[Cites
8
, Cited by
38
]
Supreme Court of India
Sodan Singh vs N.D.M.C. & Ors on 4 February, 1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 1174, 1998 (2) SCC 743, AIR 2003 ANDHRA PRADESH 396, 1998 AIR SCW 991, (1998) 1 SCALE 463, 1998 ADSC 2 29, (1998) 1 JT 532 (SC), (1998) 1 SCR 629 (SC), (1998) 2 SUPREME 158, 1998 UJ(SC) 1 424, 1998 (1) SCR 629, 1998 (1) SCALE 449, 1998 (1) ADSC 719, 1998 (2) SCC 727, (1998) 71 DLT 705, (1998) 1 RECCIVR 634, (1998) 1 SCALE 449, (1998) 3 SCJ 277, (1998) 71 DLT 804, (1998) 2 SUPREME 111, 1992 SCC (SUPP) 2 121, (2003) 2 ANDHLD 206, AIRONLINE 1998 SC 349
Bench:
S.B. Majmudar
,
M. Jagannadha Rao
PETITIONER:
SODAN SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
N.D.M.C. & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	04/02/1998

BENCH:
S.B. MAJMUDAR, M. JAGANNADHA RAO.




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
M. JAGANNADHA RAO, J .
Leave granted.
This  judgment   is  in  continuation  of	two  earlier
judgments of this Court rendered in this very case, which is
a public  interest case	 concerning the	 hawkers, squatters,
etc, in	 the public  streets  in  the  New  Delhi  Municipal
Committee area. The first of the judgments WAS rendered by a
Connotation Bench on 30.8.1989 in
Sodan Singh Vs. N.D.M.C.
:
1989 (4) SCC 155 and the second was rendered on 13.3.1992 by
a three	 Judge Bench in Sodan Singh Vs. N.D.M.C 1992 (2) SCC
458. In	 sub - para 6 of para 10 of the latter judgment, all
cases then  pending except one (the case now before us) were
treated as  disposed of	 an claimants were permitted to seek
further	 directions  in	 future	 as  and  when	the  Thareja
Committee Report  (to which  we shall  presently refer)	 was
given. The  said report WAS given in May 1996 and thereafter
about 130  I. As  were filed  in this S.L.P. pursuant to the
permission granted  as stated  above. We heard there IAs. We
have also  heard the  objections  of  the  N.D.M.C.  to	 the
Thareja Committee  Report. Counsel  made various submissions
on 6th,	 7th & 8th January. Several IAs were rejected at the
time of	 the said  hearing. In	some IAs  were the claimants
were found  `eligible' bu the Thareja Committee, orders were
passed adopting	 the recommendations  of  the  Committee  as
orders of  the Court  subject to  "general directions" to be
given in  the case  now before	us. Some  IAs of `eiligible'
claimants  were	  adjourned  and   are	being	disposed  of
separately.
We shall  make a  berried reference to the events which
have taken  place hitherto  and then  deal with	 the  issues
argued before us.
The first Sodan Singh case- 1989 (4) SCC 155:
This decisions  was by  a Constitution  Bench  of	this
Court and  was rendered	 on 30.8.1989.	It was held that the
right to  carry on  trade or  business was  not	 covered  by
Article 21
of the  Connotation of  India but was covered by
Article 19  (1)(g)
and could be reasonably restricted by law
made under
Article 19(6).
It was held that hawking on road -
sides fell  within  the	 expression  `occupation,  trade  or
business' in
Article 19(1)(g).
It was	 also held  that all
puce streets and roads vest in the State but the State holds
them as	 trustee on  behalf of the public and the members of
the public  are beneficiaries  entitled to  use	 them  as  a
matter of  right. The  Municipality has	 full  authority  to
permit `hawkers	 and squatters'	 on the	 side walks wherever
the Municipality  considers it	practicable and	 convenient,
under the  provisions of  the
Punjab Municipal Act, 1911
(or
Delhi Municipal	 Corporation Act, 1957
). But there cannot be
a fundamental  right vested  in	 a  citizen  to	 occupy	 any
particular place  on the  pavement where  he can  squat	 and
engage in  trading business.  Nor can  the hawkers  assert a
fundamental right  to occupy  any  place  permanently  on  a
pavement. If  the circumstances	 are appropriate  and  small
trader	can  do	 some  business	 for  personal	guanine	 the
pavement to  the advantage of the general public and without
discomfort  or	 annoyance  to	 others,  there	 can  be  no
objection. Hawkers  cannot be  permitted to  squat on  every
road. Whether  it is  located close to a hospital or whether
there is  need for  security measures  in a particular area,
etc. and  similar eleventh  factors has	 to  be	 taken	into
account	 for  permitting  business  on	a  particular  road.
Licence has  to be  given for trading but this does not mean
that licence is to be given on a daily basis. Regard must be
had also to the provisions of the
Delhi Police Act, 1978
and
Delhi Control  of Vehicular  and other	Traffic on  Roads  &
Streets Regulation,  1980.
This Court, on a consideration of
all the	 above factors,	 directed the  New  Delhi  Municipal
Committee to frame a scheme in regard to the areas or places
where hawking  / squatting  is to be permitted and as to the
number of  squatters that  could be allowed. The authorities
would be fully justified in refusing any facility to hawkers
who sell  costly luxury articles. The right is basically for
poor hawkers  and not to sellers of luxury items or smuggled
goods. Broadly,	 these are the directions given in the first
Sodan Sing
's case.
The NDMC Scheme: (10.11.1989)
     Pursuant to  the directions  above stated, the N.D.M.C.
came forward with a detailed scheme on 10.11.1989. Under the
said scheme,  the N.D.M.C. area was divided into 5 Zones and
the  places  where  these  squatters  or  hawkers  could  be
permitted to trade in each zone were identified. It was also
stated that squatting will not be permitted in certain areas
because of  certain unique  characteristics of	the area  or
because of  the	 place	being  security-sensitive.  However,
existing permission  of Tehbazari or Kiosks in some of these
areas were  not to  be disturbed.  Squatting  would  not  be
permitted on  the footpaths or on road so far as major roads
are concerned.	No permissions, in verandah of markets which
have been declared as public streets, were to be granted.
Annexure A	 of the	 scheme gives  details of  places in
each zone where squatting/hawking could be permitted and the
total number,  of the  stalls,	kiosks,	 pan  tharas,  Mocho
tharas, cycle  repair tharas,  telephone booths, tax booths,
vegetable tharas,  tehbazari or	 tolerations which  could be
given in  each zone  and also  those which could be given on
compassionate grounds.	Annexure B  of the  scheme gives the
total of stalls, kiosk, etc. already built as 108 degree and
states that the number of existing permissions for Tehbazari
is 228	and tolerations 106. Still, there are 1500 squatters
in  N.D.M.C.  area  to	be  provide  for  a  eligibility  of
claimants was  to be  considered as  per criteria  stated in
para 6 of the Scheme.
Under para 6 of the scheme squatters were divide into 3
categories, (i)	 those before  1977. (ii) those between 1978
to 1980	 and (iii)  those between  1981 and  1987. The first
category who  are the  senior most,  would get kiosks/stalls
subject to  availability. Further,  "till they	are allotted
kiosks/stalls, they  will be  given permission for tehbazari
on usual charges". The second category of eligible squatters
of 1978-1980  will be  given tehbazari	permission in  their
respective area	 subject to  availability f  stalls,  unless
there are  kiosks/stalls available  as per  their seniority.
The third  category of	eligible squatters  of 1981  to 1987
would also be considered for allotment of tehbazari, in case
suitable vacant spaces in respective zones are available for
such allotment.	 A further  procedure  for  reservation	 was
spelled out as follows:
(a)  general category  (60%) ; (b) SC/ST category (12 1/2%);
(c)  physically	 handicapped  (10%);  (d)  Ex-serviceman  (2
1/2%); (e)  war-widows (2%);  (f) freedom fighters (3%); (g)
extreme hardship and humanitarian grounds (10%).
Paras 7  and 8 of the Scheme mention the conditions for
allotment of tehbazari. Only non-licensable trades excluding
sophisticated luxury  items, imported or smuggled goods) are
to be  permitted i.e.  Pan, Biri, Cigarette, etc. No cooking
or sale	 of food  items exposed	 to dust  which could  cause
health hazard,	- was  to be  allotted. Para 9 of the Scheme
dealt with  the issue  of hawking licences. This question of
eligibility  was  to  be  examined  by	a  Committee  to  be
appointed.
The Lok	 Adalat (Dated	19.11.1989) and recommendation as to
`finality'.
After the	Scheme was  framed as  above, a	 Lok Adalat,
presided by  a learned	Judge of  this Court  and a  retired
Judge of  the Allahabad	 High Court was held and the learned
Judges	observed   that	 the  job  allotment  to  individual
claimants should  be given  to a  Committee consisting	of 2
members from the N.D.M.C. and a Judicial Officer of the rank
of a District Judge. It was further directed that
     "the  decision   by  the  Committee
     shall be binding and final".
In other  words, the  decisions of	 the said  allotment
Committee was to be final.
Supreme  Court   Orders  dated   21.12.1989.  1.2.1990.
9.2.1990
     We shall  next briefly  to refer  to certain  orders of
this Court.  It was directed on 21.12.1989 that the District
Judge, Delhi  should nominate  a judicial  officer with	 the
previous concurrence  of the  High Court  to carry  out	 the
suggestion made	 by the Lok Adalat. It was again directed on
1.2.1990 that  initially 100  cases should  be	examine.  By
another order  dated  9.2.1990	it  was	 directed  that	 the
Judicial  Officer   nominated.	could	even  make  surprise
inspections etc. and work on a whole time basis.
The Judicial Officer nominated was Mr. Thareja. He gave
an interim  repot. On 29.1.1991 this Court noticed that 5000
applications were  pending before  the Officer.	 This  Court
directed  that	the  Committee	will  consist  only  of	 Mr.
Thareja. In  a latter  order dated  28.10.1991.	 this  Court
stated that  the timings 4.00 Pm to 9.00 PM suggested by the
N.D.M.C. for  the hawkers were not acceptable and that 12.00
Noon to 7.00 PM could be more appropriate.
The  second
Sodan	 Singh
Case:  [1992  (2)  SCC	458]
(13.3.196)
     The second	 judgment is  dated 13.3.1992.	This  court,
initially rejected  the complaint that the Thareja Committee
was applying  very strict standards of proof for eligibility
and that this was affecting interests of bonafide claimants.
But in order to protect genuine claimants, this Court gave a
set of nine directions. We do not propose to refer to all of
them except  two. Under	 direction 8,  the Thareja Committee
was to draw up a list of squatters/hawkers identified by it.
Under direction	 9. the Committee was to draw up a seniority
list of	 squatters/hawkers and	the Committee was to already
identified". All pending cases were to be treated a disposed
of, except  one case.  No Court	 was to	 entertain any fresh
case.
Public notice & cut off dated (22.5.1992):
As directed  in para  12 of  the second  Sodan  Singh's
case, public  notice was  give inviting	 claims	 before	 the
Thareja Committee  and cut  off date  namely  22.5.1992	 was
fixed. Pursuant	 thereto, several  claims were	received. In
all, there  were 5627 claims before the Committee, including
126 review petitions.
The Thareja Committee Report (May, 1996):
The Committee  examined 5627  claims in a very detailed
fashion during	a period  of 5 1/2 years and passed detailed
orders in  every case,	examining the  evidence produced  by
both sides.  We have  gone through  the Report and have also
read a	large number  of individual  orders  passed  by	 the
Committee. It  was against  those orders  that the 130 I. As
were filed  in this  Court questioning	the  adverse  orders
passed against some of the claimants.
We must  place on record our deep sense of appreciation
for the	 tremendous work dome by Mr. Thareja and the trouble
he had	taken in completing these cases. He had also visited
the places  where the  hawking was being done or was claimed
as being done, - on various occasions with or without notice
to  verify  facts.  He	has  also  applied  a  judicial	 and
humanitarian approach to the problems of the hawkers. At the
sametime, he  has also	took care  to apply principles which
eliminated any	possible manipulations	by the	employees of
the   N.D.M.C.	  or   exploitation   by   them	  of   these
squatters/hawkers  regarding  which  there  were  complaints
before him.
The  Thareja   Committee  took   up  the	question  of
identification of  sites. Fourteen  sub areas in the 5 zones
were identified.,  Others areas	 which were  not accepted by
N.D.M.C., were subjected to detailed serenity to find out if
the objections	raised by the NDMC were tenable. The Thareja
Committee, in  Chapter II,  has dealt  with  the  individual
sites in  each zone  (page  56	to  310)  and  took  up	 the
objections to the NDMC in respect of each site, and rejected
almost all  the objections  of the N.D.M.C., particularly in
regard to lucrative areas. The Committee has given elaborate
and very  tenable and  rational reasons.  This part  of	 the
Report is  from page  56 to  page 310,	nearly 250 pages. we
shall deal  with these	areas lower  down. The Committee has
also gone into claims of individual claimants and found only
760 as	eligible persons  to be accommodated. This figure is
in addition  to the  cases of `hardship'. The Committee also
compiled a  separate volume  (volume 2)	 of  the  Report  in
respect of  the names  of eligible  applicants, their trade,
and their seniority and details of the area occupied (6'x 4'
or 4 x 3' or stall - kiosk) along with the photograph of the
particular claimant.  The Committee here referred to the 760
claimants and also the other cases coming under the category
of hardship.  This volume  2 runs to more than 200 pages. As
to eligibility of squatting at various places, the Committee
considered several  claimants eligible	and  made  tentative
allotments,  subject   to  final  allotment  later  on.	 The
Committee said (page 38 of its Report):
"Since the	 N.D.M.C. is  contesting
     the sites identified, it is yet not
     finally  settled  which  sites  are
     available	  for	  purposes    of
     allocation to  the	 squatters.  The
     sites identified  have  been  dealt
     with in Chapter II....Thus even the
     list of  squatters is  not final as
     yet. In  this views  of the matter,
     no site  has ben  allocated  to  an
     individual squatter.  The scheme of
     allocation of  sites, however,  bas
     been described  in brief in Chapter
     III.  The	sites  can  be	actually
     allocated only after the identified
     sites are	approved by  the Hon'ble
     Supreme  Court,   the  Scheme   for
     allocation is approved and also the
     list  of  identified  squatters  is
     finalised".
Thus  the	 occupation  of	 these	places	by  eligible
squatters as  decided  by  the	Thareja	 Committee  is	only
tentative and subject to regular allotment after a decisions
arrived at  as to  whether the places in regard to which the
NDMC claimed  exclusion (see below) would be accepted by the
Thareja	 Committee   and  by   this  Court.   The  tentative
allocation by  the Thareja  Committee  is  also	 subject  to
further final  allotment on  the basis of priorities between
the three  groups of  squatters i.e.  those before  1977  to
1987.  Final   allotment  depended  also  on  Seniority	 and
reservation ratio  of the  squatters in	 each of  the  three
groups.
An	 important  aspect  of	timings	 as  to	 "squatting.
hawkers "  was considered  by the Committee (pages 44-45) to
say that neither the hawkers nor the N.D.M.C. officials were
acting in  accordance with  the timings	 referred to by this
Court  in one of its orders dated 28.10.1991. It was pointed
out by	the Committee  that those  who	were  settling	with
N.D.M.C. officials  were being	allowed all  24 hours  while
others not so inclined were being harassed and discriminated
against. This resulted din a flood of IAs being filed before
the Committee  in  regale  to  timings	alone.	The  Thareja
Committee therefore  recommended time  schedule as "sun-rise
to sun-set"  - as  has been granted to tehbazari". We accept
this recommendation  to the  above said	 extent. One  of the
eligibility criteria followed by Thready Committee;
In respect of the period
(1)  prior to 1977
(2)  1978-80
(3)  1981-87
The Thareja  Committee was  prepared to	 condone absence  of
proof of  squatting/hawking only  for one  year. Further the
squatting/hawking after	 187 putto date of inspection by the
Committee has  been also gone into. In other Words those who
were squatting	in the periods (withal one year gap) were to
be squatting even after 1988. For the period after 1988 also
only one  year gap  has ben  condoned.	This  principle	 was
followed  uniformly.   Some  claimants	 whose	claims	were
rejected on this basis have filed IAs. We have rejected them
as we have agreed with the principles adopted by the Thareja
Committee.
Submissions of N.D.M.C. in this Court in regard to rejection
of NDMC's objections to some sites:
In regard	to the	some important and if fact lucrative
areas  to  which  the  N.D.M.C.	 had  objection	 before	 the
Committee and  which objections were rejected by the Thareja
Committee, the	N.D.M.C. has  filed before  us	its  written
submissions on	19.7.1997. The	said objections (at pp 77 to
84 in the paper book of IA  3/91) also list out 76 sites for
which the  N.D.M.C. has	 no objection.	While  making  these
written submissions,  the NDMC	has  also  given  number  of
kiosks and/or  tehbazari  which	 could	be  accommodated  in
various places	for which  there  was  no  objection.  Total
number of the available places is also given.
In addition 7 sites are proposed by the N.D.M.C. mostly
for kiosks  or for  covered  Thara  and,  one  place  for  6
tehbazari.
The Thareja  Committee while rejecting the objection of
the NDMC in respect of these areas and including them in the
list of acceptable places, has also given the figures of how
many kiosks,  squatter or  tehbazari can  be accommodate  in
these areas.
Objections were raised before us by the NDMC  in regard
to (i)	26 important places in the various zones, (ii) place
in Sarojini  Nagar and (ii) six other places in some zones -
in all	33. Learned senior counsel for the N.D.M.C. Sri R.K.
Maheshwari made	 his submissions  in regard to each of these
items and  referred to	the reasons  give by Mr. Thareja and
contended that	these sites  were wrongly  included  by	 the
Committee   and have  to be  excluded and  further that	 the
reasons given by the Thareja Committee are not sound.
The objections  of the  N.D.M.C. in  respect  of  these
sites fall  into the  various categories  : (i)	 Pedestrians
hindrances and	major road,  (ii)  falls  under	 development
scheme	(iii)	adds  to  congestion  (iv)  disturbs  unique
character of  Connaught Place  (v) traffic  congestion	(vi)
security problem  and major  road (vii)	 over crowded  (vii)
over congested	(ix) no	 further scope. Part 9 of the report
of the	Thareja Committee  from pp  56 to  310 dealing	with
these aspects has been read before us by the learned counsel
for NDMC  for 2	 days on 6th and 7th January. taking up item
by item.  The reasons  given by	 the Thareja  Committee were
challenged.
We have  heard these  submissions and  have  also	gone
through the elaborate reasons given by the Thareja Committee
in regard  to each  of these 33 places. We do not propose to
record our reasons nor to deal with each item independently.
We are indeed not sitting in appeal. Further, we are keeping
in mind	 the recommendation as to `finality' made in the Lok
Adalat on  19.11.1989. Further	the plea  of the  NDMC	that
certain areas fall under `development scheme' was a plea not
raised before  the Thareja Committee and has been raised for
the first  time before	us. We	find that  the Redevelopment
Scheme prepared by the DDA is of March 1993 and the NDMC had
full knowledge thereof long before May 1996 when the Thareja
Committee Report  was submitted	 to this  court. Hence	this
ground is  liable to  be rejected. We are satisfied that Mr.
Thareja has  based his	conclusions on valid material and on
the existing  factual position	at the	grass-root levee. He
has also  relied  upon	factual	 information  gathered	from
personal visits made by him to these places and kept in mind
the manner in which, the N.D.M.C. had itself already granted
certain kiosks,	 squatting or tehbazari rights in these very
areas earlier.	In our view no exception can be taken to the
reasoning and conclusions of the Thready Committee in regard
to these  items and  to its  ultimate recommendations to the
suitability (or	 otherwise) of	these areas.  We do not find
any grounds  to modify	or set	aside the recommendations in
regard	to  these  sites.  In  the  result,  we	 accept	 the
recommendation, reject	the  objection	of  the	 NDMC	 and
therefore these	 33 sites  would get  added to	the 76 and 7
sites already  mentioned -  resulting in 116 sites. (In this
connection, our order in IA No. 114/97 may also be seen).
As already	 stated, the  Thareja Committee also decided
the  relative	seniority  of  each  claimant  and  wherever
individual claimants  have  questioned	the  adverse  orders
passed by  the Committee,  we have passed separate orders in
the IAs.  Subject to  the orders  passed  in  the  IAs,	 the
recommendations	 of   the  Committee  as  to  seniority	 are
accepted by us.
The Committee  has recommended the procedure that could
be followed  while making  final  allotments.  It  reads  as
follows (p.309):
"....the squatters	 who  have  been
     identified have  been shows  as per
     the  seniority   in  the	list  of
     squatters squatting  in  respective
     areas.  The  allocation  of  sites,
     accordingly is  to be  made as  per
     the  seniority   of  the  squatters
     identified in the area. To do this,
     it is  proposed that  the squatters
     of the  particular area  be invited
     to give  their preference for sites
     available	in   that   area,   with
     respect to the trade as approved in
     consultation with the NDMC. Where a
     site is  preferred by an individual
     squatter	only,	 the   same   be
     allocated	 to    him.   Where    a
     particular site  has been preferred
     by more than one squatter, then the
     same be  allocated by  seniority or
     by the  system of	draw of lots for
     the first five senior squatters for
     one  site.	  A  squatter  shall  be
     eligible to give his preference for
     only three	 sites so  that a  large
     number  of	  applications	for  one
     single site  is  avoided.	Such  an
     approach,	it  is	felt  shall  not
     result in objection from any of the
     squatters	and   will  be	in  fair
     play."
In other  words, apart  from seniority,  each  eligible
squatter should	 be allowed  three sites  as options  in the
zone.
We	 accept	 the  above  procedure	recommended  by	 the
Thareja Committee  and the  recommendation for	giving three
options in  the zone  subject only  to one modification that
the allocation	will be	 accordingly to seniority as decided
by the	Committee and  not by  draw of lots as alternatively
suggested by the Committee.
The concluding  para of the Committee report reiterates
that the allotments made by the Committee are only tentative
and that  final allotment  has to  be made  after this Court
passes orders  on the  Committees Report.  This part  of the
recommendation (which  is similar to recommendations at page
38 of its report) reads as follows (p.310):
"At present.  it is not possible to
     allocate a	 site to  an  individual
     squatting in  the area  of NDMC  as
     the   NDMC	   is	contesting   the
     identified sites  and it is not yet
     finally decided  by  the  Honorable
     Supreme Court as to which sites are
     available	  for	  purposes    of
     allocation		 to	     the
     squatters/hawkers.		 Various
     petitions	for  directions	 against
     the   claims    rejected	by   the
     squatters	 are	still	 pending
     consideration  before  the	 Supreme
     Court. The	 lists of  the squatters
     also cannot  be said to be final as
     yet. it is only after the petitions
     for directions are decided that the
     list of squatters can be said to be
     final and	the identified sites are
     approved by the Supreme Court. that
     the task of allocation of sites can
     be done. Accordingly, the report is
     submitted	with   respect	to   the
     allocation of  sites as was desired
     by the  Honorable Supreme	Court in
     its Order dated 23.9.1994."
Therefore, the  allocation of  palaces, if any, done by
the Thareja Committee in individual cases, is only tentative
inasmuch as  new places	 have been  added, seniority  is now
fixed and  three options  are to be now given by each person
and question  of reservation  is also  to be considered. Now
that the IAs regarding claims of squatters whose claims have
been rejected by the Committee have also been disposed of by
us  and	  the  seniority   list	 stands	 accepted,  and	 the
objections of  the NDMC	 for excluding	certain areas  stand
rejected, while	 some areas  ares suggested by the NDMC have
got added,  the stage  is therefore set for final allocation
of  the	  sites	 to  the  various  claimants.  While  making
allotments for	squatters\tehbazari  the  proportion  as  to
reservation motioned  in the  scheme will  also have  to  be
followed. We  are, therefore,  proposing that after a public
notice to  be issued  by the  authority whom  we propose  to
nominate, claims  will be  filed in  Part I  by the eligible
claimants (Part	 II will  deal	with  arrears  of  Tehbazari
charges).
Arrears if tehbazari charges:
The  Thareja   Committee  has   recommended  that	 all
squatters who  have been given seniority and eligibility for
allotment should  pay  arrears	of  dues  towards  tehbazari
within 2  weeks and  that in  case of  failure to  pay,	 the
claimant would	not be entitled to benefit under the Scheme.
The  said   Committee  also   suggested	 that  all  approved
claimants - though they were squatting prior to 1.1.1990 and
were  allowed	to  continue  under  orders  passed  by	 the
Committee, -  should pay  the arrears  of tehbazari  charges
only from 1.1.1990 and that the arrears proof to 1.1.1990 be
waived by the NDMC.
So far  as waiver	of the	arrears of tehbazari charges
prior to  1.1.1990  by	the  NDMC  is  concerned,  we  heard
arguments and  considered the facts and circumstances of the
case and we accept this recommendation.
So far  as arrears after 1.1.1990 are concerned, it has
been stated before us that the tehbazari charges for a space
of 6'  x 4'  are Rs. 240/- p.m. and that for a space of 4' x
3' are Rs. 120/- p.m. There was considerable argument before
us as to whether in order to avoid dispute as to what is the
actual amount  in arrears  after 1.1.1990.  we should  fix a
lump sum  amount applicable  to all  claimants or whether we
should order an enquiry into individual cases where there is
dispute as  to the  period of  occupation. Having considered
this aspect carefully we are not inclined to fix a lump sum.
We are	of the	view that  the authority  whom we propose to
nominate should	 examine, in  case of  dispute, the facts in
each case  relating to	arrears of tehbazari charges for the
period after  1.1.1990 and  decide the	extent of arrears in
each case  after giving	 a reasonable  opportunity of  being
heard, to  the	claimants  found  eligible  by	the  Thareja
Committee wherever  there is  a dispute	 as to the amount of
arrear. We  also direct that deduction will be given for any
amounts already	 paid for the period after 1.1.1990 provided
adequate proof is produced therefor.
It has been argued for the NDMC that unless the arrears
are paid,  the eligible	 claimants should  not be allowed to
conduct their  trade at	 the places tentatively allocated to
them or	 where they  have  been	 lawfully  conducting  their
trade.	We   are  unable   to  agree  with  this  contention
particularly because  we have  directed an iniquity into the
arrears after  1.1.1990, wherever the quantum is in dispute.
We are	of the	view pending  a decision on arrears that the
current tentative occupation by these persons of any places,
as decided  by the Thareja Committee, need not be disturbed.
The claimants will be permitted to carry on their avocations
at  the	  places  tentatively	designated  by	the  Thareja
Committee, subject of course to final allotment of places by
the authority to whom we propose to entrust the job for such
final allotment.
The authority  whom we  propose to	 designate shall, as
per the procedure for public notice indicated below, require
eligible claimants  to file in Part II of their application,
details as  to the Tehbazari charges paid after 1.1.1990, so
that the issue of arrears, if any, is not raked up after the
issue of  allotment of site is finalised. Booth issued could
be decided  more or less simultaneously, so that in case the
arrears finally determined are not paid, the final allotment
of site	 could be made to another eligible person by the new
Committee.
Construction of Kiosks: time to be fixed etc.:
As pointed	 by the	 Thareja Committee,  those claimants
who are	 senior most  would  be	 allotted  kiosks/stalls  as
mentioned in the Report. It is however stated by the learned
counsel for  the NDMC  that the kiosks to be constructed are
92 in  number and  that construction  of these kiosks at the
places identified  by the  Thareja Committee would take some
time and there is also need for obtaining adequate budgetary
provision for these purposes. Question has also arisen as to
whether	 at   these  places  where  the	 kiosks	 are  to  be
constructed by the NDMC, the places should be kept idle till
such time as the kiosks are constructed.
It has  been rightly  suggested by	 Shri Maheshwari for
the NDMC  that it  is not  necessary to	 keep  these  places
identified for	construction of	 kiosks idle till the kiosks
are actually  constructed. In  the meantime,  those to	whom
these kiosks  have been	 allocated by  the Thareja Committee
tentatively  or	  who	have   already	 been	authorisedly
continuing, will  continue to  squat at the places where the
kiosks are to come up and conduct their avocation subject to
any final  allotment that  may be made by the authority whom
we propose to dominate.
It has  been argued  for the  NDMC that  so far  as the
construction of these kiosks is concerned, permission may be
obtained from  Delhi Urban Arts Commission and also from the
Archaeological Survey  of India	 and the  Department Capital
Territory, New	Delhi. If  such a  procedure is warranted by
law, surely  the NDMC  may follow  the	same.  But,  in	 the
meanwhile, if  tentative allotment  is already	made by	 the
Thareja Committee  or there  are authorised  occupants, they
will not  be  disturbed,  pending  construction	 of  kiosks.
Further if  there are  any `unauthorised'  persons at  these
places where  kiosks are  to  be  constructed  -  conducting
tehbazari or  squatting, -  such persons  shall forthwith be
removed from those places by the NDMC.
In the  event of  the  Urban  Arts	 Commission  or	 the
Archaeology Departments mentioned above not approving any of
these sites  for kiosks identified by the Thareja Committee,
the said  places shall	be available  for tehbazari  and the
authority whom	we propose  to nominate,  shall consider the
said places  for tehbazari and make such allotment as he may
deem  fit,   in	 accordance   with  the	  procedure  already
indicated.
For  the	purpose	 of  obtaining	clearance  from	 the
aforesaid authorities,	we grant  time	to  the	 NDMC  putto
30.6.1998. Copy	 of our	 order will  be communicated  to the
above  departments   i.e.  Delhi   Urban  Arts	 Commission;
Archaeology Survey  of India,  New Delhi  and Department  of
ARCHAEOLOGY, N.C.T., New Delhi.
Immediate eviction of unauthorised squatters/hawkers:
A reading of the Thareja Report and connected documents
does show  that is  several areas  unauthorised squatters or
hawkers have been allowed to conduct their operations. It is
alleged	 by   the  learned   counsel   appearing   for	 the
squatters/hawkers that	this is	 done is  collusion with the
NDMC or	 officers of  other departments	 and this  should be
stopped forthwith.  In fact,  it is  vehemently argued	that
such unauthorised  squatters/hawkers are  there in places in
respect of  which the  NDMC claimed  exclusion on  pleas  of
heavy traffic  sensitivity  etc.  It  was  therefore  agreed
before	us   by	 the  learned  counsel	for  the  NDMC,	 Sri
Maheshwari that these unauthorised squatters/hawkers will be
removed by the NDMC forthwith.
We are of the view that these persons should be removed
forthwith and  that it	is not	necessary to  wait till	 the
final allotment of these sites to the eligible claimants. We
accordingly direct  that the  unauthorised squatters/hawkers
trading at  the places	recommended by the Thareja Committee
or suggested  by the  NDMC - which have now been accepted by
us -  should be	 removed by  the NDMC  within one  week from
today and  the NDMC  shall also	 ensure that,  in future, no
unauthorised squatter/hawker conduct his triad at the places
accepted by the Thareja Committee and by this Court. We make
it clear  that if  the above  directions are violated by the
NDMC, it  may call  for serious	 action from  this Court. It
will also  be open  to the  authority  whom  we	 propose  to
appoint to  bring to  the notice of this Court any breach by
the NDMC of this direction.
Mode of  issuing  public  notice.	fixing	cut-off	 and
procedure for hearing before the authority:
We have  already stated  that for	the purpose of final
allotment of  the places to the authorised squatters/hawkers
as per their seniority, and to consider the three options of
each person,  and for the purpose of deciding the quantum of
arrears of  tehbazari charges for the period after 1.1.1990,
we will	 be nominating	a particular authority. Question has
arisen s to what procedure he should adopt.
Public  notice:   inviting	 applications	-   Part   I
(allotment of sites)
     Initially he  will	 issue	a  public  notice  that	 the
eligible claimants  may submit their applications in respect
of the	116 sites  and in  Part I  of their application they
shall state  their claim in regard to the size (whether 6' x
4' or  4' x  8') within	 the respective	 Zones - restricting
choice to  three places	 in each  Zone -  and quoting  their
seniority ad  decided by  the Thareja Committee. (The option
in all	will be	 only for  3 places in the zone). The public
notice shall also require the eligible claimants to state in
Part II	 details of  the arrears  of tehbazari	charges from
1.1.90 and  if there  are arrears  as on date or not. Public
Notice will be issued in one English and one Hindi Newspaper
having circulation  in Delhi  in this  behalf. Such  notices
will also  be put  up at the various offices of the NDMC. It
will also  be stated  that claimants  can purr forward their
claims within  three weeks (a specific cut off date is to be
given)	before	which  the  applications  is  to  reach	 the
authority whom	we propose  to nominate.  It shall  also  be
stated in  the public  notice in  the newspaper that for the
purpose of  giving the	three  options,	 the  claimants	 can
ascertain. if  necessary, the  details of  the location	 and
size of	 these 116  places for	which they  would give their
options -  from the  Notice Board  of the  NDMC at specified
places. We  are	 emphasising  this  aspect  to	obviate	 any
grievance that	the eligible  claimants did not know details
of the	available places  in each  Zone or  the size  and to
eliminate any  grievance that they did not have a reasonable
opportunity of submitting the three options.
Public notice  - Part  II of  application: (arrears  of
Tehbazari)
     As already	 stated, we  have also	required a statement
from the claimants regarding arrears of tehbazari charges in
Part II	 so  that  the	question  of  arrears  can  also  be
simultaneously decided	and so	that in	 case the  amount is
decided and  not paid and the claimant loses his eligibility
but  to	 non-payment,  the  new	 Committee  can	 proceed  to
consider if  the vacancy  so available could be allocated to
some other  eligible candidate,	 if any, who did not got any
allotment.
Cut off  date for filing application and further notice
of hearing to petitioners or counsel
     After receipt  of the  claims which  are received on or
before the  cut-off date  indicated in the public notice the
nominated authority  shall issue notices to the claimants by
registered post-A.D. fixing particular dates for hearing. It
could also  - if it considers it necessary - issue a general
public notice  through the  NDMC that  eligible claimant who
have lodged  their claims, could appear before the nominated
authority  on  or  before  a  particular  date,	 for  orally
submitting their case.
The nominated  authority will  decide rival options for
each place  and for  the that  purpose it may evolve its own
procedure consistent  with natural  justice. On the question
of arrears  from  1.1.1990  also  separate  orders  will  be
passed. Hearing	 will be  given to  the claimants  who could
either represent  their cases personally or through counsel,
Reasoned orders	 will be  passed by  the nominated authority
and the decisions shall be final and shall not be questioned
before any  authority, tribunal	 or court or law or the High
Court of  Delhi nor  in	 this  Court.  In  other  words,  as
recommended in the Lok Adalat on 19.11.1989. the decision of
the authority  both on	questions of  allotment of place and
arrears due  shall be  binding on the claimants and the NDMC
as well.
Ban on further IAs:
We also  direct that  as from  today, no  IAs  will  be
allowed to  be filed against the Thareja Committee Report or
against individual  orders  passed  by	the  said  Committee
before it submitted its Report in his Court. The IAs, if any
pending, as  of date  will be  listed for  final disposal so
that by the time the authority we propose to nominate, gives
its public  notice, all	 the pending  IAs are disposed of by
this Court.
We are  giving this direction to put a seal of finality
to the	decisions of  the authority  so	 that  the  problems
arising out  of this  PIL case in respect of the squatters /
hawkers which  have been  pending in  this Court  since 1989
could come to an end atleast in 1998.
Change of trade:
(i)  general right to change in trade:
This aspect  is somewhat  important.  The	first
Sodan
Singh
Case  upheld the right to trade under
Article 19(1)(g)
of the	Constitution of	 India on  the payment and sidewalks
without however,  interfering with  the	 freedom  of  others
using these  places. This  right could	also be	 subject  to
reasonable restrictions,  if any,  made by law under
Article
19(6).
As  yet no  such special	 law has been brought to our
notice except  the
Delhi Police Act, 1978
and Delhi (Control
of  Vehicular	and  other  traffic  on	 Roads	and  Streets
Regulation) Act, 1980, referred to in the first Sodan Sing's
Case.  Of   course,  certain   provisions  of	the   Punjab
Municipality Act, Rules or bye laws thereunder could also be
relevant.
In  addition,  the  Scheme  issued  by  the	NDMC
pursuant to  orders of	this  Court  permits  non-licensable
trades (excluding  luxury and smuggled outlets) Further this
Court had  also stated	in the first
Sodan Singh
's Case that
the grant  of  hawking/squatting  right	 is  not  meant	 for
luxurious items or smuggled goods.
In IA  No.83 of  1995. in	which we have today passed a
separate  order,  the  claimant,  Bishwanath  Roy,  who	 was
trading in `tea' wanted to change over to garments. The NDMC
took the  stand that  it had a discretion either to grant or
not to	grant the  change in  trade to garments and it would
take up	 the issue  after  the	Thareja	 Committee  gave  no
objection. The	Thareja Committee  did not pass final orders
but dealt  with this  question in its report. It pointed out
that absolute discretion for change of trade even in respect
of non-licensable  trades cannot  be granted to the NDMC and
that, for  exampled  there  are	 some  locations  where	 the
business of hawkers could yield substantial gross income per
day and	 therefore abuse of discretion by the NDMC officials
could not  be ruled  out. Bearing all these factors in mind,
we have	 allowed IA  No.83 of  1995 for	 change of  trade to
garments
in that case
as such trade was not unlawful and was
not one	 in `luxurious	goods' or  `smuggled goods'  and  we
added the  NDMC	 could, at the most, imposer reasonable with
Article 19(1)(g)  (
and
Article	19(2).
We  have also  stated
that in	 the matter of change of trade, if the NDMC's orders
or the	conditions imposed  are unreasonable or arbitrary or
contrary to  any provisions  of law, if would be open to the
aggrieved parties to avail all remedies at law. We reiterate
the same position in this order also.
(ii) Lotteries:
In certain	 cases the eligible squatters were presently
selling lotteries which have since been barred. As agreed to
before us  by  some  counsel  appearing	 for  those  selling
lotteries, such	 claimants  will,  apply  to  the  concerned
authority in  the NDMC	for change of trade. The NDMC shall,
if such	 new trade  is not a prohibited one nor one relating
to imported or luxury items, grant the request for change in
trade. Such  claimants will  indicate in  Part	1  of  their
application as	to whether  they have (or are proposing to),
applied for  change of	trade from lottery to any other non-
prohibited trade.
Appointment of Shri V.C. Chaturvedi and infrastructure:
     We	 hereby	 nominate  Sri	V.C.  Chaturvedi,  presently
working as  Joint Registrar  in the  High Court	 of Delhi to
undertake the  various duties  and functions  enumerated  as
above (which  are again	 summarised below)  and complete the
job, as	 far as possible, within a period of a 6 months from
the date of receipt of this order. We request the High Court
of Delhi  to spare his services, during the remaining period
of his	service as  Joint Registrar in the Delhi High Court,
for the	 aforesaid purpose. ( We are passing separate orders
in connection  with his	 remuneration, in this very SLP.) We
direct the  NDMC   to issue orders directing the Directorate
of Estates  and the  Director of  Enforcement  to  help	 and
implement the  decisions or directions or orders of Sri V.C.
Chaturvedi. The	 NDMC is directed to provide a place for the
office of  Sri V.C. Chaturvedi, clerical staff, stenographer
and class IV employees and all other infrastructure required
by Sri V.C. Chaturvedi for the purpose of facilitating early
disposal of  the matters. If any assistance or clarification
is required  by Sri V.C. Chaturvedi, it shall be open to him
to seek	 appropriate directions	 from this  Court by filling
IAs in this SLP, even though this SLP is disposed of. Nobody
else will be entitled to file any application or proceedings
before any  other tribunal, Court of law, High Court or this
Court to  challenge any orders passed by Sri V.C. Chaturvedi
on any ground whatsoever.
Summary of  procedure  to  be  followed	 by  the  Chaturvedi
Committee and N.D.M.C.
1.   Sri Chaturvedi  Committee	(sole  member)	shall  issue
public notice in an English and a Hindi Newspaper  (expenses
to  be	borne  by  the	NDMC)  within  15  days	 from  today
permitting the	eligible claimants  so found eligible by the
Thareja Committee  to submit  their application	 in Part  I.
containing options  in regard  to the  identified places and
sizes (whether 6' x 4' or 4' x 3') in the particular zone to
which these claims belong. The public notice in he newspaper
will state  that the  details regarding	 the available sites
and their  locations and size is put up on the Notice Boards
of the	NDMC   at various  place, whose addresses are given.
The notice  will also require the claimants to state in Part
II of  their applications  the	details	 as  to	 payment  of
Tehbazari charges due after 1.1.1990 and if there are or nor
any arrears  as on  date. The  notice will also be put up in
the varies offices of the NDMC within the above said period.
The notice  in NDMC office will also give a detailed list of
the  places  available	for  squatting/hawking	and  stating
whether it  is a  kiosk/stall or a place for mere vending on
Tehbazari basis	 as decided  by the  Thareja  Committee	 and
indicating their sizes (6' x 4' or 4' x 3').
2.   The eligible  claimants will  be given  3 weeks time to
file in	 Part I	 of their  application their  three options,
indicating the zone concerned, their seniority as decided by
Thareja Committee,  stating  whether  they  come  under	 any
reservations category,	the type  of trade  they  have	been
trading in  or the  new trade for which they have applied to
the NDMC  and such other particulars as may be called for or
relevant. In Part II the eligible claimants shall specify if
they have  made payments  of Tehbazari	arrears due  for the
period after  1.1.1990 and  it there  are any  arrears as on
date.
3.   After receipt  of the  claims,  Committee	shall  issue
notice to  the concerned  parties and  the NDMC in regard to
each of	 the places  at which squatting/hawking is permitted
as per	the Thareja Committee Report and decide on the basis
of seniority  and reservation,	size of place and such other
relevant material  as may be placed before the Committee, as
to who should be allotted at what place. The Committee shall
fix up	dates of  hearing by issuing Registered A.D. notices
to the	parties concerned.  (The expenditure  in this behalf
shall be  borne by  the NDMC.)	The Committee  shall give an
opportunity of	being heard and pass reasoned orders and its
decisions shall	 be final and shall not be questioned before
any other authority, tribunal, Court, nor the High Court nor
in this Court.
4.   It shall  however be  open to Sri Chaturvedi to obtain,
if necessary,  such direction  or clarifications  from	this
Court by  way of  filing IAs  in this SLP, even though it is
now disposed of.
5.   The claimants  will be  permitted to  appear before the
Chaturvedi Committee  either  in  person  or  through  their
counsel.
6.   In case it is decided by the Chaturvedi Committee after
the hearing  of the  case  in  Part  II	 that  any  eligible
claimant is  in arrears	 of tehbazari  dues for	 any  period
after 1.1.1990	then the  said Committee  shall fix  a	date
before which  the arrears have to be paid and informing that
if the	amount is  not paid  by that date, the claimant will
lose his claim for the kiosk/stall or for the place. In case
the claimants  rights cease  as stated above, the Chaturvedi
Committee will	consider if  the vacancy  can be allotted to
any other  claimant already declared eligible by the Thareja
Committee.
7.   In	 case	any  of	  the  placed	found  eligible	 for
kiosks/stalls by  the Thareja  Committee are not accepted by
the Urban  Arts Commission  or the  Archaeological Survey of
India and the Department of Archaeology of the Govt. of NCT,
the said  places meant	for kiosks/stall  shall be available
for  tehbazari	and  the  Chaturvedi  Committee	 shall	pass
appropriate orders  of allotment  on that basis. As and when
the above  said authorities  inform the NDMC that the places
earmarked for  kiosks/stalls are  not  acceptable  for	that
purpose, the  NDMC shall  inform  the  Chaturvedi  Committee
about
the  said decision
.  (We have  already  observed	that
pending construction of kiosk/stall the claimant tentatively
allotted the  place or	other person  authorisedly using the
place for vending on Tehbazari; shall continue. We also said
unauthorised persons  vending  at these places be evicted by
the NDMC forthwith.)
     For the  purpose of  obtaining clearance  for the	said
authority, the	NDMC is granted time putto 30.6.1998 and for
construction of the Kiosks/stalls putto 31.10.1998.
8.   In regard	to eviction  of	 unauthorised  squatters  of
other persons  using the  placed identified  by the  Thareja
Committee the  NDMC has	 undertaken  to	 have  them  evicted
forthwith and  in case	this is not done, it will be open to
the Chaturvedi	Committee to  bring it to the notice of this
Court for appropriate orders, as stated earlier.
9.   The NDMC in general and the Director of Estates and the
Director  of   Enforcement  in	 particular  will  help	 and
implement the  decisions, directions  or orders	 of Sri V.C.
Chaturvedi.  The   NDMC	 shall	 also  provide	 the   other
infrastructure to  Sri Chaturvedi as stated in the main body
of this	 order and  pay his remuneration (in regard to which
we are passing separate orders in this SLP).
10.  The decisions  of the  Chaturvedi Committee both on the
question of  allotment of  the kiosk/stall  or the sites for
tehbazari and  also as	to quantum  of arrears	of tehbazari
shall be  final as  indicted in	 the body  of this order and
shall not  be questioned either by the claimants or the NDMC
before any  authority. Tribunal,  a Court  of Law,  the High
Court or  in this  Court. No petition shall be registered in
this behalf  by the above bodies. We have only permitted the
Chaturvedi Committee  to file  IAs in the appeal seeking any
direction or clarification and none others. So far so orders
of NDMC	 in regard  to change  of trade,  it is	 open to the
affected parties  to resort  to all appropriate remedies. We
have so	 permitted Sri	Chaturvedi to  move  this  court  in
certain respects.
The  above	  summary  is	in  addition  to  directions
contained in  the main	body of	 this  Judgment.  The  Civil
Appeal stands dispose of.