[Cites
6
, Cited by
15
]
Supreme Court of India
Collector Of Customs, Cochin vs Trivandrum Rubber Works Ltd. on 11 November, 1998
Equivalent citations: 2000(69)ECC27, 1999ECR171(SC), 1999(106)ELT9(SC), JT1998(9)SC485, (1999)2SCC553, AIRONLINE 1998 SC 38, 1999 (2) SCC 553, (1999) 106 ELT 9, (1999) 81 ECR 171, (2000) 1 KER LT 45
Bench:
Sujata V. Manohar
,
A.P. Misra
ORDER
Sujata V. Manohar and A.P. Misra, JJ.
1. The respondent, M/s. Trivandrum Rubber Works Ltd. imported Neoprene Foam Sheets which were cleared under a Bill of Entry for home consumption through their clearing agent, M/s. Achuthan Pillai & Co. The goods were cleared on 9-4-1986. On 9-10-1986, a notice to the importer i.e. the respondent herein was issued by the appellant under
Section 28
of the Customs Act, 1962 calling upon the respondent to pay duty amounting to Rs. 20,20,370.80 on the ground that the goods were correctly assessable under Tariff Heading 4008.11. The notice, therefore was in respect of short-levy of duty. The clearing agents, M/s. Achuthan Pillai & Co. were served with this demand on 9-10-1986. The respondent was served with the notice on 14-10-1986.
2. Sub-section (1) of
Section 28
of the Customs Act, provides as follows:
28. Notice for payment of duties, interest etc. - (1) When any duty has not been levied or has been short-levied or erroneously refunded or when any interest payable has not been paid, part paid or erroneously refunded, the proper officer may,
(a) in the case of any import made by any individual for his personal use or by Government or by any educational, research or charitable institution or hospital within one year;
(b) in any other case within six months;
from the relevant date, serve notice on the person chargeable with the duty or interest which has not been levied or charged or which has been so short-levied or part paid or to whom the refund has erroneously been made, requiring him to show cause why he should not pay the amount specified in the notice;
....
3. The period of limitation for service of notice, therefore, when duty
has been short-levied, is six months. The notice on the clearing agent was
served on the last day before expiry of limitation while the respondent itself
was served with the notice after the expiry of the period of limitation.
4. The Tribunal has held that the demand contained in the said notice is
time barred and hence cannot be recovered. The appellant, however, contends
that since the notice on the clearing agent of the respondent was served on the
last date of limitation, the notice is served within time, and the claim against
the respondent is not barred under
Section 28
.
5. The narrow question which requires consideration is whether a
notice to the importer which is served on the clearing agent of the importer,
long after the goods have been cleared by the clearing agent, will amount to a
valid notice to the respondent. In this connection, the appellant has relied on
Section 147(3)
of the Customs Act, 1962. Sub-section (3) of
Section 147
provides,
"when any person is expressly or impliedly authorised by the...importer...to
be his agent in respect of such goods for all or any of the purposes under this
Act, such person shall, without prejudice to the liability of the owner or
importer...be deemed to be the owner or importer...". The proviso to
Section 147(3)
, however, makes it clear that where any duty is, inter alia, short-levied
for a reason other than any wilful act, negligence or default of the agent, the
agent shall not be liable for payment of that duty, save and except where, in the
opinion of the Assistant Collector of Customs, the duty cannot be recovered
from the owner or the importer.
Section 147(3)
does not deal with the validity
of service of a notice to an owner/importer which is served not on him but on
his clearing agent after the goods have been cleared.
Section 147(3)
read with
the proviso specifies circumstances in which the clearing agent can be treated
as the owner/importer of the goods and made liable for the payment of duty.
In the present case no notice is addressed to the clearing agent making him
liable for the short-levied duty. The notice is directed only on the respondent.
6. Under
Section 28
, notice has to be served on "the person chargeable
with duty". The person chargeable with duty in the case of imports is the
importer. If the clearing agent of the importer is sought to be made liable as
person chargeable with duty in the circumstances set out in
Section 147(3)
read
with proviso, the notice must be addressed to the clearing agent and must set out that he is being made liable under the proviso to
Section 147(3)
.
7. We do not find that in the present case, any notice has been served on
the clearing agent on the ground that the department cannot recover the duty
from the owner or importer thus making the agent liable. The notice, therefore,
cannot be construed as a valid notice against the agent for the recovery of any
duty from the agent under the proviso to
Section 147(3)
. In fact, in the present
case, on 9-10-1986, such notice could not have been served on the agent because
on 9-10-1986, there was nothing which would lead the Assistant Collector of
Customs to come to the conclusion that the duty could not be recovered from
the importer. Even a notice for recovery of duty had not been served on the
importer on 9-10-1986. Notice has been served on the importer only later, on
14-10-1986, when such service of the notice was barred by limitation. The
proviso to
Section 147(3)
does not contemplate a case where the claim against
the principal i.e. the importer is time barred because of a default on the part of
the department itself. It refers to a case where a department after taking all
necessary steps under the
Customs Act, 1962
is, for some reason, unable to
recover the duty from the importer or owner. That is not the case here. We have
not been shown any reason why the notice could not be served on the importer
within the period of six months prescribed under
Section 28
. Therefore, on the
facts of the present case, the proviso to
Section 147(3)
is not attracted.
8. In the present case, notice has been given under
Section 28
to the
owner/importer as a person chargeable to duty. The notice must, therefore, be
served on the owner/importer. A service on the clearing agent of the
owner/importer long after the clearing agent has ceased to deal with the goods
in question under the
Customs Act
, cannot be treated as valid service of notice
on the owner/importer.
9. Learned Counsel for the appellant relied upon
Section 229
of the
Contract Act under which any notice given to or information obtained by the
agent, provided it be given or obtained in the course of the business transacted
by him for the principal, shall, as between the principal and third parties, have
the same legal consequences as if it had been given to or obtained by the
principal. A contract between the importer and his clearing agent, however, is
a special contract under which a clearing agent is authorised to perform
various functions under the
Customs Act
for the purpose of clearing the goods
from the customs. Once he has discharged all his duties and functions as such
agent and the goods in question have been cleared and delivered to the importer/owner, his work as clearing agent in respect of the goods ordinarily
comes to an end. Any notice served on him thereafter in respect of goods
already cleared cannot be construed as a notice given in the course of business
of clearing the goods concerned, transacted by him for the principal.
10. We were also shown Customs House Agents Licensing Regulations, 1984. There is no provision under these Regulations which authorises
clearing agent who has already cleared the goods and completed his business
qua these goods on behalf of the principal, to accept a notice on behalf of the
principal.
11. Learned Counsel for the appellant relied upon a decision of the
CEGAT in
Almelo Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. v. Collector of Customs  (Tribunal
) in support of his contention that a notice served on the clearing agent under
Section 28
is, in law a valid notice on the importer himself. We are not in agreement with the view taken by the CEGAT.
12. The Tribunal has found on facts that there is no evidence to show
that M/s. Achuthan Pillai & Co. continued to remain as agents of the respon
dent or that as on 9-10-1986 M/s. Achuthan Pillai & Co. had been authorised or
empowered by the respondent to receive notice under the
Customs Act
on
their behalf. The Tribunal has also noted that M/s. Achuthan Pillai & Co. did
not acknowledge receipt of the notice as for or on behalf of the respondent. It
has rightly rejected the appeal of the department, looking to the totality of
circumstances.
13. The appeal is, therefore, dismissed. There will, however, be no
order as to costs in the circumstances of the case.