[Cites
14
, Cited by
573
]
Supreme Court of India
K.K. Modi vs K.N. Modi & Ors on 4 February, 1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 1297, 1998 AIR SCW 1166, 1998 UJ(SC) 1 623, (1998) 2 ICC 1, (1998) 1 SCALE 403, 1998 BOM LR 2 521, (1998) 2 APLJ 29, (1998) 92 COMCAS 30, (1998) 71 DLT 654, (1998) 1 CURCC 113, (1998) 1 SUPREME 484, (1998) 1 ARBILR 296, 1998 ADSC 1 697, (1998) 2 ALLMR 667 (SC), 1998 (3) SCC 573, (1998) 1 SCR 601 (SC), (1998) 1 JT 407 (SC)
Author:
Sujata V.Manohar
Bench:
Sujata V. Manohar
,
D.P. Wadhwa
PETITIONER:
K.K. MODI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
K.N. MODI & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	04/02/1998

BENCH:
SUJATA V. MANOHAR, D.P. WADHWA




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
[WITH C.A.No.  614 Of  1998 (Arising  out of  S.L.P. (C) No.
18711 of 1997} and T.C.{C} No. 13.97]
		      J U D G M E N T
Mrs. Sujata V.Manohar. J.
Leave granted  in Special Leave Petition Nos. 14905 and
18711 of 1997.
The present litigation has arisen on account of dispute
between Seth  Gujjar Mal  Modi's five  sons - K.K.Modi, V.K.
Modi, S.K.Modi.	 B.K.Modi  and	U.K.Modi  on  the  one	hand
(hereinafter referred  to as `Group B') and Kedar Nath Modi,
the younger  brother of	 Seth Gujjar  Mal Modi and his three
sons -	M.K.Modi and  D.K.Modi (hereinafter  referred to  as
`Group A')  on the other hand. The Modi family owns or has a
controlling  interest	in  a	number	of   public  limited
companies. They	 also own  various assets.  Differences	 and
disputes have  arisen between  Kedar Nath  Modi and his sons
constituting Group  A and  the sons  of late Gujjar Mal Modi
constituting Group  B on  the other  hand. To  resolve these
differences, negotiations  tool place  with the	 help of the
financial  institutions	  which	 had  lent  money  to  these
companies, and through whom substantial public funds had ben
invested in  the companies  owned and/or controlled by these
two groups.  Representatives of	 several banks, Reserve Bank
of India  and financial	 institutions were  also invited  to
participate.  Ultimately,   on	24th  of  January,  1989,  a
Memorandum of  Understanding was  arrived at between Group A
and Group  B.  Under  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  so
arrived at,  it is  agreed between  the parties that Group A
will manage  and/or control the various companies enumerated
in Clause  1. One  of the  companies so	 included is Modipon
Ltd. minus  Indofil (chemical  division) and selling agency.
Under Clause  2, Group	B is  entitled to manage, own and/or
control the  companies enumerated in that clause. One of the
companies so  included is  Modipon Ltd.	 minus Modipon Fibre
Division. The agreement also provides for division of assets
which are  to be valued and divided in the ration of 40:60 -
Group A getting 40% of the assets and Group B getting 60% of
the assets.  The shares	 of the companies are required to be
transferred to	the respective groups after their valuation.
Under Clause  3, valuation  has	 to  be	 done  by  M/s	S.B.
Billimoria  &	Company,  Bombay.   Clause  5  provides	 for
companies which	 are to	 be split  between the two groups as
per the	 Memorandum of Understanding. The division has to be
done under  Clause 5  by  a  scheme  of	 arrangement  to  be
formulated by  M/s Bansi  S. Mehta  & Company,	Bombay after
taking into  consideration the	valuation done	by M/s. S.B.
Billimoria &   Company,	 Bombay. Units	of a  company to  be
given to  each group  are to  be given	along with assets ad
liabilities. Clause  6	provides  for  interim	arrangements
which are to be made in respect of the three companies which
are being sp[lit - these being Modi Industries Ltd., Modipon
Ltd. and Modi Spinning and Weaving Mills Company Ltd. We are
not concerned  with the	 other clauses,	 except to note that
the date  for carrying	out valuation,	the date of transfer
the appointment	 of independent	 Chairmen of these companies
which are to be split and certain other matters specified in
the Memorandum	of Understanding  shall be done consultation
with the  Chairman, Industrial	Finance Corporation of India
(IFCI).
Clause 9 provides as follows:-
"Implementation  will  be	done  in
     consultation  with	  the  financial
     institutions.  For	  all  disputes,
     clarifications etc,  in respect  of
     implementation of	this  agreement,
     the same  shall be	 referred to the
     Chairman,	IFCI   or  his	nominees
     whose decisions  will be  final and
     binding on both the groups."
Pursuant  to  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding,  M/s	S.B.
Billimoria &  Company gave reports between January and March
1991. M/s  Bansi S.  Mehta &  Company who  were required  to
provide a  scheme for  splitting of  the three	companies by
taking	into   account	the  valuation	fixed  by  M/s	S.B.
Billimoria &  Company, also  sent  various  reports  between
November 1989  and December,   1994. The members of both the
Groups were  dissatisfied  with	 these	reports.  They	sent
various	 representations   to  the   Chairman  and  Managing
Director of the Industrial Finance Corporation of India Ltd.
in view of Clause 9 of the Memorandum of Understanding.
The Chairman  and Managing Director, Industrial Finance
Corporation of India formed a Committee of experts to assist
him in	deciding the  questions that arose. The Committee of
Experts and the Chairman, IFCI had discussions with both the
groups. Meetings  were also  held with	the Chairman  of the
concerned  companies  who  were	 independent  Chairmen.	 The
discussions took  place form  12th of  March 1995  to 8th of
December, 1995.
On 8th  of December  1995, the  Chairman, IFCI gave his
detailed decision/report.  In his  covering letter of 8th of
December,  1995,   the	Chairman   and	Managing   Director,
Industrial Finance  Corporation of  India Ltd. has described
this report  as his  decision  on  each	 dispute  raised  or
clarification sought.  He has  quoted in his covering letter
that since that memorandum of Understanding has already been
implemented to	a large extent during 1989 to 1995, with the
decisions on the disputes/clarifications gives by him now in
the enclosed  report, he has hoped that it would be possible
to  implement  the  remaining  part  of	 the  Memorandum  of
Understanding. He  has drawn attention to paragraph 9 of his
report where  he has said that it is now left to the members
of Groups  A and  B to	settle amongst themselves the family
matter without	any further  reference to  the Chairman	 and
Managing Director  of the  Industrial Finance Corporation of
India. In  paragraph 7	of the	letter he has stated that on
the basis  of the  total valuation  of Modi Group assets and
liabilities and	 allocation thereof  between Groups  A and B
the decisions given by him in dated 8.12.1995. The averments
and prayers  in this  suit were	 substantially the  same  as
those  in   the	 arbitration  petition.	 In  one  paragraph,
however, in  the plaint, it was stated that the same reliefs
were being  claimed in	a suit in the event of it being held
that the  decision of  the Chairman  and Managing  Director,
IFCI was not an arbitration award but was just a decision.
In arbitration  petition O.M.P.  No.  58  of  1996	 the
present appellants  also applied  for interim  relief by I.A
4550 of	 1996. By  an ad-interim  order in  O.M.P. No. 58 of
1996 and I.A 4550 of 1996 dated 24th of May, 1996, the Delhi
High  Court  stated  the  operation  of	 the  "award"  dated
8.12.1995 and  directions of  the Chairman,  Modipon Ltd. as
set out	 in the	 said order.  The High Court also restrained
respondents  6	 and  7	  (Group  A)   from  selling  and/or
transferring and/or  disposing of, in any manner, the shares
held by them in Godfrey Phillips India Limited until further
orders. From  this ad-interim order a special leave petition
was preferred by the respondents which was dismissed by this
Court on  3.6.1996 on  the   ground that  it was  only an ad
interim order.
Interim application  I.A 4550  of 1996  in	 Arbitration
Petition O.M.P. No. 58 of 1996 was heard and disposed of  by
the Delhi  High Court by its impugned judgment dated 11th of
February, 1997.	 A learned  Single of  the Delhi  High Court
held b y the said judgment that the decision of the Chairman
and  Managing  Director,  IFCI	dated  8.12.1995  cannot  be
considered as  an  award  in  arbitration  proceedings.	 The
parties did  not have any intention to refer any disputes to
arbitration. All the disputed were settled by the Memorandum
of Understanding  dated	 24th  of  January,  1989  and	what
remained was  only the	valuation of  shares and division of
the three  companies as	 agreed	 to  in	 the  Memorandum  of
Understanding. In  order to  avoid any disputes, the parties
had agreed  that the  Chairman and  Managing Director,	IFCI
would issue  all clarifications	 and give  his	decision  in
relation to  the  valuation under Clause 9 of the Memorandum
of Understanding. The arbitration petition, according to the
learned Single Judge, was, therefor, not maintainable, since
the decision  impugned was  not award  within the meaning of
the
Arbitration  Act,	1940
.  Under  the  circumstances  he
dismissed the  interim	application  I.A  4550	of  1996  in
arbitration petition  O.M.P. No.58  of 1996.  By t  he	said
order he posted the hearing of a similar interim application
I.A 5112  of 1996 in Suit No. 1394 of 1996 on 26th of March,
1997.
Another interim  application being	 I.A 2293 of 1997 in
arbitration petition  O.M.P. No. 58 of 1996 was heard by the
learned Single	Judge on  13th of  March, 1997.	 The learned
Single Judge  passed an	 interim order	to the	effect	that
until further  orders, no testing of the Modipon Board shall
be held for considering any matter.
On 6th  of September,  1997 Suit No. 1394 of 1996 filed
by Group  B, interim application in the suit being I.A. 5112
of 1996	 in arbitration	 petition O.M.P. No. 58 of 1996 were
heard together	and decided  by the learned Single Judge b y
his judgment  and  order  of  the  same	 date  i.e.  6th  of
September, 1997.  The learned  Single Judge  held  that	 the
entire exercise of filling Suit No. 1394 was an abuse of the
process of  the Court.	According to  him the allegations in
the arbitration	 petition and in the plaint in the suit were
identical. Both	 proceedings were  instituted  on  the	same
date. The  learned Single Judge struck down the plaint under
order VI  Rule XVI  of	the  code  of  Civil  Procedure	 and
dismissed the  suit. By	 the same  order, he  also dismissed
I.A. 5112  of 1996  in the suit and I.A. 2293 of 1997 in the
arbitration petition.
Being aggrieved  b y the above judgment and order dated
6th of	September, 1997,  the present  appellants  filed  an
appeal before  the Division  Bench of  the Delhi  High Court
being R.F.A.  (OS) 41  of 1997.	 The appellants also made an
interim application being C.M. 1270 of 1997 in R.F.A (OS) 41
of 1997.  The Division Bench of the Delhi High Court, by its
order dated  15th of  September, 1997,	admitted the  appeal
being R.F.A (OS) 41 of 1997. It also disposed of by the same
order, C.M.  1270 of  1997 by  passing an order reviving the
order passed  by the   learned	Single Judge on 13.3.1997 by
which the  learned Single  Judge had  directed that  pending
further orders	no meeting  of the  Modipon Board should b e
held to consider any matter.
S.L.P.(Civil) No.	18711/1997 is  filed before  us from
this impugned order of 15th of September, 1997. Thus we have
before us  S.L.P. (Civil)  No. 14905/1997  from the judgment
and order  of the  learned Single  Judge of   the Delhi High
Court dated  11.2.1997 in  I.A 4550  of 1996  in arbitration
petition O.M.P.	 No. 58	 of 1996.  We h	 ave also  before us
S.L.P. (Civil)	No. 18711  of	1997 from  the order  of the
Division Bench	of the	Delhi High  Court dated 15.9.1997 in
C.M. 1270 of 1997 under which the interim order of 13.3.1997
is revived.  By consent	 of parties,  R.F.A. (OS) 41 of 1997
has also  been transferred to us being T.C.(civil) No. 30 of
1997 for  consideration. All  these three  proceedings	have
been heard  together. During  the pendency of S.L.P. (Civil)
No. 18711  of 1997,  in I.A. No.3 we have b y our ad-interim
order dated  18.11.1997 varied t he interim order of 13th of
March, 1997 to the following effect:
"Until further orders no meeting of
     the Modipon Board shall be held for
     considering any  matter relating to
     decision of  the C.M.D., IFCI dated
     8.12.1995 or concerning the sale of
     shares held in Godfrey Philip India
     Limited."
Thereafter, on	7th of	January,  1998	after  hearing	both
sides, the  following order  has been  passed in I.A.No.3 in
S.L.P (Civil) No. 18711/97, in terms of the minutes :-
"For a  period of  eight weeks
     from today,  neither Mr.  K.K. Modi
     nor  Mr.  M.K.  Modi  will	 acquire
     directly or  indirectly any further
     shares of	Modipon Limited nor take
     any steps	that would  in	any  way
     directly or  indirectly  destablise
     the control  and management  of the
     Fibre Division  of Modipon	 Limited
     by Mr. K.K.Modi and of the Chemical
     Division of  Modipon Limited by Mr.
     M.K.Modi.
Liberty to	 apply for  variation if
     circumstances change."
The present proceedings raise two main question :
Question 1:   Whether  Clause 9  of the  Memorandum  of
Understanding dated  24th of  January, 1989  constitutes  an
arbitration agreement;	and  whether  the  decision  of	 the
Chairman, IFCI	dated  8th  December,  1995  constituted  an
award? and
     Question 2:   Whether Suit No. 1394/1996 is an abuse of
the process of court?
Question No.1:
Mustill  and   Boyd  in   their  book   on	 "Commercial
Arbitration", 2nd  Edition, at	page 30, point out that in a
complex	 modern	  State	 there	is  an	immense	 variety  of
tribunals,  differing	fundamentally	as   regards   their
compositions, their  functions and  the sources	 from  which
their powers  are  derived.  Dealing  with  tribunals  whose
jurisdiction is derived from consent of parties, t hey list,
apart from  arbitral tribunals, persons (not properly called
Tribunals) entrusted by consent with the power to affect the
legal rights  of two  parties inter see in a manner creating
legally enforceable  rights, but  intended to  do  so  by  a
procedure of  ministerial and  not a  judicial, nature	(for
example, persons  appointed by contract to value property or
to  certify   the  compliance	of  building  works  with  a
specification).	 There	are  also  other  tribunals  with  a
consensual jurisdiction	 whose	decisions  are	intended  to
affect the  private rights of two parties inter see, but not
in a  manner which creates a legally enforceable remedy (for
example,   conciliation	  tribunals   of   local   religious
communities,  or  persons  privately  appointed	 to  act  as
mediators between  two disputing persons or groups). Mustill
and Boyd  have listed  some of	he attributes  which must be
present for  an agreement to be considered as an arbitration
agreement, though  these attributes in themselves may not be
sufficient.   They    have   also   listed   certain   other
consideration which  are relevant to this question, although
not conclusive on the point.
Among the	attributes which  must	be  present  for  an
agreement to be considered as an arbitration agreement are :
(1) The arbitration agreement must contemplate that the
	  decision of  the tribunal  will be  binding on the
	  parties to t he agreement,
     (2) That the jurisdiction of the tribunal to decide the
	  rights of parties must derive either from the
	  consent of the parties or from an order of the
	  Court or from a statute, the terms of which make
	  it clear that the process is to be an arbitration,
     (3) The  agreement must  contemplate  that	 substantive
	  rights of parties will be determined by the agreed
	  tribunal,
     (4) That  the tribunal will determine the rights of the
	  parties in  an impartial  and judicial manner with
	  the tribunal owing an equal obligation of fairness
	  towards both sides,
     (5) That  the judgment  of the  parties to	 refer their
	  disputes to  the decision  of the tribunal must be
	  intended to be enforceable in law and lastly,
     (6) The  agreement must  contemplate that	the tribunal
	  will make  a decision	 upon  a  dispute  which  is
	  already formulated at the time when a reference is
	  made to the tribunal.
The other	factors which  are relevant include, whether
the agreement  contemplates that  the tribunal	will receive
evidence from  both sides  and hear  their contentions or at
least give  the parties	 an opportunity to put them forward;
Whether the  wording  of  the  agreement  is  consistent  or
inconsistent with  the view that the process was intended to
be an  arbitration, and	 whether the  agreement requires the
tribunal to decide the dispute according to law.
In Russell	 on Arbitration,  21st Edition,	 at page 37,
paragraph 2-014,  the question	: How to distinguish between
an expert  determination and arbitration, has been examined.
It is  stated, "Many  cases have  been fought over whether a
contract's chosen  form	 of  dispute  resolution  is  expert
determination  or   arbitration.  This	 is  a	 matter	  of
construction of	 the contract,	which involves	an objective
enquiry into the intentions of the parties. First, there are
the express  words of the disputes clause. If specific words
of  the	  disputes  clause.   If  specific   words  such  as
'arbitrator', 'arbitral	 tribunal', 'arbitrator' are used to
describe the manner in which the dispute resolver is to act,
they  are  likely  to  be  persuasive  although	 not  always
conclusive.......... Where  there is no express wording, the
court will  refer to  certain guidelines. Of these, the most
important used	to, whether there was an 'issue' between the
parties such as the value  of an asset on which they had not
taken defined  positions, in  which case  the procedure	 was
held to	 be expert  determination; or a 'formulated dispute'
between the  parties where defined positions had been taken,
in which  case the  procedure was held to be an arbitration.
This imprecise	concept is  still being	 relied	 on.  It  is
unsatisfactory because some parties to contract deliberately
chose expert  determination for dispute resolution. The next
guideline is  the judicial  function of an arbitral tribunal
as opposed  to the  expertise of  the expert'...........  An
arbitral tribunal  arrives at  its decision  on the evidence
and submission	of the	parties and must apply the law or if
the parties agree, on other consideration; an expert, unless
it is agreed otherwise, makes his own enquiries, applies his
own expertise and decides on his own expert opinion......"
The authorities thus seem to agree that while there are
no conclusive  tests, by  and large, one can follow a set of
guidelines in  deciding whether the agreement is to refer an
issue to  an expert  or whether	 the parties  have agreed to
resolve disputes through arbitration.
Therefore	our  courts  have  laid	 emphasis  on	 (1)
existence of  disputes as  against intention to avoid future
disputes; (2) the tribunal or forum so chosen is intended to
act judicially	after taking  into account relevant evidence
before it and the submissions made by the parties before it;
and (3)	 the decision  is  intended  to	 bind  the  parties.
Nomenclature used  by the parties may not be conclusive. One
must examine  the true	intent and support of the agreement.
There are,  of	course,	 the  statutory	 requirements  of  a
written	 agreement,  existing  or  future  disputes  and  an
intention to  refer them  to arbitration.  (Vide
Section  2
Arbitration  Act   1940	 and
Section	7
Arbitration	 and
Conciliation Act, 1996).
In the  case of
Smt. Rukmanibai  Gupta  v.  Collector,
Jabalpur &  Ors.
[(1980)  4 SCC	 556], this Court dwelt upon
the fact  that disputes were referred to arbitration and the
fact that  the decision	 of the	 person to whom the disputes
were referred  was made final, as denominative of the nature
of the	agreement which	 the court  held was  an arbitration
agreement.
In the  case of
State of U.P. v. Tipper Chand
[(1980) 2
SCC 341],  a clause  in the contract which provided that the
decision of  the Superintending	 Engineer  shall  be  final,
conclusive and	binding on  all parties to the contract upon
all questions relating to the meaning of the specifications,
designs, drawings  and instructions  was  contoured  as	 not
being an  arbitration clause.  This Court said the there was
no mention  in this  clause of	any dispute,  much less of a
reference thereof.  The purpose of the clause was clearly to
vest the  Superintending Engineer  with supervision  of	 the
execution of  the work	and administrative  control over  it
from time to time.
In the case of
Cursetji Jamshedji Ardaseer Wadia & Ors.
v.   Dr. R.D.Shiralee
[AIR 1943  Bombay 32]  the test which
was emphasised	was whether the intention of the parties was
to avoid  disputes or  to resolve  disputes.
In	 the case of
Vadilal Chatrabhuj  Gandhi v.  Thakorelal Chimanlal  Munshaw
[55 Bombay  Law Reporter  629] the  emphasis was on judicial
enquiry and  determination as  indicative of  an arbitration
agreement  as	against	 an  expert  opinion.  The  test  of
preventing disputes  or deciding  disputes was also resorted
to for	the purpose of considering whether the agreement was
a reference  to	 arbitration  or  not.	In  that  case,	 the
agreement provided that the parties had agreed to enter into
a compromise  for payment of a sum up to, but not exceeding,
Rs. 20	lacs, "which  shall be borne and paid by the parties
in such	 proportions or	 manner	 as  Sir  Jamshedji  B.Kanga
shall, in  his absolute	 discretion, decide  as a valuer and
not as	an  arbitrator	after  giving  each  of	 us  summary
hearing." The  court said that the mere fact that a judicial
enquiry had been held is not sufficient to make the ultimate
decision a  judicial  decision.	 The  court  held  that	 Sir
Jamshedji Kanga	  had  not to  decide upon  the evidence led
before him.  He had  to decide	in his	absolute discretion.
There was  not to  be judicial enquiry worked out a judicial
manner. Hence this was not an arbitration.
In the  case of
State of West Bengal & Ors. v. Haripada
Santra
[AIR   1990  Calcutta	83],   the   agreement	 the
Superintending Engineer	 of the	 Circle shall  be final	 The
court relied  upon  the	 fact  that  the  reference  was  to
disputes  between  the	parties	 on  which  a  decision	 was
required to  be	 given	by  the	 Super	intending  Engineer.
Obviously, such	 a decision  could b  e arrived	 at b  y the
Superintending Engineer	 only when  the dispute was referred
to him by either party for decision. He was also required to
act judicially	and decide  the disputes  after hearing both
parties and  after considering	the material  before him. It
was, therefore, an arbitration agreement.
In	 the   case  of
Jammu	 and  Kashmir  State  Forest
Corporation v.	Abdul Karim  Wani &  Ors.
[(1989)  2 SCC 701
para  24],   this  Court  considered  the  agreement  as  an
agreement of  reference to  arbitration. It  has  emphasised
that (1) the agreement was in writing; (2) It was a contract
at present  time to  refer the	dispute arising	 out of	 the
present contract;  and (3)  There was  a valid	agreement to
refer the  dispute to  arbitration of the Managing Director,
Jammu  and  Kashmir  State  Forest  Corporation.  The  Court
observed that endeavor should always be made to find out the
intention of the parties, and that intention has to be found
out by	reading the  terms broadly and clearly without being
circumscribed.
The decision  in the  case of
Rukmanibai Gupta
(supra)
has been  followed by  this Court  in the case of
M.Dayanand
Reddy v.  A.P. Industrial Infrastructure Corporation Limited
& Ors.
[(1993) 3 SCC 137 para 8], Commenting on the special
characteristics of  an arbitration agreement this court h as
further	 observed
in
the   above  case
that	 arbitration
agreement embodies  an agreement between the parties that in
case  of   a  dispute  such  dispute  shall  be	 settled  by
arbitrator or  umpire of  their own  constitution or  by  an
arbitrator to  be appointed  by the  court in an appropriate
case. "It  is pertinent	 to mention that there is a material
difference in  an arbitration  agreement inasmuch  as in  an
ordinary contract  the obligation  of the  parties  to	each
other cannot,  in  general,  be	 specifically  enforced	 and
breach of  such terms  of contract  results only in damages,
The  arbitration  clause,  however,  can  b  e	specifically
enforced by the machinery of the
Arbitration Act
.........".
The Court	has further  observed that  it	is  to	b  e
decided whether	 the existence	of an agreement to refer the
dispute to  arbitration can  be clearly	 ascertained in	 the
facts and  circumstances of the case. This, in turn, depends
on the	intention of  the parties  to be  gathered from	 the
relevant documents and surrounding circumstances.
The decisions in the case of
State of U.P. Tipper Chand
(supra) and
Rukmanibai Gupta
(supra) have  also been cited
with approval by this Court in the case of
State of Orissa &
Anr. v.	 Damodar Das
[(1996) 2 SCC 216]. In this case, t his
Court considered  a clause  in the  contract which  made the
decision of  the Public	 Health Engineer, "final, conclusive
and binding  in respect	 of all	 questions relating  to	 the
meaning of  specifications, drawings,  instructions...... or
as to  any other  question claim,  right,  matter  of  thing
whatsoever in  any way	arising out  of or  relating to	 the
contract,  drawings,   specifications,	estimates......	  or
otherwise concerning  the works	 or the execution or failure
to execute   the same whether arising during the progress of
the work or after the completion or the sooner determination
thereof the contract." This Court held that  this was not an
arbitration clause.  It did not envisage that any difference
or dispute  that  may arise in execution of the works should
be referred to the arbitration of an arbitrator.
A long line of English cases starting with In Re Carus-
Wilson and Greene  [1986 (18) Queen's	Bench  Division	  7]
have also  been cited  before us.  In  Re  Carus-Wilson	 and
Green, on  the sale  of land,  one of the conditions of sale
was that the purchaser should pay for the timber on the land
at a  valuation for which purpose, each party should appoint
a valuer and the valuers should, before they proceed to act,
appoint an  umpire. The	 court said  that such valuation was
not in	the nature of an award.	 The court applied the tests
which we  have already	referred to, namely, (1) Whether the
terms of  the agreement	 contemplated that  the intention of
the parties  was for  the person,  to hold an enquiry in the
nature of  a judicial  enquiry, hear  the respective case of
the parties  and decide	 upon evidence	laid before him, (2)
Whether the person was appointed to prevent differences from
arising and  not for settling them when they had arisen. The
court held  the agreement  to be for valuation. It said that
the fact that if the valuers could not agree as to price, an
umpire was  to be  appointed would  not indicate  that there
were any disputes between the parties.
In the  case of  Sutcliffe v.  Thackrah [1974  (1)	 AER
859], the  clause in  question provided	 that  at  specified
intervals the  architect should	 issue interim	certificates
stating the  amount due	 tot he	 builders in respect of work
properly executed.  There was a separate arbitration clause.
The question  was whether  the function of the architect was
sufficiently  judicial	 in  character	for  him  to  escape
liability in negligence. The House of Lords was not directly
concerned with the question whether the architect was acting
as an  arbitrator or  a valuer.	 It was	 required to  decide
whether the  architect, who had not taken sufficient care in
certifying the	amount payable,	 should be  held  liable  in
negligence. And	 the court said that when a professional man
was employed to make a valuation, and to his knowledge, that
valuation was  to be  binding on  his principal	 and another
party under  an agreement  between them,  it did  not follow
that because  he was  under   a duty to act fairly in making
his valuation,	he was	immune from  liability for negligent
valuation. A  similar  question	 arose	in  connection	with
valuation of  shares by	 auditors in  the case of Arenson v.
Casson Beckman Rutely & Co. [1975 (3) AER 901]. The House of
Lords said  that an  auditor of	 a private  company who,  on
request, valued	 the shares  in the company in the knowledge
that his valuation was to determine the price to be paid for
the shares  under a  contract of sale, was liable to be sued
by the	seller	or  the	 buyer	if  he	made  the  valuation
negligently. These two case do not directly assist us in the
present case.
In the  case of Imperial Metal Industries (Kynoch) Ltd.
v. Amalgamated	Union of  Engineering Workers  [1979 (1) AER
847], the  contract between the parties included a clause to
the effect  that persons in the employment of the contractor
were required  to be  paid fair	 wages	as  per	 Fair  Wages
Resolution. A  trade union complained that the conditions of
the Fair  Wages Resolution  were not  being observed b y the
employers.  This   dispute  was	  referred  to	the  Central
Arbitration Committee.	The Court  said that even though the
Committee was  acting as arbitrators, they were not doing so
pursuant to  arbitration agreement  as defined	in  the	 Act
because the  arbitration was  required	to  be	between	 the
parties to the parties to the agreement about a matter which
they had  agreed to  refer to  arbitration. In	the  present
case, the Union was not a party to the contract.
In the  present case,  the Memorandum  of Understanding
records the settlement of various dispute as between Group A
and Group  B in terms of the Memorandum of Understanding. In
terms of  the settlement,  the shares  and assets of various
companies are  required to be valued in the manner specified
in the	agreement. The	valuation is  to be done by M/s S.B.
Billimoria &  Co. Three	 companies which  have to be divided
between the  two groups are to be divided in accordance with
a scheme  to be	 prepared by  Bansi S.	Mehta &	 Co. In	 the
implementation of  the Memorandum  of Understanding which is
to be  done in consultation with the financial institutions,
any disputes  or clarifications	 relating to  implementation
are to	be referred  to the  Chairman, IFCI  or his nominees
whose decision	will be	 final and  binding. The  purport of
Clause 9 is to prevent any further disputes between Groups A
and B. Because the agreement requires  division of assets in
agreed proportions after their valuation by a named body and
under a	 scheme of  division by another named body. Clause 9
is intended  to clear any other difficulties which may arise
in the	implementation of the agreement by leaving it to the
decision of  the Chairman,  IFCI.  This	   clause  does	 not
contemplate any judicial determination by the Chairman of he
IFCI. He is entitled to nominate another person for deciding
any question.  His decision has been made final and binding.
Thus, Clause  9 is  not intended  to be	 for  any  different
decision that  what  is	 already  agreed  upon	between	 the
parties	 to   the  dispute.   It  is   meant  for  a  proper
implementation of  settlement already arrived at. A judicial
determination,	recording   of	 evidence   etc.   are	 not
contemplated. The  decision of	the Chairman  IFCI is  to be
binding on  the parties. Moreover, difficulties and disputes
in implementation may not be between the parties disputes in
implementation	may  not  be  between  the  parties  to	 the
Memorandum of Understanding. It is possible that the Valuers
nominated in  the Memorandum  of Understanding	or the	firm
entrusted with	the responsibility  of splitting some of the
companies  may	require	 some  clarifications  or  may	find
difficulties in	 doing the  work. They	can also  escort  to
Clause 9.  Looking  to	the  scheme  of	 the  Memorandum  of
Understanding and  the purpose behind Clauses 9, the learned
Single	Judge,	 in  our  view,	 has  rightly  come  to	 the
conclusion that	 this was not an agreement to refer disputes
to arbitration. It was meant to be an expert's decision. The
Chairman, IFCI has designated his decision as a decision. He
has consulted  experts	in  connection	with  valuation	 and
division of  assets. He	 did not  file his decision in court
nor did any of the parties request him to do so.
Undoubtedly, in  the course of correspondence exchanged
by various  members of	Groups A  and B	 with the  Chairman,
IFCI, some  of the members have used the words "arbitration"
in connection with Clause 9. That by itself, however, is not
conclusive. The intention of the parties was not to have any
judicial determination	on the	basis of evidence led before
the Chairman,  IFCI. Nor  was the Chairman, IFCI required to
base his  decision only on the material placed before him by
the parties  and their	submissions. He was free to make his
own inquiries.	He had to apply his own mind and use his own
expertise for  the purpose.  He was free to take the help of
other experts.	He was	required to  decide the	 question of
valuation and the division of assets as an expert and not as
an arbitrator.	He had been authorise to nominate another in
his place.  But	 the  contract	indicates  that	 he  has  to
nominate an  expert. The  fact that  submissions  were	made
before the  Chairman, IFCI,  would not	turn  the  decision-
making process into an arbitration.
The Chairman,  IFCI has  framed issues before answering
them in	 his decision.	These issues  have  been  framed  by
himself for  the purpose  of enabling  him to pinpoint those
issues which  require  his  decision.  There  is  no  agreed
reference in respect of any specific disputes by the parties
to him.
The  finality   of  the	 decision  is	also
indicative of  it  being  an  expert's	decision  though  of
course, this  would not	 be conclusive.	 But looking  at the
nature of  the functions  expected to  be performed  by	 the
Chairman,  IFCI,  in  our  view,  the  decision	 is  not  an
arbitration award.  The learned	 Single Judge was, therefor,
right in  coming to  the  conclusion  that  the	 proceedings
before the Chairman, IFCI, were not arbitration proceedings.
Nor was his decision an award. Appeal arising out of Special
Leave Petition	No. 14905  of 1997  is, therefore, dismissed
with costs.
Question No. 2:
The next  question which requires to be decided related
to Suit	 No. 1394  of 1996.  The learned  Single  Judge	 has
struck off  the plaint	in the	suit as being an abuse of he
process of  court. The appellants had filed this suit in the
Delhi High  Court on  the same	day as	Arbitration Petition
bearing	 O.M.P.	 No.58	of  1996.  It  challenges  the	same
decision of  the Chairman,  IFCI which	is challenged in the
arbitration petition as an award.
The learned Single Judge has compared the plaint in the
suit with  the petition filed under the
Arbitration Act
. The
prayers in  the arbitration  petition are  for a declaration
(a) that  the award  of the C.M.D., IFCI, dated 8.12.1995 is
illegal, bad  in  law  and  null  and  void;  (b)  that	 the
directions given  and actions taken by the Chairman, Modipon
Ltd, in	 letters dated	22-1-1996, 5.2.1996,  17.4.1996	 and
24.4.1996 and the scheme of arrangement drawn up by M/s S.S.
Kothari &  Co. are illegal and bad in law; (c) that the said
award to  the Chairman	and Managing  Director, IFCI and the
said letters  and directions  of the  Chairman, Modipon Ltd,
and the said scheme of arrangement drawn by M/s S.S. Kothari
&  Co.	 be  set   aside;  (d)	for  a	perpetual  injection
restraining the	 respondents from taking any action directly
or indirectly  in pursuance of or to give effect to the said
award; (e)  for a perpetual injection restraining respondent
no .5  from passing any resolutions in terms of the proposed
items 8	 and 9	set out in the notice regarding the proposed
Board Meeting of Modipon Ltd.; (f) for a perpetual injection
restraining respondents 6 and 7 from selling or disposing of
shares in  Godfrey Phillips  India Ltd. or from dealing with
the said  shares in a manner contrary to the scheme prepared
by M/s	Bansi S.  Mehta &  Co. and  for	 further  and  other
reliefs.
In the  plaint in the suit, prayers (c), (d), (e), (f),
(G) &  (h) are identical with the prayers in the arbitration
petition with  small variations which are of no consequence.
The remaining  prayers are  as follows:	 Prayer (a) is for a
declaration  that  the	Memorandum  of	Understanding  dated
24.1.1989 is  binding on  both the plaintiffs and defendants
and all	 parties are  bound in law to act in conformity with
the same. Prayer (b) is for a declaration that neither the
Chairman, IFCI	nor the Chairman, Modipon Ltd. had any power
to alter,  amend, or  modify in	 any manner  the  scheme  of
separation drawn  by M/s  Bansi S. Mehta & Co. Prayer (i) is
for an	injection restraining  the defendants from altering,
amending or  modifying the  scheme of separation drawn up by
M/s Bansi  S.Mehta & Co. Prayer (j) is for a decree ordering
and directing  Modipon Ltd.  to be  split in accordance with
the   scheme of	 separation drawn up by M/s Bansi S. Mehta &
Co. and	 prayer (k)  is for  a decree ordering and directing
the implementation  of the  said Memorandum of Understanding
dated 24.1.1989	 in respect of Modipon Ltd, in such a manner
that the  control and  a  management  of  Chemical  Division
including the shares of Modi Group Company allotted to Group
B held	by Modipon  Ltd, is  vested in the plaintiff and the
control and  management of  the	 remainder  of	the  company
including the  Fibre Division  is vested in the Group A. The
paragraphs in the plaint and in the arbitration petition are
verbatim that  same to a substantial extent. The respondents
have pointed  out that	paragraphs 1A to 54A in the petition
are the	 same as  paragraphs 1	to 54A	in the	plaint.	 The
grounds which  are set out in the petition as well as in the
plaint are also substantially the same.
Mr. Nariman, learned senior counsel for the appellants,
however, has  drawn our	 attention to  paragraph 55  of	 the
plaint. In paragraph 55 it is stated as follows:
"The  plaintiff  says  and	 submits
     that as the said Ruling/Decision of
     the CMD,  IFCI  is	 an  Arbitration
     Award within  the	meaning	 of  the
Arbitrator Act,  1940
, the legality
     and validity  of the  same	 can  be
     questioned and a prayer can be made
     for setting  aside that  said award
     only  in  an  arbitration	petition
     filed  under
Section  33
of  the
     Arbitration    Act,    1940.    The
     Plaintiff	is,   therefore,  filing
     along  with  the  present	suit  an
     Arbitration  Petition   under   the
     provisions of  he
Arbitration  Act
,
     challenging   the	  legality   and
     validity	of   the   said	  award.
However, the  present suit	 is also
     being  filed   in	respect	  of  he
     actions   of   third   parties   in
     pursuance of  and to give effect to
     the said  Award.  Further,	 in  the
     event of  it being contended by any
     of the  defendants	 herein,  or  it
     being held	 by this  Hon'ble  Court
     for  any	reason	that   the  said
     Ruling/Decision of the CMD, IFCI is
     not  an   Arbitration  Award,   the
     legality and  validity of	the said
     Ruling/Decision   is   also   being
     challenged in the present suit."
He	  has submitted	 that in  the event of it being held
that Clause  9 of  the Memorandum of Understanding is not an
arbitration clause  and the  decision of the Chairman, IFCI,
is not an award, it is open to the appellants to file a suit
to challenge the decision. This is the reason why along with
the arbitration	 petition, a  suit has also been filed as an
alternative  method  of	 challenging  the  decision  of	 the
Chairman and  Managing Director,  IFCI, is  not an award. He
has contended  that filling  a separate	 proceeding in	this
context cannot	be considered  as an  abuse of he process of
the court;  and the  learned Single  Judge was	not right in
striking out the plaint under
Order 6 Rule 16 of the Code of
Civil Procedure
.
Under Order  6 Rule  16, the Court may, at any state of
he proceeding,	order to  b e  struck out,  inter alia,	 any
matter in  any pleading	 which is  otherwise an abuse of the
process of  the court.	Mulla in his treatise on
the Code of
Civil Procedure
. (15th Edition, Volume II, page 1179 note 7)
has stated that power under clause (c) of Order 6 Rule 16 of
the Code  is confined to cases where the abuse of he process
of the	Court is  manifest from the pleadings; and that this
power is  unlike the  power  under  Section  151  whereunder
Courts have  inherent power  to strike	out pleadings  or to
stay or	 dismiss proceedings  which are	 an abuse  of  their
process. In  the present  case the  High Court	has held the
suit to	 be an	abuse of he process of Court on the basis of
what is stated in the plaint.
The Supreme  Court Practice  1995 published  by Sweet &
Maxwell in paragraph 18/19/33 (page 344) explains the phrase
"abuse of  the	process	 of  the  court"  thus:	 "This	term
connotes that  the process  of the  court must	be used bona
fide and  properly and	must not  be abused.  The court will
prevent improper  use of  its machinery and will in a proper
case, summarily	 prevent its  machinery from being used as a
means  of   vexation  and   oppression	in  the	 process  of
litigation........ The	categories of  conduct	rendering  a
claim frivolous,  vexatious or	an abuse  of process are not
closed but  depend on  all the	relevant circumstances.	 And
for this  purpose considerations   of  public policy and the
interests of justice may be very material."
One of the examples cited as an abuse of the process of
court is re-litigation. It is an abuse of the process of the
court and  contrary to justice and public policy for a party
to re-litigate	the same issue which h as already been tried
and decided earlier against him. The re-agitation may or may
not be	barred as  res judicata.  But if  the same  issue is
sought to be re-agitated, it also amounts to an abuse of the
process of  court. A proceeding being filed for a collateral
purpose, or  a spurious	 claim being  made in litigation may
also in	 a given  set of  facts amount	to an  abuse of	 the
process of the court. Frivolous or vexatious proceedings may
also amount  to an abuse of the process	 of court especially
where the  proceedings are  absolutely groundless. The court
then has  the power  to stop  such proceedings summarily and
prevent the  time of  the public  and t	 he court from being
wasted. Undoubtedly,  it is  a matter  of courts' discretion
whether such  proceedings should be stopped or not; and this
discretion has	to be exercised with circumspection. It is a
jurisdiction  which   should  be  sparingly  exercised,	 and
exercised only	in special  cases. The	court should also be
satisfied that there is no chance of the suit succeeding.
In the  case of  Greenhalgh v.  Mallard [19147  (2) AER
255] the  e court  had to  consider different proceedings on
the same  cause of  action for	conspiracy, but supported by
different averments.  The Court,  held that if the plaintiff
has chosen  to put his case in one way, he cannot thereafter
bring the same transaction before the court, put his case in
another way  and say  that he  is relying  on a new cause of
action. In such circumstances he can be met with the plea of
res judicata or the statement or plaint may be struck out on
the ground  that the action is frivolous and vexation and an
abuse of the process of court.
In Mcllkenny v. Chief Constable of West Midlands Police
Force and another [1980 (2) AER 227], the Court of Appeal in
England struck	out the	 pleading on  the  ground  that	 the
action was  an abuse  of the  process of  the court since it
raised an  issue identical  to that  which had	been finally
determined at  the plaintiffs'	earlier criminal  trial. The
court said  even when  it is  not possible to strike out the
plaint on  the ground  of issue	 estoppel, the action can be
struck out  as an  abuse of the process of the court because
it is  an abuse	 for a	party to  re-litigate a	 question or
issue which has already been decided against him even though
the other  party cannot	 satisfy  the  strict  rule  of	 res
judicata or the requirement of issue estoppel.
In the  present case, the learned Judge was of the view
that  the   appellants	had   resorted	 to   two   parallel
proceedings, one  under the
Arbitration Act
and the other by
way of a suit. When the order of interim injunction obtained
by the	appellants was	vacated in  arbitration proceedings,
they obtained  an injunction in the suit. The learned Single
Judge also  felt that the issues in the two proceedings were
identical, and	the suit  was substantially to set aside the
award. He,  therefore, held  that the proceeding by way of a
suit was  an abuse of the process of court since it amounted
to litigating  the same	 issue in  a different forum through
different proceedings.
The  perception   of   the	  Learned   Judge   may	  be
substantially correct  throughout entirely  so. Undoubtedly,
if the	plaint in the suit is viewed as challenging only the
arbitration award,  a suit  to challenge  the award would be
re-litigating the  issues already  raised in the arbitration
petition. The  suit would also be barred under
Section 32
of
the Arbitration	 Act, 1940.
Section 32
of the	 Arbitration
Act, 1940 provides that notwithstanding any law for the time
being in  force, no suit  shall lie on any ground whatsoever
for a  decision upon  the existence effect or validity of an
arbitration agreement  or award,  nor shall  any arbitration
agreement or  award b  e set  aside, amended, modified or in
any way affected otherwise than as provided in this Act.
According to  the appellants,  however, the suit is not
confined only  to  challenging	the  award  or	steps  taken
pursuant to the award by the Chairman, Modipon Ltd. in order
to enforce  it. According  to the  appellants, in  the	suit
there is  an alternative  plea that if the impugned decision
of  the	  Chairman  and	  Managing  Director,  IFCI  is	 not
considered as  an awards,  then that  decision as a decision
should be  set aside.  It is  contended that the suit, in so
far as	it challenges  the  decision  of  the  Chairman	 and
Managing Director,  IFCI, as  a decision and not as an award
is maintainable.  In support,  the e  appellants have relied
upon the  submissions in  paragraph 55	of the	plaint which
were have set out earlier.
The plaint	 in the	 suit, tot he limited extent that it
challenges the	decision as  a decision, would not amount to
abuse of  the process  of Court.  We are  not called upon to
examine whether	 this alternative submission is supported by
proper averments  and whether  there is	 a proper  cause  of
action	framed	 in  the   plaint  in  Support	of  such  an
alternative plea.  This is  a matter which the court hearing
the suit  will have  to examine and decide. But in the suit,
the decision cannot be challenged as if it were an award and
on the	same grounds  as if it were an award. The court will
also have  to consider the binding nature of such a decision
particularly when  no mala  fides have	been alleged against
the CMD,  IFIC. If  ultimately it  is found that even on the
alternative plea,  the claim  is not  maintainable the court
may pass  appropriate orders  in accordance with law. But to
the limited  extend that  the  suit  erased  an	 alternative
independent plea,  it cannot  be considered as re-litigation
of the same issue or an abuse of the process of court.
In	 a   proceeding	 under	 the
Arbitration  Act
,	 the
appellants could not have raised an alternative plea that in
case the  impugned decision  is treated not as an award. but
as a  decision, the same is bad in law. This plea could only
have been raised by filing a separate suit. Similarly in the
suit, the  appellants could  not h ave raised an alternative
plea that  in case the impugned decision is considered as an
award, the  same should	 be set	 aside. For  this purpose an
arbitration petition was required to be filed. Therefor, the
suit, if  and to the extent that it challenges in accordance
with law,  the impugned	 decision as  a decision,  cannot be
treated as an abuse of	the process of the court.
Group A  also contends  that there	 is no	merit in the
challenge to  the decision of the Chairman of IFCI which has
been made binding under the Memorandum of Understanding. The
entire Memorandum of Understanding including Clause 9 has to
be looked  upon	 as  a	family	settlement  between  various
members	 of   the  Modi	 family.  Under	 the  Memorandum  of
Understanding, all  pending the	 Modi family forming part of
either Group  A or  Group B  have been	finally settled	 and
adjusted. Where it has become necessary to split any of	 the
existing companies,  this has  also  been  provided  for  in
Memorandum of  Understanding. It  is a	complete settlement,
providing how  assets are  to be  valued, how they are to be
dividing some  of the specified companies has to be prepared
and who	 has to	 do this  work.	 In  order  to	obviate	 any
dispute, the parties have agreed that the entire working out
of this agreement will b e subject to such directions as the
chairman, IFCI	may give pertaining to the implementation of
Memorandum of  Understanding. He  is also  empowered to give
clarifications and  decide any	differences relating  tot he
implementation of  the Memorandum  of Understanding.  Such a
family settlement  which settled  disputes within the family
should not  be lightly	interfered with	 especially when the
settlement has	been already  acted upon  by some members of
the family.  In the  present case,  from 1989  to  1995	 the
Memorandum of  Understanding has  been	substantially  acted
upon and  hence the  parties must  be held to the settlement
which is  in the  interest of  the family  and which  avoids
disputes between the members of the family. Such settlements
have  to  be  viewed  a	 little	 differently  from  ordinary
contracts and  their internal  mechanism for working out the
settlement should  not be lightly disturbed. The respondents
may make  appropriate submissions  in this connection before
the High  Court. We are sure that they will be considered as
and when  the High  Court is  required to  do so  whether in
interlocutory proceedings or at the final hearing.
The appeal	 of the	 appellants from the judgment of the
Learned Judge  striking out the plaint is, therefore, partly
allowed and  the suit,	to the	extent	that  it  challenges
independently the  decision of	the  Chairman  and  Managing
Director, IFCI	as a  decision	and  not  as  an  award,  is
maintainable in	 the sense  that it  is not  an abuse of the
process of  the court.	We make	 it clear  that we  are	 not
examining the  merits of the claim nor whether the plaint in
the suit  discloses a  cause of	 action in  this regard. The
plaint leaves  much to	be desired  and it  is for the trial
court to decide these and allied questions. The plaint in so
far as	it challenges  the decision  as an  award and on the
same  grounds	as  an	 award;	 or  seeks  to	prevent	 the
enforcement of	that award  by the Chairman, Modipon Ltd. or
in any	other way has been rightly considered as an abuse of
the process  of court  since the  same reliefs	have already
been asked  for in  the arbitration  petition. The  Transfer
Case No.13 of 1997 is, therefore, partly allowed.
We also  direct that all the defendants in he said suit
who are	 supporting the	 Plaintiffs shall  be transposed  as
plaintiffs along  with the  original plaintiffs	 since	they
have a	common	cause  of  action.  For	 this  purpose,	 the
plaintiffs shall carry out necessary amendments in he causer
title and  any consequential amendments in he suit with four
weeks of this order.
Pending the  hearing and  final disposal of the suit in
he Delhi  High Court  and/or until  any further	 orders	 are
passed by the trial court if the exigencies of the situation
then prevailing	 so require, no meeting of the Modipon Board
shall be  held for  considering any  matter relating  to the
decision  of   the  CMD,  IFCI	dated  8.12.1995.  Also	 the
defendants in  eh said	suit (Group  A) shall  not sell	 any
shares held  in Godfrey	 Phillips India	 Ltd.  provided	 the
plaintiffs in the suit deposit in the Delhi High Court a sum
of Rs.5 crores (Five Crores) within four weeks from the date
of this	 order. In the event of their failure to deposit the
said  amount   within  the   aforesaid	period,	  the  order
restraining the	 defendants (Group  A) from selling the said
shares shall stand vacated. The amount so deposited shall be
invested  by   the  High  Court	 in  Fixed  Deposits  within
Nationalised Banks pending further orders. The interim order
of 7th	January, 1998  will continue  to  operate  in  terms
thereof. In  the event	of any	change in the circumstances,
the parties  will be  at liberty  to apply to the High Court
for any	 variation  of	this  order.  Appeals  arising	from
Special Leave  Petition Nos. 14905/97, 18711/97 and Transfer
Case No. 13/97 are disposed of accordingly together with all
interim applications.