[Cites
2
, Cited by
104
]
Supreme Court of India
Narsi vs State Of Haryana on 12 November, 1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1999 SUPREME COURT 234
Bench:
G.T.Nanavati
,
S.Rajendra Babu
PETITIONER:
NARSI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF HARYANA

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	12/11/1998

BENCH:
G.T.NANAVATI, S.RAJENDRA BABU




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
Nanavati. J.
The appellant has been convicted under
Section 25
of
the Arms Act and
Section 5
of the TADA Act by the Designated
Court,	Bhiwani	 as  he	 was  found  in	 possession   of   a
countrymade 315 bore pistol and a live cartidge.
The Designated Court relying upon  the	evidence  of
P.W.2  - Ganga Ram held that the allegation made against the
appellant was proved and he was infect found  in  possession
of a  pistol and a live cartidge.  The Designated Court also
relied upon the report of Forensic  Science  Laboratory	 and
held that the pistol was in a working condition.
What  is  contended  by	 the learned counsel for the
appellant is that the Designated Court failed to  appreciate
that the evidence of Ganga Ram was so improbable that it did
not deserve to be accepted.  As disclosed by the prosecution
evidence,  a  space was registered against the appellant and
seven others for the offence of murder on November  1,	1988
at Fatehabad Police Station.  The police was on look out for
the appellant.	   On  8th  November,  1988,  the  appellant
accompanied by his maternal uncle presented  himself  before
the Officer  incharge  of the Fatehabad Police Station.	 SHO
Ganga Ram took him in custody and at that  time	 found	from
his possession,	 a  pistol  and	 a cartidge.  No independent
witness was kept present at the time of	 either	 taking	 the
appellant  into	 custody or while seizing the pistol and the
cartidge.  The reason given by Ganga Ram in this  behalf  is
the  because his maternal uncle was present he did not think
it fit to call bay other person to witness  the	 seizure  of
the weapon  and	 the  cartidge.	   This	 obviously is a lame
excuse.	 In absence of any independent evidence, seizure  of
a  pistol  and	a  cartidge from possession of the appellant
becomes doubtful.    It	 is  also  highly   improbable	 the
appellant  had	presented  himself  with  a weapon which was
unlicensed.  He had not gone there to make a confession.  He
had gone to the police station because he was wanted by	 the
police in  that	 case.	No other witness was examined by the
prosecution on the point of  recovery  of  a  pistol  and  a
cartidge from  the  possession	of  the	 appellant.   As the
evidence of Ganga Ram does not appear to  be  truthful,	 the
conviction of the appellant will have to be set aside.
We,  therefore,	 allow this appeal and set aside the
conviction of the appellant and also the order	of  sentence
passed	against	 him  and acquit him of the charges levelled
against hem.