[Cites
3
, Cited by
18
]
Supreme Court of India
Jag Narain Prasad vs The State Of Bihar on 31 March, 1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 2879, 1998 AIR SCW 1767, 1998 (3) SCALE 197, 1998 CRIAPPR(SC) 216, 1998 SCC(CRI) 1346, 1998 (2) BLJR 986, (1998) 3 JT 460 (SC), 1999 (3) SRJ 395, 1998 (4) ADSC 349, (1998) 2 EASTCRIC 77, (1998) 23 ALLCRIR 1236, (1998) 2 CHANDCRIC 45, (1998) SC CR R 497, (1998) 2 RECCRIR 472, (1998) 2 SCJ 232, (1998) 4 SUPREME 175, (1998) 3 SCALE 197, (1998) 37 ALLCRIC 30, (1998) 3 BLJ 520, (1998) 2 ALLCRILR 695, (1998) 2 CRIMES 250, 1998 (2) ANDHLT(CRI) 35 SC
Bench:
G. T. Nanavati
,
V.N. Khare
PETITIONER:
JAG NARAIN PRASAD

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE STATE OF BIHAR

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	31/03/1998

BENCH:
G. T. NANAVATI, V.N. KHARE




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
NANAVATI, J.
The appellant, along with his son Om Prakash, was tried
for the	 offence of  murder of	Prabhakar  Kumar  Martin  in
Sessions Trial	No. 130	 of 1985,  in the  court of  the 1st
Additional Sessions  Judge, Arrah. The trial court convicted
Om Prakash  under
Section  302
, IPC  and the  appellant	 jag
narain was  convicted under
section 302
read with
Section
34
/
109
, IPC. Both of them appealed to the High Court against
their conviction  but without any success. They then applied
to this	 Court for  special leave  to file an appeal against
the judgment  of the High Court. This Court granted leave to
appellant Jag  Narain only  an dismissed  the special  leave
petition of Om Prakash.
The prosecution case was that on 5.9.1984 at about 8.30
a.m. Om Prakash was seen by Shailendra going on a cycle with
high speed.  As his nephew was playing in the lane and could
have been hit by the cycle, he scolded Om Prakash by telling
him not	 to drive  cycle so speedily in the lane. Om Prakash
replied	 by   saying  that   the  lane	did  not  belong  to
Shailendra's father.  That  led	 to  an	 exchange  of  wards
between Om prakash and Shailendra. While leaving that place,
Om Prakash  threatened Shailendra  that he would teach him a
lesson. within	few minutes,  Om prakash returned with a gun
followed by  his father appellant jag Narain and his younger
brother chhote.	 By that  time Prabhakar and Regina had also
come in the lane and they saw Om Prakash coming towards them
with a	gun. Regina tried to prevent him from coming near by
holing him  and his gun and it is at that point of time that
the appellant  exhorted Om  Prakash not	 merely to  look  at
their faces  bu to fire his gun. Thereupon, Om Prakash fired
a shot	which hit  prabhakar. Prabhakar died before he could
reach the hospital. All the three accused were chargesheeted
but as it was noticed that the third accused Chhote was aged
about 15  years only,  his case	 was separated and the trial
proceeded against the appellant and Om Prakash only.
In order  to prove its case, the prosecution had mainly
relied upon  the evidence  of five eye-witnesses - PW- 1 Raj
Kumar,	PW-3   Martin  sarfin,	 PW-4  Regina  Martin,	PW-5
Shailendra Kumar Martin and PW-6 Agness Joseph. PW-6 did not
support the  prosecution and  she  was	declared  a  hostile
witness and  was also  permitted to be cross-examined by the
Public Prosecutor.  The trial court believed the evidence of
other four  witnesses  and  convicted  Om  Prakash  and	 the
appellant as stated above.
The High Court was of the view that the evidence of PWs
3,4 and	 5 was	quite believable  because they were the most
natural witnesses  as the  incident had	 taken place just by
the  side  of  their  house  and  their	 evidence  was	also
consistent and	convincing. In view of the infirmity noticed
in the	evidence of  PW-1, the	High Court thought it fit to
ignore his  evidence. Thus, relying upon the evidence of PWs
3,4 an	5 ,  the High  Court confirmed the conviction of the
appellant of the Om Prakash.
What is  contended	 by  the  learned  counsel  for	 the
appellant is  that the evidence of the four eye-witnesses is
not at	all consistent as regards the actual words spoken by
the appellant  before Om  Prakash fired	 his  gun.  He	also
submitted that	PWs 3  and 4  had made material improvements
and, therefore,	 their evidence	 should not have been relied
upon by	 the High  Court. He also submitted that even though
PWs 4  and 5  had consistently	stated	that  appellant	 Jag
Narain had  exhorted his  son to fire a shot, their evidence
ought not  to have  been believed  as it was improbable that
for a  trivial reason like scolding by a neighbour, he would
have told  his son  to	kill  the  neighbour  and  thus	 get
involved in  a serious offence of murder. On the other hand,
it  was	 submitted  by	Shri  B.B.  Singh,  learned  counsel
appearing for  the State  that since  the  evidence  of	 the
prosecution witnesses has been found to be consistent and as
their evidence	has been  believed by both the courts below,
this court  should not	interfere merely because a different
view on appreciation of their evidence is possible.
As stated	earlier, we  are now  not concerned with the
conviction of  Om  Prakash  and	 the  only  question  to  be
considered is  whether the appellant had really exhorted his
son to	kill any one from the other side . According to PW-1
Raj Kumar,  the appellant had stated: " why are you watching
their faces, kill those persons".  This	    witness	 was
contradicted by	 his police  statement wherein	he  had	 not
stated that  the appellant  had exhorted  his son  to fire a
shot. He  was also  contradicted  by  his  police  statement
wherein he  had not  even referred to the name	of appellant
jag Narain  as one of the accused present at the time of the
incident. PW-3	Martin Sarfin  stated before  the court that
the appellant  had given  an order  and upon  his  order  Om
prakash had  fired a  shot. He	did not	 refer to  the exact
words spoken by the appellant. Moreover, we find that he had
tried to  make an important improvement by stating that Arun
had a  pistol in  his hand  at the  time of the incident. No
other  witness	 had  stated   like  that.  This  deliberate
improvement made by the witness indicates that he was not an
impartial and  truthful witness	 and had  tried	 to  falsely
implicate Arun	by ascribing  a positive  role to    him  by
stating that  he was  carrying a  pistol at  the time of the
incident. PW-4	Regina Martin  had stated  before the  court
that the  appellant had told his son: " What are you seeing,
fire." Apart  from the	other inconsistencies as regards the
sequences of  the events, we find that she had also tried to
make an improvement by stating that she had tried to prevent
Om Prakash  from firing	 his gun bu Om Prakash gave her push
with the  butt of  his gun  and had them fired at Prabhakar.
PW-5 Shailendra	 deposed  that	the  words  uttered  by	 the
appellants were: " What are you seeing, shoot a bullet. " He
had lodged  the FIR  . Therein	what  he had stated was that
the appellant had told his son "what were they seeing and to
kill them"  . From the above narration of what the witnesses
had stated, it clearly appears that there is not consistency
as regards  the words  spoken by  the  appellant  before  Om
Prakash had fired his gun. PW-1	   had not stated before the
police that  the appellant was present when Om Prakash fired
a shot.	 Though there  is no evidence to show that there was
any previous  enmity between  the prosecution  witnesses and
the appellant  and his	sons, they  having lost one of their
family members had tried to implicate all the three accused.
Their version  also appears  to be  improbable and unnatural
because the  appellant being  an aged  person would not have
told his  son to  fire a  shot, kill  the neighbour  and get
himself involved  in  a	 serious  offence  of  murder.	What
appears to have happened is that having noticed that his son
was going out with a gun, he followed him with a view to see
what was  happening and	 also to prevent him from committing
any offence. There is no evidence to show that the appellant
had started  along with his son from his house. The evidence
also discloses	that houses of the prosecution witnesses and
the  accused   were  very  close  to  each  other.  Possible
believing that	mere presence  of the  father at the time of
the incident  will not	be regarded as sufficient to involve
him, PWs  3 to	6 who  are all family members appear to have
attributed certain words to him.
All these	aspects have not been considered by the High
Court. We  are of  the view  that the  prosecution  has	 not
proved	beyond	reasonable  doubt  that	 the  appellant	 had
exhorted his  son to  kill Prabhakar  and therefore the High
Court was  not right  in confirming  the conviction  of	 the
appellant. We,	therefore, allow  this appeal, set aside the
judgment and  order passed  by the High Court and acquit the
appellant of the charge levelled against him. His bail bonds
are ordered to be discharged.