[Cites
1
, Cited by
52
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Punjab vs Gian Kaur And Anr on 5 March, 1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 2809
Bench:
G.T. Nanavati
,
V.N. Khare
PETITIONER:
THE STATE OF PUNJAB

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
GIAN KAUR AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	05/03/1998

BENCH:
G.T. NANAVATI, V.N. KHARE




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
NANAVATI, J.
The State	has filed  t his appeal against the judgment
of the	Punjab &  Haryana High	Court in Criminal Appeal No.
13/87. The High Court acquitted both the respondents for the
offence punishable  under Section  302 read  with
Section 34
IPC.
Both the  respondents alongwith  two others  were tried
for  causing   death  of  Rita,	 Respondents  -	 Gian  Kaur,
Balvinder kaur,	 Darshan lal  and Balbir were the mother-in-
law, sister-in-law,  father-in-law and	husband respectively
of Rita (deceased).
The proesecution  case was that they were not satisfied
with the  dowry given  to her  by her parents at the time of
her marriage  and that had often led to quarrels between the
accused	 and   Rita  and   her	parents.  According  to	 the
prosecution, on	 21.6.86 at  about 6.00	 p.m., Gian Kaur and
Balvinder Kaur sprinkled kerosene on her and thereafter Gian
kaur set  her on  fire by  throwing a lighted match stick on
her. It was further alleged that the mother-in-law wanted to
get her	 son re-married	 and for that reason also she wanted
to kill her.
The  only	 evidence  which   was	relied	 on  by	 the
prosecution and	 on the	 basis	of  which  the	trial  court
convicted  Gian	 Kaur  and  Balvinder  kaur  was  the  dying
declaration recorded by ASI-Darshan Singh - PW 5.
The High Court disbelieved the dying declaration on the
ground that  even thought  according to the medical evidence
Rita had  100% burns  over her	body. The  High Court relied
upon the  deposition of	 Doctor Aneja, who had performed the
post-mortem and who has categorically stated that there were
100% burns  over her  body and both  the thumbs of Rita were
burnt. In view of such inconsistent evidence, the High Court
was right  in giving benefit of doubt to the respondents. It
cannot be said in this case that the High Court has taken an
unreasonable view.
This appeal  is, therefore,  dismissed, Bail  bonds are
ordered to be cancelled.