[Cites
5
, Cited by
374
]
Supreme Court of India
Shreenath & Another vs Rajesh & Others on 13 April, 1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 1827, 1998 (4) SCC 543, 1998 AIR SCW 1619, 1998 (2) ALL CJ 1008, 1998 (33) ALL LR 273, 1998 (2) SCALE 725, 1998 SCFBRC 220, 1998 ALL CJ 2 1008, 1998 (3) ADSC 624, (1998) 3 ALLMR 213 (SC), (1998) 33 ALL LR 273.2, (1998) 1 KER LT 95, (1998) 2 SCR 709 (SC), 1998 ADSC 3 624, (1998) 3 JT 244 (SC), 1998 (2) UJ (SC) 60, 1998 UJ(SC) 2 60, 1999 (1) SRJ 418, (1998) 1 LS 544, (1998) 2 APLJ 279, (1998) 3 ANDHLD 273, (1998) 3 ANDH LT 1, (1998) 1 RENCR 454, (1998) 2 ALL RENTCAS 683, (1998) 2 ALL WC 1403, (1998) 2 CIVILCOURTC 202, (1998) 2 JAB LJ 187, (1998) 2 MAD LW 418, (1998) 3 MAH LJ 1, (1998) 2 MPLJ 180, (1998) 1 RENTLR 564, (1998) 2 RAJ LW 279, (1998) 2 SCJ 432, (1998) 4 SUPREME 155, (1998) 2 ICC 484, (1998) 2 SCALE 725, (1998) 3 CIVLJ 625, (1998) 2 CURLJ(CCR) 184
Bench:
K. Venkataswami
,
A.P. Misra
PETITIONER:
SHREENATH & ANOTHER

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RAJESH & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	13/04/1998

BENCH:
K. VENKATASWAMI, A.P. MISRA




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
Misra, J.
The seekers  of justice  many a time has to take a loan
circuitous routes,  both on  account of	 hierarchy of Courts
and the	 procedural law. Such persons are and can be dragged
till the  last ladder  of the  said hierarchy  for receiving
justice but  even here	he only breaths earness of receiving
the fruits of that justice for which he has been aspiring to
receive. To reach this stage is in itself an achievement and
satisfaction as	 the, by  then has  passed  through  a	long
arduous journey	 of the	 procedural  law  with	may  hurdles
replica of  mountain attain with ridges and furrows. When he
is ready  to take  the bite  of that  fruit, he	 has to pass
through the  same terrain  of  the  procedural	law  in	 the
execution proceedings  the morose is writ large on his face.
What looked  inevitable to  him to  receive it	at his hands
distance is  deluded back  into the horizon. The creation of
hierarchy of  Courts was  for  a  reasonable  objective	 for
confering greater  satisfaction to  the parties that errors,
if any, by any of the lower Courts under the scruitiny	of a
higher Court be rectified and long procedural laws also with
good intention	to exclude  and filter	out all unwanted who
may be	the cause  of obstruction  to such  seekers  in	 his
journey to  justice. But this obviously is one of the causes
of delay in justice. Of course, under this pattern the party
wrongfully gaining  within permissible limits also stretches
and litigation	an much as possible. Thus, this has been the
cause  of   anxiety  and  concern  of  various	authorities,
Legislators  and  Courts.  How	to  eliminate  such  a	long
consuming justice?  We must confess that we have still to go
long  way   before  true  satisfaction	in  this  regard  is
received. Even	after one reaches the stage of final decree,
he has	to undergo  a long  distance by	 passing through the
ordained procedure  in the  execution proceedings  before he
receives the bowl of justice.
The   Courts   within   its   limitations	 have	been
interpreting the  procedural laws  so  as  to  conclude	 all
possible disputes pertaining to the decreetal property which
is within  fold in  an execution  proceeding i.e., including
what  may  be  raised  later  by  way  of  another  bout  of
litigations through  a fresh  suit.  Similarly	legislatures
equally are  also endeavouring	by amendments to achieve the
same objective.	 the present  case is  one in  this  regard.
Keeping this  in view, we now proceed to examine the present
case.
In interpreting any procedural law, where more than one
interpretation is  possible,  the  one	which  curtails	 the
procedure without  eluding the justice is to be adopted. The
procedural law	is always  subservient to  and is  in aid to
justice. Any  interpretation which  eludes or frustrates the
receipient of justice is not to be followed.
This appeal arises out of the judgment and order of the
High Court  of Madhya  Pradesh, Bench  at Indore,  in  Civil
Revision No. 406 of 1983.
The question  raised is,  whether the  third  party  in
possession of  a property  claiming independent	 right as  a
tenant not  party to  a decree	under execution could resist
such decree  by seeking adjudication of his objections under
order 21, Rule 97 of the Civil Procedure code?
The respondent  No. 1,  Rajesh, filed  a suit  for	 the
redemption of  his mortgage  against respondent	 No.2,	Prem
Shanker, which was decreed. The decree directed the delivery
of vacant  possession  of  the	mortgaged  property  to	 the
applicant (Respondent  No.1). In  the said suit, admittedly,
the present  appellants were  not parties. The decree-holder
put his	 decree in execution in which the present appellants
obstructed on  the ground  that vacant	possession cannot be
delivered in  execution because they were the tenants in the
shop from  the year  1952 much	before the  execution of the
mortgage which	was in the year 1962, hence, only symbolical
possession can	be given.  There  has  been  two  rounds  of
proceedings in	execution. Initially,  the  Executing  Court
held that  the decree-holder was not entitled to take actual
possession in  execution of  the  decree  against  the	non-
applicants. The	 case of  the decree-holder  is that  in the
suit it	 was held  that the  mortgagor had to deliver vacant
possession to  the mortgagee.  hence he	 is entitled  to get
back vacant  possession. Thus	he  made strong	 plea for  a
vacant possession  in terms  of the  decree. For  him, it is
submitted that a similar objection was taken by the judgment
debtor Prem  Shanker that  only symbolic possession could be
given to  the decree-holder.  The objection was negatived by
the trial court, appellate court, and even by the High Court
in the	second appeal.	Hence, the executing court cannot go
behind the  decree. The	 appellants case  is they  were	 not
parties to those proceedings. However, this objection of the
decree-holder  was  rejected  in  the  first  round  by	 the
Executing Court	 and the  Revisional Court  holding that the
person	resisting  viz.	 the  present  appellants  were	 not
parties to the suit nor there is any decree against them. It
seems subsequently,  the decree-holder	again moved  another
application in the aforesaid execution case No. 1A of 19970-
81 for delivery of vacant possession. The present appellants
also moved an application/objections under order 21,
Rule 97
C.P.C
. resisting  that they  cannot be dispossessed in terms
of the	said decree,  as they  were not	 parties to the said
suit nor  they are  deriving any right and title through the
Judgement debtor.  They claim separate and independent legal
right, not  affected either by the mortgage or redemption of
the mortgage.  it is  not clear	 as under what circumstances
the second application for actual possession was made by the
decree-holder after  the matter	 was  earlier  disposed	 of.
Since this point seem not raised either before the Executing
Court or the High Court, we are not adverting to this point.
We  find   the	Executing  Court  in  the  second  round  on
consideration of  a subsequent decision of the Full Bench of
the M.P.  High Court  in  Smt.	Usha  Jain  and	 others	 Vs.
manmohan Bajaj and others (AIR 1980 (Vol 67) M.P. 146), held
that the  appellants had  no right  to object  to the decree
under order 21, Rule 97. The said full Bench held :-
"The executing  Court	 has  no
     jurisdiction to  start  an	 enquiry
     suo motu  or at  the instance  of a
     third party  other than the decree-
     holder/aution-purchaser under 0.21,
     Rule  97.	 This  rule   is  merely
     permissive	 and  not  mandatory  so
     that   the	   decree-holder/aution-
     purchaser not  resort to it against
     his will  and may	even  apply  for
     fresh warrant  under 0.21,	 R.  35,
C.P.C
. Executing Court is not bound
     to stay  its  hands  the  moment  a
     third party  files an  objection to
     the execution  nor the  stay  would
     continue till  an unwilling decree-
     holder/auction-purchaser is  forced
     to apply for investigation into the
     right or title claimed by the third
     party  and	  negative   the   claim
     therein.  If  the	executing  Court
     were  to	stay  its   hands   till
     investigation into	 a third party's
     claim is  not finally  decided then
     it would  result in  depriving  the
     decree-holder of  his possession by
     filing repeated spurious claims.
	  No enquiry  into the	title or
     possession	 of  a	third  party  is
     contemplated at  any  rate	 at  his
     instance either  under Rules 35 and
     36 or rules 95 and 96 of Order, 21,
C.P.C
. when  the  decree-holder  or
     the  auction-purchase  applies  for
     obtaining possession.  Subsequently
     when the decree-holder or auction -
     purchaser is  met with  obstruction
     or	  resistancee	 in    obtaining
     possession, one of the options open
     to him  is to  apply under	 Rule 97
     but  that	 provision   is	  merely
     permissive and not mandatory and it
     is	   open	    to	  the	 decree-
holdr/auction-purchaser	   apply
     instead  for  a  fresh  warrant  of
     possession.  an   enquiry	at   the
     instance  of   a  third   party  in
     possession	 is   contemplated  only
     under  0.21.R   100  after	 he  was
     dispossessed and not before it.
	  The omission	by the executing
     Court  to	 investigate  into   the
     objection filed  by a  third  party
     does not result in injustice to the
     third party. It cannot be said that
     he would  have no remedy to protect
     his possession  and have  his title
     judicially	 investigated  brief  to
     his dispossession	his only  remedy
     then being under order 21, Rule 100
     after dispossession. Another remedy
     available to  such a third party is
     to institute  an independent  civil
     suit for a declaration of his title
     claiming  therein	 the  relief  of
     temporary injuction  to protect his
     possession."
The High  Court  upheld  the  Executing  Court's  order
following the  said Full  Bench decision  of the  M.P.	High
Court. hence  this appeal.  The	 only  question	 raised	 is,
whether the  Full Bench	 decision is  correctly decided.  In
view of this Full Bench decision, objection of the appellant
was rejected  without considering the points raised on merit
or other objections.
In order  to appreciate the controversy, order 21, Rule
35, order  21, Rule  36 and  order 21,	Rule 97	 are  quoted
hereunder :-
"O.  21.  R.	35:  Decree  for
     immovable property :-
(1) Where  a decree is for the
     delivery of any immovable property,
     possession	  thereof    shall    be
     delivered to  the party  to whom it
     has  been	 adjudged,  or	to  such
     person as he may appoint to receive
     delivery on  his  behalf,	and,  if
     necessary, be  removing any  person
     bound by  the decree who refuses to
     vacate the property.
(2) Where  a decree is for the
     joint   possession	  of   immovable
     property, such  possession shall be
     delivered by affixing a copy of the
     warrant in	 some conspicuous  place
     on the  property and proclaiming by
     beat of  drum, or	other  customary
     mode, at some convenient place, the
     substance of the decree.
	  (3) Where  a possession of any
     building  is  enclosure  is  to  be
     delivered	 and   the   person   in
     possession,  being	  bound	 by  the
     decree,  does   not   afford   free
     access,  the   court,  through  its
     officers,	 may,	 after	  giving
     reasonable warning	 and facility to
     any woman	not appearing  in public
     according to  the	customs	 of  the
     country to withdraw, remove or open
     any lock  or bolt or break open any
     door or  do any other act necessary
     for putting  the  decree-holder  in
     possession.
O.21, R.36 Decree for delivery
     for  immovable   property	when  in
     occupancy of tenant:-
Where	 a  decree  is	for  the
     delivery of  any immovable property
     in the  occupancy of  a  tenant  or
     other person entitled to occupy the
     same and not bound by the decree to
     relinquish	 such	occupancy,   the
     court shall  order delivery  to  be
     made by  affixing	a  copy	 of  the
     warrant in	 some conspicuous  place
     on the property, and proclaiming to
     the occupant  by beat  of	drum  or
     other  customary	mode,  at   some
     convenient place,	the substance of
     the  decree   in  regard	to   the
     property.
O.21, R.  97 :  Resistance  or
     obstruction   to	 possession   of
     immovable property :-
(1)  Where  the  holder  of  a
     decree  for   the	 possession   of
     immovable property the purchaser of
     any such property sold in execution
     of	 a   decree   is   resisted   or
     obstructed	  by   any   person   in
     obtaining	 possession    of    the
     property,	 he    may    make    an
     application    to	   the	   Court
     complaining of  such resistance  or
     obstruction.
(2) Where  any application  is
     made under	 sub rule  (1) the court
     shall proceed  to	adjudicate  upon
     the application  in accordance with
     the provisions herein contained."
This sub-clause (2) was substituted by the
Amending Act
1976. Earlier sub-clause (2) was :
"The Court  shall fix a day of
     investigating the	matter and shall
     summon the	 party against	whom the
     application is  made to  appear and
     answer the same."
Under sub-clause  1 order	21, Rule  35, the  Executing
Court delivers	actual physical	 possession of	the disputed
property to the decree-holder and, if necessary, by removing
any person  bound by  the decree  who refuses  to vacate the
said property.	The significant	 words are  by removing	 any
person bound  by he  decree. Order  21, Rule 36 conceives of
immovable property  when in  occupancy of  a tenant or other
person	not   bound  by	  the  decree,	the  Court  delivers
possession  by	 fixing	 a  copy  of  the  warrant  in	some
conspicuous place  of the  said property and proclaiming  to
the occupant by beat of drum or other customary mode at some
convenient place,  the substance  of the decree in regard to
the property.  In other	 words, the  decree-holder gets	 the
symbolic  possession.	Order  21,   rule  99  conceives  of
resistance or  obstruction to  the possession  of  immovable
property when  made in	execution  of  a  decree  by  "	 any
person". this  may be  either by  the person  bound  by	 the
decree, claiming  title through	 judgment debtor or claiming
independent right  of his  own including tenant not party to
the suit  or even a stranger. A decree holder, in such case,
may make  an application  to the Executing Court complaining
such resistance, for delivery of possession of the property.
Sub-clause  (2)	  after	 1976	substitution  empowers	 the
executing Courts  when such  claim is  made  to	 proceed  to
adjudicate upon	 the applicants	 claim	in  accordance	with
provisions contained  hereinafter. This	 refers to Order 21,
Rule 101 (As ammended by 1976 Act) under which all questions
relating to right, title or interest in the property arising
between the parties under Order 21, Rule 97 or Rule 99 shall
be determined  by the  Court and  not by a separate suit, By
the amendment,	one has	 not to	 go for a fresh suit but all
matter pertaining  to that  property even if obstructed by a
stranger is  adjudicated and  finality	given  even  in	 the
executing proceedings.	We find	 the expression "any person"
under sub-clause  (1) is  used deliberately for widening the
scope of  power so that the Executing court could adjudicate
the claim  made in any such application under order 21, Rule
97. Thus  by the  use of  the words 'any person' it includes
all persons resisisting the delivery of possession, claiming
right in  the property	even those  not bound by the decree,
includes tenants  or other  persons claiming  right on their
own including a stranger.
So, under	order 21,  Rule 101 all disputes between the
decree-holder and  any such  person is	to be adjudicated by
the Executing  Court. A	 party is not thrown out to religate
itself to  the long  drawn out arduous proceedure of a fresh
suit. This  is to  salvage the possible hardship both to the
decree-holder and  other person	 claiming title on their own
right  to   get	 it   adjudicated  in	the  very  execution
proceedings. We find that order 21, Rule 35 deals with cases
of delivery  of possession  of an  immovable property to the
decree-holder by  delivery of actual physical possession and
by removing  any person	 in possession	who is	bound  by  a
decree,	 while	 under	Order  21,  Rule  36  only  symbolic
possession is  given where  tenant is  in actual possession.
Order 21,  rule 97  as aforesaid,  conceives of	 cases where
delivery of  possession to  decree-holder  or  purchaser  is
resisted by any person. 'Any person' , as aforesaid, is wide
enough to  include even	 a person  not bound  by a decree or
claiming right	in the property on his own including that of
a tenant including stranger.
Prior to the 1976
Ammending Act
, provisions under Order
21, Rules  97 to 101 and 103 were different which are quoted
hereunder :-
"97.(1) Where	 the holder of a
     decree  for   the	 possession   of
     immovable property or the purchaser
     of	 any   such  property	sold  in
     execution of  a decree  is resisted
     or	 obstructed  by	 any  person  in
     obtaining	 possession    of    the
     property he may make an application
     to the  Court complaining	of  such
     resistance or obstruction.
     (2) The  Court shall  fix a day for
     investigating the	matter and shall
     summon the	 party against	whom the
     application is  made to  appear and
     answer the same.
98. Where	the Court  is  satisfied
     that the  resistance or obstruction
     was  occasioned  without  any  just
     cause by  the judgment debtor or by
     some   other    person    at    his
     instigation, it  shall direct  that
     the   applicant	be   put    into
     possession	 of  the  property,  and
     where  the	  applicant   is   still
     resisted or obstructed in obtaining
     possession, the  court may also, at
     the  instance   of	 the  applicant,
     order the	judgment-debtor, or  any
     person acting at his instigation to
     be detained in the civil prison for
     a term  which may	extend to thirty
     days.
99. Where	the court  is  satisfied
     that the  resistance or obstruction
     was occasioned by any person (other
     than the  judgment-debtor) claiming
     in good  faith to	be in possession
     of the  property on his own account
     or on  account of some person other
     than the judgment-debtor, the Court
     shall make	 an order dismissing the
     application.
100. (1)  Where  any  person  other
     than   the	   judgment-debtor    is
     dispossessed of  immovable property
     by the  holder of	a decree  for he
     possession	 of  such  property  or,
     where such	 property or  where such
     property has been sold in execution
     of	 a decree, by purchaser thereof,
     he may  make an  application to the
     Court    complaining     of    such
     dispossession.
(2) The  Court shall  fix a day for
     investigating the	matter and shall
     summon the	 party against	whom the
     application is  made an  answer the
     same.
101. Where	 the Court  is satisfied
     that   the	   applicant   was    in
     possession of  the property  on his
     own account  or on	 account of some
     person  other  than  the  judgment-
debtor, it	 shall direct  that  the
     applicant be put into possession of
     the property.
103.  Any	 party	 not   being   a
     judgment-debtor  against	whom  an
     order is  made under  rule 98, rule
     99 and  rule 101  may  institute  a
     suit to  establish the  right which
     he claims to the present possession
     of the  property, but,  subject  to
     the result	 of such  suit (if any),
     the order shall be conclusive."
So far  sub-clause (1) of Rule 97 the provision is same
but after  1976	 amendment  all	 disputes  relating  to	 the
property made  under Rules  97 and  99 is  to be adjudicated
under Rule  101, while	under unamended provision under sub-
clause (2) of Rule 97, the Executing Court issues summons to
any such  person obstructing  possession over  the  decretal
property. After	 investigation under  Rule 98  he Court puts
back a	decree-holder in  possession where  the Court  finds
obstruction was	 occassioned without  any just	cause, while
under rule  99 where obstruction was by a person claiming in
good faith  to be  in possession  of the property on his own
right,	the   Court  has   to  dismiss	 the   decree-holder
application. Thus  even prior  to 1976	right of  any person
claiming right	on his	own or as a tenant, not party to the
suit such person's right has to be adjudicated under rule 99
and he	need not fall back to file a separate suit, By this,
he is  saved from  a long  litigation. So  a tenant  or	 any
person claiming	 a right  in the  property, on	his own,  if
resists delivery  of possession	 to  the  decree-holder	 the
dispute and his claim has to be decided after 1976 amendment
under Rule  97 read with Rule 101 and prior to the amendment
under Rule 97 read with Rule 99. However, under the old law,
in cases  order	 is  passed  against  the  person  resisting
possession under Rule 97 read with Rule 99 then by virtue of
Rule 103, as it then was, he has to file a suit to establish
his right.  But now  after the	 amendment one need not file
suit even  in such  cases as  all disputes are to be settled
by the Executing court itself finally under rule 101.
We find  both either  under the  old law or the present
law the	 right of  a tenant  or any person claiming right on
his own	 of the	 property in  case he resists, his objection
under order  21, Rule 97, has to be decided by the Executing
court itself.
Rule 100  of the  old law, as referred in the aforesaid
Full Bench  decision of	 the madhya  Pradesh High Court is a
situation different  from what	is covered by Rule 97. Under
rule 100  (old law)  and Order	99 the	new law covers cases
where persons  other than judgment-debtor is dispossessed of
immovable property  by the  decree-holder, of  course,	such
cases are also covered to be decided by the Executing Court.
but this will not defeat the right of such person to get his
objection decided  under Rule  97 which	 is a stage prior to
his dispossession  or a	 case where  he is in possession. In
other  words,	when  such   person  is	 in  possession	 the
adjudication to	 be under  rule 97  and in case dispossessed
adjudication to	 be under  rule 100  (old law)	and Rule  99
under the  new law.  Thus a  person holding possession of an
immovable property  on his  own	 right	can  object  in	 the
execution proceeding under Order 21, rule 97. One has not to
wait for  his dispossession  to enable him to participate in
the execution  proceedings. This  shows that such person can
object	and  get  adjudication	when  he  is  sought  to  be
dispossessed by	 the decree-holder.   For  all the aforesaid
reasons, we  do not  find the  Full Bench  in Smt. Usha jain
(supra) correctly decided the law.
In
Noorduddin  Vs. Dr. K.L. Anand
(1995 (1) SCC 242) it
is held :-
"Para B:  Thus the  scheme  of
     the Code  clearly	adumbrates  that
     when an  application has  been made
     under Order  21, Rule 97, the court
     is enjoinded to adjudicate upon the
     right, title  and interest	 claimed
     in the property arising between the
     parties to	 a proceeding or between
     the decree-holder	and  the  person
     claiming independent  right,  title
     or	 interest   in	 the   immovable
     property  and   an	 order	in  that
     behalf be	made. the  determination
     shall  be	conclusive  between  the
     parties  as  if  it  was  a  decree
     subject or	 right of appeal and not
     a	matter	 to  be	 agitated  by  a
     separate suit.  In other  words, no
     other proceedings	were allowed  to
     be taken.	It has	to be remembered
     that preceding
Civil Procedure Code
     Amendement Act, 1976
, right of suit
     under Order  21, rule  103 of  1908
     code was  available which	has been
     now  taken	  away.	  By   necessary
     implication,    the     legislature
     relegated	 the   parties	 to   an
     adjudication  of  right,  title  or
     interest in  the immovable property
     under execution  and  finality  has
     been  accorded  to	 it.  Thus,  the
     scheme of the Code appears to be to
     put an  and to  the protraction  of
     the execution  and to  shorten  the
     litigation between	 the parties  or
     persons claiming  right, title  and
     interest in  the immovable property
     in exeuction."
In
Brahmdeo  Chaudhary Vs. Rishikesh Prasad Jaiswal and
Another
(1997) (3) SCC 694), the question raised was whether
a stranger  occuping the  premises on  his  own	 right	when
offered resistance  to the  execution of the decree obtained
by the	decree holder  can or  cannot request  the Executing
Court to  adjudicate his  claim without	 being insisted upon
that first  he must handover the possession and then move an
application under Order 21, Rule 97. It is held in para 9 :-
"Para	 9   :	In   short   the
     aforesaid statutory  provisions  of
     Order 21  lay down	 a complete code
     for    resolving	 all	disputes
     pertaining	 to   execution	 of  the
     decree for possession obtained by a
     decree-holder and whose attempts at
     executing the said decree meet with
     rough weather.  Once resistance  is
     offered by	 a purported stranger to
     the decree	 and which  comes to  be
     noted by  the  executing  court  as
     well as  by the  decree-holder  the
     remedy  available	to  the	 decree-
     holder the	 remedy available to the
     decree-holder   against   such   an
     obstructionist is	only under Order
     21, Rule  97, sub-rule  (1) and  he
     cannot bypass  such obstruction and
     insist on reissuance of warrant for
     possession under  Order 21, Rule 35
     with the  help of	police force, as
     that   course   would   amount   to
     bypassing	and   circumventing  the
     procedure laid down under Order 21,
     Rule 97.. ..............."
In view of the aforesaid finding and the law being well
settled the interpretation given by the aforesaid full Bench
of the	M.P. High Court in the case of Usha Jain Vs.Manmohan
Bajaj (supra)  cannot be  held to  be a good law. As we have
recorded above,	 both the Executing Court and the High court
have rejected  the application	of the applicant under Order
21, Rule  97 only  on the  basis  of  the  said	 Full  Bench
decision,  hence   the	said   order  cannot  be  sustained.
Accordingly, both  the	orders	dated  20th  February,	1985
passed by  the High  Court in civil Revision No. 406 of 1983
and the	 order dated  20th April,  1983 passed	by Executing
Court in execution  case No. 1-A/70/81 is herewith quashed.
We direct	the Executing  Court to consider and dispose
of the	objections and	the application	 of  the  appellants
under Order  21, Rule  97 after	 giving opportunity  to	 the
parties in  accordance with  law. The  appeal is accordingly
allowed. On the facts and circumstances of the case, cost on
the parties.