[Cites
17
, Cited by
23
]
Supreme Court of India
Mayawati vs Markandeya Chand & Ors on 9 October, 1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 3340, 1998 (7) SCC 517, 1998 AIR SCW 3281, 1998 ALL. L. J. 2550, 1998 (7) ADSC 533, (1998) 7 JT 36 (SC), 1998 ADSC 7 533, 1998 (7) JT 36, (1999) 2 SCJ 82, (1998) 5 SCALE 517, (1998) 8 SUPREME 16
Author:
K.T.  Thomas
Bench:
K.T.  Thomas
PETITIONER:
MAYAWATI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MARKANDEYA CHAND & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	09/10/1998

BENCH:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE,HON'BLE MR.  JUSTICE K.T.  THOMAS, ANDHON'BLE MR JUSTICE M.  SRINIVASAN.




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENTS
The following Judgments of the Court were delivered:
PUNCHHI, CJI:
------------
I  have	 bestowed  great  care	in  reading  the  two
elaborate but sharply cleaving draft Judgments prepared by my
learned brethren, K.T.	 Thomas,  J.   and M.  Srinivasan, J.
resting on the provisions contained in the Tenth Schedule  of
the Constitution.    I need to emphasis at the outset, in the
context above, the importance of recording  of	events	which
take  place  in	 the  House,  which  means  either  House  of
Parliament or the Legislative Assembly or, as  the  case  may
be,  either House of the Legislature of State, because Clause
(b) of Paragraph 3 provides that from the time of such split,
such faction shall deemingly become  the  political  party...
The  Speaker/Chairman in the nature of his role when informed
of a spilt is administratively the time keeper and he has  to
be definite  in	 respect  of  the  time of such split.	Or is
there any scope for procrastination?	He  is	the  Tribunal
undoubtedly for quasi-judicial purpose.
In
Kihoto Hollohan V.  Zacnillnu & Others
, 1992 Supp.
(2) SCC, the majority, in Paragraph 109, has  summed  up  the
nature	of  the	 function  exercised  by the Speaker/Chairman
under Paragraph 6(1) to be that of a Tribunal and  the	scope
of  judicial  review  under
Articles 136
, 226
and
227
of the
Constitution  in  respect  of  an   order   passed   by	  the
Speaker/Chairman   under  Paragraph  6	to  be	confining  to
jurisdictional	errors	only  vix.,  infirmities   based   on
violation    of	   constitutional    mandate,	mala   fides,
non-compliance with rules of natural justice and  perversity.
The  question however as to whether a Member of the house has
become subject to disqualification must	 arise	for  decision
under  Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule only on its being
referred for decision of the Speaker/Chairman and not on  his
own, whose  decision  shall  be	 final.	  The defence against
disqualification  incurred  on	ground	of  defection	under
Paragraph 2 is separately provided in Paragraph 3 to say that
such disqualification is not to apply to a case of split.  Is
not  the  cognition of the Speaker/Chairman of the occurrence
of split  not  administrative  in  nature,  unconnected	 with
decision making on disqualification is it an adjunct thereto?
Kihoto Hollohan	 is  silent  on	 this  aspect.	If the act of
cognoscing the time  of	 such  split  is  the  administrative
function  of  the  Speaker/Chairman,  the  scope  of judicial
review of the said administrative act would, to my  mind,  be
qualitatively  different  than	what  it  is when testing his
quasi-judicial order as a Tribunal.  Kihoto Hollohan,  as  is
evident from Paragraph 111 the report, apparently confines to
decision  making by the Speaker/Chairman in Paragraph 6(1) on
reference of the question of disqualification,	inviting  his
decision,  and	leaves	his role under Paragraph 3 untouched.
These determinations of importance, in my view, are necessary
to be made before the  matter  can  be	examined  as  to  the
perversity or otherwise of the Speaker's decision, obligating
him at a point of time to record categorically when the split
took place  thereby  pinning the time of such split.  I opine
therefore that the matter be  referred	to  the	 Constitution
Bench for decision.
SRINIVASAN J.
------------
Leave granted.
I  have	 had  the  advantage  of  perusing  the draft
judgment prepared by learned brother Thomas, J.	 I am  unable
to agree  with	the  same.    My  judgment in this case is as
follows:
A.  PRELUDE
1.Though  the  Anti-defection law contained in Articles
101,102,  190  and  191	 and  the  10th	  schedule   of	  the
constitution  was  born after a very long period of gestation
(from 1967 to 1985), it has not had the desired effect.	  The
need  for  scrapping  it  and  ushering in a new law has been
realized.  It is hoped that  before  a	new  law  is  enacted
regard	will  be  had  to  the	following passage in Chawla's
Election Law and Practice (6th Edn.) p.1.589 :
"Looked at from a more fundamental angle, inasmuch as
	the point of reference for every case of defection is
	a  political  party, no reforms in the Anti Defecting
	Law would be meaningful without a  deep	 analysis  of
	the   conception,  structure,  functioning  and	 role
	perception of political parties in our polity.
	Parties	 as  they  exist  and  operate	today
	hardly	deserve	 any  protection against defection by
	their members.	If  parties  are  not  based  on  any
	principles,  ideologies or programmes and if they are
	not democratically run, there can be no	 question  of
	any  principles being involved in either defecting or
	staying with a party.
2.The events in the Legislative Assembly of  the  State
of  Uttar Pradesh after the general elections in 1996 justify
the above view.	 While expressing  my  concurrence  with  the
above  view, I wish to point out with great dismay that those
days of	 statesmen  who	 rendered  selfless  service  to  the
country are gone and alas!  these are days of politicians who
want the  country to serve them.  But the issues in this case
have to be resolved by constitutional  measurement,  free  of
any predilection.
B. Chronology.
3.In the general elections to  the  U.P.    Legislative
Assembly which took place in 1996 no political party obtained
absolute majority.    There  was  an  agreement	 between  the
Bhartiya Janata Party ('BJP' for short) and the Bahujan Samaj
Party ("BJP' for short) to support each other for running the
Government.  The BSP had 67 MLAs  who  were  elected  on  its
fold.	Pursuant  to the agreement the appellant belonging to
BSP became the Chief Minister of  the  State  on  21.3.97  On
21.9.97	 Kalyan	 Singh	belonging to the BJP became the Chief
Minister.  On 19.10.97 the appellant announced withdrawal  of
participation and support of BSP to the coalition government.
All   the   BSP	  Ministers  resigned  from  the  Government.
Immediately the Governor of  the  State	 convened  a  special
Session of  Assembly  at  11.00	 A.M.	 on 21.10.97 and told
Kalyan Singh to prove his majority on the Floor of the House.
On 20.10.97 the appellant issued a  whip  directing  all  BSP
MLAs   to   remain   present  in  the  House  throughout  the
proceedings on the next day and vote against  the  Motion  of
Confidence to be moved by the Chief Minister.
4.	On 21.10.97 there was pandemonium and violence in the
Assembly and several MLAs went	out  of	 the  House.  In  the
proceedings which followed, 222 Members of the Assembly voted
in  favour  of the Government. There was no vote opposing the
Motion.
5.In the  speeches  which  followed,  Mr.  Sardar Singh
congratulated the speaker for being able to preside over  the
Assembly without  getting  hurt.    He	narrated  as  to  how
instructions were given by the appellant to  the  members  of
BSP  to	 indulge  in  violence	and cause confusion including
causing hurt to the Speaker.  Markandeya Chand another member
told the Speaker that along with him 23 others had  quit  the
BSP  and  supported  the  Government. Respondents 1 to 12 had
voted in support of the Motion.
6.On 24.10.97, 13 petitions were filed by respondents 1
to  12 as well as one Hari Krishan on the ground of violation
of whip issued by her on 20.10.97.    The  petitions  invoked
only   clause	2(1)(b)	  of   the   Tenth  Schedule  to  the
Constitution.	On  27.10.97  respondents  1  to  12   became
Ministers and joined the Cabinet.  On 11.11.97 another set of
13  petitions  similar	to  those filed by the appellant were
filed by one Mr.  R.K.	Chowdhary claiming the same relief on
the same ground.  After removal of defects by amendments, the
petitions were taken on file and  notice  was  ordered.	   In
these  proceedings  we	are  not  concerned with the petition
against Hari Krishan which was later dismissed as  withdrawn.
On  25.11.97  respondents  1 to 12 filed written statement in
which is was inter alia	 pleaded  that	a  split  took	place
between	 the  Members  of  the	BSP on 21.10.97 and more than
1/3rd Legislators of the BSP got separated.  It	 was  averred
that   the  appellant  had  instructed	the  members  of  her
Legislature Party to disturb the proceedings of the  Assembly
and cause  hurt	 to  the  Speaker.  On the very next day i.e.
26.11.97 the  appellant	 filed	a  replication	statement  in
answer to  the	written	 statement of the respondents.	there
was no denial whatever	of  the	 split	referred  to  in  the
written statement.     The  only  plea	in  that  replication
pertained  to  the  whip   issued   on	 20.10.97   and	  the
non-withdrawal of the same by the appellant on 21.10.97.
7.   On	 5.12.97  the  appellant  filed	 an  application  for
amendment  of  the  petition in which disqualification of the
respondents was sought under  clause  2(1)(a)  or  the	Tenth
Schedule.  The relevant part of the pleading was as follows:
"That it is clear from the perusal of  the  reply  of
	the  respondent	 filed	on  this petition on 25.11.97
	that the respondent  has  voluntarily  given  up  the
	membership of  Bahujan	Samaj  Vidhan  Dal.  That the
	respondent had contested and  won  the	elections  of
	Vidhan	Sabha on the ticket of BSP and in this manner
	he is disqualified from the membership of the  Vidhan
	Sabha.
There  was  also  a  denial of the correctness of the
Statement made by  Markandeya  Chand  on  the  Floor  of  the
Assembly   on  21.10.97	 that  23  Legislators	of  BSP	 were
supporting him.
8.  Inspect of opposition by the  respondents  the  amendment
was allowed by the Speaker.  That order was challenged by the
respondents in W.P.  No.  348 of 1998 on the file of the High
Court of  Allahabad,  Lucknow  Bench.	That writ petition is
said to be pending after notice.   Thereafter  an  additional
written	  statement  was  filed	 by  Vansh  Narain  Singh  on
2.2.1998.  These was a narration of  the  split	 in  BSP  and
formation  of  new  group named as Jantantrik BSP ('JBSP' for
short).	 The reasons for such a split were set out in detail.
It was further stated that the members of JBSP were not	 less
than 1/3rd  of	the  total  number  of BSP MLAs.  It was also
averred that the appellant and a few other members of the BSP
started terrorizing and threatening the members of  the	 JBSP
with attack on their lives and also prevented their coming to
and going  from	 Lucknow.   There was also an allegation that
signatures of some of those persons who had become members of
JBSP were taken on blank papers by coercion.   The  appellant
did not file any reply statement.
9.On 24.2.98  the  hearing  of	the matter started.  It
continued on 25.2.98.	During	the  course  of	 the  hearing
respondents 1 to 12 filed two affidavits containing a list of
26 names  who  formed  part  of	 the  group  on 21.10.97.  An
explanation was given in the affidavits as to why  there  was
delay in  furnishing  the  names  of those MLAs.  Some of the
members mentioned in the list were present before the Speaker
along with  the	 respondents.	 the  appellant	 filed	 nine
affidavits on  the  same  day  around  7.40 P.M.  The hearing
concluded on 25.2.98 and order were reserved.
10.Thereafter  on  4.3.98  and	10.3.98	 the respondents
filed another set of affidavits	 repeating  almost  the	 case
already put forward.   On 16.3.98 R.K.	Chaudhary applied for
certified copies  of  those  affidavits.    When   the	 said
certified  copies  were	 furnished he was informed that if he
had any submissions to be made in regard to those  affidavits
he could present the same on 19.3.98 at 1.00 P.M.  No further
affidavits were filed by the appellant or R K Chaudhary.  The
speaker	 pronounced  the  judgment  on 23.3.98 dismissing the
petitions for disqualification.	 He  recognized	 19  MLAs  as
forming a separate political party by the name JBSP.
11.It	is   that  judgment  of	 the  Speaker  which  is
challenged in this appeal.   Originally	 S.L.P.	   was	filed
against respondents  1	to  12	only.	 When the matter came
before Court in 10.8.98, on the request	 of  the  appellant's
counsel	 the  Speaker  was added as a party (13th respondent)
and the matter was adjourned to 25.8.98.  On the latter	 date
the following order was passed:
"Mr.   Sibal,  learned	 senior	  counsel   for	  the
	petitioner  states that the Speaker was got impleaded
	as a party because of  the  first  respondent  having
	raised	an  objection in his counter that the Speaker
	should have been made a party.	Mr.    Sibal  further
	states	that  the  Speaker,  otherwise, is a proforma
	party and he need not file a counter."
The matter was directed to be listed for  final	 disposal  on
8.9.98	and  liberty was given to the counsel for respondents
to file additional affidavits  if  necessary.  The  case  was
heard on 8th to 10th, the afternoon of 11th and the afternoon
of 14th.
C. FINDINGS OF THE SPEAKER
12.(i) The direction/whip dated 20.10.97 by the appellant was
not issued in accordance with paragraph	 2  (1)	 of  the  Xth
Schedule   of	the   Constitution   and   as	such  it  was
unconstitutional and illegal with the result the  respondents
are  not  liable  to be disqualified under that paragraph for
voting contrary to it.
(ii) The petitions filed by the appellant did not fulfill the
requirements of 'The Members  of  Uttar	 Pradesh  Legislative
Assembly  (Disqualification  on	 grounds of Defection) Rules,
1987' (hereinafter referred to as the Rules) in	 as  much  as
they  did  not	contain	 a  statement  of  material facts and
consequently the petitions where liable to be dismissed under
Rule 8 (ii) of the said rule.
(iii)  The  appellant  had  in	fact  issued  a	 direction on
21.10.97 to the B.S.P.	M.L.As for creating disturbances  and
committing  violence  in the House on that date and therefore
the  direction	issued	by  her	 earlier  on   20.10.97	  was
superseded/withdrawn/waived  and  made	ineffective. As such,
the respondents could not be disqualified  for	having	voted
contrary to the direction dated 20.10.97.
(iv) there was a split in the B.S.P.  on 21.10.97 as a result
of which there arose a faction and  26	M.L.As	mentioned  in
annexures  1  and  2  of Chowdhary Narender Singh's affidavit
dated 24.2.98 who were more than 1/3rd	members	 of  the  BSP
Legislature  Party  constituted a group representing the said
faction.  Constituted a group became the 'original  political
party' known  as  JBSP.	  The members of the said group where
entitled to protection of para 3 of the Xth Schedule  of  the
Constitution.	Further,  after	 the  split  of	 the  BSP and
formation of the group of 26 MLAs on 20.10.97,	there  was  a
further	 split in the JBSP on 15.1.98 as a result of which 19
MLAs continued to remain members of JBSP Legislature Party.
(v)	As  a  result of the aforesaid findings the petitions
filed  by  the	appellant  and	 the   petitions   filed   by
R.K.Chaudhary  were  dismissed. The 19 persons set out in the
order were dismissed. The 19 persons set  out  in  the	order
were declared as members of JBSP in the Assembly.
13.   Mr Kapil Sibal who appeared for the appellant submitted
that the order of the  Speaker	suffers	 from  jurisdictional
errors	based  on  violation  of the constitutional mandates,
non-compliance with rules of Natural Justice and  perversity.
He  stated  expressly  that he was not attacking the order on
grounds of bias or mala fides though they were raised in  the
S.L.P.
14.Dr.	L.M.  Singhvi argued  on  behalf  of  the  first
respondent while  Mr.	Ashok Desai represented respondents 2
and 3.	Mr.  R.K.  Jain argued for respondents 4,5 and 6  and
Mr.   K.N.  Balgopal  represented  the	7th  respondent.  The
substance  of  the  contentions	 urged	on  behalf   of	  the
respondents is as follows:
The  order  of	the  Speaker  is  a  well structured one. The
findings of facts rendered by him are based on	the  evidence
on record. The order does not suffer from any perversity. Nor
is  it	vitiated  by  violation of Constitutional mandates or
principles of Natural Justice.	Even  if  the  order  is  set
aside,	the  matter has to go back to the Speaker for a fresh
decision in accordance with the judgment of this Court.
E.
ARTICLE 145(3)
OF THE CONSTITUTION
15.  In the midst of his arguments Dr.	Singhvi	 invited  our
attention  to
Article 145(3)
of the Constitution of India and
submitted that	as  the	 case  involves	 several  substantial
questions of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution
it should  be  heard  by minimum number of five Judges.	 When
the said submission was	 made,	arguments  had	already	 been
heard for  two	days.  The Hon'ble the Chief Justice observed
that there is an 'Interpretation Clause' in the Xth  Schedule
and  every  question  of law is not a substantial question of
law.  Dr.   Singhvi  did  not  persist	the  matter  further.
However Mr.    Ashok  Desai who argued on the last day of the
hearing handed over a paper setting out proposed  substantial
questions   of	 law/questions	 as   to   interpretation  of
Constitution.  He has mentioned 9 questions therein.   In  my
view  question	numbers 4 and 9 therein fall within the ambit
of
Article 145(3).
They read as follows:
"4.   The manner, authority, and  other	 requirements
	of  a  valid whip for disqualification under Clause 2
	(1) (b) of the Xth Schedule, especially	 the  meaning
	of  expressions	 "political party' and of 'any person
	or authority authorised".
"9.    Whether order  of	speaker	 refusing  to
	disqualify   members   of  house  be  substituted  by
	disqualification in course or judicial review".
F. DISCUSSION
-------------
16.   The contentions of  the  appellant's  counsel  can  be
classified   under   three   main  heads  (i)  violation  of
constitutional Mandates	 (ii)  violation  of  principles  of
Natural Justice; (iii)	Perversity.
(i)	 Violation of Constitutional Mandates.
	 This can be sub divided into two:
(a) violation of para 2 (1) (b);
(b)  violation	of para 2 (1) (a) of the Xth Schedule of the
Constitution.
A common defence to grounds under both sub paras (a) &	(b),
is  available  in  para	 3. If the situation contemplated in
para 3 is proved, neither para (a) nor para  (b)  will	help
the appellant. Para 2(1) is in the following terms:
"2.    Disqualification	 on ground of defection - (1)
	Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 3,4 and 5,  a
	member	of  a  House belonging to any political party
	shall be disqualified  for  being  a  member  of  the
	House, -
(a)    if  he has voluntarily given up his membership
	of such political party; or
(b) If he votes or abstains from voting in such House
	contrary  to  any  direction  issued by the political
	party to  which	 he  belongs  or  by  any  person  or
	authority  authorized  by  it in this behalf, without
	obtaining, in either case, the	prior  permission  of
	such  political	 party,	 person or abstention has not
	been condoned by  such	political  party,  person  or
	authority  within  fifteen days from the date of such
	voting or abstention.
Explanation - For the purposes of this sub-paragraph,
(a)  an elected member of a House shall be deemed  to
	belong	to  the	 political party, if any, by which he
	was set up  as	a  candidate  for  election  as	 such
	member;
(b)   a nominated member of a House shall, -
(i)   Where  he  is  a  member of any political
	party on the date of his nomination as	such  member,
	be deemed to belong to such political party;
(ii)  in  any  other case, be deemed to belong to the
	political party of which he becomes, or, as the	 case
	may  be,  first becomes a member before the expiry of
	six months from the date on which he takes  his	 seat
	after  complying  with the requirements of
article 99
or, as the case may be,
article 188".
Para 3 reads as follows:-
3. Disqualification on ground  of  defection  not  to
	apply in case  of split	 -  Where a member of a House
	makes a claim that he and any other  members  of  his
	Legislature party constitute the group representing a
	faction	 which has arisen as a result of the split in
	his original political party and such group  consists
	of  not	 less  than  one-third of the members of such
	Legislature party,
(a)	  he  shall   not   be	 disqualified	under
	sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2 on the ground -
(i)   that he has voluntarily given up his membership
	of his original political party; or
(ii)  that  he	has voted or abstained from voting in
	such House contrary to any direction issued  by	 such
	party  or by any person or authority authorised by it
	in that behalf without obtaining the prior permission
	of such party, person or authority and such voting or
	abstention has	not  been  condoned  by	 such  party,
	person or authority within fifteen days from the date
	of such voting or abstention; and
(b)	   from	 the time of such split, such faction
	shall be deemed to be the political party to which he
	belongs for the	 purposes  of  sub-paragraph  (1)  of
	paragraph  2  and  to be his original political party
	for the purposes of this paragraph."
(a)  Violation of para 2 (1) (b)
17.   Apart  from  the	defence	 under	para 3, an additional
defence relating to para 2 (1) (b) has been  raised  in	 this
case.	That  has  been	 accepted by the Speaker and findings
have been rendered accordingly.	  Though  it  is  a  question
involving  interpretation  of a provision in the constitution
and requires to be decided  by	a  Bench  of  at  least	 five
Judges, I am bound to express my opinion here as the case has
been heard  fully  by  this  Bench.   Both parties argued the
question  at  length  before  the  Speaker  and	 invited  his
findings.   Before us also, the appellant's counsel argued it
at length and the respondents' counsel replied.	 Hence it  is
necessary to express an opinion.
18.   The  argument  of	 the appellant is that the expression
'political party' in sub-para (b) means 'political  party  in
the House',  in	 other	words, the 'Legislature Party'.	 This
argument runs counter to the  definition  contained  in	 para
1(c).	According  to  that  definition,  'original political
party' in  relation  to	 a  member  of	a  House,  means  the
political  party  to  which  he	 belongs  for the purposes of
sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2.  The	expression  'original
political party' is used in para 3 only.  Para 2, does not at
all use the expression 'original political party' .  The said
expression  in para 3 is equated to the expression 'political
party' in para 2(1).  The definition clause  in	 para  1  (c)
does  not  make	 any distinction between sub para (a) and sub
para (b) of para 2.  But the  appellant's  counsel  wants  to
make such  a distinction.  According to him 'political party'
in sub para (a) would refer to 'original political party' but
the same expression in sub para (b) would refer only  to  the
'Legislature Party'.	The  term  'Legislature Party' having
been defined in para 1(b) could well have been used in para 2
(1)  (b)  instead  of  the  term  'political  party'  if  the
intention  of  the  Parliament	was  to	 refer	only  to  the
Legislature Party.
19.  There is another feature in Para 3 (b)  which  negatives
the appellant's	 argument.   According to para 3(b), from the
time of split in the original political party such as the one
referred to in the  first  part	 of  the  para,	 the  faction
referred to therein shall be deemed to be the political party
to  which  the	concerned  member belongs for the purposes of
sub-para (1) of para 2 and to be his original political party
for the purposes of paragraph 3.   The	entire	sub-paragraph
(1)  of	 para  2  is referred to therein meaning thereby both
clauses (a) and (b) of the sub-para 1 and no  distinction  is
made between  the  two	clauses.    Hence for the purposes of
clause 'a' as well as clause 'b' the faction referred  to  in
the  first  part of para 3 shall be deemed to be the original
'political party' mentioned in para 3.	It is thus clear that
'political party' in clause (b) of sub-para (1) of para 2  is
none  other than 'original political party' mentioned in para
3.
20.  The argument that the context in para 2 (1) (b) requires
to equate 'political party'  with  'legislature	 party'	 even
though	 the  definition  clause  reads	 differently  is  not
acceptable.  A reading of sub para  (b)	 the  Explanation  in
para 2 (1) places the matter beyond doubt that the 'political
party'	in  sub	 para  (b)  refers to the 'original political
party' only and not to the Legislature Party.	According  to
the  explanation,  for the purpose of the entire sub para, an
elected member of the House shall be deemed to belong to  the
political party.    if	any,  by  which	 he  was  set up as a
candidate for  election	 as  such  member.    Certainly,  the
Legislature  Party could not have set up the concerned member
as a candidate for election.
21.According to learned counsel for the	 appellant,  the
Legislature Party may have to take decisions on urgent matter
in  the	 House	and  as	 it represents the original political
party in the House,  whatever  direction  is  issued  by  the
Leader	of  such  Legislature  Party  must  be	regarded as a
direction issued by the political party.  There is  no	merit
in this	 contention.   When the provision in the constitution
has taken care to make a distinction between the  Legislature
Party and the original Political party and prescribe that the
direction  should  be one issued by the political party or by
any person or authority authorised in this behalf,  there  is
no  meaning  in	 saying	 that  whatever	 the  Leader  of  the
Legislature Party directs must be regarded  as	that  of  the
original political party.
22.	The  reason is not far to seek. Disqualification of a
member elected by the people is a  very	 serious  action  and
before	that  extreme step is taken, it should be proved that
he acted contrary to the direction issued by the party	which
set him up as a candidate for election.
23.  In 'Hollohan' 1992 Supp (2) 651, the majority dealt with
the expression 'any direction' in Para 2(1) (b) and held that
the objects and purposes of the Xth Schedule define and limit
the contours  of  the  meaning of the said expression.	It is
advantageous to extract para 122 of the judgment which	reads
as follows:-
"While	construing  Paragraph  2(1)  (b) it cannot be
	ignored	 that  under  the  Constitution	 Members   of
	Parliament  as well as of the State legislature enjoy
	freedom of speech in the House though this freedom is
	subject to the provisions of the constitution and the
	rules and standing orders regulating the Procedure of
	the House [
Article 105 (1)
and
Article 194 (1)].
The
	disqualification imposed by paragraph 2(1)(b) must be
	so construed as not to unduly  impinge	on  the	 said
	freedom of  speech  of	a  Member.    This  would  be
	possible if Paragraph  2(1)(b)	is  confined  in  its
	scope  by  keeping  in view the object underlying the
	amendments contained in the Tenth  Schedule,  namely,
	to  curb the evil or mischief of political defections
	motivated by the lure  of  office  or  other  similar
	considerations.	 The said object would be achieved if
	the disqualification incurred on the ground of voting
	or  abstaining from voting by a member is confined to
	cases where a change of government is  likely  to  be
	brought about or is prevented, as the case may be, as
	a  result  of  such voting or abstinence or when such
	voting or abstinence is on a matter which was a major
	policy and programme on which the political party  to
	which the Member belongs went to the polls.  For this
	purpose the direction given by the political party to
	a  Member belonging to it, the violation of which may
	ential	disqualification  under	 Paragraph   2(1)(b),
	would  have  to	 be  limited  to  a vote on motion of
	confidence or no  confidence  in  the  government  or
	where  the  motion  under  consideration relates to a
	matter which was an integral policy and programme  of
	the   political	 party	on  the	 basis	of  which  it
	approached the electorate.  The voting or  abstinence
	from  voting by a Member against the direction by the
	political party on such	 a  motion  would  amount  to
	disapproval of the programme on the basis of which he
	went  before  the  electorate and got himself elected
	and such voting	 or  abstinence	 would	amount	to  a
	breach	 of   the   trust   reposed  in	 him  by  the
	electorate".
24.   If  the direction referred to in para 2 (1)(b) is to be
restricted to the two kinds referred to in the said  passage,
there  is  no  doubt  that  'political party' in para 2(1)(b)
refers only to the 'original political party' as it  is	 only
such party  which  could  issue	 such  direction.    In	 such
matters, the members of the House would	 certainly  be	given
sufficient  notice  in	advance	 and original political party
would have  sufficient	time  to  take	decisions  and	issue
directions.
25.  In 'The Journal of	 Parliamentary	Information'.	 1993
(Vol.39).
Article  19.
Anti	 -  Defection  Law - Split In
parties by D. Sripada Rao @ p.p. 104 and 105, it is stated as
follows:-
"It is not as though the schedule does  not	 take
	into  its  fold	 the outside events and organisation.
	The Schedule mentions the direction of the  political
	parties.  etc.	in Clause (b) of sub-para (1) or para
2. The direction of a member of the House can be from
	a functionary of a political party outside the	House
	according  to  the  constitution  of  the  respective
	parties.  The  label  which  a	member	carries	  and
	ultimately  goes  to constitute his Legislature Party
	under rule 4(2) is an agency outside the House.
	A member is disqualified for giving up that label and
	not the	 membership  of	 the  Legislature Party.  The
	operation  of  the  Schedule   is   not	  exclusively
	intramural  or	confined  to  the  four	 walls of the
	House, where  the  Speaker's  writ  runs.    If	  the
	intention  of the Parliament in enacting the schedule
	is to confine the Speaker merely to count the members
	of the Legislature Party there is no need to  mention
	'the  original	political  party' in paras 3 and 4 in
	connection  with  split	 or  merger.  A	 party	split
	outside	 the  House  without  the  support  of	1/3rd
	members inside the House renders it to wipe  out  its
	identity  in  the House and the House and the Members
	who engineer a split  in  Legislature  Party  without
	there  being  a	 corresponding	split  in  the	party
	outside make themselves vulnerable  to	forego	their
	seat  in  the  House  albeit their command over 1/3rd
	legislature party".
The above passage shows that no	 distinction  can  be
made  between  sub  para  (a)  and sub para (b) vis a vis the
meaning of the term 'political party' and that it means	 only
the original political party.
26.  It has been rightly held by the Speaker that there is no
material  whatever  to	hold  that  the	 direction  issued on
20.10.97 was issued by the B.S.P.  or that the appellant  was
authorized by  the  BSP	 to  issue such a direction.  Neither
before the speaker non before  us  any	such  plea  was	 even
raised.
27.    There is also no difficulty in accepting	 the  finding
of  the	 Speaker that the direction dated 20.10.97 was not in
accordance with the law
laid down by
this court in 'Hollohna'
- In para 123, it is said:
"Keeping  in	 view  the   consequences   of	 the
	disqualification i.e., termination of the membership
	of  a  House;  it  would  be  appropriate  that	 the
	direction   or	 whip	which	results	  in	such
	disqualification   under  Paragraph  2(1)(b)  is  so
	worded	as  to	clearly	 indicate  that	 voting	  or
	abstaining   from   voting   contrary  to  the	said
	direction   would   result    in    incurring	 the
	disqualification  under	 Paragraph  2(1)(b)  of	 the
	Tenth Schedule so  that	 the  member  concerned	 has
	fore-knowledge	of the consequences flowing from his
	conduct in voting or abstaining from voting contrary
	to such a direction".
Mr.   Sibal's contention that such a warning as mentioned in
the above passage is necessary only when whips are issued on
unimportant matters and that the above passage in 'Hollohan'
is misunderstood by the Speaker is unsustainable.  A reading
of paras 122 and 123 in 'Hollohan'  clearly  shows  that  no
meaning	 can  be  given to para 123 other than that given by
the Speaker.
28.	 Hence I hold that the Speaker has not violated para
2(1)(b) of the Tenth Schedule.
(b)  Violation of Para 2(1)(a)
-------------------------
29.  The attack of the appellant on the factual findings  of
the  Speaker  could  be	 more conveniently and appropriately
considered when I discuss violation of principles of Natural
Justice and perversity.	 Under this head,  I  would  discuss
the question of law raised by Mr.  Sibal.
30.	 The meaning to be given to the work 'split' in Para
3 is left open in 'Hollohan'. In Para 124, it is said:
"There are some submissions as to the exact import of
	a  "split"  -  whether	it  is	to  be	understood an
	instantaneous, one time event or  whether  a  'split'
	can be	said  to  occur	 over  a period of time.  The
	hypothetical poser  was	 that  if  one-third  of  the
	members of a political party in the legislature broke
	away  from  it	on  a  particular  day and a few more
	members joined the splinter group a  couple  of	 days
	later, would the latter also be a part of the 'split'
	group.	This  question	of  construction issues.  The
	meaning to be given to "split"	must  necessarily  be
	examined  in  a	 case in which the question arises in
	the context of its particular facts.  No hypothetical
	predications can or need be made.   We,	 accordingly,
	leave  this  question to be decided in an appropriate
	case".
31.   Issue No. 6 framed by the Speaker is as follows:-
"Whether on 21.10.97 a group was formed in Bahujan
	Samaj  Party  Legislature  Party under paragraph 3 of
	Tenth Schedule of the constitution  representing  the
	group  which  had  arisen  as  a  result  of split in
	Bahujan Samaj Party and whether there were  at	least
	one-third  members of Bahujan Samaj Party Legislature
	Party in such group? If yes, its effect.
There is no dispute before us as to the	 correctness  of  the
issue as framed. There is also no difference of opinion among
the two sides as to the meaning of para 3.
32.   The only question of law raised by Mr. Sibal relates to
the maintainability of	the  plea  of  split  in  default  of
compliance with Rule 3 of the Rules. According to the learned
counsel,  the  Rules,  having  been framed in exercise of the
powers conferred by para 8 of the Tenth Schedule  for  giving
effect to the provisions of the schedule, have the same force
as  constitutional  mandates and non-compliance thereof would
disentitle the concerned party from invoking  the  provisions
of the constitution. Rule 3(1) of the Rules reads thus:
"3.  (i) The leader of each legislature party,	other
	than  a	 legislature  party  consisting	 of  only one
	member shall within thirty days from the date of  the
	first	sitting	  of   the   House,  or,  where	 such
	legislature party is formed after such	date,  within
	thirty	days  from  the date of its formation, and in
	either case within such further period as the Speaker
	may for sufficient cause allow, furnish the following
	to the Speaker, namely:-
(a) a statement in writing in Form I  containing  the
	names  of  members  and	 other	particulars  of	 such
	legislature party:
(b) names and designations of each such member of the
	legislature  party  who	 has been chosen as leader of
	that party or authorized for the purposes referred to
	in clause (f) of rule 2, to act as, or	to  discharge
	the functions of, such leader;
(c)	names and designations of such members of the
	legislature  party  who	 have been authorised for the
	purposes  of  these  rules  to	correspond  with  the
	Speaker;
(d) a copy of the constitution and rules (by whatever
	name  called)  of  such	 legislature party and of the
	political party to which its members are affiliated".
33.   Learned counsel submits that in the present case though
the split was  alleged	to  have  taken	 place	on  21.10.97.
Markandeya  Chand,  the	 leader of JBSP did not within thirty
days from the said date or for that matter till 25.2.98,  the
day  on which the arguments before the Speaker were concluded
furnish the statement etc. as set out  in  thee	 Rule.	Hence
according  to  him the respondents were not entitled to raise
the plea of split in this case.
34.  According to him the decision of this Court in  Ravi  S.
Naik Versus  Union  of	India and Another etc.	1994 Supp (2)
S.C.C.	641 is not correct and it  requires  reconsideration.
It is therefore argued that thee order of the Speaker placing
reliance  on  the said ruling is erroneous and has to be seat
aside.
35.  Before  referring	to  Ravi  S.	Naik  (supra) I would
consider the question on first principles.   Para  3  of  the
Tenth  Schedule	 excludes  the operation of para 2 (1)(a) and
(b) where a member of a House makes a claim that he  and  any
other  member  of  his legislature party constitute the group
representing a faction which has arisen	 as  a	result	of  a
split in his original political party and such group consists
of not less than one third of the members of such legislature
party.	 The  following are the conditions for satisfying the
requirements of the para:
(i)	  A split in the original political party giving rise
to a faction.
(ii)  The faction is represented by a group	 of  MLAs  in
the House.
(iii) Such group consists not less  than  one  third  of  the
members of  legislature	 party to which they belong.  For the
purpose of  that  para	all  the  three	 conditions  must  be
fulfilled.   It	 is not sufficient if more than 1/3rd members
of a legislature party form a  separate	 group	and  give  to
itself	a  different  name without there being a split in the
original political party.  Thus the factum of  split  in  the
original  party	 and  the  number  of  members in the 'group'
exceeding 1/3rd of the members of the legislature  party  are
the conditions to be proved.
36.   Rule  3  provides	 for furnishing of information to the
speaker.  Rule 6 provides for recording of  such  information
in a  register	to  be maintained by the Secretary.  Will the
recording of information in the register conclude  the	issue
relating  to  the  two	requirements  of  para 3 of the Tenth
Schedule?  There is not even a provision for  presumption  as
to  the correctness of the entries in the register maintained
under Rule 6.  The entries would at best only show that	 such
and  such  information was furnished by such and such member.
The entries in the register  cannot  have  any	other  effect
whatever.
37.   Rule  10 enables the Speaker to issue from time to time
such directions as he may consider necessary in regard to the
detailed working of the rules.	Will such directions also  be
considered as constitutional mandates?
38.   Rules  7,8  and  9  set  out  the procedure for seeking
disqualification of a member.  In this case the petitions for
disqualifications were filed even on 24.10.97 long before the
expiry of the period of 30 days specified in  Rule  3.	  The
question  of  disqualification	had  to	 be  decided in those
petitions.  The power  to  decide  disputed  disqualification
under  Para  6(1) of the Tenth schedule is 'preeminently of a
judicial complexion'.  The Speaker  or	the  Chairman  acting
under Para 6(1) is a Tribunal (See 'Hollohna' 1992 Supp.  (2)
S.C.C.651).  Can the entries in the register maintained under
rule  6	 by the Secretary have the effect of establishing the
two conditions required for para 3 of the Tenth Schedule?  It
can if at all be only a piece of evidence in support  of  the
claim of  one  party.	 If  as	 contended by the appellant's
counsel, failure to comply with the  rule  will	 prevent  the
raising	 of  a plea of split, the compliance of the rule must
have  the  effect  of  conclusively  proving  the  conditions
required for  para  3.	  That	will  lead  to	an  anomalous
situation.  When a disqualification proceeding	is  initiated
against	 the members who claim the benefit of para 3 they can
defeat the proceeding by furnishing some information  to  the
Speaker	 under Rule 3 and getting it recorded in the Register
under rule 6.	 Thus  a  matter  which	 has  to  be  decided
judicially  under  Para	 6(1)  of  the Tenth schedule may get
decided administratively by compliance	of  Rules  3  and  6.
Undoubtedly  such a status cannot be given to the rules which
are only procedural.  If the contention	 of  Mr.    Sibal  is
accepted, form will stand exalted over substance.
39.  Now I  shall  advert  to 'Ravi S.	Naik' 1994 Supp.  (2)
S.C.C.	641.  Both the learned Judges who  decided  the	 case
were party to the majority Judgment in "Hollohan'.  it is too
much  to  say that they had not properly understood their own
dictum in 'Hollohan', the Bench dealt with the facts of	 each
appeal separately.   The Bench observed in C.A.	 3390 of 1993
as follows:
"...  The Disqualification Rules have been  framed  to
       regulate	 the  procedure that is to be followed by the
       Speaker for exercising  the  power  conferred  on  him
       under  sub-paragraph  (1)  of Paragraph 6 of the Tenth
       Schedule to the constitution.	The  Disqualification
       Rules  are  therefore  procedural  in  nature  and any
       violation of the same would amount to an	 irregularity
       in procedure which is immune from judicial scrutiny in
       view  of sub-paragraph (2) of paragraph 6 as construed
       by this Court in
Kihoto Hollohan
case.
Moreover,  the
       field  of  judicial  review  in	respect of the orders
       passed  by  the	Speaker	 under	sub-paragraph(1)   of
       paragraph  6  as	 construed  by	this  court in
Kihoto
       Hollohan
case  is  confined  to	  breaches   of	  the
       constitutional  mandates,  mala	fides, non compliance
       with rules of Natural Justice and perversity.  We  are
       unable  to  uphold the contention of Shri Sen that the
       violation of the	 Disqualification  rules  amounts  to
       violation of  constitutional mandates.  By doing so we
       would be elevating the rules  to	 the  status  of  the
       provisions of the constitution which is impermissible.
       Since  the  Disqualification rules have been framed by
       the Speaker in exercise of the power  conferred	under
       paragraph  8  of the Tenth Schedule they have a status
       subordinate to the constitution and cannot be  equated
       with the	 provisions of the constitution.
They cannot
       therefore be regarded as constitutional	mandates  and
       any  violation  of the Disqualification rules does not
       afford a ground for judicial review of  the  order  of
       the  Speaker  in view of the finality clause contained
       in sub-paragraph (1)  of	 paragraph  6  of  the	Tenth
       Schedule as construed by this Court in kihoto
Hollohan
case.
40.   Again in Civil Appeal 2904 of  1993.  the	 Bench	dealt
with Paras 2 and 3 of the 10th Schedule and said:
"  As  noticed	earlier	 paragraph  2  of  the Tenth
	Schedule provides for disqualification on the ground
	of defection if the conditions laid down therein are
	fulfilled and  paragraph  3  of	 the  said  schedule
	avoids	such  disqualification	in  case  of  split.
	Paragraph 3 proceeds on the assumption that but	 for
	the   applicability   of   the	said  provision	 the
	disqualification  under	  Paragraph   2	  would	  be
	attracted.   The burden to prove the requirements of
	paragraph 2 is on  the	person	who  claims  that  a
	member	has  incurred  the  disqualification and the
	burden to prove the requirements of paragraph  3  is
	on the member who claims that there has been a split
	in  his	 original  political  party and by virtue of
	said split the disqualification under paragraph 2 is
	not attracted.	In the present	case  Naik  has	 not
	disputed  that he has given up his membership of his
	original political party but  he  has  claimed	that
	there has  been	 a  split  in  the  said party.	 The
	burden, therefore, layon  Naik	to  prove  that	 the
	alleged	  split	  satisfies   the   requirements  of
	paragraph 3.  The said requirements are:
(i)  The  member of a House should make a claim that
	he  and	 other	members	 of  his  legislature  party
	constitute  the	 group	representing a faction which
	has arisen as a result of a split  in  his  original
	party:	and
(ii)   Such group must consist of not less than
	one-third of the members of such legislature party.
In  the	 present  case	the  first  requirement	 was
	satisfied because Naik has made such a claim.	 The
	only  question is whether the second requirement was
	fulfilled.  the	 total	number	of  members  in	 the
	legislature party of the MGP (the original political
	party) was   eighteen.	  In  order  to	 fulfil	 the
	requirements of	 paragraph  3  Naik's  group  should
	consist	  of   not   less  than	 6  members  of	 the
	legislature party of the MGP.  Naik has claimed that
	at the time of split on December 24, 1990 his  group
	consisted  of  eight  members  whose  signatures are
	contained in the declaration, a copy  of  which	 was
	filed with the reply dated February 13, 1991.
	The Speaker has held that the  split  had  not	been
	proved	because	 no  intimation	 about the split has
	been given to him in accordance with rules 3  and  4
	of the Disqualification rules.	We find it difficult
	to endorse   this   view.     Rule  3  requires	 the
	information  in	 respect  of  matters  specified  in
	clauses	 (a)  (b)  and	(c)  of	 sub-rule  (1) to be
	furnished in the prescribed form  (Form	 1)  to	 the
	Speaker	 by  the  leader  of  the  legislature party
	within 30 days after the first sitting of the  House
	or  where such legislature is formed after the first
	sitting, within 30 days after its formation.  rule 4
	relates to information	to  be	furnished  by  every
	member	to  the	 Secretary  of	the  Assembly in the
	prescribed form (Form III).  In respect of a  member
	who  has taken his seat in the House before the date
	of commencement of the Disqualification	 Rules,	 the
	information  is	 required  to be furnished within 30
	days from such date.  In respect  of  a	 member	 who
	takes  his  seat in the House after the commencement
	of the Disqualification rules such  information	 has
	to  be	furnished  before  making and subscribing an
	oath  or  affirmation  under
Article  188
of	 the
	Constitution and taking his seat in the House.	rule
	4 has no application in the present case because the
	stage  for  furnishing	the required information had
	passed	long  back  when  the	members	  made	 and
	subscribed  to	oath  and  affirmation	after  their
	election in 1989.  Rule 3 also comes into play after
	the split and the failure on the part of the  leader
	of  the	 group that has been constituted as a result
	of the split does not mean that there  has  been  no
	split.	 As  to whether there was a split or not has
	to be determined by the Speaker on the basis of	 the
	material placed before him.  In the present case the
	split  was  sought  to	be proved by the declaration
	dated December 24, 1990 whereby eight MLAs belonging
	to  the	 MGP  declared	that  they  had	 constituted
	themselves  into  a  group  known as Maharashtrawadi
	Gomantak Party (Ravi Naik Group).   A  copy  of	 the
	said  declaration was submitted along with the reply
	filed by Naik on February 13, 1991 and the  original
	declaration bearing the signatures of the eight MLAs
	was  produced  by  the	advocate for Naik during the
	course	of  the	 hearing  before  thee	Speaker	  on
	February 13,   1991.	  The	genuineness  of	 the
	signatures on the said declaration was not  disputed
	before the  Speaker.   One of the signatories of the
	declaration, namely, Dharma Chodankar,	had  written
	to  the	 Speaker  that	his signatures were obtained
	forcibly.  That may have a bearing on the number  of
	members constituting the group.	 But the fact that a
	group  was  constituted	 is  established by the said
	declaration."
[Emphasis supplied]
	With respect, I express my whole  hearted  agreement
	with  the  reasoning.  The  ruling  does  not at all
	require	 re-consideration.  The	 contention  of	 the
	appellant  is  therefore  rejected.  I hold that the
	Speaker has not violated any of	 the  constitutional
	mandates.
(II)  Violation of principles of Natural Justice
-------------------------------------------
41.  Under this head, the argument of the appellant  relates
to  two affidavits filed on 25.2.98 six on 4.3.98 and one on
10.3.98.  The two affidavits filed on 25.2.98 were  that  of
Narinder Singh	and  Markandeya	 Chand.	 They were presented
when the arguments were proceeding.  The same  was  objected
to by the counsel who was appearing for the appellant before
the  Speaker  on  the  ground that they had been filed after
9.2.98 which was the last day to produce evidence.   In	 the
copy   of  the	proceedings  dated  25.2.98,  the  following
statement is found:
"Whether the above affidavits be placed on record and  be
read  in evidence or not will be considered presently during
arguments".
According to the appellant, the Speaker	 did  not  pass	 any
order  thereafter  to  take  the affidavits on record but he
relied on them in his order and thus violated the principles
of Natural Justice as the appellant had	 no  opportunity  to
controvert the averments in the affidavits.
42.    In his order, the Speaker has stated as follows:
"When we resumed  the  hearing	at  6.00  P.M.	  on
	25.2.98 the respondents' counsel Shri A Kumar made a
	request	 that the presence of 6 MLAs who were in the
	division of the BSP on 21.10.97	 be  noted  and	 the
	affidavits  of	Chaudhary  Narendra  Singh  and Shri
	Markandeya Chand be read in  evidence.	  These	 six
	MLAs  were Sarvasri Munna Lal Maurya, Rajendra Singh
	Patel, Jai Narain Tewari, Ved Prakash,	Shiv  Ganesh
	Lodhi and  Qasim Hasan.	 The names of all these MLAs
	are  mentioned	in  Annexure  I	 to  the   aforesaid
	affidavits.
Similarly,  the	 petitioners  also produced Sarvasri
	Haji Akbar Husain, Ram Ratan Yadav,  Vibhuti  Prasad
	Nishad,	 Shiv  Charan  Prajapati,  Ram Kripal Singh,
	Chootey Lal Rajbhar and Matesh Chandra	Sonkar	MLAs
	and   requested	  that	 their	 presence   on	 the
	petitioners' side be also noted.  The names of these
	persons also find place in Annexure I  to  the	said
	affidavits.
The  presence of all the adovementioned MLAs
	presented by both sides was accordingly noted.
	So  far	 as  the  affidavits  of   Chaudhary
	Narendra  Singh	 and Markandeya Chand are concerned,
	the petitioners counsel	 strongly  objected  to	 the
	same  on  the ground that the respondents were given
	last opportunity of file affidavit by 9.2.1998 which
	date has expired and hence the affidavits should not
	be taken or record.
On being asked whether the petitioners would
	like to file reply to the said affidavit in case the
	same  is  placed on record, the petitioners' counsel
	Shri Umesh Chandra stated that he would not file any
	reply but would object to taking the same on record.
	During the course of arguments	Shri  Umesh  Chandra
	referred  to  some paragraphs of this affidavit also
	to contend that there was no division  of  the	BSP.
	(Underlining mine)
	I find that for determining the	 controversy
	completely  and	 finally  it  is  in the interest of
	justice	 to  place  the	 affidavits  on	 record	 and
	particularly  when  the	 petitioners  do not want to
	file any reply to the same.
Again in another place, it is stated as follows:
The  various  applications, pleadings and affidavits
	filed after the petition  was  amended	on  5.12.97,
	have  already  been stated earlier in this order and
	they need not be repeated here.	  Reference  to	 the
	relevant   applications,  pleadings  and  affidavits
	shall made where considered necessary.	 Suffice  it
	to  say	 that  in  order  to  finally and completely
	adjudicate upon the controversy, and in the interest
	of justice, and particularly  keeping  in  view	 the
	serious	 consequences  flowing from disqualification
	of a member of the Assembly.  I have taken on record
	all the applications and affidavits filed even after
	9.2.1998.  Parties  have  been	afforded  sufficient
	opportunity to meet the case of each other.
43.  In the S.L.P.  a ground is raised that the averment  in
the  order  that  the appellant's counsel said that he would
not file any reply to the affidavits is factually incorrect.
But there is no denial whatever in the SLP of  the  averment
that  during  the  course  of  arguments  Shri Umesh Chandra
referred to  some  paragraphs  of  that	 affidavit  also  to
contend that  there  was  no  division	of  the	 BSP.	 No.
argument  was  also  advanced  before  us  challenging	 the
correctness of	that averment.	When the appellant's counsel
had himself relied on portions of the  affidavits  filed  on
25.2.98,  there	 is  no substance in the contention that the
Speaker had taken them on record  behind  the  back  of	 the
appellant.   There  is	also  no substance in the contention
that the appellant had	no  opportunity	 to  controvert	 the
contents of   those  affidavits.    On	the  very  same	 day
(25.2.98) the appellant filed an application and  affidavits
of nine MLAs at 7.40 P.M.  She could have then said whatever
she wanted to say about the contents of the affidavits filed
by the	respondents.	It  is not the case of the appellant
that Speaker did not permit her to  file  any  affidavit  in
reply to  the  said affidavits of the respondents.  the only
objection to the reception of the affidavits in question was
that it was filed after	 the  expiry  of  the  time  granted
earlier to file a list of members of BSP.  The appellant was
represented  by	 practising  lawyers who knew very well that
the Speaker had ample powers to condone the delay in  filing
the affidavits.	  In the Proceedings of 25.2.98 it is stated
towards the end that "learned counsel for the two sides	 had
made their submissions on factual and legal aspects".  It is
not  the  case	of  the	 appellant  that  any  argument with
reference to the said affidavits was shut out.	Moreover the
contents of the affidavits filed on  25.2.98  are  almost  a
repetition   of	 the  contents	of  the	 Additional  Written
Statement filed on 2.2.98 plus the two annexures  containing
the  names  of	26  members  who formed the group of JBSP on
21.10.97 and 18 members who continued in the group till then
besides a plea of split within split.  I  do  not  find	 any
violation  of  the  principles	of  Natural  Justice  in the
Speaker's taking on record the two affidavits filed  by	 the
respondent on 25.2.98.
44.   The other affidavits said to have been taken on record
without notice to the appellant were  filed  on	 4.3.98	 and
10.3.98.  According to the respondents those affidavits were
filed in reply to the nine affidavits filed by the appellant
on 25.2.98  at	7.40  P.M.   According to them the appellant
filed them without serving copies on the  and  they  had  to
obtain copies from the office of the Speaker on 27.2.98.  It
is  stated by the appellant that the affidavits filed on her
behalf were presented before the Speaker in  the  course  of
arguments in  the  presence of counsel for the parties.	 The
proceedings of the Speaker dated 25.2.98  do  not  make	 any
reference to  the  said	 affidavits.  The endorsement on the
margin of the application of the appellant dated 25.2.98 and
the affidavits filed therewith prove that they were filed in
the office of the Secretary to the Speaker at 7.40 P.M.	 and
on the same day, thee Speaker has made an endorsement in the
margin	directing  the	placing	 of  the   application	 and
affidavits on  record.	  Whatever  it may be, it is not the
case of the appellant that copies of those  affidavits	were
served on  the	respondents  or	 their counsel.	 There is no
record to prove such service.
45.	The Speaker has dealt with this matter in his  order
as follows:-
"The  petitioners  themselves had filed 9 affidavits
	at 7.40 P.M.  on  25.2.1998  while  hearing  on	 the
	petitions  was	going on. Copies of these affidavits
	were not served on respondents on  25.2.1998.  Their
	counsel	 obtained  it  on  27.2.1998  i.e. after the
	orders were reserved on the case on  25.2.1998.	 The
	respondents  filed  6 affidavits dated 25.2.1998 and
	27.2.1998 by means of an application dated  4.3.1998
	which specifically stated that these affidavits were
	being  filed  in reply to the said 9 affidavits. The
	affidavit of Shri Ram Ratan Yadav filed on 10.3.1998
	is almost entirely the same as the affidavits  filed
	by the petitioners on 25.2.1998.
One  more  fact	 needs	to  be stated at this stage.
	Shri R.K.      Chaudhary,   petitioner,	  sent	  an
	application/letter dated 16.3.1998 asking for copies
	of the affidavits filed on behalf of the respondents
	after the  order  was  reserved	 on  25.2.1998.	 The
	copies of these affidavits were sent  to  Shri	R.K.
	Chaudhary  along  with	a  letter dated 17.3.1998 in
	which he was informed that copies of the  affidavits
	filed  by  the petitioner on 25.2.1998 were received
	by the respondents  counsel  on	 27.2.1998  and	 the
	affidavits  filed  alongwith  the  application dated
	4.3.1998 were filed in reply thereof.	 Along	with
	the  said  letter,  a copy of the affidavit filed by
	Shri Ram Ratan Yadav dated 10.3.98 was also sent  to
	Shri R.K.  Chaudhary.  It was specifically mentioned
	in  the	 letter of 17.3.98 that in case he wanted to
	submit anything he may appear before me	 on  19.3.98
	at 1.00	 P.M.	Information of this date was sent to
	the respondents also.  On  19.3.98  the	 respondents
	Chaudhary   Narendra   Singh  and  Markandeya  Chand
	appeared along with their counsel Shri A  Kumar	 and
	Sri N.K.  Pandey.  On behalf of the petitioners Shri
	Daya Ram Pal, President of the U.P.  BSP handed over
	a letter of Shri R.K.  Chaudhary that the purpose of
	the  letter  dated 17.3.98 was not clear and as such
	the same be made clear.	 In reply to this letter  of
	Shri R.K.    Chaudhary,	 a letter was sent to him on
	19.3.98 informing him that if he wanted to file	 any
	reply  to  the	said affidavit or submit anything in
	his favour or to file anything, he may do  the	same
	on that date   i.e.	19.3.98.    Nobody  appeared
	thereafter on behalf of	 the  petitioner  Shri	R.K.
	Chaudhary nor  filed  any  document.   The aforesaid
	letters have been placed on  the  records.    In  my
	view, in the particular circumstances of the case no
	prejudice  has	been caused to any of the parties by
	admitting the aforesaid affidavits on record".
46.	Again the Speaker has stated thus in his order:-
"Since the facts stated about the  split  and  threat
	etc.   in the affidavits of Sri Vans Narain Singh and
	others filed on 2.2.1998  and  the  affidavits	dated
	25.2.1998  of  Shri  Markandeya	 Chand	and Chaudhary
	Narendra Singh, (including the allegations  of	split
	within	split)	and  the  facts	 stated	 in  the  six
	affidavits  filed  through  the	  application	dated
	4.3.1998   have	  not	been   controverted   despite
	opportunity having been given to the petitioner	 Shri
	R.K.   Chaudhary  (who	was  also  looking  after the
	petitions of Ms Mayawati), I prefer to place reliance
	on them and hold  that	there  was  a  split  in  the
	Bahujan	 Samaj	Party on 21.10.1997 and a faction had
	risen as a result of this split	 in  the  BSP  and  a
	group  of  BSP	MLAs consisting of 26 BSP MLAs (whose
	names are mentioned in Annexure I to  the  affidavits
	of  Chaudhary  Narendra	 Singh	and  Shri  Markandeya
	Chand,	filed  on  25.2.1998)  was   constituted   on
	21.10.97  itself  representing the faction which thus
	arose and that this group known as Jantantrik BSP".
47.  An objection  is  taken  before  us  in  the  course  of
arguments  that R K Chaudhary never represented the appellant
in the proceedings before the speaker and notice to him	 will
not amount  to	notice	to the appellant.  No such ground has
been taken in the S.L.P.  There is no denial  in  the  S.L.P.
of  the	 averment found in the order of the Speaker that R.K.
Chaudhary was looking after the petitions of  the  appellant.
Without	 challenging  the correctness of the statement in the
S.L.P.	it is not open to counsel for the appellant to	raise
the  contention	 for  thee  first  time	 in the course of his
arguments.  In the order of the Speaker dated 7.11.97  it  is
stated that R.K.   Chaudhary MLA and D.R.  Verma, Ex Chairman
Legislative Assembly came and produced	two  letters  of  the
appellant before the Speaker which shows that R.K.  Chaudhary
did represent the appellant in these proceedings.  In fact he
filed  petitions  for  disqualification	 only on 11.11.97 and
those petitions were nothing but repetition of the  petitions
filed by  the  appellant.    In	 the  circumstances it is not
possible for this Court to say that the averment made by  the
Speaker in  his	 order that R.K.  Chaudhary was looking after
the petitions filed by the appellant is not correct.
48.   While I am unable to accept the factual contention that
the appellant had no opportunity to controvert the affidavits
filed before the Speaker on 25.2.98, 4.3.98 and 10.3.98, I am
of the opinion that even so there  is  no  violation  of  the
principles of  natural	justice.    This  court	 has  in
The
Chairman, Board of Mining Examination and Chief Inspector  of
Mines  of Mining Examination and Chief Inspector of Mines and
Another versus Ramjee
(1977) 2	S.C.C.	  256  discussed  the
principles of natural justice and said:
"Natural justice is no unruly horse, no lurking	 land
	mine, nor  a judicial cure-all.	 If fairness is shown
	by the decision maker to the man  proceeded  against,
	the  form,  features  and  the	fundamentals  of such
	essential processual propriety being  conditioned  by
	the  facts  and	 circumstances	of each situation, no
	breach of  natural  justice  can  be  complained  of.
	Unnatural   expansion  of  natural  justice,  without
	reference to the administrative realities  and	other
	factors of a given case, can be exasperating.  We can
	neither	 be  finical  nor  fanatical  but  should  be
	flexible yet firm in this jurisdiction.	 No man shall
	be hit below the belt - that is the conscience of the
	matter"
"But  then  we	cannot look at law in the abstract or
	natural justice as a mere artifact.  Nor can  we  fit
	into   a   rigid  mould	 the  concept  of  reasonable
	opportunity"
"These general observations must  be  tested  on  the
	concrete  facts	 of  each  case	 and  every minuscule
	violation does not spell illegality.  If the totality
	of circumstances satisfies the court that  the	party
	visited	 with  adverse	order  has  not suffered from
	denial	of  reasonable	opportunity  the  Court	 will
	decline	 to  be	 punctilious  or  fanatical as if the
	rules of natural justice were sacred scriptures".
49.   It has not been proved by the appellant that there is a
failure of substantial justice. In the absence	of  bias  and
malafides,  the	 contention  that the order of the Speaker is
vitiated by violation of principles of natural justice has to
fail.
(III)  PERVERSITY
-----------------
50.  One of the contentions urged under	 this  head  is	 that
speaker	  has	by  unduly  delaying  the  proceedings	acted
perversely.  Though learned senior counsel  stated  expressly
in  the	 course of his arguments that he is not alleging bias
or personal mala fides against the Speaker,  in	 the  written
submissions given by him, it is stated as follows:
"The Hon'ble Speaker by not deciding the  petitioners
	expeditiously  and by allowing the BJP time to garner
	support for  the  purposes  of	the  defence  of  the
	respondents  under  paragraph 3 has acted contrary to
	the constitutional mandate".
The said  submission  is  not  permissible  in	view  of  the
statement expressly  made  and
referred  to  above
.   In any
event, merely because there is	a  delay  in  concluding  the
hearing, the  order  cannot  be	 said  to  be  perverse.  The
Speaker has framed the question	 properly  as  to  whether  a
split  as  alleged  by	the  respondents  had  taken place on
21.10.97 and whether it was supported by acceptable evidence.
This Court in exercise	of  its	 power	of  limited  judicial
review has only to see whether the findings arrived at by the
Speaker	 are  perverse	in  the sense in which the expression
"perversity" has been understood by  this  court  in  several
decisions.   I	am  unable to accept that as a matter of law,
delay in  the  completion  of  proceedings  would  by  itself
vitiate the order passed by him.
51.   But  I  wish to add that it is absolutely necessary for
every Speaker to fix a time schedule in	 the  relevant	rules
for  disposal of the proceedings for disqualification of MLAs
or MPs.	   In  my  opinion  all	 such  proceedings  shall  be
concluded  and	orders	should	be  passed within a period of
three weeks from the date on which the petitions are taken on
file.
52.   Before considering the relevant findings of the Speaker
which are said to be perverse by the appellant, it is  better
to refer to the rulings which define perversity.
53.   As  pointed  out	already	 in
Kihoto  Hollahan  versus
Zachillhu and others
1992  Supp.    (2)  S.C.C.    651	  the
constitution  Bench  has laid down that the power of judicial
review vis-a-vis the order of  the  speaker  under  paragraph
6(1)  of  the  Tenth  schedule	is confined to jurisdictional
errors only based on  violation	 of  constitutional  mandate,
mala  fides,  non  compliance of rules of natural justice and
perversity.
54.   In Associated Provincial Picture	Houses,	 Ltd.  Versus
Wednesbury  Corporation	 1947  Vol  2 All England Reports 680
Lord Greene, M.R.  dealt with a case where the proprietors of
a Cinema  theatre  sought  a  declaration  that	 a  condition
imposed	 by the Wednesbury Corporation on grant of permission
for Sunday performances to be held in that cinema  was	ultra
vires.	The  Court dismissed the action. The relevant passage
in the judgment reads as follows:
"In the present case we have heard a great deal about
	the meaning  of	 the word "Unreasonable".  It is true
	the discretion must be exercised  reasonably.	 What
	does that   mean?      Lawyers	 familiar   with  the
	phraseology commonly used in relation to the exercise
	of  statutory  discretions   often   use   the	 word
	"unreasonable" in  a  rather comprehensive sense.  It
	is frequently used as a general	 description  of  the
	things that must not be done.  For instance, a person
	entrusted  with	 a  discretion	must  direct  himself
	properly in law.  He must call his own	attention  to
	the matters  which  he is bound to consider.  He must
	exclude from  his  consideration  matters  which  are
	irrelevant to the matter that he has to consider.  If
	he  does  not obey those rules, he may truly be said,
	and often  is  said,  to  be  acting  "Unreasonably".
Similarly,  you	 may have something so abuser that no
	sensible person could ever dream that it  lay  within
	the powers of the authority...."
After referring to a judgment of Theatre de Luxe (Halifax)
Ltd. versus Gledhill (5) (1915) 2 K.B. 49 the  learned	Judge
observed:
"  I  do not find in any of the language that he used
	any justification for thinking that  it	 is  for  the
	court to decide the question of any justification for
	thinking  that	it  is	for  the  court to decide the
	question of  reasonableness  rather  than  the	local
	authority. I do not read him as in any way dissenting
	from  the view which I have ventured to express, that
	the task of the court is not to decide what it thinks
	is reasonable, but to decide  whether  the  condition
	imposed	 by  the  local	 authority  is	one  which no
	reasonable authority, acting within the four  corners
	of their jurisdiction, could have decided to impose".
55.    In  "Judicial Review of Administrative Action" 5th ed.
at P.549 it is stated as follows:
"Unreasonableness"   is	  sometimes  used  to  denote
	particularly extreme behavior, such as acting in  bad
	faith,	or a decision which is "perverse" or "absurd"
- implying that the decision-maker has taken leave of
	his senses".
56.   In CCSU versus Minister for Civil Service (1984) 3  All
E.R. 935 Lord Diplock observed:
"By  'irrationality'  I	 mean  what  can  by  now  be
	succinctly     referred	    to	   as	  'Wednesbury
	unreasonableness'  (see Accociated Provincial Picture
	Houses Ltd. versus Wednesbury Corporation 1947 Vol. 2
	All E.R. 680, (1948) 1 K.B. 223).  It  applies	to  a
	decision  which	 is  so	 outrageous in its defence of
	logic or accepted moral standards  that	 no  sensible
	person who had applied his mind to the question to be
	decided could have arrived at it".
57.	In Nottinghamshire County Council versus Secretary of
the Environment and another appeal 1986 Vol 1  All  E.R.  199
Lord Scarman observed as follows:
"Such an examination by a court	 would	be  justified
	only  if  a  prima  facie  case	 were to be shown for
	holding that the Secretary of State had acted in  bad
	faith	or  for	 an  improper  motive,	or  that  the
	consequences of his guidance were so absurd  that  he
	must have taken leave of his senses".
58.
In
Tata Cellular versus Union of India
(1994) 6 S.C.C.
651, a Three Judge Bench of this court to  which  one  of  us
(M.M. Punchhi, J., as His Lordship then was) was a party, the
law was stated thus:
"...Shortly   put,   the   grounds   upon   which  an
	administrative	action	is  subject  to	 control   by
	judicial review can be classified as under:
(i)    Illegality:    This   means the decision-maker
	must understand correctly the law that regulates  his
	decision making power and must give effect to it.
(ii)	    Irrationality,     namely,	   wednesbury
	unreasonableness.
(iii)	 Procedural impropriety"
59.
In
Union	of  India  and another versus G.  Ganavutham
(1997) 7  S.C.C.      463   this   court   has	 interpreted
reasonableness	and  rationality  which	 are two grounds for
judicial review.    The	 Court	referred  to  the  rule	  in
Wednesbury (supra) and observed:
"Therefore    to    arrive    at    a	decision   on
	"reasonableness" the Court has to  find	 out  if  the
	administrator  has left out relevant factors or taken
	into account irrelevant factors.  The decision of the
	administrator must have been within the	 for  corners
	of  the	 law,  and  not	 one which no sensible person
	could have reasonably arrived at,  having  regard  to
	the  above principles, and must have been a bona fide
	one.  The decision could be one of many choices	 open
	to  the	 authority  but	 it was for that authority to
	decide upon the choice	and  not  for  the  Court  to
	substitute its view".
60.   The order of the Speaker has to be tested in the light
of the above principles only in order to decide	 whether  it
is perverse.	The  Speaker has taken note of the following
circumstances for accepting the case of the respondents:
(i)    Markandeya  Chand  announced  on	 the  floor  of	 the
Assembly on 21.10.97 that under his leadership 23  MLAs	 got
separated  from	 BSP and they formed one group. This was not
controverted by the appellant or the other members of BSP.
(ii)	In spite of such announcement, the petition filed by
the appellant on 24.10.97 did not invoke  paragraph  2(1)(a)
of  the	 Tenth	Schedule  for disqualifying the respondents.
There was no mention whatever about the split  announced  in
the Assembly.
(iii)	In the petitions filed by R.K. Chaudhary on 11.11.97
the  position  was  the	 same. There was no reference to the
split announced in the Assembly.
(iv)   On 13.11.97 applications were filed for amendment  of
the  petitions	which  were allowed by the speaker but there
was no reference in these applications either to  the  split
or to paragraph 2 (1)(a) of the Tenth Schedule.
(v)  On 25.11.97 the respondents filed the written statement
in which it was stated that a split had occurred as a result
of  which  there  was  more  than  one	third  of  the	 BSP
legislators under  the	leadership  of Markandeya Chand.  On
26.11.97 appellant filed a reply/rejoinder.   There  was  no
denial	of the split referred to in the written statement of
the respondents.
(vi) On 5.12.97 applications for amendment of the  petitions
were  filed  in which there was only a denial of correctness
of the statement made by Markandeya Chand  in  the  Assembly
that  23  legislators  of BSP were with him. In Paragraph 7A
and 7B of the petitions which were introduced  by  the	said
amendment  there  was  no  dispute  of	the  factum of split
pleaded by the respondents.
(vii) On 2.2.98 an additional written statement was filed by
Vansh Narain Singh setting out the  facts  relating  to	 the
split and  formation of JBSP.  There was also a reference to
the threat caused by the appellant to JBSP members  and	 the
fact that  they were prevented from going to Lucknow.  There
was also an allegation that signatures were taken  on  blank
papers from  such  members.  The averments in the additional
written statement were never controverted.
(viii) The affidavits filed by the appellant on 25.2.98 were
sworn to in November, 1997.  There was	no  explanation	 for
the same.    Three  of	the affidavits were contradicted and
controverted by the dependents thereof.	 The stamp papers on
which the affidavits had been prepared were  issued  on	 the
same  day  and	the  names  of the persons to whom the stamp
papers were issued were not written by the stamp vendor.
(ix) The list of persons who joined JBSP on 21.10.97 was for
the first time disclosed on 25.2.98 only but  the  appellant
had  obtained  affidavits  from	 9  of	the in November 1997
itself.	 That shows that the appellant	knew  that  those  9
MLAs were at that time in the group led by Markandeya Chand.
(x)  The video cassettes and other records filed in the case
revealed that the appellant had instigated violence  in	 the
Assembly on  21.10.97  and  disrupted the proceedings.	That
itself probablises the version that the MLAs  who  supported
the  respondents were kept under threat by the appellant and
prevented from going to Lucknow for some time.	 The  matter
is  one of oath against oath and the affidavits filed by the
respondents and the other evidence  produced  by  them	were
acceptable.
61.	 All  the above circumstances referred to and relied
on by  the  Speaker  are  quite	 relevant  and	germane	 for
deciding the issue whether there was a split on 21.10.97 and
whether	 the group led by Markandeya Chand had not less than
one third members of the BSP legislature party.
62.  Apart from this, the Speaker has considered the various
facts relied on by the appellant  and  discussed  the  same.
According to the appellant the following are the facts which
would disprove the case of the respondents:
(a)   That a claim was made by	Markandeya  Chand  in
	the  Assembly  that he had 23 BSP MLAs along with him
	who got separated but the respondents who are  12  in
	number were the only members of the BSP who had voted
	in support of the Motion of Confidence on that day.
(b)   Those 12 persons became Ministers on 27.10.97.
(c)  In	 spite	of  several opportunities having been
	given and inspite  of  expiry  of  the	time  finally
	granted till 9.2.98, the respondents did not disclose
	the names of the members of the JBSP who were said to
	be 26 in number.
(d)    When  the list was given on 25.2.98 there were
	only 17 members in all in JBSP.
(e)   The respondents  have  not  complied  with  the
	mandatory  provisions  of Rule 3 of the Rules inspite
	of extension of time granted by the Speaker.
63.   All the above circumstances relied on by the  appellant
have  been referred to and discussed in detail by the Speaker
in his order. If any of them had been ignored,	it  could  be
said  that  his	 order	is vitiated. But that is not the case
here. When there is no bias or mala fide, the  acceptance  of
one  party's  statement	 on  facts and rejection of the other
cannot be canvassed before this Court.
64.   The  appellant's	counsel argued that the Speaker is in
error in proceeding on the basis that the  averments  in  the
affidavits filed on 25.2.98 on behalf of the respondents were
not  controverted  by  the  appellant  and  the	 Speaker  has
overlooked that in the application filed by the appellant  on
25.2.98	  along	  with	 nine	affidavits   they  have	 been
specifically controverted.    It  is  also  argued  that  the
Speaker	 is  in	 the wrong in rejecting the affidavits of the
MLAs filed by the appellant on	the  ground  that  they	 were
sworn in  November  1997 on different dates.  It is submitted
by learned counsel that the appellant started collecting such
affidavits from all the members of the BSP from 6.11.97 after
the respondents claimed that they had  24  members  in	their
group  and  that  she  could get them only when the concerned
MLAs were available in LUCKNOW.
65.  The above arguments are fallacious.  The first  of	 them
negatives the other plea of the appellant that no opportunity
was give to her to controvert the averments in the affidavits
of the respondents filed on 25.2.98.  It is already seen that
the  relevant  averments  were	all  made  in  the additional
written statement filed on 2.2.98 and the appellant  did  not
file any reply thereto.	 The averments setting out the reason
for  the  split	 in  the  party on 21.10.97 and the averments
describing the way in which the appellant kept the MLAs under
threat and forced  them	 to  sign  blank  papers  were	never
controverted.	That  is  a crucial circumstance relied on by
the Speaker and he cannot be faulted thereor.	 The  Speaker
has  drawn  an	inference  that the appellant knew that the 9
MLAs whose affidavits were  filed  by  her  on	25.2.98	 were
members of the group of the respondents when it was formed on
21.10.97  and  that  is	 why  she got affidavits from them in
November 1997 by force.	 In the S.L.P.	the said inference of
the Speaker has not been traversed.  There is no averment  in
the S.L.P.    or  any  other  record  that  the appellant got
affidavits from November' 97 onwards  of  all  the  MLAs  who
continued to  be  in  the  BSP.	   In the absence of any such
record, an argument advanced by counsel at the fag end of the
arguments cannot be accepted.
66.	The reasoning of the  Speaker  is  in  the  following
passages:-
"The   affidavits  of  the  respondents	 thus  remain
	uncontroverted and there is nothing on the record  to
	disbelieve  them.  On  the other hand, the statements
	made on	 oath  in  the	respondents'  affidavits  are
	corroborated   by  the	following  materials  on  the
	record:-
(i)  Statement of Shri Sardar Singh made on the floor
	of the House on 21.10.97 while speaking on the motion
	of confidence.	The petitioners have  not  filed  any
	evidence  to  controvert the statement of Shri Sardar
	Singh,	which  was  made  on  the   first   available
	opportunity.
(ii) Admission in Paragraph 3  of  the	9  affidavits
	filed  on  behalf  of  the respondents that there was
	anarchy in the House on 21.10.97.   These  affidavits
	have  been  sworn  in the month of November, 1997 and
	are totally silent on the points  of  Ms.  Mayawati's
	direction given on 21.10.97.
(iii) Video cassettes recording the proceedings dated
	21.10.97  of  the  House   unmistakably,   and	 with
	prominence, show Ms.  Mayawati instigating, exhorting
	and  directing the BSP MLAs sitting behind her and on
	her side, to come to the well of the House and create
	disturbance.  It may be noticed the Speaker was being
	attacked by BSP MLAs and  other	 opposition  MLAs  by
	suing(sic)  wooden loud speaker box, microphones etc.
	The video cassettes of Enadu, BI, Zee, ANITV channels
	may be referred to in this behalf.   These  cassettes
	are on the record.  Still photographs taken from some
	of  the	 video cassettes have also been placed on the
	record.
(iv)  The  fact	 that  violence	 was  committed,  and
	disturbance  created, in the House at the instance of
	Ms.   Mayawati	and  some   other   opposition	 MLAs
	immediately  after  the recital of 'Vande Matram' was
	over and the Speaker was attacked.  This is precisely
	what Ms.  Mayawati had directed her  MLAs  to  do  on
	21.10.97."
"The video cassettes clearly show that Ms.   Mayawati
	instigated  and abetted the commission of violence in
	the House on 21.10.1997 in which  microphones,	table
	tops   and  sound  boxes  were	pulled	up  from  the
	legislators'  and  reporters'  table  and  used	  for
	assaulting the	Speaker	 and  others.  Their acts are
	criminal in nature.  Apatment of these acts is also a
	crime.	There is prima facie evidence in the  present
	petitions to  show  that  Ms.	Mayawati is quilty of
	this offence".
"Now it is to be seen as to whether as matter of fact
	a faction had arisen as a result of split in the  BSP
	and  the  respondents have made a claim that they and
	other  members	of  the	 BSP  Legislature  party  had
	constituted a group representing that faction.
	Paragraph 11 of the affidavits of Sarvsri Vans Narain
	Singh and other respondents filed on  2.2.98  clearly
	states	that in the background of directions given by
	Ms.  Mayawati to the BSP MLAs when they	 had  sat  in
	the   cars   for   coming   to	the  Assembly,	these
	respondents and other MLAs of the BSP,	whose  number
	was  not  less	than one-third of the total number of
	the BSP MLAs, sat in the lobby, discussed the  matter
	and at that very moment there was a split amongst the
	BSP  MLAs  and these member of the BSP, who separated
	from the BSP,  formed  a  separate  group  under  the
	leadership  of	Shri  Markandey	 Chand	and  that the
	number of such members was not less than one-third of
	the BSP members.  It is further averred that  it  was
	not  possible  for  them to remain members of the BSP
	any more  and  that  the  fact	was  stated  by	 Shri
	Markandey Chand	 in the House on 21.10.97.  Paragraph
	12 of the said affidavits further state that  as  was
	apparent  from	the statement of Shri Markandey Chand
	there was a split in the BSP and there were 23 member
	(MLAs) after that split with him and  this  became  a
	separate group.	   The timings of the split was given
	before the Speaker came to the sitting of  the	House
	on 21.10.1997.
The	    averments	in   these   affidavits	  are
	corroborated by the statement of Shri Markandey Chand
	given on the floor of the House on  21.10.1997	which
	was read in evidence by agreement of parties.
The  petitioners  did  not file any reply to the
	said affidavits".
"These is no  sufficient  reason  to  disbelieve  the
	averments in   these  affidavits.    They  have	 been
	corroborated in material particulars by	 circumstance
	and other  materials on record.	 The reason given for
	splitting the BSP has been found to be true as it  is
	supported  by  the actual happening of violent events
	in the House on 21.10.1997 which took  place  at  the
	active	instigation  exhortation  and abetting of Ms.
	Mayawati herself.  The video cassettes and  the	 news
	reports	 of  the proceedings of the House of 21.10.97
	further support this.  Then  the  statement  of	 Shri
	Sardar	Singh  about the split and its cause and Shri
	Markandey Chand's statement about the split both made
	on the first available opportunity on  the  floor  of
	thee House  on	21.10.97  itself  are  there.	 Shri
	Markandey Chand informed the House  of	the  fact  of
	split in BSP by 23 BSP MLAs under his leadership.
Another fact which	 supports  the	case  of  the
	respondents  is	 that,	apart  from  the respondents,
	there were many BSP MLAs who did not  participate  in
	the   disorder	 or   violence	 in  the  House.  The
	respondents say that they were those who were in  the
	group  of  BSP	MLAs  causing  split.  This  fact  of
	non-participation of several BSP MLAs in disorder  or
	violence is corroborated by the video cassettes".
"Further,  the	petitioners  counsel  had  stated  on
	26.11.97  that	he  did	 not  propose  to  file	  any
	documentary  evidence  except  those  filed  with the
	petitions.   These  affidavits	have  been   suddenly
	produced on 25.2.98 when Chaudhary Narendra Singh and
	Shri   Markandey   Chand   filed   their   affidavits
	disclosing the names of 26 MLAs and  further  setting
	up the	case  of split within split.  The contents of
	these affidavits are not supported by the  events  of
	21.10.1997.   There  is	 no  reason  why their recent
	affidavits were not filed.  In fact they do create az
	suspicion in the mind that they had been obtained  by
	the  petitioners  under	 threat	 as  alleged  by  the
	respondents".
67.  There is not even an attempt to explain any of the above
features relied on by the  Speaker  for	 rejecting  the	 nine
affidavits filed  by  the appellant on 25.2.98.	 Nor is there
any argument against the reliance placed by  the  Speaker  on
the video tapes showing how the appellant instigated the MLAs
to  resort  to	violence  and  disturb the proceedings in the
Assembly on 21.10.97.  The question before this Court is  not
whether	 on the facts and circumstances of the case there was
a split as alleged by the respondents  on  21.10.97  but  the
question  is whether the conclusion arrived at by the Speaker
after taking note of all the aforesaid circumstances for  and
against	 the  respondents  is  so  unreasonable	 or absurd or
perverse that he must have taken leave of his  senses.	  The
speaker	  has	not  left  out	any  relevant  material	 from
consideration; nor has he referred to any irrelevant  matter.
In  the	 facts	and  circumstances of this case it can not be
said that no reasonable or sensible person  who	 had  applied
his  mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at
the findings  given  by	 the  Speaker.	  It  should  not  be
forgotten while dealing with this question of perversity that
according  to  the  appellant's	 counsel there was no bias or
mala fide on the part of the Speaker.  If  the	materials  on
record	are  considered	 on that basis it can at best be said
that, if at  all,  two	conclusions  were  possible  and  the
Speaker has  chosen  one  of them.  In the circumstances I do
not find any perversity	 in  the  findings  rendered  by  the
Speaker.   It  is  worth  recalling  the observations of Lord
Fraser of Tullybelton in Re Amin (1983) 2  All	E.R.  864  at
page  868,  that  "Judicial  review is concerned not with the
merits of a  decision  but  with  the  manner  in  which  the
decision  was  made...	Judicial review is entirely different
from an ordinary appeal".
68.  The Speaker has considered the question of split  within
split alleged to have taken place in JBSP.  It is unnecessary
for the	 purpose of this case to go into that question.	 Such
a subsequent split in JBSP is referred to by the  respondents
only  for  the	purpose	 of explaining how there were only 19
members in that group on 25.2.98.  The only relevant question
is whether there was a split on 21.10.97 and the group	which
got  separated	from  the  BSP consisted of not less than one
third members of the BSP legislature party.    That  question
having	been answered in favour of the respondents, it is not
necessary to go into the question whether there was a further
split in  JBSP	and  if	 so,  the  effect  thereof.	After
considering the materials on record, I am of the opinion that
the  findings  arrived	at by the Speaker are not vitiated by
perversity.
G. SEQUEL TO JUDICIAL REVIEW
69.  In the view I have taken it is not necessary for  me  to
consider  the  question	 whether this Court should decide the
entire matter here in the event of setting aside the order of
the Speaker or remand the matter for fresh  disposal  by  the
Speaker in  accordance	with the judgment of this Court.  For
the sake of completion.	 I wish to express my opinion on that
question too.  If the order of	the  Speaker  is  to  be  set
aside, I am of the view that the matter should go back to the
Speaker for  fresh  decision.  It is not the function of this
Court to substitute itself in place of the Speaker and decide
the questions which have arisen in the case. Learned  counsel
for  the  appellant  placed  reliance on the judgment of this
court  in  Bengal  Chemical  &	Pharmaceutical	Works	Ltd.,
Calcutta   versus Their workmen1959 Supp. (2) S.C.R. 136. The
law as stated in that case is as follows:
".....A free and liberal exercise of the power	under
Art.  136
may materially affect the fundamental basis
	of  such  decisions,  namely,  quick solution of such
	disputes to achieve industrial peace.	 Though
Art.
	136
is	 couched in widest terms, it is necessary for
	this Court to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction
	only in cases where awards are made in	violation  of
	the    principles   of	 natural   justice,   causing
	substantial and grave injustice to parties or  raises
	an  important  principle  of industrial law requiring
	elucidation and	 final	decision  by  this  court  or
	discloses   such   other   exceptional	 or   special
	circumstances which merit the consideration  of	 this
	Court".
I  do  not  know  how  this passage would help the appellant.
This Court has only said that interference under
Article  136
is  necessary  (1)  where awards are made in violation of the
principles of natural justice causing substantial  and	grave
injustice  to  parties (2) where the case raises an important
principle of law requiring elucidation and final decision  of
this  Court  and  (3)  where  the  case	 discloses such other
exceptional circumstances which merit  the  consideration  of
this Court.    the passage cannot be interpreted to mean that
after setting aside the order of thee  Tribunal	 the  factual
questions could	 be  decided  by this Court.  Learned counsel
referred also to Hindustan Tin	Works  Pvt.    Ltd.    versus
Employees of Hindustan	Tin Works Pvt.	Ltd.  1979 (1) S.C.R.
563.  The Court relied upon the passage in Bengal Chemical  &
Pharmaceutical	 Work	Ltd.,  (supra)	extracted  above  and
modified the award.  That  ruling  also	 does  not  help  the
appellant in any manner.
70.    In vice Chancellor, Utkal University versus S.K. Ghosh
1954  S.C.R.  883  the Constitution Bench held that it is not
the function of Courts of law to substitute their wisdom  and
discretion  for	 that  of  the	persons to whose judgment the
matter in question is entrusted by the law.
71.    When the Tenth Schedule has expressly constituted  the
Speaker	 or  the  Chairman  as	the case may be to decide the
question of disqualification and attach finality thereto,  it
is  not	 for  this Court to consider the facts and decide the
said question by substituting itself  in  the  place  of  the
Speaker.  If  the order of the Speaker is set aside on any of
the grounds mentioned in
'Hollohan
' (supra) by exercising the
power of limited judicial review, the consequential course to
be adopted is to leave the matter to the  Speaker  to  decide
afresh in accordance with law.
H. CONCLUSION
72.    The Speaker has found on the basis of the records that
the appellant instructed the members of the BSP to indulge in
violence and disrupt  the  proceedings	in  the	 Assembly  on
21.10.97.  It  is also found that the allegations made by the
respondents that the members of	 the  JBSP  were  kept	under
threat	by the appellant and prevented from entering Lucknow.
In view of such finding also which is supported	 by  records,
the  discretionary  jurisdiction  under
Article  136
of the
Constitution  should  not  be  exercised  in  favour  of  the
appellant.
For  all	 the above reasons this appeal deserves to be
and is hereby dismissed.
THOMAS, J.
---------
Leave granted.
Twelve	MLAs of Bahujan Samaj Party ("BSP" for short) crossed
floor of the House in the Legislative Assembly of  the	State
of  Uttar  Pradesh  (UP)  and  voted in favour of a motion of
confidence moved by the Chief Minister of the  State.	 Soon
thereafter  all	 those twelve MLAs were made Ministers in the
State cabinet headed by Chief  Minister	 Shri  Kalyan  Singh.
Appellant  (MS Mayawati) who is the leader of BSP Legislature
Party complained that the twelve MLAs who defected (they  are
arrayed	  as   respondents  in	this  appeal)  have  incurred
disqualification for membership of the Assembly. the  Speaker
of  the	 Assembly,  by	the  impugned  order  exonerated  the
respondents from the tentacles of disqualification  envisaged
in  the Xth schedule to the Constitution of India. Hence this
appeal by special leave.
There  is  no need to elaborate on the facts as they,
by themselves, are compendious.	 Elections held to the	Uttar
Pradesh	 Vidhan Sabha (Legislative Assembly) in 1996 resulted
in a hung Assembly as no  political  party  secured  absolute
majority.  However,  appellant	Ms.    Mayawati	 became Chief
Minister of the State as her party consisting of 67  MLAs  in
the  Assembly was supported by the MLAs belonging to Bhartiya
Janata Party (BJP).  But she demitted  the  office  of	Chief
Minister  on  29.9.1997	 as  per an understanding between the
aforesaid two parties.	On the next day	 Shri  Kalyan  Singh,
leader	of the BJP Legislature Party became Chief Minister on
the assumption that BSP would support him.  But	 contrary  to
the  said  assumption  BSP  withdrew  support to Kalyan Singh
Government on 17.10.1997.  Kalyan Sing was thereupon directed
by the Governor to prove  that	he  enjoyed  the  support  of
majority MLAs  in  the Assembly.  On 20.10.1997 the appellant
Ms Mayawati issued a whip to all the MLAs of her party in the
following terms.
"You are hereby informed that you should  be  present
	in  the	 Session  of  the  UP Legislative Assembly on
	21.10.1997 from 11 A.M.	 till the end of the  sitting
	and  vote  against  the Motion of Confidence moved by
	the BJP Government".
On 21.10.1997 twelve MLAs from	BSP  (respondents)  voted  in
favour	of  the	 motion	 of  confidence	 moved by Shri Kalyan
Singh.	A violent pandemonium broke out inside the  House  in
which  a  number of MLAs were assaulted by some other members
and consequently  no  business	could  be  transacted.	   On
24.10.1997  appellant  filed  a	 petition  before the Speaker
under Rule 7 of The  Members  of  Uttar	 Pradesh  Legislative
Assembly  (Disqualification  on	 Grounds of Defection) Rules,
1987 which will hereinafter be referred to  for	 convenience,
as "Disqualification Rules" for a declaration that the twelve
respondents  became  disqualified as per Paragraph 2(1)(b) of
the Xth Schedule of the Constitution.  When respondents	 took
up  the	 plea that they, along with some more MLAs, the total
of which reached 23 in number, have formed themselves into  a
new  political	party by name Janatantrik Bahujan Samaj Party
(for short JTBSP).  Appellant thereupon moved  for  amendment
of  the	 petition  on  5.12.1997  seeking incorporation of an
additional ground for disqualification which is envisaged  in
Paragraph 2(1)(a)  of  the  Xth Schedule.  Additional written
statement  was	filed  by  the	respondents  to	 the  amended
petition.
As  the	 names	of  all	 the 23 MLAs who allegedly formed the
split have not	been  furnished,  the  Speaker	directed  the
respondents to	file  a	 list of such names by 29.1.1998.  As
they failed to give names on that day also the	Speaker	 gave
another date as a last chance and posted it to 9.2.1998.  But
respondents  failed to furnish the names of such MLAs even by
that extended time, and instead again they pleaded  for	 more
time.	On  25.2.1998  a list of 26 MLAs was furnished to the
Speaker claiming that they were the MLAs who formed  a	split
on 21.10.1997.
The speaker  passed  the  impugned  order  holding  that  (1)
respondents are not liable to be disqualified under Paragraph
2(1)(b)	 of the Xth Schedule on the syllogism that the person
who issued the direction on 20-10-1997 is not proved to be an
authorised person.  (2)	 Such  direction  was  superseded  by
another	 oral  direction  which	 was  subsequently issued and
hence on  disqualification  would  visit  on  the  ground  of
non-compliance with  the  former  direction.  (3) At any rate
the whip issued on 20-10-1997 was ineffective  since  it  was
silent as to the consequences of its non-compliance.  (4) Nor
are the respondents liable to be disqualified under Paragraph
2(1)(a)	 of the Xth Schedule because they belong to a faction
which came into being as sequel to a split which arose in the
BSP on 21-10-1997 consisting of not less than  1/3rd  of  the
total members of the Legislature Party of the BSP.
It	 would	be advantageous to consider first whether the
disqualification envisaged in  sub-clause  (a)	of  Paragraph
2(1)  of the Xth Schedule should have visited the respondents
because it is admitted by  the	respondents  themselves	 that
they  ceased to be members of BSP from 21-10-1997 as they had
formed a new political party (JTBSP). Such severance from BSP
is sought to be protected from	disqualification  by  seeking
shelter under the umbrella of Paragraph 3 of the Xth Schedule
which is extracted below:
"3.  Disqualification on ground of defection  not  to
	apply in  case	of  split.  Where a member of a House
	makes a claim that he and any other  members  of  his
	Legislature party constitute the group representing a
	faction	 which has arisen as a result of the split in
	his original political party and such group  consists
	of  not	 less  than  one-third of the members of such
	Legislature party:-
(a)	he   shall   not   be	disqualified	under
	sub-paragraph  (1)  of paragraph 2 on the ground- (i)
	that he has voluntarily given up  his  membership  of
	his  original  political  party;  or (ii) that he has
	voted or abstained from voting in such House contrary
	to any direction issued	 by  such  party  or  by  any
	person	or  authority authorised by it in that behalf
	without obtaining the prior permission of such party,
	person or authority within fifteen days from the date
	of such voting or abstention; and (b) from  the	 time
	of such split, such faction shall be deemed to be the
	political  party to which he belongs for the purposes
	of sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 2  and  to  be  his
	original  political  party  for	 the purposes of this
	paragraph".
Two conditions are sine qua  non  for  avoiding	 the
disqualification  when	any  member of the House voluntarily
gives up membership of his original political  party.  First
is  that  the member concerned should have made a claim that
the  split  in	the  original  Political  Party	 has  arisen
resulting in the constitution of a group in its Legislature
Party	representing  a faction thereof. Second is that such
group should consist of not less than 1/3rd of	the  members
of such Legislature Party.
In  order  to  establish  that	the first condition has been
fulfilled the first respondent (Shri Markandeya	 Chand)	 has
made  a	 statement in the House on 21-10-1997 that the split
of BSP Legislature Party had arisen consisting	of  a  group
which  represents  a  faction  of not less than 1/3rd of the
members thereof.  It appears that the Speaker has  proceeded
on  the assumption that a claim has been made as provided in
the said Paragraph.
Regarding the second condition the Speaker held that  "there
was  a	split in the Bahujan Samaj Party on 21-10-1997 and a
faction had arisen as a result of the split in the BSP and a
group consisting of 26 BSP MLAs was constituted on  21-10-97
itself	representing  the  faction  which did arise and that
group is known as Janatantrik BSP".
According  to  the respondents, the aforesaid finding
being a finding of fact is not amenable to challenge  as  it
was  rendered  by  the Speaker of the Assembly on whom alone
the jurisdiction is conferred  to  determine  such  disputed
fact.
The scope of judicial scrutiny on matters pertaining to	 the
decision  of  a	 Speaker passed under Paragraph 6 of the Xth
Schedule has been elaborately considered by  a	Constitution
Bench  in support of the plea that Xth Schedule is liable to
be struck  down	 as  violative	of  basic  features  of	 the
Constitution was    that:      "the   investiture   of	 the
determinative and adjudicative jurisdiction in	the  Speaker
would,	by  itself,  vitiate  the provision on the ground of
reasonable likelihood of bias and lack of  impartiality	 and
therefore   denies   the   imperative	of   an	 independent
adjudicatory machinery.	 The Speaker is	 elected  and  holds
office	on  the	 support  of  the  majority party and is not
required to resign his membership  of  the  political  party
after his election to the office of the Speaker".
Venkatachaliah,	J (as the learned Chief Justice then
was) has delved into the importance of	the  office  of	 the
Speaker	 and  found that the Speaker holds a high, important
and  ceremonial	 office,  he  is  the  very  embodiment	  of
propriety  and	impartiality  and  he  performs wide ranging
functions including the performance of	important  functions
of a judicial character, and observed thus:
"It  would, indeed, be unfair to the high traditions of
that great office to say that the investiture in it of	this
jurisdiction  would  be	 vitiated  for	violation of a basic
feature	 of  democracy.	 It  is	 inappropriate	to   express
distrust  in  the high office of the Speaker, merely because
some of the Speakers are alleged, or  even  found,  to	have
discharged  their  functions  not  in keeping with the great
traditions of that high office. The robes of the Speaker  do
change and elevate the man inside."
Accordingly,    the    contention	 that	vesting	  of
adjudicatory functions in  the	Speaker	 would	vitiate	 the
provision  on the ground of likelihood of political bias was
rejected.
Paragraph  6 of the Xth Schedule renders the decision of the
Speaker final.	  The  Constitution  Bench  considered	 its
validity in
Kihoto  Hollohan
(supra).	   In  the  majority
judgment it was held that the finally clause in Paragraph  6
does  not  completely  exclude the jurisdiction of the court
under
articles	 136
,  226
and
227
of  the  Constitution.
Ultimately the Constitution Bench upheld the validity of the
Xth Schedule  subject  to the aforesaid rider.	However, the
Bench further held
that the scope of  judicial	scrutiny  is
limited	 to ascertain whether the decision of the Speaker is
vitiated by jurisdictional errors viz.	 "infirmities  based
on   violation	 of   constitutional  mandate,	mala  fides,
non-compliance	 with	rules	of   natural   justice	 and
perversity."
Shri  Kapil Sibal, learned senior counsel who argued for the
appellant focussed on the contention that  the	decision  of
the Speaker that on 21.10.1997 a split has arisen in the BSP
comprising  of	more than 23 MLAs is vitiated by perversity.
Of course learned counsel  also	 contended  that  there	 was
violation of constitutional mandate, and non-compliance with
rules of  natural justice.  But ultimately the stress of the
attack was confined to the ground of perversity.   According
to  the counsel no authority conferred with the jurisdiction
would have come to such a conclusion on the  facts  of	this
case.	In the above context it was submitted by the counsel
that a split can be recognized by a Speaker only  if  it  is
followed  up  by  the  steps  prescribed  in  Rule  3 of the
Disqualification Rules, as per which the Leader of the split
faction should have furnished to the Speaker with in  thirty
days  from  the	 date  of  its	formation of the faction the
following particulars:	(a) a statement in writing in Form-I
containing the names of the members and other particulars of
the faction; (b) names and designations of  such  member  of
the  faction  who  has been chosen its leader; (c) the names
and designations of such members who  have  been  authorised
for  the  purposed  of	the  Rules  to	correspond  with the
Speaker; (d) a copy of the Constitution and Rules of the new
legislature party and of the political party  to  which	 its
members are affiliated.
"Legislature  Party" is defined in Paragraph 1(b) of the Xth
Schedule.  It includes the group consisting of	all  members
of  the House for the time being belonging to that political
party formed in accordance with	 Paragraph  3.	  Hence	 the
faction	 consisting  of	 not  less than 1/3rd members of the
parent legislature party which was constituted as  a  sequel
to  the	 split	arisen	therefrom  is  also  deemed  to be a
legislature party.    The  leader  of  such   newly   formed
legislature  party  is	also  obliged  to  comply  with	 the
requirements contained in Rule	3  of  the  Disqualification
Rules.
According	  to	thee	learned	   senior   counsel,
non-compliance with the Rules would lead to  the  inevitable
consequence that respondents cannot be heard to contend that
there  was a split in BSP as envisaged in Paragraph 3 of Xth
Schedule.
Dr.  L.M.  Singhvi, learned senior counsel  who	 argued	 for
some  of  the respondents contended that non-compliance with
the Rules would not  by	 itself	 establish  that  the  split
pleaded by the respondents did not take place.	According to
the  learned  counsel,	Rules  are  only procedural and they
cannot get the status of of  constitutional  provisions	 and
cannot be  equated therewith.  He relied on the observations
of a two Judge Bench of this Court in
Ravi S Naik  Vs  Union
of India
(1994 Suppl(2) SCC 641) that Disqualification Rules
are procedural in nature and any violation of the same would
only  amount to an irregularity in procedure which is immune
from judicial scrutiny.	 Shri Ashok Desai and Shri RK  Jain,
the  other  two	 learrned senior counsel who also argued for
some of the remaining respondents  supported  the  aforesaid
contention.   As  against  the plea made by Shri Kapil Sibal
that the observation in Ravi S.Naik needed  re-consideration
all  the  other	 senior counsel pointed that the two learned
judges in Revi S.Naik have only adopted the reasoning of the
Constitution Bench in Kihoto Hollohan  on  that	 aspect	 and
hence it is not liable to be disturbed.
Learned	 judges who decided Ravi S.Naik were considering the
contention that petitions filed before the Speaker  did	 not
fulfil	the  requirements  of Rule 6(5)(a)(b) and (6) of the
Disqualification rules	inasmuch  as  those  petitions	were
bereft	of facts on which petitioner therein was relying and
also for not appending copies of the documents and  evidence
in  those petitions. It was hence contended before the Bench
that such petitions were liable	 to  be	 dismissed  on	that
count  alone.  Learned	Judges, while dealing with the above
contention have observed thus:
"The Disqualification  Rules  have  been  framed  to
	regulate the procedure that is to be followed by the
	Speaker	 for  exercising  the power conferred on him
	under sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 6	of  the	 Xth
	Schedule  to  the Constitution. The Disqualification
	rules are, therefore, procedural in nature  and	 any
	violation   of	 the   same   would   amount  to  an
	irregularity  in  procedure  which  is	immune	from
	judicial  scrutiny  in	view of sub-paragraph (2) of
	paragraph 6 as construed by  this  Court  in
Kihoto
	Hollohan
case."
In Kihoto Hollohan the	Constitution  Bench,  while  dealing
with the deeming provision contained in Para 6(2) of the Xth
Schedule,  made the observation that the immunity adumbrated
therein is only for the irregularities	of  the	 procedures.
In  this  context  is  is  worthwhile  to  refer to the next
observations made by the Bench in the succeeding portion  in
Kihoto Hollohan:
"The   very   deeming  provision  implies  that	 the
	proceedings of disqualification are,  in  fact,	 not
	before	the  house; but only before the Speaker as a
	specially designated authority. The  decision  under
	Paragraph 6(1) is not the decision of the House, nor
	is  it	subject	 to  the  approval by the House. The
	decision operates  independently  of  the  House.  A
	deeming	 provision  cannot by its creation transcend
	its own power.	There  is,  therefore,	no  immunity
	under
Articles 122
and
212
from judicial scrutiny of
	the  decision  of the Speaker or Chairman exercising
	power under Paragraph 6(1) of the Tenth Schedule."
We  will not say that rules of procedure are on par with the
constitutional mandate incorporated in the Xth	Schedule  of
the Constitution.   Nonetheless, the procedure prescribed in
the Disqualification Rules are meant to be followed for	 the
purpose for  which  they  are  made.  It is by virtue of the
authority   conferred	by    the    Xth    Schedule	that
Disqualification  Rules are formulated "for giving effect to
the provisions of this Schedule." What would  have  happened
if  the	 Rules	have  not  been	 formulated  as	 enjoined by
Paragraph 8 of the Xth Schedule?  The provisions of the	 Xth
Schedule would	remain	ineffective.  So the Rules cannot be
read in isolation from the provisions of the  Xth  Schedule,
in stead  they	must be read as part of it.  Of course, mere
violation of a Rule is not enough to constitute violation of
the provisions	of  the	 Xth  Schedule.	   When	 a   certain
procedure  is required by the Rules to be adopted for giving
effect	to  the	 provisions   of   the	 Constitution,	 the
non-adopted  of	 the  procedure	 would	very  much  help the
authorities to decide whether there  was  violation  of	 the
constitutional provision envisaged in the Xth Schedule.
Before	a  claim  is  made  by	a  member of the House under
Paragraph 3 of the Xth Schedule a  split  in  the  political
party should have arisen.  Such a split must have caused its
reaction  in  the  Legislature	Party also by formation of a
group consisting of not less than one third of	the  members
of that	 Legislature  party.	We have to bear in mind that
clause (b) of Paragraph 3 mandates that "for the purposes of
this paragraph" such factions shall  be	 deemed	 to  be	 the
original  political  party of the member concerned "from the
time of such split." What is the  overt	 act  through  which
formation  of  such a group can be perceived by the Speaker?
It is in this context that Rule 3  of  the  Disqualification
Rules assumes	relevance   and	  importance.	 Unless	 the
particulars required in the rule are furnished how would the
Speaker know, authoritatively, of the formation	 of  such  a
group?	 Ordinarily  such  information	must be furnished as
early as possible.  But there can be rare cases in which  it
may  not be possible, due to situational reasons, to furnish
the particular soon after the formation	 of  such  a  group.
But  the  30  days  time  provided  in the Rule is not to be
understood  as	any  indication	  to   dispense	  with	 the
promptitude in	furnishing  those  particulars.	 The time 30
days fixed in Rule 3 must be  treated  as  the	outer  limit
within	 which	 the  Speaker  should  be  informed  of	 the
particulars required.  So the need for compliance with	Rule
3 is  not  a  bare formality.  Insistence on compliance with
the Rule is, therefore, to  enable  the	 Speaker  to  decide
whether the protection envisaged in the 3rd Paragraph can be
afforded to the members concerned.
We are of the opinion that a Speaker has	to  consider
the  repercussions of non-compliance of a particular rule in
the Disqualification Rules  to	ascertain  how	far  it	 has
affected the credibility of the case of a claimant who seeks
protection under Paragraph 3 of the Xth Schedule.
The  Speaker  has	accepted the plea of the respondents
that there was a split as envisaged in Paragraph  3  of	 the
Xth  Schedule. the said finding can be subjected to judicial
scrutiny only in the  limited  sphere  indicated  in
Kihoto
Hollohan
(supra) viz. whether "the infirmities are based on
violation   of	 constitutional	  mandate,    mala    fides,
non-compliance	 with  the  rules  of  natural	justice	 and
perversity."  This is a case where appellant did not succeed
in showing a case of mala fides or non-compliance  with	 the
rules of natural justice as for the conclusion arrived at by
the  Speaker.  As  pointed out earlier the main endeavour of
the learned counsel was to show	 that  the  finding  of	 the
Speaker	 is  vitiated  by  perversity  in the sense that the
conclusion is so unreasonable that no  tribunal	 would	have
arrived at it on the given facts.
It  is	suggested  on  behalf of the respondents that if the
conclusion of the Speaker is based on some materials  it  is
immune	from  judicial	interference  because  of  two broad
restrictions.  First  is  the  extremely  limited  scope  of
judicial  scrutiny which is permitted by law as indicated by
the Constitution Bench in Kihoto Hollohan.   Second  is	 the
positional   height  of	 the  Speaker  as  a  constitutional
functionary upon  whom	the  jurisdiction  is  conferred  to
determine the  disputes	 under the Xth Schedule.  Shri Ashok
Desai, learned senior  counsel	contended  for	the  extreme
position   that	 if  the  conclusion  reached  by  the	said
functionary is a possible  conclusion  it  stands  insulated
from   any   outside   interference  including	by  judicial
exercise.
The said extreme proposition may lead to the situation that,
no matter, however illegal the order may be,  it  cannot  be
touched if  its	 author	 is  the  Speaker.    I am unable to
concede such an immunity to any	 constitutional	 functionary
to  be	above law or to have unfettered jurisdiction to pass
unreasonable orders with  immunity.    The  test  cannot  be
whether	 it  is	 possible  for	the Speaker to record such a
conclusion, because the very fact that the Speaker passed an
order itself is the instance to show that  it  is  possible.
The  test  is  whether the conclusion or the finding made by
the Speaker is so unreasonable or so unconscionable that  no
tribunal should have arrived at it on the given materials.
Parameters  for	 scrutinising  what  is unreasonable are, of
course, nebulous.  What appears to be reasonable to one	 man
may be	unreasonable  to  another  and	vice  versa.  It was
perhaps that approach which made Lord Hailsham to  make	 his
quaint	 comment  that	two  reasonable	 persons  can  reach
diametrically opposite conclusion on the same set  of  facts
without	 either	 of  them  forfeiting  the  credential to be
reasonable.  However, the test of perversity has now  bogged
down to	 this:	  No  conclusion  can  be dubbed as perverse
unless the unreasonableness is of such a dimension  that  no
authority  vested  with	 the jurisdiction would have come to
such a	conclusion.    Even  the  oft	quoted	 "Wednesbury
principle of reasonableness" as propounded by Lord Greene MR
(Picture House	vs.    Wednesbury  Corporation - 1947 (2 all
England Report 680) has not changed the said approach.
Shri Ashok Desai, learned Senior Counsel made  an  endeavour
to  show  that	the  aforesaid	principle  is a check on the
courts from apperceiving a decision reached by an  authority
(vested with  power  to	 decide)  as  unreasonable.  Learned
Master of Rolls (Lord Greene) has observed thus:
"In the present case we	 have  heard  a	 great	deal
	about  the meaning of the word "unreasonable." It is
	true the discretion must  be  exercised	 reasonably.
	What  does  that  mean?	 Lawyers  familiar  with the
	phraseology  commonly  used  in	 relation   to	 the
	exercise  of statutory discretion often use the word
	"unreasonable" in a rather comprehensive  sense.  It
	is  frequently	used as a general description of the
	things that must not be done........	  Similarly,
	you  may  have	something so absurd that no sensible
	person could ever  dream  that	it  lay	 within	 the
	powers	of  authority............Theoretically it is
	true to say - and in practice it may operate in some
	cases - that, if a decision on a competent matter is
	so unreasonable that no reasonable  authority  could
	ever have come to it, then the courts can interfere.
	That, I think, is right."
No  departure  from the said principle is warranted,
more so because the Wednesbury ratio has gained approval  of
this  Court  in	 a  number  of decisions (vide
Sitaram Sugar
Company Limited vs. Union of India
- 1990 (3) SCC 223;
Tata
Cellular  vs.  Union  of  India
- 1994 (6) SCC 651;
Union of
India vs. Ganayutham
- 1997 (7) SCC 463.
The Speaker has, in the impugned order, adverted  to
the following facts to support his conclusion:
(1)    In  the	affidavit files by Shri Vansh Narain
	Patel (6th respondent) and others on 2.2.1998 it  is
	mentioned  that	 a split was formed on 21-10-1997 at
	the lobby of the House when "not less than 1/3rd  of
	the  total members of BSP MLAs discussed and decided
	to separate from BSP under the	leadership  of	Shri
	Markandeya  Chand  (1st	 respondent).  The number of
	such MLAs is mentioned in the affidavit as 23.
	(2)	Appellant and her followers did not file any
	reply to the said affidavits.
(3)	On 21-10-1997 Shri Vansh Narain	 Patel	(6th
	respondent) announced on the floor of the House that
	more than 1/3rd MLAs of the BSP have come out of the
	party.
(4)	  Even	though	the  respondents  failed  to
	mention the names of the 23 MLAs who formed  such  a
	faction	 in split of opportunities granted including
	the  last  opportunities  granted  on 9/2/1998, they
	disclosed the names of 26 MLAs of the BSP who formed
	the split, in the affidavit filed on 25-2-1998.
	(5)	the facts stated in the said affidavits have
	not been controverted  "despite	 opportunity  having
	been given."
In   substance	 the   crucial	 circumstance  which
persuaded the Speaker to rely  on  the	ipse  dixit  in	 the
affidavit  filed  by Markandeya Chand and Vansh Narain Patel
on 25-2-1998 is that appellant has not controverted it.
It must be remembered that it is an undisputed	fact
that  at no time the number of BSP MLAs who voted for Kalyan
Singh's government had reached the number 23 (which  is	 the
minimum	  number   necessary   to  constitute  the  required
percentage for forming a split as envisaged  under  the	 3rd
Paragraph of   the  Xth	 Schedule).    It  must	 further  be
remembered that the number of individual MLAs who  held	 out
that  they left BSP had never reached 23 either then or even
now.  (Of course appellant had admitted that in addition  to
12 respondents who had defected on 21-10-1997 some more MLAs
subsequently  crossed  the floor and their number was only 5
and thus the total number of defectors reached 17).
It what the Speaker has pointed out is correct (that
the  assertion	contained  in the affidavit filed by R-1 and
R-6 on 25-2-1998 have not been controverted despite granting
opportunity to do so) it  is  not  proper  to  question	 the
conclusion  arrived at by the speaker that there was a split
as envisaged in the Third Paragraph of the Xth Schedule.  If
that is the position this Court	 will  not  probe  into	 all
other  criticisms  made	 against  the  order  passed  by the
Speaker.  But a scrutiny of the materials first	 shows	that
as  a  matter of fact no opportunity whatsoever was given to
the appellant to  controvert  the  assertions  made  in	 the
affidavit of  25-2-1998.  The evisceration of the Speaker to
the contrary is without any  foundation.    The	 proceedings
minuted	 by  the  Speaker  himself on 25-2-1998 at 6.00 P.M.
contained the following entries after referring to  the	 two
affidavits   being   filed   by	 Shri  Narendra	 Singh;	 and
Markandeya Chand:
"The same  was	objected  to  by  Shri	Umesh  Chand
	learned	 counsel  for  the  petitioner on the ground
	that those affidavits have been filed after 9-2-1998
	which was the last date to produce evidence. Whether
	the above affidavits should be taken  on  record  or
	not,  or  whether they should be read in evidence or
	not, will be considered presently during argument."
The second glaring feature which has winched to	 the
fore  during  judicial scrutiny is that the appellant had in
fact strongly  controverted  the  stand	 of  the  respondent
regarding  formation  of  a  split. On the same day when 6th
respondent filed the affidavit (i.e.  25.2.1998)  specifying
thee  names  of	 26  MLAs,  the	 appellant  had,  on her own
initiative,  filed  a  petition	 at  7.40   P.M.   pointedly
repudiating the above claim of the respondents. The relevant
passage from the said petition is extracted below:
"Today	at  about  4  P.M. I have been informed that
	Shri Narendra Singh submitted an additional list  of
	9  MLAs	 in  addition to the above referred (2+5=17)
	MLAs before you, claiming that they were  also	with
	him and that they have not returned to the BSP.... I
	submit	that  the  above  referred  claims  of	Shri
	Narendra  Singh	 are  totally  false  and   baseless
	excepting  the	above  referred	 12 MLAs. Other MLAs
	belong to the BSP and they  are	 continuing  in	 the
	BSP."
Appellant had produced affidavits of  9	 MLAs  along
with the  said	petition.    All  such	affidavits contained
averments forcefully repudiating  the  claim  of  the  first
respondent  that on 21-10-1997 he got the support of 23 MLAs
of BSP. All those  affidavits  are  identically	 worded	 and
hence the following passage from one alone need be extracted
below:
"That the dependent was	 present  in  the  session  of	U.P.
Legislative Assembly held on 21.10.1997 under the Leadership
of Ms.	  Mayawati  and he had to leave the House because of
chaos/disorder in the House along with his Leader, otherwise
he would have cast his vote against the Trust  Motion  moved
by  Sri	 kalyan	 Singh	Ministry in accordance with the whip
dated 20.10.1997 issued by the leader  of  said	 Legislative
party.
That the deponent has been continuously opposing the
	statement   given   by	 Sri  Markandey	 Chandra  on
	21.10.1997  on	the  floor  of	the  House  and	 the
	statement of said Sri Markandey Chandra in the House
	that  he enjoys the support of 23 Members of Bahujan
	Samaj  Party  in  the  U.P.  Legislature  is  wholly
	incorrect."
Now  the contention is that the said affidavits were
procured in November 1997 and hence they cannot	 be  answers
to  the	 affidavits  of	 the 1st respondent dated 25.2.1998.
Explanation of the appellant for  that	is  very  important.
According  to the learned counsel for the appellant, she has
been collecting affidavits  of	all  the  MLAs	who  loyally
remained  in  the party since 1st respondent made a claim on
21.10.1997 that 23 MLAs have gone out of  her  party.	 She
could get affidavits only one by one from all those MLAs who
remained  in  the party so that she could show them whenever
the need arose.	 Where was the opportunity for the appellant
to produce the affidavits of 9 MLAs until 25.2.1998 when for
the first time 1st respondent proclaimed the  names  of	 267
MLAs who have defected on 21.10.1997?  But when we perceived
the  promptitude  with	which  appellant controverted it and
supported her statement with thee affidavits of	 all  the  9
MLAs,  we  fell	 that  it  is  very  unfortunate that she is
accused of the charge that she	has  not  controverted	thee
affidavits filed by the respondents on 25.2.1998.
Thus   the   basis   of	 Speaker's  conclusion	i.e.
appellant has not denied the assertion	of  the	 respondents
made in	 the  affidavit dated 25.2.1998 is non-existent.  If
so, the Speaker must necessarily  have	other  materials  to
decide	that  the  number  of  deserters reached the crucial
limit of 23.  Even on the day when 1st respondent  announced
in  the	 Assembly  (21.10.1997)	 that  23 BSP MLAs under his
leadership have separated from the parent party and  decided
to  support Kalyan Singh's Government the fact remained that
only 12 MLAs (who are the respondents) voted  in  favour  of
the Government.	   The	other  MLAs  who are alleged to have
joined the faction repudiated the allegation in unmistakable
terms.	Thus when admittedly the  number  of  BSP  MLAs	 who
supported  Kalyan  Singh's  Government had never reached the
figure	23  at	any  time,  even  subsequently,	  and	when
respondents  could  never even mention the names of those 23
MLAs  at  any  time  in	 spite	of  the	  Speaker   granting
opportunities  to  them	 for that purpose including the last
opportunity  on	 9.2.1998,  it	is  a  perverse	 conclusion,
overlooking  the  aforesaid formidable circumstances that 23
MLAs had  split	 from  the  BSP	 on  21.10.1997.    We	have
absolutely   no	  doubt	  that	 no  authority	vested	with
jurisdiction to decide the question should ever have reached
such a conclusion on the facts and materials made  available
to him.
The  danger  involved  in upholding such a conclusion of the
Speaker merely relying on the ipse dixit  of  the  defectors
can be illustrated thus:  From one Legislature Party (having
a  strength  of	 say one hundred members) two MLAs, A and B,
defected and when they were confronted with the	 consequence
of  disqualification, they sought protection under the Third
Paragraph of Xth Schedule by saying that along with them  31
more MLAs of their party have also gone out of the Party and
A and  B  mentioned their names also.  But all those 31 MLAs
repudiated the allegations.  In	 such  a  case	the  Speaker
holds  that the two defectors have the protection of the 3rd
Paragraph for the simple reason that the  Speaker  chose  to
believe their  ipse  dixit.    Such a syllogism, if adopted,
would  be  be  preposterous  and   revolting   to   judicial
conscience  from  any  standard	 of reasonableness and would
toll  the  death  knell	 of  the  Constitutional  philosophy
enshrined in  the Xth Schedule.	 The finding in the impugned
order is  not  materially  different  from  the	 afore-cited
illustration.
I,  therefore,	unhesitatingly hold that the finding
of the Speaker that a split arose in the BSP  on  21.10.1997
forming	 a  group  representing	 a faction consisting of not
less than 1/3rd of the members of the Legislature  party  of
BSP is	vitiated by perversity.	 The corollary of it is that
the 12 respondents who have defected from  the	BSP  on	 the
said  date  cannot  escape  from the consequence provided in
sub-clause (a) paragraph 2(1) of the Xth Schedule.
In	 the light of our above finding it is unnecessary to
consider the next question relating  to	 sub-clause  (b)  of
Paragraph  2(1)	 of  the Xth schedule because such a venture
would only be of academic utility now.
Learned	 senior	 counsel for the respondents made an
alternative contention that in the event  this	court  holds
that  the finding of the Speaker is perverse the next course
to be adopted is to remit the matter to the Speaker for	 his
final decision.	   Learned  counsel  cited some decisions of
this Court which held the proposition that  it	is  not	 the
function  of  courts  of  law to substitute their wisdom and
decision for that of the authority  to	whose  judgment	 the
matter in   question   is  entrusted  by  law.	  [The	Vice
Chancellor, Utkal University vs.   S.K.	   Ghosh  (1954	 SCR
883), Mansukh  Lal  Vithaidas  Chauhan vs.  State of Gujarat
{1997 (7) SCC 622].
Learned counsel then invited our  attention  to	 the
following  passage from Fraser's speech in Re Amin {1983 (2)
All England Reports 864}.
"Judicial  review  is  entirely	 different  from  an
	ordinary appeal. It is made effective by  the  court
	quashing   the	 administrative	  decision   without
	substituting  its  own	decision,  and	is   to	  be
	contrasted   with  an  appeal  where  the  appellate
	tribunal substitutes its own decision on the  merits
	for that of the administrative officer."
The above passage has been quoted with approval by a
three Judge Bench of this Court in
Tata Celluiar vs Union of
India
[1994 (6) SCC  651].
In cases where the authority vested with jurisdiction has to
consider and reach a fresh decision  it	 is  necessary	that
after  exercising  judicial scrutiny the matter must go back
to such authority for fresh decision.  But  in	the  present
case the  situation  is	 different.   A remit to the Speaker
will not serve	any  additional	 purpose  because  there  is
nothing further	 for  him  to  decide.	 As the respondents,
having given up their membership from the  parent  political
party  voluntarily,  have  sought to insulate such severance
with the cover provided in Paragraph 3 of the  Xth  Schedule
the  only issue to be decided is whether the respondents are
entitled to such protection.  When this Court found that the
aforesaid protection is not available to them under  law  in
substitution  of the contra finding made by the speaker, its
inevitable sequetor is that all the twelve respondents stand
disqualified under Paragraph 2(1) of the Xth Schedule of the
Constitution. The impugned order would stand thus altered.
I may point out, in this context, that the action of
the Speaker, in allowing  the  12  respondents	to  register
their  votes  in  a  "composite poll" held by the Speaker on
26.2.1998 (as between Sri Kalyan Singh	and  Sri  Jagdambika
Pal  -	a  rival claimant to the post of Chief Ministership)
without deciding the complaint made by the appellant seeking
their disqualification from the membership of the House, was
criticised before  this	 Court	in  special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) No.4495 of 1998.  This Court then noted in the Order
dated  27.2.1998 that out of 225 MLAs who voted in favour of
Sri Kalyan Singh as against  196  MLAs	(who  supported	 Sri
Jagdambika  Pal)  the  votes  of  12  respondents  were also
counted.  However, the Court did not
in that case
pursue the
said criticism made  against  the  Speaker  mainly  for	 the
following reasoning:
"Even  when those 12 members are taken to have voted
	in favour of Sri  Kalyan  Singh,  their	 votes	when
	substracted from those polled still leaves him to be
	the    one    having	majority   in	the   House.
Correspondingly, those 12 votes do  not	 go  to	 Sri
	Jagdambika Pal who would still be in minority."
Presumably  on	the  above  premise it was submitted
before us that disqualification of 12 respondents would	 not
affect	the  government	 of  Sri  Kalyan  Singh	 which	even
otherwise commands a majority in the House. We make it clear
that our decision, on the present issue, is not intended  to
disturb	 the government of Sri Kalyan Singh in any manner so
long as he commands majority in	 the  Legislative  Assembly.
But  that  aspect cannot detract us from exercising power of
judicial review of the impugned verdict.
In the result this appeal is  allowed  by	declaring
that the twelve respondents stand disqualified to be members
of  the U.P. Legislative Assembly under Paragraph 2(1)(a) of
the Xth Schedule of the Constitution of India.
New Delhi.
October 9, 1998.