[Cites
13
, Cited by
97
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Gujarat vs Mohammed Atik And Others on 3 April, 1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 1686, 1998 (4) SCC 351, 1998 AIR SCW 1453, (1998) 2 SCR 664 (SC), 1998 (2) SCR 664, 1998 (2) SCALE 633, 1998 (4) ADSC 35, 1998 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 488, (1998) 3 JT 60 (SC), 1998 APLJ(CRI) 2 2, (1998) 2 APLJ 41.1, 1998 CRILR(SC&MP) 488, 1998 ADSC 4 35, 1998 CRIAPPR(SC) 329, 1998 CALCRILR 266, 1998 SCC(CRI) 936, (1998) 1 EASTCRIC 1045, (1998) 3 GUJ LR 2347, (1998) 2 MADLW(CRI) 412, (1998) MAD LJ(CRI) 477, (1998) 2 RECCRIR 574, (1998) 2 CURCRIR 108, (1998) 3 SUPREME 488, (1998) 2 SCALE 633, (1998) 36 ALLCRIC 779, (1998) 2 CHANDCRIC 222, (1998) 2 ALLCRILR 316, (1998) 2 CRIMES 92, 1998 (1) ANDHLT(CRI) 342 SC
Bench:
M.K. Mukherjee
,
K.T. Thomas
PETITIONER:
STATE OF GUJARAT

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MOHAMMED ATIK AND OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	03/04/1998

BENCH:
M.K. MUKHERJEE, K.T. THOMAS




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G E M E N T
Thomas J.
A Public  Prosecutor  moved  in  the  trial  court	 for
permission to  use a confessional statement recorded from an
accused during investigation of another crime, but the trial
judge investigation  of another	 crime, but  the trial judge
disallowed  the	 motion	 on  the  premise  that	 unless	 the
confession was recorded during the investigation of the very
offence under  trial it	 cannot be  used in evidence of that
case. The order thus passed by the trial court (A Designated
Court under
Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention)
Act
1987,  (TADAA as  acronym) is   now being  challenged by
the State of Gujarat by special leave.
It is  not	  necessary   to set  out facts	 of the case
which  is    now  pending    before  the  Designated  Court.
Nonetheless, some  skeletal facts  necessary for disposal of
these appeals  have to	be stated:  The three respondents in
these appeals  were accused  in	 some  cases  registered  by
different police stations of Gujarat State following certain
instances  of	  bomb	   blasts   at	 different   places.
Investigation  revealed	  that	those	instances  were	 the
aftermath of  conspiracies hatched by different conspirators
who operated  in different areas. Hence, offences came to be
registered  at	 different  police  stations  and  different
investigating agencies	commenced investigation	 in separate
areas. Fourth  respondent (Abdul  Latif Abdul  Wahab Sheikh)
was arrested in connection with Crime No.1/34 of 1993 of the
Maninagar Police  station. During investigation of that case
a Superintendent  of Police (Shri ashish Bhati) has recorded
a confessional	statement from	the said  Abdul Latif  under
Section 15
of the  TADAA.  Second  respondent	(Musakhan  @
Babakhan) was  arrested in  connection with  Crime 1/284  of
1993 of	 Shahibag Police Station. His confessional statement
was also recorded in the same manner.
In the meanwhile, police charge-sheeted the cases which
were registered	 at two	 other police  stations (Kalupur and
Karanj Police  Stations) as  against fourth respondent Abdul
Latif and  some others.	 The Designated	 Court at  Ahmedabad
began proceedings to try those cases. While the trial was in
progress, the  Public Prosecutor in that Court felt that the
confessional  statements   recorded  by	 the  police  during
investigation of  the case  registered at  Maninagar  Police
Station under
Section 15
of the  TADAA have  to be used as
prosecution evidence  as those	statements related to events
which are  subject-matter of the cases registered in Kalupur
and Karanj  Police Stations.   It  was then  that the Public
Prosecutor filed  application for  permission  to  use	such
confessional statements.  The application was opposed on the
main ground  that the confession made in another case cannot
be used in the crime registered by Kalupur and Karanj Police
Stations. Learned  Judge of the Designated Court, thereupon,
considered the following question:
"The question  therefore is whether
     the  prosecution  be  permitted  to
     introduce	   and	   prove     the
     confessional   statement	 of   an
     accused alleged  to have  been made
     during the investigation of another
     offence committed	on  a  different
     date,  during  the	 trial	of  that
     accused in another crime."
Learned Judge  answered the  question in  the	negative  by
upholding the objection raised by the respondent, as per the
impugned order.
As	 these	special	 leave	petitions  were	 pending  an
important development  happened	  - fourth respondent (Abdul
Latif)	died   and  the	  case	against	  him  got   abated.
Nevertheless the  question remains alive as the confessional
statement attributed  to the  second respondent	 Musakhan  @
Babakhan is  also sought  to be used in the cases registered
by Kalupur  and Karanj	Police Stations. For considering the
said question  we look	at
Section  15(1)
of the TADAA which
reads thus:-
"15. Certain  confessions	made  to
     police officers  to be   taken into
     consideration- (1)	 Notwithstanding
     anything in  the  Code  or	 in  the
     Indian  Evidence  act  1872  (1  of
     1872),   but    subject   to    the
     provisions	 of   this  section,   a
     confession made  by a person before
     a police  officer not lower in rank
     than superintendent  of Police  and
     recorded  by  such	 police	 officer
     either  in	  writing  or	on   any
     mechanical device	like  cassettes,
     tapes or  sound tracks  from out of
     which  sounds   or	 images	 can  be
     reproduced, shall	be admissible in
     the trial	of such	 person [or  co-
accused,  abettor	or  conspirator]
     for an  offence under  this act  or
     rules made thereunder."
It is  clear from the above section that a confessional
statement  recorded  in	 accordance  with  the	requirements
contained in  the Section becomes admissible in spite of the
ban contained  in
Section  25
of the Evidence Act or
Section
162
of	the Code  of Criminal  Procedure.  The	requirements
stipulated in
Section 15(1)
of the TADAA for admissibility
of a  confession made  to a   police  officer  are  (1)	 The
confession should  have	 made to a police officer  not lower
in ran	k than a Superintendent of Police (2) it should have
been recorded by said police officer (3) the trial should be
against the   maker  of confession   (4) such trial must  be
for an	offence under  TADAA or the Rules thereunder. If the
above requirements  are	 satisfied  the	 confession  becomes
admissible in  evidence and  it is  immaterial	whether	 the
confession was	recorded in  one particular  case  or  in  a
different case.
When there	 is no	statutory inhibition  for using such
confession on  the premise  that it was	 not recorded during
the investigation  of the  particular offence which is under
trial there  is no need or reason for the Court to introduce
a  further   fetter  against   the  admissibility   of	 the
confessional statement.	 It often  happens that	 a confessor
would disclose very many acts and events including different
facets of  his involvement  in the  preparation attempt	 and
commission  of	 crimes	 including   the  acts	of  his	 co-
participators	therein.    But	  to   expel   every   other
incriminating disclosures  than those under investigation of
a particular  crime from  the ambit  of admissibility is not
mandated by any provision of law.
We	 have,	 therefore,  absolutely	  no  doubt  that  a
confession, if	usable under
Section 15
of the TADAA, would
not become  unusable merely because the case us different or
the crime  is  different.  If  the  confession	covers	that
different crime	 in which  that crime  is under trial and it
would then become admissible in the case.
In State  of Rajasthan  vs. Bhup  Singh - 1993 (10) SCC
675	a  similar  objection  raised  by  the	defence	 was
considered in the context of admissibility of a confessional
statement under
Section 27
of the  Evidence Act.  In	that
case, information  was	elicited  by  the  police  from	 the
accused during investigation in connection with a particular
offence and  weapon of	offence was recovered in consequence
thereto. That  information became  relevant in	a subsequent
case, but the accused contended that the said information is
not admissible	in evidence  in the  subsequent case.	This
High Court over-ruled the objection on the ground that there
is no such prohibition in
Section 27
of the Evidence Act. It
was observed  that "it is immaterial whether the information
was  supplied  in  connection  with  the  same	crime  or  a
different crime." The same principle applies to a confession
recorded under
Section 15
of the TADAA.
However, Shri  S.K.Dholakia, learned Senior Counsel who
argued for the appellant State contended that the confession
made by	 the 4th  respondent-Abdul Latif  (who	died  during
pendency of  these Special  leave petitions)  is useful	 and
relevant  in  evidence	to  prove  the	criminal  conspiracy
involving the  remaining accused  as the  said	confessional
statement relates  to the  role	 played	 by  such  remaining
accused in  the crime.	Learned counsel	 said that since the
maker  of   the	 confession   died,  the  relevancy  of	 the
confessional  statement	 would	fall  within  the  ambit  of
Section 32(3)
of the  Evidence Act. The sub-section renders
the following  statement relevant if it was made by a person
who is dead:
"(3) When	the statement is against
     the pecuniary or propriety interest
     of the  person making  it, or when,
     if true,  it would	 expose	 him  or
     would  have   exposed  him	  to   a
     criminal prosecution  or to  a suit
     for damages."
Even if  the fourth respondent - Abdul Latif were alive
his confession	could have  been  used	as  against  another
person only under the strict parameters fixed in the proviso
to
Section  15(1)
of  the TADAA.  The proviso  reads  thus:-
"Provided that co-accused, abettor or conspirator is charged
and tried  in the  same case together with the accused." But
the  moment   the  maker   of  the  confession	dies  before
conclusion of the trial, the above proviso sinks into disuse
because than  it would	be impossible to try the two persons
together.
However, learned  counsel submitted  that what  becomes
relevant under
Section 32(3)
of  the	Evidence  Act  would
become relevant	 under
Section	10
of the Act  as well: That
Section pertains  to  "Things  or  done	 by  conspirator  in
reference to common design.
It provides  that where  there is	reasonable ground to
believe that  two or more persons have conspired together to
commit an  offence "anything said, done or written by anyone
of such persons in reference to their common intention" is a
relevant fact.	So unless  what the  deceased accused (Abdul
Latif)	disclosed   in	his  confessional  to  their  common
intention," that  statement cannot  be	brought	 within	 the
scope of
Section 10
of the Evidence Act.
We have  to see  the amplitude  of the  expression	 "in
reference to  their common  intention" as used in
Section 10
of the	Evidence Act. It was once considered that expression
is  as	 good  as  saying  "in	furtherance  of	 the  common
intention." Almost  seven decades  ago a  Full Bench  of the
Patna High  Court had  held it	like that  in
Indra  Chandra
Narang and others vs. Emperor-
AIR 1929 Patna 145:
"The object  of   this  section  is
     merely to	assure that  one  person
     shall  not be  made responsible for
     the acts  or deeds of another until
     some bond	in the	nature of agency
     has been  established between  them
     and the  act, words,  or writing of
     another which  it	is  proposed  to
     attribute vicariously to the person
     charged must  be in  furtherance of
     the common	 design and  after  such
     design was entertained."
But a three judge bench of this Court in Bhagwan Swarup
Lal Bishan Las and others vs. State of Maharashtra (AIR 1965
SC 682	said that  the expression  ("in reference  of  their
common intention'  and is  very comprehensive and it appears
to have	 been designedly  used to give it a wider scope than
the words 'in furtherance of' in the English Law. Even if it
is  wider,   would  its	  width	 go  beyond  the  period  of
conspiracy? It	is well-neigh settled that
Section 10
of the
Evidence act is founded on the principle of law of agency by
rendering the statement or act of one conspirator binding on
the other  if it  was said  during subsistence of the common
intention as  between the  conspirators.  If  so,  once	 the
common intention  ceased to  exist any	statement made	by a
former conspirator  thereafter cannot  be  regarded  as	 one
made "in  reference to	their common  intention."  In  other
words, a  post-arrest statement	  made	to a police officer,
whether it  is	a  confession  or  otherwise,  touching	 his
involvement in	the conspiracy,	 would not  fall within	 the
ambit of
Section 10
of the Evidence act.
Privy Council  has held  so in
Mirza  Akbar  vs.	King
Emperor
- AIR 1940 PC 176. The relevant observations of Lord
Wright are the following:
"This being  the  principle,  their
     Lordships think  the words	 of
S.10
must be  constructed in  accordance
     with it  and  are	not  capable  of
     being widely  construed  so  as  to
     include   a    statement	by   one
     conspirator in  the absence  of the
     other with	 reference to  past acts
     done  in	the  actual   course  of
     carrying out  the conspiracy, after
     it has  been completed.  The common
     intention is  in the past. In their
     Lordships,	 judgement,   the  words
     "common  intention"     signify   a
     common intention  existing	 at  the
     time when	the thing was said, done
     or written	 by  the  one  of  them.
     Things said,  done or written while
     the  conspiracy  was  on  foot  are
     relevant as  evidence of the common
     intention, once  reasonable  ground
     has been  shown to	 believe in  its
     existence. But  it would  be a very
     different matter  to hold	that any
     narrative or statement or statement
     or confession    made  to	a  third
     party after the common intention or
     conspiracy was  no longer operation
     and  had	ceased	 to   exist   is
     admissible against the other party.
     There is  then  no common intention
     of the  conspirators to  which  the
     statement can  have  reference.  In
     their  Lordships'	 judgement
S.10
embodies this  principle.	That  is
     the  construction	which  has  been
     rightly   applied	  to
S.10
in
     decisions in  India, for instances,
     in
Emperor	 v. Ganesh Raghunath
(
55
     Bombay 839)  and Emperor  v.  Abani
(38 Cal  169). In	these cases  the
     distinction   was	 rightly   drawn
     between   communications	 between
     conspirators while	 the  conspiracy
     was going	on with reference to the
     carrying  out   of	 conspiracy  and
     statements	  made, after  arrest or
     after the	conspiracy has ended, by
     way of  description of  events then
     past."
(Emphasis supplied)
     A three  judge bench  of this  Court has  also said  in
Sardul Singh  Caveeshar and   others  vs The State of Bombay
(AIR 1957 SC 747)
     "The   principle	underlying   the
     reception of evidence under S.10 of
     the Evidence Act of the statements,
     acts  and	 writings  of  once  co-
conspirator as against the other is
     on the  theory of	agency. The rule
     in S.10 Evidence Act, confines that
     principle	of  agency  in	criminal
     matters to	 the  acts  of	the  co-
conspirator   within   the	  period
     during which  it can  be said  that
     the  acts	were  "in  reference  to
     their common  intention" that is to
     say, things  said, done or written,
     while the	conspiracy was	on  foot
     and in carrying out the conspiracy.
It would seem to follow that where,
     the charge	 specified the period is
     not receivable in evidence."
(Emphasis supplied)
     Thus, the	principle is  no longer res integra that any
statement made	by an accused after his arrest, whether as a
confession or  otherwise, cannot  fall within  the ambit  of
Section 10
of the Evidence Act. The corollary of it is that
the confessional  statement of	4th respondent	(Abdul Latif
Abdul Wahab  Sheikh) who  is no more alive now thus vanishes
from the ken of evidentiary use.
In the  result we allow these appeals and set aside the
impugned order	and permit  the prosecution  to	 make use of
the confessional  statement, recorded  under
Section  15
of
TADAA of the accused who are now facing trial.