[Cites
3
, Cited by
30
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Orissa vs Mrutunjaya Panda on 13 January, 1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 715
Author:
M.K.Mukherjee
Bench:
M.K. Mukherjee
,
K.T. Thomas
PETITIONER:
STATE OF ORISSA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MRUTUNJAYA PANDA

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	13/01/1998

BENCH:
M.K. MUKHERJEE, S.P. KURKUKAR, K.T. THOMAS




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
THE 13TH DAY OF JANUARY, 1998
Present:
Hon'ble Mr. Justice M.K.Mukherjee
	       Hon'ble Mr. Justice S.P.Kurdukar
	       Hon'ble Mr. Justice K.T.Thomas
Mr. Manish  Mishra and	Mr. P.N.  Mishra, Advocates  for the
appellant.
Mr. N.P.Midha  and Mr.	Bharat	Sangal,	 Advocates  for	 the
respondent.
J U D G M E N T
     The following Judgment of the Court was delivered:
M.K.MUKHERJEE, J.
The respondent  was tried	for  and  convicted  of	 the
offences under
Section 161
of the  Indian Penal  Code an d
5(2) read with 5(1) (d) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act,
1947
by   the	Special	 Judge	(Vigilance),  Sambalpur	 for
accepting a  sum of  Rs. 500/- as illegal gratification from
Mohd. Ushaman  (P.W.2), an employee of Rourkela Steel Plant.
In  appeal   preferred	by  him	 the  High  Court  that	 the
respondent received  the above	sum as illegal gratification
and that  the defence  of the  respondent received the above
sum as	illegal gratification  and that	 t he defence of the
respondent that	 the above  amount was paid by P.W.2 as loan
was unbelievable.  Inspite thereof  the High Court set aside
the convictions	 of the respondent solely on the ground that
there was  no valid  sanction to  prosecute him.  The  above
judgment is under challenge in this appeal.
2.   On perusal	 of the	 impugned judgment  we find that the
High Court's  attention was  not drawn	to the provisions of
Section	 465
of  the	Code  of  Criminal  Procedure  which
expressly  lays	  down,	 inter	 alia,	that  any  error  of
irregularity in	 any sanction  for the prosecution shall not
be a  ground for  reversing an	order of  conviction by	 the
appellate Court	 unless in  the	 opinion  of  that  Court  a
failure of  justice has in fact been occasioned thereby. The
section further	 lays down  that in  determining whether any
error or  irregularity in  any sanction	 for the prosecution
has occasioned	a failure  of justice,	the Court shall have
regard to  the fact  whether the  objection could and should
have been  raised at an earlier stage of the proceedings. In
view of	 the above provisions the High Court was required to
decide, after  recording a finding that there was some error
or irregularity	 occasioned a failure of justice and further
whether	 such	objection  regarding  the  validity  of	 the
sanction was  raised in	 the trial  Court.  Admittedly,	 the
above point was not raised in the trial Court nor do we find
anything on  record from which it can be said that the error
or irregularity	 in the sanction (even if we assume that the
finding of  the High  Court in	this regard  is correct) did
occasion any  failure of justice. In that view of the matter
it must be said that the High Court was not at all justified
in acquitting the respondent on the ground that there was no
valid  sanction	 to  prosecute	him.  Since  on	 facts,	 the
concurrent findings  of the Courts below are based on proper
appreciation of evidence and supported by cogent reasons the
judgment of the High Court has got to be reversed.
3.   Resultantly,  we  allow  this  appeal,  set  aside	 the
impugned judgment  and restore	the conviction	and sentence
recorded against  t he	respondent by  the trial  Court. The
trial Court  will now  take appropriate steps to incarcerate
the respondent to serve out the sentence imposed by it.