[Cites
11
, Cited by
48
]
Supreme Court of India
C. Rangaswamaiah & Others vs Karnataka Lokayukta & Others on 21 July, 1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 2496, 1998 AIR SCW 2498, (1998) 4 ALLMR 372 (SC), (1998) 5 JT 64 (SC), 1998 (2) UJ (SC) 380, 1998 (4) ALL MR 372, 1998 (4) SCALE 266, 1998 (6) SCC 66, (1998) 3 SCR 837 (SC), 1998 UJ(SC) 2 380, (1998) 4 LAB LN 60, (1998) 4 SCALE 266, (1998) 2 CURLR 522, (1998) 3 RECCRIR 547, (1998) 6 SUPREME 68, 1998 SCC (L&S) 1448
Author:
M. Jagannadha Rao
Bench:
K. Venkataswami
,
M. Jagannadha Rao
PETITIONER:
C. RANGASWAMAIAH & OTHERS

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
KARNATAKA LOKAYUKTA & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	21/07/1998

BENCH:
K. VENKATASWAMI, M. JAGANNADHA RAO




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
M. JAGANNADHA RAO, J.
On the  last  day	before	  summer  vacation,  namely,
14.5.1998, we  dismissed these Special Leave Petition at the
stage of  admission and stated that we shall pass a reasoned
order later. We are passing that order now.
These seven special leave petitions have been preferred
against the  common Judgment  of the Karnataka High Court in
Writ Petition  Nos.24215/97, 32653/97,	33388/97,  27056/97,
33852/97 and  4361/98. The  judgment, in  fact, disposed  of
several other writ petitions also and in addition considered
the correctness of the judgment dated 12.8.1997 of a learned
single Judge  of that  Court rendered  in writ	Petition No.
17819 of  1994 against	which writ  Appeals Nos. 5081/97 and
5071/97	 were	respectively  preferred	 by  the  petitioner
therein and the State of Karnataka.
The  point	  raised  in   these  SLPs  is	whether	 the
investigation  under
section	17
of	 the  Prevention  of
Corruption Act,	 1988 entrusted by the state of Karnataka to
the police  officers of	 the State having the requisite rank
could still  be said to be vitiated because of the fact that
the said  officers were	 on deputation to the police wing of
the Karnataka State Lok Ayukta at the relevant time?
The facts	of the	case are as follows: The petitioners
before us  file writ  petitions contending  that the  police
officers on  deputation with  the Lok  Ayukta could not have
been entrusted	with the  investigation under
section 17
of
the prevention	of
Corruption  Act, 1988
.  In writ  petition
17819/94 filed	earlier by another public servant which went
before a  learned single  Judge	 of  that  Court,  the	same
questions were	raised. A learned single Judge of that Court
while  however	 rejecting  the	  contention  of   the	Writ
Petitioner in  writ petition  No. 17819/94  that the  police
officers sent  on deputation  to the  Lok Ayukta to 'assist'
the said  authority under  section 15(1)  of  the  Karnataka
State Lok Ayukta Act, 1984 would cease to be police officers
for purposes  of
section  17
of the prevention of corruption
Act, 1988,  held that  the petition  was liable to be partly
allowed on  the basis f the following reasoning. The learned
Judge held  that in  view of
section 15(2)
of the Lok Ayukta
Act which  required the	 staff of  the	Lok  Ayukta  to	 act
without 'fear'	in the	discharge  of  their  functions	 and
section 15(4)
of the said Act- which vested 'administrative
and disciplinary  control' of the staff in the Lok Ayukta, -
the independence  of the  Lok Ayukta  as an  autonomous body
would be  affected if the police officers on deputation with
the  Lok   Ayukta   were   entrusted   with   functions	  of
investigation  under
section	17
of	 the  Prevention  of
Corruption Act,	 1988 and  that,  therefore,  such  officers
should	not   have  been   asked   to	conduct	  any	such
investigation. The  learned Single Judge, however, sustained
the investigation  already made,  by invoking  the de  facto
doctrine laid  down by	the Supreme  Court in Gokaraju Ranga
Raju vs.  State	 of  Andhra  Pradesh  [1981  (3)  SCC  132].
Question arose	as to  the position  of the post of director
General of  Police in the Lok Ayukta created w.e.f. 21.12.92
which post  was however	 not included in the rules governing
the Lok	 Ayukta and  to the  effect of	another notification
dated 22.12.92	issued by the State Government under
Section
17
of the prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988
designating all
the Inspectors	of Police, Karnataka Lok Ayukta to be police
officers for  purposes of  the proviso	to
section 17
of the
said  Act.   The  learned   judge  held	  that	the   latter
notification in	 so far as it placed the said officers under
the 'general  and overall  control and	supervision' of	 the
Director  General,  Bureau  of	Investigation,	Lok  Ayukta,
Bangalore -  rather than  under the  Lok Ayukta - as was the
position under an earlier notification dated 2.11.1992 which
had vested  such control and supervision in the Lok Ayukta -
was bad	 inasmuch as  it jeopardised the independence of the
Lok Ayukta,  particularly when	the post of Director General
of the	Bureau of Investigation, Lok Ayukta was not included
among the  posts listed	 in the Karnataka Lok Ayukta (Cadre,
Recruitment and	 conditions of	Service of  the Officers and
the Employees) Rules, 1988. The learned Judge also held that
the   notification    dated   12.12.1992   mentioned   above
designating the	 inspectors of Police who were on deputation
in the	Karnataka Lok  Ayukta to  be police  officers  under
section 17
of the  prevention of
Corruption Act,  1988
and
that the  notification dated 26.5.19986 issued under
Section
2(s)
of the Criminal procedure Code, 1973 whereby Offices of
the Lok	 Ayukta throughout the state were declared as Police
stations respect  of jurisdiction  mentioned against each of
them -	could not  be of  any help  to the state inasmuch as
those police  officers on  deputation in  the police wing of
the Lok	 Ayukta could  not have been asked to under take any
functions other	 than those of 'assisting' the Lok Ayukta as
specified in  section 15(1)  of the Lok Ayukta Act, 1984. In
the result, the learned single Judge directed that, from the
stage at  which the investigation stood under the prevention
of
Corruption  Act, 1988
,  as on  the date of the Judgement,
the Police  wing/Bureau of  investigation of  the Lok Ayukta
'shall cease'  all investigations  but that  this would not,
however, prevent the said agency from transferring the cases
for further  investigation and	appropriate  action  to	 any
other agency  competent to  investigate the  same. So far as
the investigation  which was  already  made  by	 the  police
officers of  the Bureau	 was  concerned,  -  though  it	 was
sustained under	 de facto  doctrine, - it was still observed
that the  same would  be  subject  to	 the  right  of	 the
concerned public servants to prove that prejudice was caused
to them	 on account  of the entrustment of the investigation
to such	 officers who  were on deputation. the writ petition
No. 17819 of 1994 was allowed to the extent stated above.
The said  writ petition  having been  partly allowed as
stated above  - both  the petitioner  therein and  the State
filed Writ   Appeals  as stated earlier. Other officers like
the petitioners in these SLPs who filed fresh writ petitions
- had  their writ  petitions  clubbed  with  the  said	Writ
Appeals.
The Division  Bench dismissed  the writ petitions filed
by the	petitioners as	also the  writ Appeal  of  the	writ
petitioner in  writ petition  17819 of	1994 and allowed the
Writ Appal  filed by  the State.  It held  that	 even  after
deputation, there  could be a "dual" role on the part of the
police officers	 in their functions, namely, functions under
the Lok	 Ayukta and  functions in  discharge of	 the  duties
entrusted to  them by  the State  of  Karnataka,  under	 the
Prevention  of	Corruption  Act,  1988
.	 It,  however,	held
reversing the  view of	the learned  Single Judge  that	 the
notification dated 22.12.1992 issued under
section 17
of the
prevention  of
Corruption  Act,   1988
designating	 all
Inspectors on  deputation in  the  Lok	Ayukta	as  officers
competent for  purpose of
Section 17
of the  Act  and	 the
notification dated  26.5.1986 issued  under
section  2(s)
of
the Code  of Criminal  Procedure designating  all offices of
the Lok	 Ayukta in  the State as Police Stations - indicated
that these  police  officer's  though  on  deputation,	were
entrusted with	these powers  of investigation, by virtue of
statutory power. The Division Bench further held that though
the  Director	general	 of  Police  newly  attached  w.e.f.
21.11.92 to the Bureau of Investigation of Lok Ayukta by way
of an  administrative order  of the  Government was to be in
control and  supervision of  the police	 staff	in  the	 Lok
Ayukta and  though the	said post  of  Director	 General  of
Police	was   not  -   by  appropriate	 amendment  of	 the
recruitment rule  of the  Lok Ayukta Staff - included in the
cadre of  posts in the police wing of the Lok ayukta - still
it had	to be taken that the said Director General of Police
was under the administrative and disciplinary control of the
Lok  Ayukta  and  therefore  the  above	 notification  dated
22.12.1992  could   not	 be   treated  as   invalid  or	  as
jeopardising the  independence of  the Lok  ayukta. It	also
held that  the appointment  of the said Director General and
the notification  placing the  police officers	of  the	 Lok
Ayukta under  his control  did not  amount to  divesting the
powers of  the	Lok  ayukta  in	 relation  to  these  police
offences nor to vesting the said powers only in the Director
General of  police. It observed that dual functions could be
performed by  these officers  in relation  to the  two Acts,
namely the  Prevention of  Corruption Act and the Lok Ayukta
Act and	 such a	 situation of dual control could not be said
to   be	  alien	  to   criminal	  jurisprudence	  concerning
investigation of  crimes. In other words. These officers who
were of	 the  requisite	 rank  as  per
section	 17
of	 the
Prevention of  Corruption Act,	1988 could not be said to be
incompetent to	investigate into  offences assigned  to them
under that  Act by  the competent  authority  by  virtue  of
statutory powers  under
Section	 17
thereof or to the extent
not  excluded	by  the	 Lok  Ayukta.  The  Division  Bench,
therefore, held	 that the  further investigation against the
petitioners could  be continued	 through the police officers
on deputation with the Lok Ayukta.
We have  also to  also to refer to an office Memorandum
dated 2.9.1997	issued by  the Lok Ayukta after the judgment
of the	learned Single	Judge. The  Lok ayukta issued office
memorandum dated  2.9.1997 to the effect that in view of the
judgment in the writ petition, all police officers in charge
of police  stations of the Lok ayukta, could take cognizance
and investigate	 offences punishable under the Prevention of
corruption Act,	 1988 and  the
IPC
but that keeping in view
section 17
of the  Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, they
were  to   obtain  necessary   orders  from  the  respective
Superintendents of  Police, attached to the Lok ayukta - who
in their  turn would  report to	 the Lok Ayukta a or Upa Lok
Ayukta, as  the case  may  be  -  with	reference  to  their
respective jurisdictions  through the  Inspector General  of
Police (except	in trap	 cases). The  memorandum stated that
the report of the police officers should be submitted to the
Lok- Ayukta  or Upa  Lok Ayukta,  as the case may be through
the IGP	 immediately after  such action	 was  taken  in	 the
proceedings. It	 further stated that the IGP would place the
FIR, the  evidence collected  and  the	final  investigation
report before  the Lok	Ayukta and that before filing charge
sheet for  prosecution or  filing closure reports, orders of
the Lok	 Ayukta or  Upa Lok  Ayukta -  as the  case may be -
would have  to be obtained. The validity of this Memorandum,
therefore, fell	 for consideration before the Division Bench
in the	light of  the other  findings given  by the Division
Bench reversing the opinion of the learned single Judge.
In regard	to the	above Memorandum  of the  Lok Ayukta
dated 2.9.97,  the Division Bench held that it was issued by
the Lok	 Ayukta only  in view of the Judgment of the learned
Single	Judge  and  Govt.  notification	 dated	20.8.97,  to
overcome the  difficulties faced  by the  police officers in
the Lok ayukta. The office Memorandum purported to have been
issued under
section 15(4)
of the karnataka
Lok Ayukta Act
.
The  Bench  held  that	the  Lok  ayukta  had  no  authority
statutorily  delegated	 to  it	 to  issue  such  an  office
Memorandum. The	 Bench held  that, in the light of the views
expressed in  the judgment  of the  Division Bench  that the
Director General  attached to  the  Lok	 Ayukta	 was  to  be
treated as  under the  administrative  control	of  the	 Lok
Ayukta,	 the   memorandum   had	  become   `redundant'	 and
'unworkable.'  Even   otherwise	 the  Court  would  have  no
hesitation to  set aside  the same  on	ground	of  want  of
jurisdiction or	 as being  in excess  of jurisdiction of the
Lok ayukta.  The Division Bench, however, clarified that the
setting aside  of the  said Memorandum did not mean that the
Lok Ayukta  had no  administrative and	disciplinary control
over the police officers on deputation. It held that in case
the Lok ayukta directed a police officer  'not to proceed in
relation to a case', such a police officer could not venture
to initiate  investigation. A direction not to go ahead with
entire duties  entrusted to  him by the Government under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
could be given by the Lok
ayukta only  under specified  and exceptional  circumstances
such as	 - when there was "excess loaded of work" in the Lok
Ayukta which  might not consequently leave adequate time for
investigation of  offences being  investigated	by  the	 Lok
Ayukta.	 These	 exceptions,  the   Bench  held,   were	 not
exhaustive and	there could  well be  other situations where
the Lok	 Ayukta could direct its officers not to take up the
extra work  entrusted to  them	by    the  State  under	 the
Prevention of  Corruption Act, 1988
. The Division Bench thus
allowed the Writ Appeal filed by the State and dismissed the
Writ Appeal  of the  petitioner in  W.P. 17819	of 1994	 and
dismissed the writ petitions filed by the petitioners before
us.
It was  contended	in  these  special  leave  petitions
before us  by the learned senior counsel for the petitioners
Sri Gopal  Subramanyam that  the  Division  Bench  erred  in
dismissing the writ petitions filed by the petitioners, that
the entire  investigation under the Prevention of corruption
Act so	far conducted  by the  police officers	of  the	 Lok
Ayukta must  be treated	 as illegal and that the entrustment
of the	remaining investigation	 to these officers could not
be permitted.  In other	 words, it  was contended  that	 the
entire proceedings must be quashed.
Before  giving  our  reasons  for	dismissal  of  these
special leave  petitions we  may  state	 that  we  are	here
conscious of  the fact that writ petitioner in writ petition
No. 17819/1994	out of	which the  two	writ  appeals  arose
before the  High Court is not before us. But inasmuch as the
fresh writ  petitions filed  by the  petitioners who are now
before us  have	 been  disposed	 of  by	 a  common  judgment
alongwith writ	appeals, it has not become possible to avoid
consideration of  the reasons  given by	 the learned  Single
Judge in writ petition No. 17819/1994.
The following points arise for consideration:
(1)  Was it  permissible for  the State Government to create
the post of Director General of Police, Lok ayukta by way of
an administrative  order of  21.12.1992 though the said post
was not included in the relevant rules of recruitment of the
staff of the Lok Ayukta? If permissible, can it be said that
the  said   officer  was   independent	 and   outside	 the
administrative and disciplinary control of the Lok Ayukta?
(2)  Is the entrustment of functions under the
Prevention of
Corruption  Act,  1988
by  the	 Government  to	 the  police
officers  on   deputation  with	  the  Lok   Ayukta  without
jurisdiction?
(3)  In what  manner can the provisions of
section 17
of the
Prevention of  Corruption Act,	1988 and
section 15
of the
Karnataka Lok ayukta Act, 1984 be harmonised?
(4)  Is further	 investigation in  the present	cases to  be
continued by  the police  officers on disputation to the Lok
Ayukta?
Point 1:-
At the  outset, it is necessary to refer briefly to the
provisions of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
, and of
the Karnataka  State Lok  ayukta Act, 1984 in so far as they
are relevant and to certain notifications adverted to by the
parties before the High Court.
Section 17
of the	 Prevention of	Corruption Act, 1988
states that  notwithstanding anything  contained in the
Code
of Criminal  Procedure
1973  (Act  2  of  1974),  no  police
officer below  the rank (a) in the case of the Delhi Special
Police Establishment,  of an Inspector of Police, (b) in the
metropolitan area  of Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and Ahmedabad
and in	any other  metropolitan areas notified as such under
sub-section (1)	 of
Section  8
of  the Code  of the
Code of
Criminal Procedure
,  1973(Act 2	 of 1924),  of an  Assistant
Commissioner of	 Police or  a police  officer of  equivalent
rank, shall,  investigate any  offence punishable under that
Act without  the order	of a  metropolitan Magistrate  or  a
Magistrate of  the first  class, as the case may be, or make
any arrest  without a  warrant. The first proviso to
Section
17
states  that when  a police	officer of  a rank below the
rank of	 an Inspector of police can take similar action. The
second proviso	states that  if the  offence  is  one  under
clause (e)  of sub-section (1) of
section 13
namely, dealing
with possession	 of  assets  disproportionate  to  the	know
sources of  income of  the  public  servant,  then  such  an
offence shall  not be  investigated without  the orders of a
police officer	not below  the	rank  of  Superintendent  of
Police.
We shall  next refer  to Section  15 of  the State	 Lok
Ayukta Act,  1984, which  deals with the mode of recruitment
of staff  of the  Lok Ayukta.
Section 15
of the Act reads as
follows:
"
Section 15
:  Staff of  Lok Ayukta.
etc.:  (1)	  There	 shall	be  such
     officers and  employees as	 may  be
     prescribed to assist the Lok Ayukta
     and the  Upa Lok  Ayukta or the Upa
     Lok  Ayukta  in  the  discharge  of
     their functions under this Act.
(2) The  categories recruitment and
     conditions	 of   service	of   the
     officers and  employees referred to
     in	  sub-section	 (1)   including
     special  conditions   as	may   be
     necessary for  enabling them to act
     without fear  in the  discharge  of
     their functions,  shall be	 such as
     may be  prescribed in  consultation
     with the Lok Ayukta.
(3)  Without   prejudice	to   the
     provisions of  sub-section (1), the
     Lok Ayukta	 or an	Upa  Lok  Ayukta
     may, for  the purpose of conducting
     investigations   under   this   Act
     utilise the services of
(a)	  any	  officer     or
     investigating agency  of the  State
     Government; or
	  (aa)	  any	  officer     or
     investigating agency of the Central
     Government	   with	    the	   prior
     concurrence    of	  the	 Central
     Government; or
(b) any other agency.
(4)   The	  officers   and   other
     employees	referred   to  in   sub-
section  (1)  shall  be  under  the
     administrative   and   disciplinary
     control of the Lok Ayukta:
provided that	 when Lok Ayukta
     is	  unable    to	 discharge   his
     functions owing to absence, illness
     or any  other cause,  the	Upa  Lok
     Ayukta or	if there  are more  than
     one upa  Lok Ayukta or if there are
     more than	one Upa	 Lok Ayukta, the
     senior among them may discharge the
     functions of  the Lok  Ayukta under
     this sub-section".
It will  be noticed  from the above provisions that the
staff of  the Lok  Ayukta is  to "assist" the Lok ayukta and
Upa Lok Ayukta in the discharge of their functions as stated
in
section  15(1)
and  that the staff is to function without
"any fear"  in the  discharge of  their duties	as stated in
section 15(2)
.	The staff  is to be under the administrative
and disciplinary jurisdiction of the Lok Ayukta as stated in
section 15(4)
.
Under the	rule making power conferred on it by section
23 of  the Lok	Ayukta Act, 1984, the State of Karnataka has
framed rules  for recruitment  of the staff in the Lok Aukta
called the  Karnataka Lok  Ayukta (Cadres,  Recruitment	 and
conditions of  Service of the Officers and Employees) Rules,
1988.  Rule   3	 thereof   provides  for  the  strength	 and
composition of	the staff of the Lok Ayukta and states	that
the staff  shall be  recruited	as  detailed  in  the  First
Schedule of  the Rules.	 Rule 4	 of the Rules prescribes the
method	of   recruitment  and	the  minimum  qualifications
therefor. The  first Schedule  divides the  staff into three
wings" (i)  Administrative and Enquiry Wing (ii) Police Wing
and (iii)  General Wing. The number of posts in each wing is
also specified.	 So far	 as the Police Wing is concerned, it
is to comprise of one IGP, one Dy. IG, three Superintendents
of Police,  three non-IPS  Superintendents of Police, eleven
Dy. Superintendents  of Police,	 apart from 24 Inspectors of
police and  an equal  number  of  Sub-Inspectors  of  police
besides	 Head	Constables  and	 Drivers,  etc.	 The  Second
Schedule  to   the  Rules   provides  for   the	 method	  of
recruitment, according	to which  so far  as  staff  in	 the
Police Wing  of the  Lok Ayukta	 is concerned,	it has to be
appointed by  deputation from  the  karnataka  State  Police
Service. The only condition is that the Inspector General of
Police, Deputy	Inspector  General  of	Police	(except	 the
Superintendents of Police) have to be IPS Officers.
We shall next refer to the relevant notifications which
were referred  to in  the High Court. We have a notification
dated 22.12.92	issued by the State Government under
Section
17
of  the Prevention  of Corruption  Act, 1988	 (issued  in
modification of	 an earlier  notification  dated  2.11.1992)
designating all	 Inspectors of Police on deputation with the
Karnataka Lok Ayukta to be police  officers for the purposes
of
section  17
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 but
subject to the "general and overall control and supervision"
of  the	 Director  General,  Bureau  of	 Investigation,	 Lok
ayukta, Bangalore.  Under the  previous	 notification  dated
2.11.1992. the	said control  and supervision  of the police
officers was  vested with the Lok Ayukta. On 21.12.1992, the
Government of  karnataka created a post of Director General,
Bureau of  Investigation, Lok  Ayukta, in  the	rank  of  an
Additional Director  General of	 Police and  then issued the
notification dated  22.12.1992 above referred to vesting the
control of  the police	staff in  the Lok  Ayukta  with	 the
General of  Police.  There  is	also  a	 notification  dated
26.5.1986 issued  under
section 2(s)
of the code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973	 declaring offices  of	the  Lok  Ayukta  as
police stations and authorising Inspectors of Police therein
to conduct investigations under the
Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988
.
The above	are the	 relevant provisions  of the Central
and State Acts, the rules and notifications.
We may  first deal	 with the  crucial  question  as  to
whether the  Director General of Police in the Office of the
Lok Ayukta  who is  to supervise  the  work  of	 the  police
officers on  deputation in  the Lok Ayukta is independent of
the Lok	 Ayukta and  is	 out  side  the	 administrative	 and
disciplinary control  of the  Lok Ayukta.  We agree with the
Division Bench	when it	 took the view, - differing from the
learned Single	Judge, -  that though the newly created post
of Director  General of	 Police in  the Office	of  the	 Lok
Ayukta was  created on 21.12.1992 by an administrative order
and the	 relevant recruitment  rules of the staff of the Lok
Ayukta were  not amended  to bring  the said  post into	 the
cadre under  the Lok  Ayukta, still the said post created in
the Lok	 Ayukta, still	the said  post created	in  the	 Lok
Ayukta police Wing was intended to be and must be treated as
part of	 the staff  of Lok  Ayukta in the police wing. It is
well-settled that  administrative orders  even created posts
can be	issued so  long as  they are  not inconsistent	with
rules, that is to say, as long as there is no prohibition in
the statutory  rules for creation of such posts. The learned
single Judge's	view that the independence of the Lok Ayukta
was under threat was mainly based upon his decision that the
post of	 the Director  General	created	 on  21.12.1992	 was
outside the  control of	 the Lok  Ayukta. This	view, in our
opinion, is not correct for the reasons mentioned above.
Therefore,	 while	 it  is	  true	that   as  per	 the
notification dated  21.11.1992 issued by the Government, the
police wing in the Lok Ayukta is to be under the general and
overall control	 of the	 said Director	General	 of  police,
still, in  our opinion, the said staff and, for that matter,
the Director  General himself  are under  the administrative
and disciplinary control of the Lok Ayukta. This result even
if it  is not  achieved by  the express	 language of
section
15(4)
is  achieved  by	the  very  fact	 that  the  Director
General's post	is created  in the office of the Lok ayukta.
By creating  the said  post of Director General of Police in
the Office  of the  Lok Ayukta	and keeping  the police wing
therein under  control and  supervision of the said Director
General, the  State of	Karnataka, in  our opinion,  did not
intend to  remove the  police  wing  or	 the  said  Director
General	  from	  the	administrative	  and	disciplinary
jurisdiction of	 the Lok  Ayukta nor did the State intend to
interfere with the independent functioning of the Lok Ayukta
and its	 police	 staff.	 The  modification  of	the  earlier
notification  dated   2.11.1992	  was,	 in   our   opinion,
necessitated on	 account of  the creation of the post of the
Director General  in the  office of  the Lok Ayukta. Nor was
the notification  intended to  divest the  Lok Ayukta of his
powers and  to vest  the said  powers only  in the  Director
General. For  the aforesaid  reasons, the  Memorandum  dated
2.9.1997 issued	 by the Lok Ayukta after the judgment of the
learned Single	Judge has  become redundant  as held  by the
Division Bench.	 Thus the  main	 argument  relating  to	 the
threat to  the independence of the Lok Ayukta which appealed
to the learned Single Judge stands rejected.
Point 2:
The next  question is whether when the State Government
had sent  the police  officers	on  deputation	to  the	 Lok
Ayukta, it  was permissible  for the  Government to  entrust
them  with   additional	 duties	  under	 the
Prevention  of
Corruption Act, 1988
?
The learned  Single Judge as well as the Division Bench
are one,  as already  stated, in  accepting that  the police
officers of  the State	on deputation  continue to remain as
public servants	 in the	 service of the State Government, as
along as they are not absorbed in the Lok Ayukta. This legal
position is  absolutely unassailable  because the  State  of
Karnataka has  merely lent the services of these officers to
the Lok	 Ayukta and the officers continue to be employees of
the State.  Inspite of	the deputation	of officers with the
Lok Ayukta  the relationship  of master	 and servant between
the State  of Karnataka	 and these  officers does  not stand
terminated (State  of Punjab  vs. Inder	 Singh 1997  (6) SCC
372).
There is  no dispute  that though these officers are on
deputation they	 are otherwise	of  the	 requisite  rank  as
contemplated by
section 17
of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988  and that  other formalities	under that  Act	 are
satisfied for  entrustment of duties under the Prevention of
corruption Act,	 1988.	Question  is  whether  these  police
officers of  the  State	 can  be  invested  with  powers  of
investigation  under
section	17
of	 the  Prevention  of
Corruption Act,	 1988 by  the  Stated  under  its  statutory
powers traceable to the same section?
It is  true that  normally, in respect of officers sent
on deputation by the State to another authority, the lending
authority should  not, after  deputation  of  its  officers,
entrust extra  duties concerning  the said lending authority
to such	 officers  without  the	 consent  of  the  borrowing
authority. If,	however, such action is taken by the landing
authority by virtue of statutory powers and such a course is
not objected  to by  the borrowing authority, can it be said
that  the   entrustment	 is  without  jurisdiction?  In	 our
opinion, from  a jurisdictional angle, the entrustment being
under statutory	 powers of the State traceable to
section 17
of the	Prevention of  Corruption Act, 1988 the same can not
be  said  to  be  outside  the	jurisdiction  of  the  State
Government. May be, if it is done without consulting the Lok
Ayukta and  obtaining its consent, it can only be treated as
an issue between the State and the Lok Ayukta and is none of
the concern  of those  public servants	against	 whom  these
police	 officers   on	 deputation   are   conducting	 the
investigation. Such  entrustment  of  duties  has  statutory
backing and  obviously also  the tacit	approval of  the Lok
Ayukta. Once there is such tacit approval of the Lok Ayukta,
the writ petitioners can not have any grievance that the Lok
Ayukta ought not to have permitted such a course.
Point 3 and 4:
As stated by the Division Bench, situations might arise
where the  Government might  like to  entrust such duties to
the police  officers on	 deputation but the Lok Ayukta might
feel that  such entrustment  would  affect  the	 independent
working of  the	 Lok  Ayukta  or  add  unreasonably  to	 the
workload of  the officers on deputation in the office of the
Lok Ayukta.  The question  is as  to how  to  harmonise	 the
powers of  the Government  under the  Central Act and of the
Lok Ayukta under the State Act. Points 3 and 4 deal with the
balancing of  the respective  powers of the State Government
and the Lok Ayukta.
In our  view, if  the State Government wants to entrust
such extra  work to  the officers on deputation with the Lok
Ayukta, if can certainly inform the Lok Ayukta of its desire
to do  so. If  the Lok	Ayukta agrees  to such	entrustment,
there will  be no  problem. But	 if for good reasons the Lok
Ayukta thinks  that such  entrustment of  work by  the State
Government is  likely to affect its functioning or is likely
to affect  its independence,  it can  certainly	 inform	 the
State Government  accordingly. In  case the State Government
does not  accept the  view point  of the Lok Ayukta, then it
will be	 open to the Lok Ayukta, - having regard to the need
to preserve  its independence  and effective  functioning to
take action  under
section  15(4)
{read	 with
section 15(2)
}
and direct  that these	officers on deputation in its police
wing will not take up any such work entrusted to them by the
State Government.  Of course,  it is expected that the State
Government and the Lok Ayukta will avoid any such unpleasant
situations but	will  act  reasonably  in  their  respective
spheres.
But once  the Lok	Ayukta has,  as in the present case,
not objected,  - at  the threshold  - to such entrustment of
work by	 the State Government to the officers on deputation,
then it	 will not  normally be reasonable for the Lok Ayukta
to object  to said entrustment when these officers are half-
way through  the extra	work. Such  withdrawal	by  the	 Lok
Ayukta	at   a	   latter   stage   might   create   various
administrative	problems  and  will  only  help	 the  public
servants against  whom investigation  is being done to raise
unnecessary legal issues. Of course, in the present case, it
is not	the Lok Ayukta which has raised any objection but it
is he  public servants	- against  whom the investigation is
going on  - who	 have raised  objections. As already stated,
they cannot  raise objections  if the  Lok  Ayukta  has	 not
raised any  objections at  the threshold.  The above, in our
view, will  take care  of  the	independence  and  effective
working of  the Lok  Ayukta and at the same time will enable
the State of Karnataka if need be, to exercise its statutory
powers under
section 17
of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988.
In the  matters before us, as already stated, there has
been no	 objection by the Lok Ayukta at the initial stage of
the entrustment	 of work under section 17 of the Central Act
to these  police officers on deputation. It is therefore not
possible to  interdict the  further investigation  by  these
officers at  this  stage  at  the  instance  of	 the  public
servants. As stated above, if no objection has come from the
Lok Ayukta  at	the  time  of  initial	entrustment,  it  is
certainly not  permissible for	the public  servants against
whom the  investigation is  being done,	 to raise objection.
The Division  Bench was right in holding that the Memorandum
dated 2.9.1997	issued by the Lok Ayukta is, in fact, purely
consequential to  the judgment	of the	learned Single Judge
and in declaring the same to be invalid and also redundant.
We may,  however, add  that if instead of deputation of
police officers	 from the Government, any other solution can
be found,  that is  a matter  to be decided amicably between
the State  Government and  the Lok Ayukta, - keeping in view
the  independence  of  the  Lok	 Ayukta	 and  its  effective
functioning as matters of utmost importance.
Before parting  with the  case, we	 may reiterate	what
this  Court   state  recently	in   connection	  with	 the
independence of	 the Lok  Ayukta in a case arising under the
corresponding statute  from Andhra  Pradesh, in Institute of
A.P. Lok  Ayukta etc. vs. t. P asubba Reddy [1997 (9) SCC 42
(at page 42):
"The legislative  intent behind the
     enactment is to see that the public
     servants covered  by the  sweep  of
     the Act  should be	 answerable  for
     their  actions   as  such	 to  the
     Lokayukta who is to be a Judge or a
     retired Chief  Justice of	the High
     court and	in appropriate	cases to
     the Upa-Lokayukta who is a District
     Judge of  Grade I as recommended by
     the  Chief	  Justice  of  the  High
     Court,  so	  that	these  statutory
     authorities  can	work   as   real
     ombudsmen	 for	ensuring    that
     people's faith  in the  working  of
     these  public   servants	is   not
     shaken. The  statutory  authorities
     are meant	to cater  to the need of
     the public	 at large with a view to
     seeing that  public  confidence  in
     the  working   of	 public	  bodies
     remains	intact.	    When    such
     authorities   consist    of    high
     judicial dignitaries  it  would  be
     obvious   that   such   authorities
     should be	a med  with  appropriate
     powers and	 sanctions so that their
     orders and	 opinions do  not become
     mere    paper    directions.    The
     decisions	of  Lokayukta  and  Upa-
     Lokayukta,	  therefore,   must   be
     capable of being fully implemented.
     These  authorities	 should	 not  be
     reduced to	 mere paper  tigers  but
     must be armed with proper teeth and
     claws so that the efforts put in by
     them  are	 not  wasted  and  their
     reports  are  not	shelved	 by  the
     disciplinary	     authorities
     concerned."
For the  aforesaid reasons, the special leave petitions
are dismissed.