[Cites
4
, Cited by
31
]
Supreme Court of India
Baby vs Travancore Devaswom Board & Ors on 6 November, 1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1999 SUPREME COURT 519, 1999 AIR SCW 120, 1999 (1) UJ (SC) 3, 1998 (6) SCALE 52, 1998 (8) ADSC 259, 1998 (8) SCC 310, (1998) 7 JT 552 (SC), (1998) 6 SCALE 52, (1998) 3 SCJ 369, (1998) 8 SUPREME 327, (1999) 2 LANDLR 272, 1999 (1) KLT SN 1 (SC)
Bench:
S.B.Majmudar
,
M.Jagannadha Rao
PETITIONER:
BABY

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
TRAVANCORE DEVASWOM BOARD & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	06/11/1998

BENCH:
S.B.MAJMUDAR, M.JAGANNADHA RAO




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
ORDER
Leave granted.
These appeals are filed against the judgment of	 the
High  Court  in revision given under the
Kerala Land Reforms
Act
(hereinafter referred to as the Act). The High Court set
aside the judgment of the  Appellate  Authority	 dated	20th
Dec.  1989  which  affirmed  the  order of the Land tribunal
dated 24th Nov.,  1980.	 The  dispute  between	the  parties
before	the  international  was	 as to whether the appellant
before us was the cultivating tenant.
A limited notice was issued in these appeals  as  to
whether	 the  High  Court  had acted within its jurisdiction
under
Section 103
of the Act.  That Section reads as under:
"103, Revision by  High	 Court	:-  (1)	 Any
	person aggrieved by -
(i)  any  final	 order	passed	in an appeal
	against the order of the Land Tribunal; or this Act;
	or
(ii) any final	order  passed  by  the	Land
	Board Under this Act; or
(iii)  any  final  order  of  the Talok Land
	Board under this Act,
Learned senior counsel for the	appellant  contended
that  the  Taluk Land Board and the Appellant Authority have
not failed to decide any question of law  nor  could  it  be
said that  any	such  question was erroneously decided.	 The
High Court had interfered with the order of the tribunals on
the  ground  that  several  material   documents   including
judicial  proceedings were not adverted to by the tribunals.
The High Court held that the legal effect of these documents
was not considered by the tribunals.  On those	grounds,  it
was  argued  the  High	Court  was not entitled to interfere
under
Section 103
of the Act.  Learned	senior	counsel	 for
the  appellant	submitted that if certain documents were not
considered  or	their  legal  effect  was  not	taken	into
consideration,	still  that  did  not amount to an erroneous
decision of a question of  law,	 not  failure  to  decide  a
question of  law.   Learned senior counsel for the appellant
submitted that the question of existence of  tenancy  was  a
question  of  fact  and	 if  certain  documents	 which	were
relevant  in   that   connection   were	  not	taken	into
consideration  it could not be said that the question of law
was erroneously decided or was not decided.
We find sufficient force in the	 contention  of	 the
learned	 senior	 counsel  for the appellant in regard to the
meaning of the words  "has  either  decided  erroneously  or
failed to  decide any question of law".	 On the facts of the
present	 case  learned	senior	counsel	 is   justified	  in
submitting  that the lower tribunals had neither decided any
question  of  law  erroneously	nor  failed  to	 decide	 any
question of   law.	Mere  non-cnsideration	of  relevant
documents  including  the  relevance  of  certain   Judicial
Proceedings  would  not	 strictly fall within
Section 103
of
the Act.
But that, in our opinion, is  not  the	end  of	 the
matter.	  The  High court had still powers under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India to quash the orders  passed  by
the tribunals if the findings of fact had been arrived at by
non-consideration of the relevant and material documents the
consideration  of  which  could	 have  led  to	an  opposite
conclusion.   This  power  of  the  High  court	 under	 the
Constitution of India is always in addition to the powers of
revision under
Section 103
of the Act.	 In that view of the
matter the High Court rightly set aside the  orders  of	 the
tribunals.   We	 do  not, therefore, interfere under
Article
136
of the constitution of India.  The appeals fail and	 are
dismissed.
No costs.
may  within such time as may be prescribed, prefer a
petition to the High Court against the order on	 the  ground
that the appellate authority or the Land Board, or the Taluk
Land  Board,  as  the  erroneously, or failed to decide, any
question of law."
Learned