[Cites
7
, Cited by
31
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. B. Oil Mills Ltd vs Sales Tax Tribunal & Ors on 3 September, 1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 3055, 1998 (6) SCC 577, 1998 AIR SCW 2915, 1998 ALL. L. J. 2161, 1999 BRLJ 219, 1998 (2) UPTC 1020, 1998 (7) ADSC 24, (1998) 6 JT 210 (SC), 1998 ( ) STI 71, 1998 UPTC 2 1020, 1998 ADSC 7 24, 1998 (6) JT 210, (1998) 78 ECR 497, (1998) 5 SCALE 135, (1998) 7 SUPREME 170, (1998) 111 STC 188, (1999) 115 STC 458, 1998 UPTC 1 296
Author:
M.K.  Mukherjee
Bench:
S.P.Bharucha
,
M.K. Mukherjee
,
G.T. Nanavati
PETITIONER:
M/S.  B.  OIL MILLS LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SALES TAX TRIBUNAL & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	03/09/1998

BENCH:
S.P.BHARUCHA, M.K. MUKHERJEE, G.T. NANAVATI.




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G E M E N T
M.K.  MUKHERJEE, J.
The appellant carries on business in manufacture and
sale  of  oils	at  Agra  in  the  State  of  Uttar  Pradesh
(U.P.).	 As a part of their business they purchase crude oil
of different varieties,	 such  as  linseed-oil,	 castor-oil,
mustard-oil  and,  after  refining, sell as refined oil. The
refinement is brought about by first treating the  oil	with
alkali	to  remove the acid contents, then bleaching it with
absorbent cotton or activated carbon and lastly	 deodorising
it with steam.
To ascertain whether they were liable to pay tax  on
the  sale  of  refined	oil as they had already paid tax for
purchase of the crude oil and, if so, what would be the rate
thereof, the appellant approached the Commissioner of  Sales
Tax, U.P.  Invoking the provisions of Section 35 of the U.P.
Trade Tax  Act,	 1948 ('Act' for short).  By his order dated
June 19, 1985, the Commissioner held that the appellant	 was
liable	to  pay sales tax notwithstanding the fact that they
had paid tax on the purchase of the crude oil and  that	 the
rate of	 tax  would  be	 4%.	Assailing  the	order of the
Commissioner the appellant preferred an	 appeal	 before	 the
Sales Tax   Tribunal   which   was  dismissed.	  They	then
approached the Allahabad High Court  by	 filing	 a  petition
under
Article	226
of	 the Constitution of India which was
also dismissed.	 Hence this appeal by special leave.
Mr.   Swarup,  the learned counsel appearing for the
appellant, firstly submitted that they were  not  liable  to
pay tax on the sale of refined oil for even after refinement
it   continues	 to  retain  its  basic	 character  as	oil.
According to Mr.  Swarup, mere processing of the  crude	 oil
for  its  conversion  to  refined  oil, cannot be said to be
'manufacture' of new goods  so	as  to	make  the  appellant
liable	for  tax thereupon under Section 3(3)(b)(iii) of the
Act.
In support  of  his  contention  he  relied  upon	 the
judgements of this Court in
MS.	 Tungabhadra Industries Ltd.
V.   The  Commercial  Tax Officer, Kurnool
(1961) 2 SCC 141,
MS.  Sterling Foods V.	State of Karnataka & Anr.  [(1986) 3
SCC 4691 and State of Maharashtra V.  M./s.    Shiv  Datt  &
sons and Ors.  (1993 supp.  (1) SCC 2221."
In   response	Mr.   Misra,   appearing   for	 the
respondent-State, submitted that the appellant was liable to
pay  tax on the refined oil inasmuch the meaning of the word
'manufacture' in Section 2(e-1) of the Act clearly envisages
any  sort  of  processing.  Therefore,	he  contended,	 the
question  whether  the crude oil maintained its character as
oil even after refinement was redundant.
Under section 2(e-I) of the Act 'manufacture'  means
producing, making, mining, collecting, extracting, altering,
ornamenting,  finishing or otherwise processing, treating or
adapting any goods; but does not include such manufacture or
manufacturing processes as may be prescribed. Section  3  of
the  Act, so far as it is relevant for our purposes reads as
under:
3, Liability to tax under the Act.
	      (1) Subject to the  provisions  of  this	Act,
	      every dealer shall, for each assessment years,
	      pay  a  tax  at the rates provided by or under
	      Section 3-A or Section 3-D on his turnover  of
	      sales or purchases or both, as the case may be
	      which  shall  be	determined in such manner as
	      may be prescribed.
(2)  No  dealer  shall,  except  as  otherwise
	      provided in Section 18, be liable to tax under
	      sub-section  (I)	if,  during  the  assessment
	      years, the aggregate of his turnover of-
(a).........
(b).........
(c).........
(d).........
3.  Nothing  in sub-section (2) shall apply in
	      respect of-
(a)........
(b) the sale by a dealer of -
(i).........
(ii)    goods   purchased	  or   imported	  by
	      furnishing   and	declaration  or	 certificate
	      prescribed under any provision  of  this	Act;
	      and
(iii) goods manufactured by him by  using	 the
	      goods   referred	 to  in	 sub-clause  (I)  or
	      subclause (ii).
4...........
5...........
When  the	provisions  of the above Section are read in
juxtaposition with the definition of the word  'manufacture'
it  is	abundantly clear that a dealer will be liable to pay
tax on sale of any goods he manufactures by  processing	 the
goods  he  purchased  by  complying with the requirements of
clause (ii) above.
The word 'processing' has, however, not been defined
under  the  Act	 but  it  has  been  the  subject  matter of
interpretation by this Court in various cases including that
of
CHOWGULE & CO.  PVT.	 LTD.  & ANR.  V.  UNION OF INDIA  &
Ors.
[1981)  1	 SCC 653].  Taking a cue from the definition
of the word 'process'  in  Webster  Dictionary,	 this  Court
observed  therein that where any commodity is subjected to a
process or treatment with  a  view  to	its  development  or
preparation  for  the  market it would amount to processing.
The nature and extent of processing may vary  from  case  to
case;  in  one	case  the  processing  may  be slight and in
another it may be extensive; but in  each  process  suffered
the commodity would experience a change.  This Court further
observed  that	whatever  be the means employed for carrying
out the processing  operation,	it  is	the  effect  of	 the
operation  on the commodity that is material for the purpose
of determining whether the operation constitutes processing.
Viewed in the context of the above meaning given to the word
'processing' by this Court there cannot	 be  any  manner  of
doubt that the nature and extent of the process to which the
crude  oil  is	subjected  to make it refined oil brings the
latter	within	the  meaning   of   the	  expression   goods
manufactured'  in  Section  3(3)(b)(iii) of the Act so as to
make the appellant liable to pay tax on its sale.
Coming now to the decisions relied upon by Mr.	 Swarup,  we
find  that none of them has any manner of application to the
facts of  the  instant	case.
In
TUNGABHADRA  INDUSTRIES
(Supra) the sole question that came up for consideration was
whether	 consequent  upon its conversion to hydrogenated oil
by Improving its quality ground nut oil lost  its  identity.
In  answering  this question in the negative this court held
that refined groundnut oil (hydrogenated oil)  continues  to
be  groundnut  oil  notwithstanding  that  such oil does not
possess the characteristic colour, or taste, odor etc.	  of
the raw groundnut oil.	Indeed, the controversy
in that case
centered   round   the	 interpretation	 of  the  expression
'groundnut  oil'  appearing  in	 Madras	 General  Sales	 Tax
(Turnover and	Assessment)   Rules,   1939.	Neither	 the
expression 'manufacture'  nor  the  expression	'processing'
directly came  up  for	interpretation
in  that  case
.
In
Sterling  Foods	 (supra)  the  question	  that	 arose	 for
determination  was  whether  shrimps,  prawns  and  lobsters
subjected to processing like cutting  of  heads	 and  tails,
peeling,  divining,  cleaning  and  freezing cease to be the
same commodity and become a different commodity	 within	 the
meaning of
section  5
of  the Central Sales Act, 1956.
In
answering  the	above  question	 this  Court   applied	 the
'commercial  parlance'	test  and  relying  upon its earlier
judgment in
Dy.	 C.S.T.	 Vs.  Pio Food Packers
[(1980) 3 SCR
1271] held that processed shrimps, prawns and  lobsters	 are
not  a	new  and distinct commodity but they retain the same
character as the original shrimps, prawns and lobsters	even
after the  processing.	This case is of no assistance to the
appellant for unlike the above commodity, the crude oil does
not at all retain its earlier character after processing.
In Shiv Datt  and  Sons	 (supra)  the  question	 was
whether	 the  dealer was entitled to the concession provided
in Section 8 of the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959 of such	part
of  their  turnover  as	 represented the resale of batteries
purchased by them from a registered  dealer.	Interpreting
the  meaning  of  the word 'resale' under
Section 2(26)
, and
the word 'manufacture' in that Act and the nature of process
applied by the dealer before their  sale,  this	 Court	held
that  basically	 speaking  the goods purchased by the dealer
from the manufacturers as well as  the	goods  sold  by	 the
former	are  one  and  the  same for nothing was done to the
goods afresh which had not been done  already.	  The  above
case also  does	 not come in aid of the appellant:  firstly,
because	 it  considered	 the  definition  of   'manufacture'
(which,	 of  course,  is identical with its definition under
the Act) in the context of 'resale' of goods as	 defined  in
that  Act  and secondly, because of the nature and extent of
the process which  the	crude  oil  undergoes  to  radically
change itself to marketable refined oil.
The other  contention raised by Mr.  Swarup was that
they had purchased the crude oil after payment	of  tax	 and
hence  they  cannot  be made liable to pay tax again for its
sale.  This contention has to be stated only to be  rejected
for  the  Act  expressly  provides  imposition of multistage
taxation under clauses (ii) and (iii) of
Section  3(3)
(0  of
the Act.
For the foregoing discussion the appeal fails and is
hereby dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.