[Cites
19
, Cited by
68
]
Supreme Court of India
Ranjit Singh vs State Of Punjab on 22 September, 1998
Equivalent citations: AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 3148, 1998 (7) SCC 149, 1998 AIR SCW 3249, 1998 (5) SCALE 375, 1998 CRIAPPR(SC) 508, 1998 SCC(CRI) 1554, 1998 (7) ADSC 217, 1998 UP CRIR 687, 1998 CRILR(SC&MP) 703, (1998) 4 CRIMES 5, 1998 ADSC 7 217, 1999 (3) SRJ 304, 1998 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 703, (1998) 6 JT 512 (SC), 1998 (6) JT 512, 1998 (2) UJ (SC) 794, 1998 UJ(SC) 2 794, 1999 CALCRILR 71, (1998) 3 CRIMES 258, (1999) 1 EASTCRIC 42, (1999) 1 MADLW(CRI) 1, (1998) 15 OCR 476, (1998) 4 RECCRIR 552, (1998) 7 SUPREME 447, (1998) 5 SCALE 375, (1998) 37 ALLCRIC 768, (1998) 3 CHANDCRIC 178, (1998) SC CR R 914, (1999) 3 ALLCRILR 156, 1998 (2) ANDHLT(CRI) 282 SC
Bench:
K.T.Thomas
,
Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri
PETITIONER:
RANJIT SINGH

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB

DATE OF JUDGMENT:	22/09/1998

BENCH:
K.T.THOMAS, SYED SHAH MOHAMMED QUADRI




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
THOMAS. J
Leave granted.
The issue raised in the	 present  appeal  is  this  :
Whether	 Sessions  Court can add a new person to the array of
accused in a case pending before  it  at  a  stage  prior  to
collecting any	evidence?  The Sessions Judge before whom the
said issue was first raised in this case held that  he	could
do so on the strength of the decision of a two Judge Bench of
this Court  in	Kishun	Singh Vs.  State of Bihar (1993 2 SCC
16).  Appellant, who was the accused so added challenged  the
order in revision before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana
and  a	learned	 Single	 Judge	who  heard  it, dismissed the
revision following the ratio in Kishun	Singh  (supra)	which
was re-affirmed	 by  this  Court in
Nissar Vs.	State of U.P.
(1995 2 SCC 23).
While considering the	 question  whether  a
committing magistrate can exercise power under
Section 319
of
the  Code of Criminal Procedure (for short "the Code"), a two
Judge Bench of this Court has,	in
Raj	 Kishore  Prasad  vs.
State  of  Bihar
(1996 4 SCC 495) expressed reservation about
the legal position propounded in Kishun Singh's	 case.	  Now
the  question  is directed to be considered by a larger Bench
in the light of the reservation expressed  in  Raj  Kishore's
case.	Hence  this  appeal  came to be listed before a three
Judge Bench.
Facts,	barely necessary for disposal of this appeal,
are following :
On 24.12.1996, an FIR was  lodged  at  Rajkot  Police
Station	 (Punjab)  alleging that eight persons (including the
present	 a  pellant)  formed  themselves  into	an   unlawful
assembly at  about  8  P.M.    and  on the exhortation of the
appellant  one	of  the	 members  of  the  unlawful  assembly
snatched  away	the  rifle  of a gunman and fired at Chamkaur
Singh who succumbed to the gunshot injuries later.    In  the
rioting some other persons also sustained injuries.
	After the case was committed to the Court of Sessions
the  de	 facto	complainant  (Darshan Singh who furnished the
first information) filed a petition before the Session	Judge
on  5-6-1997  praying  that appellant also be arraigned as an
accused singh his exoneration  by  investigating  agency  was
improper.  Learned  Sessions  Judge allowed the said petition
and appellant was summoned as an accused in  the  case.	 That
order  of  the	Sessions Judge was challenged before the High
Court but it was confirmed by the impugned order.
	Shri  T.S.Arunachalam,	Senior	 Advocate   for	  the
appellant  contended  that the only provision which enables a
Sessions Court to add a new accused is
Section	 319
of  the
Code  and  powers  thereunder  could  be  invoked only on the
strength  of  evidence	in  the	 trial,	 but  not  otherwise.
According  to  the  learned senior counsel when investigating
agency had found the appellant	innocent  the  court  has  no
power to overrule that conclusion without additional material
placed	before	the  court  in	the  manner permitted by law.
Otherwise the purpose of requiring the investigating  officer
to submit final report under
Section 173
of the Code would be
obliterated.  The  contingency	mentioned in the illustration
cited by their Lordships in Kishun Singh's case (supra) is  a
rank  exception	 which	need  not  be  taken into account for
formulating a legal principle and even	otherwise  the	ratio
laid   down   in  the  said  case  requires  reconsideration,
contended the learned senior counsel.
Shri R.S.   Sodhi, learned counsel who argued for the
State  defended	 the  impugned	order  on  the	premise	 that
Sessions   Court   has	such  powers  which  have  been	 well
recognized by this Court in Kishun Singh's case as well as in
Nissar Singh
's case (supra).
Section 319
of the Code reads thus :
"319.  Power	 to  proceed  against  other  persons
	   appearing  to  be guilty of offence. (1) Where, in
	   the course of any inquiry into, or  trial  of,  an
	   offence,  it	 appears  from	the evidence that any
	   person not being the	 accused  has  committed  any
	   offence  for	 which	such  person  could  be tried
	   together with the accused, the Court	 may  proceed
	   against  such  person  for  the  offence  which he
	   appears to have committed.
(2)	Where such person is not attending the Court,
	   he  may  be	 arrested   or	 summoned,   as	  the
	   circumstances  of  the  case	 may require, for the
	   purpose aforesaid.
(3)	Any person attending the Court, although  not
	   under arrest or upon a summons, may be detained by
	   such Court for the purpose of the inquiry into, or
	   trial  of,  the  offence  which he appears to have
	   committed.
(4) Where the Court proceeds	 against  any  person
	   under sub-section (1) then -
(a)	the  proceedings  in  respect  of such person
	   shall be commenced afresh, and witnesses re-heard;
(b) subject to the provisions of clause  (a)	 the
	   case	 may  proceed  as  if such person had been an
	   accused person when the Court took  cognizance  of
	   the	offence	 upon  which the inquiry or trial was
	   commenced."
The  said  provision is an improved form of its corresponding
provision (
Section 351
) in the old
Criminal  Procedure	Code
,
1898.  The subtle change brought about in the present Section
has been succiently delineated by Ahmadi, J (as his  Lordship
then was) in Kishun Singh's case in the following lines:
"It is, therefore, manifest that
Section 319
of
	   the	Code is an improved version of
Section 351
of
	   the old Code, the Changes  having  been  introduce
	   therein on the suggestion of the Law Commission to
	   make	 it  comprehensive  so	that even persons not
	   attending the court can be arrested or summoned as
	   the circumstances of the case may require  and  by
	   deleting  the  words 'of which such court can take
	   cognizance'	and  by	 adding	 clause	 (b)  it   is
	   clarified that the implement of a new person as an
	   accused  in	the pending proceedings will not make
	   any difference insofar as taking of cognizance  is
	   concerned."
Now   it   is  well  neigh  settled  that  "evidence"
envisaged in
Section 319
of the Code is the evidence tendered
during trial of the case if the offence is triable by a court
of Session. The material placed before	the  committal	court
cannot	be  treated  as	 evidence collected during enquiry or
trial. (vide Rajkishore Prasad Vs. State of Bihar, 1996 4 SCC
495).
In Kishun Singh's case the above position, though  in
a   different	context	 has  been  highlighted	 through  the
following observations:
"On a plain reading of sub-section (1) of
Section
	   319
there can be no doubt that it must appear from
	   the evidence tendered in the course of any inquiry
	   or trial that any person not being the accused has
	   committed  any offence for which he could be tried
	   together with the accused. This  power,  it	seems
	   clear  to  us,  can	be  exercised  only  if it so
	   appears from the evidence at	 the  trial  and  not
	   otherwise.	  Therefore,	 this	  sub-section
	   contemplates existence of some evidence  appearing
	   in  the  course  of	trial wherefrom the Court can
	   prima facie conclude that the person not arraigned
	   before it is also involved in  the  commission  of
	   the	crime  for  which  he can be tried with those
	   already named by the police."
In fact learned Judges	were  reiterating  the	legal
position  abumbrated  by a three Judge Bench of this Court in
Joginder Singh and anr. Vs. State of Punjab and anr. (1979  1
SCC 345).
Having	found  so  an  endeavour  was  made in Kishun
Singh's case to see whether power to add any other person  to
the  array of accused can be traced out from the Code be hors
Section 319
, if the Judge  finds  that	besides	 the  accused
arraigned  before him the complicity of another person in the
commission of the crime has prima  facie  surfaced  from  the
material before	 him.  The fear expressed was that if such an
approach is not adopted, the matter will slip into the	hands
of  the	 investigation officer who may or may not send up for
trial an offender for trial  even  if  prima  facie  evidence
exists.	 After detailed discussion their Lordships held thus:
"On	the  Magistrate	 committing  the  case	under
Section  209
to  the  Court of Session the bar of
Section 193
is lifted thereby investing the	Court
	   of Session complete and unfettered jurisdiction of
	   the	 court	 of  original  jurisdiction  to	 take
	   cognizance of the offence which would include  the
	   summoning   of   the	  person   or  persons	whose
	   complicity in the  commission  of  the  crime  can
	   prima faie be gathered from the material available
	   on record."
(underlining supplied)
It is	  regarding  the  last	part  of the aforesaid
observations that serious  arguments  were  addressed  by  the
counsel	 urging reconsideration thereof. We have no doubt that
with  the  committal  order  Session  Court  gets   unfettered
jurisdiction  to  take	cognizance of the offences involved in
the  case.  But	 the  crucial	question   is	whether	  such
jurisdiction  would  envelop powers to summon any person as an
accused other than those covered by the	 committal order.
The change made by the new Code in
Section 209
is that
it  is	the  "case" which is committed to the Court of Session
and not the accused.  But while committing  the	 case  to  the
Court of Session the committing court has a further duty which
is in  respect	of  the accused in the case.
Section 209
says
that the committal court has to "remand the accused to custody
until such commitment has been made" subject to the provisions
relating to bail.  The accused referred to in the  section  is
the  accused  against  whom  the Magistrate has already issued
summons or warrant under
Section 204 (1) (b)
of the Code.  The
said clause reads thus:
"If in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance
	  of  an  offence  there  is  sufficient  ground   for
	  proceeding, and the case appears to be -
(b)	a warrant-case, he may issue a warrant, or, if
	  he thinks fit, a Isummons, for causing  the  accused
	  to  be brought or to appear at a certain time before
	  such Magistrate or if he has no jurisdiction himself
	  some other Magistrate having jurisdiction".
The said power can  be	exercised  in  respect	of  any
offence	 in  warrant  cases whether it is triable by a Court of
Session or  a  magistrate.  Once  the  accused	is  before  the
magistrate,  in	 the  next  stage  he  has  to supply copies of
documents referred to in
Section 207
if it is a case instituted
on police report, and otherwise the documents  referred	 to  in
Section	 208
of  the  Code. We have to read
Section 209
in the
aforesaid sequences of provisions.
"209 Commitment of case to  Court  of  Session  when
	   offence is triable exclusively by it. When in a case
	   instituted  on  a  police  report  or otherwise, the
	   accused appears or is brought before the  Magistrate
	   and	it appears to the Magistate that the offence is
	   triable exclusively by  the	Court  of  Session,  he
	   shall-
(a)	 commit, after complying with the provisions of
section 207
or
section 208
, as the case may be,  the
	   case	 to  the  Court	 of Session, and subject to the
	   provisions of this Code relating to bail, remand the
	   accused to custody until such  commitment  has  been
	   made;
(b)	subject to the provisions of this Code relating
	   to  bail,  remand the accused to custody during, and
	   until the conclusion of, the trial;
(c)	send to that Court the record of the  case  and
	   the	documents and articles, if any, which are to be
	   produced in evidence;
(d)	notify the Public Prosecutor of the  commitment
	   of the case to the Court of Session."
Commitment  of	a  case to the Court of Session will be
complete only on compliance with the formalities enumerated  in
Section	 209
which  includes  dealing	with the accused in the
manner mentioned therein.
Now, we may look at the procedure for trial before  the
Court  of  Session  as	laid  down in Chapter XVIII of the Code
which contains practically all the provisions relating to  such
trial. The commencing
Section 225
of the Chapter only says that
prosecution shall be conducted by a Public Prosecutor. The next
Section	 226
says that "when the accused appears or is brought
before the Court in pursuance of a commitment of the case under
Section 209
, the prosecutor shall open his case	 by  describing
the  charge  brought  against  the  accused and stating by what
evidence he proposes to prove the guilt of the accused."
It is clear that during the said stage the Court of Session can
deal  only  with the accused who is referred to in
Section 209
.
The accused who can appear or can be broght  before  a	Session
Court  at that stage is only that accused who is referred to in
Section 209
.
Section 227
deals with the power of the court  to
decide whether	that accused is to be discharged or not.  If he
is not discharged the Session  Court  is  obliged  to  frame  a
charge	against	 that  accused	as per
Section 228
of the Code.
Thereafter the plea of that accused  has  ton  be  recorded  as
enjoined by
Section  229
.    The  stage of evidence collection
commences only next.  (vide
Sections 230
&
231
of the Code.)
 So from the stage of committal till the  Session  Court
reaches	 the  stage  indicated	in
Section 230
of the Code that
Court can deal with only the accused referred to in
Section 209
of the Code. There is no intermediary stage till then  for  the
Session	 Court	to  add	 any  other  person to the array of the
accused.
Thus once the Session Court  takes  cognizance	of  the
offence	 pursuant  to  the committal order the only other stage
when the Court is empowered to add  any	 other	person	to  the
array of the accused is after reaching evidence collection when
powers under
Section  319
of the Code can be invoked.	 We are
unable to find any other power for the Session Court to	 permit
addition  of new person or persons to the array of the accused.
Of course it is not necessary for the court to wait  until  the
entire evidence is collected for exercising the said powers.
But then one more question may survive.	 In a situation
where the Session Judge notices from the materials produced but
before any evidence is taken, that any other person should also
have  necessarily  been	 made  an  accused  (without  which the
framing of the charge would be defective or that it might  lead
to  miscarriage	 of  justice)  is  the Session Court completely
powerless to deal with such a contingency?  One such  situation
is cited by the learned Judges through an illustration narrated
in Kishun Singh's case (supra) as follows:
"Where two persons A & B attack and kill X & it is
	   found  from	the  material placed before the Judge
	   that the fatal blow was given  by  A	 whereas  the
	   blow inflicted by B had fallen on a non-vital part
	   of the  body	 of X.	If A is not challenged by the
	   police, the Judge may find it difficult to  charge
	   B  for  the murder of X with the aid of
Section 34
IPC.	 If he cannot summon A, how does he frame the
	   charge against B?"
Another instance  can be this.	All the materials produced by
the investigating agency  would	 clearly  show	the  positive
involvement  of	 a  person  who was not shown in the array of
accused due to some inadvertance or  ommision.	  Should  the
court  wait  until  evidence  is collected to get that person
arraigned in the case?
Though such situations may arise  only	 in  extremely
rare  cases  the Session Court is not altogether powerless to
deal with such situations to prevent miscarriage of  justice.
It  is then open to the Session Court to send a report to the
High Court detailing the situation so that the High Court can
in its	inherent  powers  or  revisional  powers  direct  the
committing  Magistrate	to  rectify  the  committal  order by
issuing process to such left out accused. But  we  hasten  to
add  that  the	said  procedure	 need be resorted to only for
rectifying or correcting such grave mistakes.
For the foregoing reasons we  find  it	difficult  to
support	 the  observations in Kishun Singh's case that powers
of the Session Court under
Section 193
of the  Code  to	 take
cognizance  of the offence would include the summoning of the
person or persons whose complicity in the commission  of  the
trial	can  prima  facie  be  gathered	 from  the  materials
available on record.
In the result we set aside the impugned order of  the
Session Court adding the appellant as an accused in the case.
However,  we make it clear that we do so without prejudice to
the powers of Session Court to add any person in the array of
the accused under
Section 319
of the Code.
The appeal is thus allowed.