[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Const. Amar Singh vs Union Of India on 29 August, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 1055                                                             NON-REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2986 OF 2012

                         CONST. AMAR SINGH                                  APPELLANT(S)
                                                        VERSUS
                         UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                              RESPONDENT(S)


                                                   JUDGMENT
ATUL S. CHANDURKAR, J.
1. The appellant, a constable with the Central Industrial Security

                            Force-CISF is aggrieved by the penalty imposed pursuant to

                            disciplinary proceedings initiated against him by the respondents.
2. When the appellant was serving as a constable at Mallaram Camp,

                            he was served with a statement of articles of charge wherein it was

                            stated that on 27.08.1995 he had left the Camp without prior

                            permission and had trespassed into family quarters of one Mr. Jhan

                            Mohammed at a distance of about 12 kms from his company Camp.

                            It was also stated that the appellant was guilty of gross indiscipline

                            and conduct unbecoming of a member of the Armed Forces of the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Union as he had indulged in unwarranted activities affecting the
   KAPIL TANDON
   Date: 2025.08.29
   17:08:19 IST

                            reputation of the Force amongst the civilians of the colony. The
   Reason:
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2986 OF 2012                                                       1
appellant was placed under suspension on 28.08.1995. The

       appellant denied the aforesaid charges. During the course of the

       disciplinary proceedings, the respondents examined two witnesses

       while the appellant examined himself in defence. The Inquiry Officer

       at the conclusion of the inquiry submitted his report dated

       16.12.1997 holding that both the charges had been proved against

       the appellant. The appellant made a representation against the

       Inquiry Report. The Disciplinary Authority, the Commandant, on

       17.01.1998 proceeded to impose the penalty of reduction of

       appellant’s pay to the minimum of the pay-scale under the Fifth Pay

       Commission for a period of three years from 01.02.1998. Future

       increments were also withheld during the period of reduction of pay-
scale. The appellant preferred an appeal against the aforesaid

       order. The Appellate Authority on 23.04.1998 agreed with the

       findings as recorded but found that the penalty awarded to the

       appellant was excessive. He therefore modified the order of penalty

       and directed reduction of the appellant’s pay-scale by one stage for

       a period of two years from 01.02.1998. The appellant was held not

       entitled to earn any increment during the said period.
3. The appellant being aggrieved approached the Delhi High Court for

       challenging the order of penalty. The Division Bench considered the

       entire matter in detail. After appreciating the report of the Inquiry
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2986 OF 2012                                             2
Officer it held that the appellant had in fact taken permission in the

       form of an out-pass that had been issued for a duration of two hours

       for going to a hospital. It therefore held that he had left the Camp

       with permission. However, insofar as second charge was

       concerned, it held that the appellant was found at a distance of 12

       kms from the Camp when in fact he had been granted permission

       to visit the hospital. It also found from the material on record that on

       account of his conduct, the civilians at the area had detained him as

       a result of which the appellant’s superior officers were required to

       come to the site. Only on the assurance that some departmental

       action would be taken against the appellant was he permitted to go.

       The High Court therefore found that though charge No. 1 was not

       proved, the evidence on record when tested on the principle of

       probability supported charge No. 2. It also found that the penalty as

       reduced by the Appellate Authority was commensurate with the

       wrong that was committed. It therefore dismissed the writ petition.
4. We have heard Mr. K.L. Janjani, learned counsel for the appellant

       and Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor General for the

       respondents. With their assistance, we have perused copy of the

       Inquiry Report, the orders passed by the Disciplinary Authority as

       well as impugned judgment. Having given thoughtful consideration

       to the material on record, we are satisfied that the impugned
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2986 OF 2012                                                3
judgment does not call for any interference. Undisputedly, the

       appellant was issued an out-pass on 27.08.1995 to enable him to

       visit the hospital between 10:00 AM to 12:00 noon on that day.

       Instead of visiting the hospital, the appellant was found at the

       residential colony at a distance about 12 kms from his Camp. The

       appellant in his deposition was unable to produce any document

       with regard to his visit to the hospital. He admitted that he had visited

       the residential colony to enquire about the quarters allotted to

       another constable. He further admitted that he had been confined

       by the civilians at the residential colony and it was only after the

       arrival of his superior, Inspector Lakra who had assured the

       gathering that departmental inquiry would be held against the

       appellant was he permitted to go. The High Court rightly found that

       the first charge that the appellant had left the camp without prior

       permission had not been proved. It however found that though the

       first limb of charge No. 1 was not established, the other limb of the

       said charge read with charge No. 2 had been proved. It was factually

       found that the appellant was at a distance of about 12 kms from the

       Camp instead of the hospital and that he had been detained by

       civilians on account of indulging in some unwarranted activity.

       Though it was held that there was no evidence of trespass into the

       family quarter of Mr. Jhan Mohammed, the fact that the appellant
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2986 OF 2012                                                 4
was permitted to leave only after intervention of his superiors who

       had assured departmental action against him was sufficient to hold

       that the appellant had indulged in some unwarranted activity by

       which the civilians were agitated thereby affecting the reputation of

       the Force amongst the civilians. The penalty as modified by the

       Appellate Authority of reducing his pay-scale by one stage for a

       period of two years from 01.02.1998 and depriving him of any

       increment during the period of reduction was found to be

       commensurate with the wrong committed.
5. The High Court having examined the entire matter in detail and there

       being no grievance raised by the appellant of breach of principles of

       natural justice during the course of the disciplinary proceedings, we

       do not find that this is a fit case to exercise discretion under
Article

       136
of the Constitution of India, more so when the appellant is a

       member of the disciplined force. The civil appeal is accordingly

       dismissed with no order as to costs. Pending interim application is

       also disposed of.
…………………………………………..J.
                                    [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]


                                    …………………………………………..J.
                                         [ATUL S. CHANDURKAR]
       NEW DELHI,
       AUGUST 29, 2025.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2986 OF 2012                                                5