[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Shikhar Chemicals vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 8 August, 2025
1

                                                                                            REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 945                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                            Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)              No.11445/2025



        M/S. SHIKHAR CHEMICALS                                                        Petitioner(s)

                                                             VERSUS


        THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.                                             Respondent(s)


                                                         O R D E R
1.                  We have received an undated letter from Hon’ble the

        Chief Justice of India requesting us to reconsider the

        directions issued by us in Paras 25 and 26 respectively

        of our order dated 04th August, 2025 passed in Special

        Leave Petition (Crl.) No.                            11445 of 2025.
2.                  In such circumstances, referred to above, we directed

        the Registry to re-notify the main matter for the purpose

        of               considering        the    request        made   by    Hon’ble     the   Chief

        Justice of India. Accordingly, the matter has been re-

        notified today.
3.                  By our order dated 4th August, 2025, we set aside the

        impugned
Signature Not Verified
judgment        of   the   High     Court     of    Allahabad      and
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.08.08
16:03:03 IST
remanded
Reason:
the     matter      to     the     High     Court      for    fresh

        consideration                      in     accordance        with      law.     While     partly
2
allowing SLP (Crl.) No. 11445 of 2025, we observed the

following:-
“22. In the result, we partly allow this
     petition and set aside the impugned order
     passed by the High Court. We remand the matter
     to the High Court for fresh consideration of
     the Criminal Miscellaneous Application No.2507
     of 2024. The quashing petition shall be reheard
     on its own merits keeping in mind the dictum
     laid in the two decisions of this Court
     referred to above.
23. We request the Hon’ble the Chief Justice of
     the High Court of Allahabad to assign this
     matter to any other Judge of the High Court as
     he may deem fit.
24. The Chief Justice of High Court shall
     immediately   withdraw  the   present   criminal
     determination from the concerned Judge.
25. The Chief Justice shall make the concerned
     judge sit in a Division Bench with a seasoned
     senior judge of the High Court.
26. We further direct that the concerned judge
     shall    not    be   assigned    any   criminal
     determination, till he demits office. If at all
     at some point of time, he is to be made to sit
     as a single judge, he shall not be assigned any
     criminal determination.
27.   We   have  been   constrained  to   issue
     directions as contained in Paras 22, 23, 24, 25
     and 26 respectively, referred to above, keeping
     in mind that the impugned order is not the only
     erroneous order of the concerned Judge that we
     have looked into for the first time. Many such
     erroneous orders have been looked into by us
     over a period of time.”
3
4.    At the outset, we must clarify that our intention was

not   to    cause   embarrassment       or   cast    aspersions   on   the

concerned Judge. We would not even think of doing so.

However, when matters cross the threshold and the dignity

of    the    institution     is     imperiled,        it   becomes     the

constitutional responsibility of this Court to intervene,

even when acting under its appellate jurisdiction under
Article 136
of the Constitution.             The directions in paras

25 and 26 respectively were issued keeping in mind the

observation in Para 27. At the cost of repetition, we

reproduce para 27 as under:-
“27.   We  have   been  constrained   to  issue
      directions as contained in Paras 22, 23, 24, 25
      and 26 respectively, referred to above, keeping
      in mind that the impugned order is not the only
      erroneous order of the concerned Judge that we
      have looked into for the first time. Many such
      erroneous orders have been looked into by us
      over a period of time.”
5.    Similarly,      whenever      we       come      across     legally

unimpeachable       orders   and        orders      that   have   ensured

complete justice to the litigants, we have always taken

the opportunity to record our appreciation for the Judges

of the High Courts. The High Courts are not separate

islands that can be disassociated from this Institution
4
and we reiterate that whatever was said in our order was

to ensure that the dignity and authority of the judiciary

as a whole is maintained high in the minds of the people

of   this     country,    as    that     will   go    a   long   way   in

reinforcing the faith that is reposed in us.
6.   It is not just a matter of error or mistake committed

by the Judge concerned in appreciating the legal points

or   facts.     We   were      concerned      about   the   appropriate

direction to be issued in the interest of justice and

with a view to protecting the honour and dignity of the

institution.     The     litigants       in   this    country    approach

different courts of law to seek justice. For 90% of the

litigants in this country, the High Court is the final

court of justice. Only the remaining 10% can afford to

approach the Supreme Court. The litigants who come to

court expect the justice delivery system to function in

accordance with law, not to obtain absurd or irrational

orders.
7.   In any view of the matter, since a request has been

made in writing by Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India,

and in due deference to the same, we hereby delete paras

25 and 26 respectively from our order dated 4 th August,

2025.   The order be corrected accordingly.
5
8.   While we are deleting paras 25 and 26 respectively

from our order dated 04th August, 2025, we leave it to the

Chief Justice of the Allahabad High Court to look into

the matter.
9.   We fully acknowledge that the Chief Justice of a High

Court    is    the    master     of    the    roster.   But,   as   observed

above, our directions are absolutely not interfering with

the administrative power of the Chief Justice of the High

Court.        When     matters        raise     institutional       concerns

affecting the rule of law, this Court may be compelled to

step in and take corrective steps.
10. Recently, a Bench comprising former Chief Justice of

India Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sanjiv Khanna and Hon’ble Mr.

Justice Sanjay Kumar observed in Rikhab Birani & Anr. vs.

State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr. reported in 2025 INSC 512,

as follows :-
“We are also constrained to impose costs of Rs.
     50,000/- (Rupees Fifty Thousand Only) on the
     State of Uttar Pradesh as in spite of repeated
     judgments/orders of this Court, we are being
     flooded with cases of civil wrongs being made
     the subject matter of criminal proceedings by
     filing chargesheets, etc.”
11. We hope that in future, we may not have to come

across   such        perverse    and    unjust    orders   from     any   High

Court. The endeavour of the High Courts should always be
6
to   uphold   the   rule   of   law   and   maintain   institutional

credibility. If the Rule of Law is not maintained or

protected within the court itself, then that would be the

end of the entire justice delivery system in the country.
12. Judges at any level are expected to work efficiently,

discharge their duties diligently and always strive hard

to fulfill their constitutional oath.
13. With the aforesaid, we dispose of the Special Leave

Petition.
14. The Registry is directed to forward one copy of this

order at the earliest to Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the

Allahabad High Court.
…………………………………………J
                                               (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                               …………………………………………J
                                               (R. MAHADEVAN)
NEW DELHI
8TH AUGUST, 2025.