[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Bhagwati Devi vs State Of Uttarakhand on 29 August, 2025
Author:
Aravind Kumar
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
2025 INSC 1051                                                                       REPORTABLE


                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2616 OF 2014


                            SMT. BHAGWATI DEVI                                   …APPELLANT(S)
                                                            VERSUS
                            STATE OF UTTARAKHAND                               …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                       JUDGMENT
ARAVIND KUMAR, J.
1.     The Appellant herein who has been convicted for the offence

                            punishable under
Section 498-A
of IPC is assailing the judgment rendered

                            by the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital in Criminal Appeal No.174 of

                            2003 on 10.04.2014.
2.     The son of the Appellant – Sh. Sanjay Mishra married Smt.

                            Chandra Devi, the daughter of the complainant – Dharmanand Joshi (PW-
1) according to Hindu customs and rites about a year prior to her death on
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
15.06.2001. PW-1 presented a complaint before Bagwshwar (P.S.) on
   babita pandey
   Date: 2025.08.29
   17:07:09 IST
   Reason:
16.06.2001 alleging that his daughter was found dead inside the

                            matrimonial home and only the accused persons were present in the house.
1
It was also stated in the complaint that the daughter of PW-1 had

committed suicide by hanging herself. However, he is said to have seen the

wounds on his daughter’s body during examination and he along with the

Patwari saw blood along with water oozing out from the mouth of his

daughter. It was further alleged that she was pregnant at the time of her

death and further stated that deceased used to inform that her mother-in-

law was commenting on her sarcastically for dowry. Hence, expressing

doubt about her death and his daughter having been killed requested

suitable action being taken against the culprits. It was also stated by the

complainant himself that her husband namely son-in-law was out of city on

professional work at Mumbai. The said complaint came to be registered in

Crime Case No.1 of 2001 for the offences punishable under
Sections 498-

A
and
304-B
of IPC. The father-in-law, mother-in-law and brother-in-law

of the deceased were arraigned as accused and the trial court framed the

charge for the offences under
Sections 304-B
,
498-A
and optional charge

under
Section 302
readwith
Section 34
of IPC. On behalf of the

prosecution, three (3) witnesses namely Dharmanand Joshi, Shambhu Dutt

Joshi and Smt. Heera Devi apart from four (4) other witnesses were

examined and on behalf of the accused one Smt. Janki Devi was examined.

The learned Sessions Judge after trial held that the charge of
Section 302
readwith
Section 34
of IPC was not proved against all the accused. So also,

for the charge of
Section 304-B
was held to be not proved and accused
2
persons were acquitted for the offences punishable under
Section 302
readwith
Section 34
and
Section 304-B
of IPC. However, Accused no.2 –

Mother-in-law namely the Appellant herein was convicted for the offence

punishable under
Section 498-A
of IPC on the ground that deceased had

informed her mother (PW-3) and brother (PW-2) about the harassment she

was facing for dowry to which effect they had accordingly deposed before

the trial court. Hence, the learned Trial Judge concluded that deceased had

committed suicide due to harassment. However, the offence under
Section

498-A
of IPC was held to be not proved against Accused no.1 and Accused

no.3 and they came to be acquitted for all the offences alleged.
3.     The Accused no.2 being aggrieved by the conviction and sentence

of three years rigorous imprisonment with fine of Rs.5,000/- and default

sentence of three months imprisonment preferred an appeal before the

High Court in Criminal Appeal No.174 of 2003. The High Court on

reappreciation of the evidence came to the conclusion that evidence of PW-

3 disclosed that on every visit made by the deceased to the paternal home,

she had disclosed the demand of dowry by her mother-in-law as well as

other accused persons as an acceptable piece of evidence and as such

affirmed the judgment of sessions court. Hence, this Appeal.
4.     We have heard the arguments of Shri Anshumaan Purohit and Smt.

Saakshi Singh Rawat, learned Counsels appearing for the Appellant and
3
the Respondent respectively. It is the contention of the learned counsel for

the Appellant that PW-1 complainant had not whispered a word in his

complaint or in his evidence about any demand for dowry having been

raised by the appellant and this vital aspect has been completely ignored by

the courts below. He would also contend none of the independent witnesses

examined by prosecution had deposed against the appellant to substantiate

the offence of dowry demand and the witness examined on behalf of the

appellant, namely neighbour Smt. Janki Devi (DW-1) had stated in

unequivocal terms of no demand for dowry having been made by the

appellant at any point of time. He would further elaborate his submissions

by contending that conviction is based solely on uncorroborated statement

of interested witnesses with no independent or medical evidence tendered

to prove cruelty or dowry demand. He would further contend that

concurrent findings conveniently overlooked the absence of any specific

dowry demand or by what act the appellant’s conviction could be

justifiable under
Section 498-A
of IPC. Hence, he prays for the appeal

being allowed by setting aside the order of conviction.
5.     Per contra, Smt. Saakshi Singh Rawat, learned counsel appearing

for the Respondent has vehemently contended that courts below have

rightly arrived at a conclusion with regard to demand of dowry and the

statement made by DW-1 examined on behalf of the accused was rightly
4
not accepted or believed since such demand for dowry would be within the

four corners of the matrimonial home and as such the courts below have

rightly convicted the appellant for the offence under
Section 498-A
of IPC.

Hence, she prays for dismissal of the appeal.
6.          Having regard to the submissions made by the learned counsels

appearing for the parties and on scrutiny of the records of the courts below,

it would clearly emerge that though the appellant alongwith her husband

and another son was charged for the offences punishable under
Section

304-B
and as an alternate under
Section 302
readwith
Section 34
of IPC

they have been acquitted by the court below for which there was no appeal.

In other words, the order of acquittal for the said two offences had attained

finality.
7.          The only issue which remains to be examined in the instant appeal

is whether the order of conviction under
Section 498-A
and consequential

sentence imposed on the appellant can be sustained on the basis of the

material evidence? The answer has to be necessarily in the negative for the

reasons indicated hereinbelow.
8.          A perusal of
Section 498-A
would clearly indicate that whoever,

being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects her

to cruelty would be liable to be punished with imprisonment for a term

which may extend to three years and also liable to fine. Under the caption
5
of explanation “Cruelty” has been defined to mean and include any wilful

     conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to

     commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health

     whether mental or physical of the said woman or harassment of the woman

     or where the harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person

     related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable

     security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to

     meet such demand. Demand for dowry in any form is itself sufficient for
Section 498-A
of IPC being attracted. Demand made in any form either by

     the husband or by the relative of the husband would also attract
Section

     498-A
of IPC. Even if the demand exhibits the conduct that would likely to

     drive the said woman being unable to bear such conduct would attract

     Explanation (a). Likewise, harassing of a married woman with a view to

     coercing her or her relative to meet any unlawful demand would also fall

     within the mischief of the expression ‘cruelty’. This court in the case of
Manju Ram Kalita vs. State of Assam1
has held cruelty for purpose of
Section 498-A
of IPC is to be established in that context as it may be

     different from other statutory provisions. In other words, it has been held

     that it has to be established that the woman had been subjected to cruelty

     continuously/ persistently or atleast in close proximity of time of lodging

     of complaint. It has been further held:-
1 (2009) 13 SCC 330
6
“21. “Cruelty” for the purpose of
Section 498-A
IPC is to be
          established in the context of
Section 498-A
IPC as it may be
          different from other statutory provisions. It is to be
          determined/inferred by considering the conduct of the man,
          weighing the gravity or seriousness of his acts and to find out as
          to whether it is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide, etc.
          It is to be established that the woman has been subjected to
          cruelty continuously/persistently or at least in close proximity of
          time of lodging the complaint. Petty quarrels cannot be termed
          as “cruelty” to attract the provisions of
Section 498-A
IPC.
Causing mental torture to the extent that it becomes unbearable
          may be termed as cruelty.”
9.     Keeping the aforesaid salutary principles enunciated by this court

in mind, while we turn our attention to the facts on hand it would be apt

and appropriate to have a look at the complaint lodged by the father of the

deceased PW-1 on the very next day of the demise of his daughter. The

perusal of the complaint would indicate that the complainant had reached

his daughter’s matrimonial home on 16.06.2001 at 4 A.M. and he came to

know that his daughter had expired in the afternoon on 15.06.2001 and was

informed that she had committed suicide by hanging. It is further stated

that the deceased used to tell them during her visit to the paternal home

that her mother-in-law used to comment on her sarcastically for dowry.

There is not even a word with regard to any dowry demand having been

raised by the appellant. In this background when the deposition of the

complainant PW-1 is perused it would not detain us for long to arrive at a

definite conclusion that his deposition does not indicate of any such

demand for dowry having been made or the deceased having been inflicted

with cruelty so as to drive her to commit suicide. It would be appropriate to
7
note at this juncture itself that the cause of death has been recorded as

asphyxia on account of strangulation as evidenced from the post-mortem

report.
10.       The trial court has based the conviction on the strength of the

evidence of the mother of the deceased PW-3. She has deposed that her in-

laws used to state that the dowry given was less and she used to weep. In

the cross-examination she admits that her daughter had come with her

younger brother-in-law and had not made any complaint about the

members of the matrimonial home. She also admits that during Shiv Ratri

her daughter had come alongwith son-in-law and she did not make any

complaint. She further admits that when PW-1 went to drop her to her

matrimonial home she did not make any complaint to her father about any

demand for dowry being made. She further admits that the alleged

demands made by father-in-law, mother-in-law and younger brother-in-law

was for the first time disclosed in the court when she tendered her

examination-in-chief. She also admits that the married life of her daughter

was happy and cordial and at the time of marriage there was no demand for

dowry. She infact admits at the time of marriage her son-in-law had told

that he has no demand of dowry. A holistic look at the deposition of PW-3

that is the mother of the deceased would not inspire any confidence to any

person of common prudence to arrive at a conclusion that on account of

either harassment for dowry or on account of demand for dowry made by
8
the appellant she had been perforced to commit suicide. Even the evidence

of PW-2 that is the brother of the deceased is in line with the evidence

tendered by his mother PW-3. Infact he also admits that there was no

demand for dowry made before marriage and the marriage was solemnised

happily and properly and only on the basis of doubt he was expressing that

his sister might have been murdered. The doctor (PW-4) who conducted

the post-mortem and submitted the report (Ex. Ka-2) of the deceased PW-4

has opined the cause of death appears to be asphyxia on account of

strangulation. He admits if there is strangulation then possibility of injuries

being suffered to other parts of the body is possible and when there is

resistance to the strangulation there is likelihood of urination and faecal

matter can also be excreted which was not found on the body of the

deceased.
11.     Thus, the cumulative effect of the evidence of these witnesses

would drive us to the irresistible conclusion that the deceased had not

committed suicide on account of either demand for dowry being made or

cruelty being inflicted on her. Our view also gets fortified by the fact that

the neighbour of the appellant who was examined as DW-1 has deposed

that appellant had never made any demand for dowry. She also deposed

that the deceased had informed her of not keeping well. She being neither

the relative of the appellant nor belonging to the same community to which

the appellant belongs would indicate that there was no interest in her to
9
depose against the factual matrix or in favour of the appellant. Her

evidence having been brushed aside by the trial court and also High Court

on the premise that she could not have deposed any fact with regard to the

demand of dowry as it happens within the four walls is an erroneous

finding particularly in such matters the word spreads faster than the wind

about a daughter-in-law being harassed for the dowry by the parents in law.

Such facts being conspicuously absent in the instant case, we have no

hesitation in arriving at a conclusion that the conviction of the appellant for

the offence punishable under
Section 498-A
and the sentence imposed on

her cannot be sustained.
12.     For the reasons aforestated above, we allow this Appeal, set aside

the judgment of the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital in Criminal

Appeal No.174 of 2003 dated 10.04.2014 and acquit the accused for the

offence under
Section 498-A
of IPC. Her bail bonds stand discharged. No

order as to costs.
.……………………………., J.
[ARAVIND KUMAR]



                                             .……………………………., J.
[N.V. ANJARIA]
New Delhi;
August 29th, 2025.
10