[Cites
53
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
K. Prabhakar Hegde vs Bank Of Baroda on 19 August, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
Dipankar Datta
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 997
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6599 OF 2025
                                [ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 6358 OF 2022]


        K. PRABHAKAR HEGDE                                                         … APPELLANT

                                                           VS.

        BANK OF BARODA                                                           … RESPONDENT


                                                    JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
PREFACE
1.
S.L. Kapoor v. Jagmohan1
is a landmark decision of this Court,

                            delivered more than half a century back, delineating the contours of the

                            principles of natural justice, more particularly the right to be heard

                            before one is condemned. The supersession of the New Delhi Municipal

                            Committee was challenged on the ground that it was in violation of the

                            principles of natural justice, since no show cause notice was issued

                            before the order of supersession was passed. Linked with that question

                            was the question whether the failure to observe the principles of natural

                            justice matters at all, if such observance would have made no difference,
Signature Not Verified   the admitted or indisputable facts speaking for themselves. The golden
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2025.08.19
13:04:48 IST
Reason:
1
(1980) 4 SCC 379
1
words of Hon’ble O. Chinappa Reddy, J., speaking for the three-Judge

         Bench, rings in our ears:
“24. … In our view the principles of natural justice know of no
               exclusionary rule dependent on whether it would have made any
               difference if natural justice had been observed. The non-observance of
               natural justice is itself prejudice to any man and proof of prejudice
               independently of proof of denial of natural justice is unnecessary. It ill
               comes from a person who has denied justice that the person who has
               been denied justice is not prejudiced. …”
                                                                        (emphasis ours)
2.   The above passage from
S.L. Kapoor
(supra) came to be noticed in the

         Constitution Bench decision of this Court in
Olga Tellis v. Bombay

         Municipal Corporation2
and met with an unconditional approval.

         Hon’ble Y.V. Chandrachud, CJI. speaking for the Bench                     (which

         incidentally included Hon’ble O. Chinappa Reddy, J.) ruled that the said

         observations sum up the true legal position regarding the purport and

         implications of the right of hearing.
3.   Close on the heels of
Olga Tellis
(supra), another Constitution Bench

         upon a survey of precedents on the point of fair and impartial hearing

         observed in
Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel3
as follows:
“95. The principles of natural justice have thus come to be recognized
               as being a part of the guarantee contained in
Article 14
because of the
               new and dynamic interpretation given by this Court to the concept of
               equality which is the subject-matter of that article. Shortly put, the
               syllogism runs thus: violation of a rule of natural justice results in
               arbitrariness which is the same as discrimination; where discrimination
               is the result of State action, it is a violation of
Article 14:
therefore, a
               violation of a principle of natural justice by a State action is a violation
               of
Article 14.
Article 14
, however, is not the sole repository of the
               principles of natural justice. What it does is to guarantee that any law or
               State action violating them will be struck down. The principles of natural
               justice, however, apply not only to legislation and State action but also
               where any tribunal, authority or body of men, not coming within the
               definition of State in
Article 12
, is charged with the duty of deciding a
2
(1985) 3 SCC 545
3
(1985) 3 SCC 398
2
matter. In such a case, the principles of natural justice require that it
                 must decide such matter fairly and impartially.”
                                                                         (emphasis ours)
4.
In another seminal decision, i.e.,
A.R. Antulay v. R. S. Nayak4
, a

         seven-Judge Constitution Bench while acknowledging that it had

         committed an error earlier which needed rectification, went on to assert

         that:
“55. … No prejudice need be proved for enforcing the fundamental
                 rights. Violation of a fundamental right itself renders the impugned
                 action void. So also the violation of the principles of natural justice
                 renders the act a nullity. …”
5.   It has recently been held by us in
State of Uttar Pradesh v. Ram

         Prakash Singh5
that just as
Articles 14
, 19
and
21
constitute a

         triumvirate of rights of citizens conceived as charters on equality,

         freedom and liberty, the trio of the Constitution Bench decisions in
Olga

         Tellis
(supra),
Tulsiram Patel
(supra) and
A.R. Antulay
(supra) form

         the bedrock of natural justice principles being regarded as part of
Article

         14
and, thereby, obviating the need to demonstrate prejudice if a

         challenge were thrown on the ground of violation of
Article 14.
6.   Reference to these decisions has been made at the inception because of

         the particular view we propose to take on consideration of decisions of a

         three-Judge Bench in
Sunil Kumar Banerjee v. State of West Bengal

         & Ors.6
and a coordinate Bench in
Union of India v. Alok Kumar7
.

         Notably, these decisions were relied on by the Division Bench of the High
4
(1988) 2 SCC 602
5
2025 SCC OnLine SC 891
6
(1980) 3 SCC 304
7
(2010) 5 SCC 349
3
Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru8 while insisting on the requirement to

                demonstrate prejudice in a claim of breach of principles of natural justice

                notwithstanding that the employer before it had violated a statutory

                regulation by which it was bound.
THE APPEAL
7.          The challenge in this civil appeal, by the appellant K. Prabhakar Hegde,

                is to the judgment and order dated 14th December, 20219 in Writ Appeal

                No. 975 of 2009 (S-DE). Vide the impugned order, the High Court

                allowed the writ appeal carried by the respondent here, Bank of Baroda.

                Consequently, the judgment and order of the Single Judge dated 24th

                February, 2009 in WP No. 27936/2003, which was under challenge,

                stood set aside with the result that the writ petition of the appellant was

                dismissed.
BRIEF FACTS
8.          The facts relevant for the purpose of deciding this appeal are these:
i.       In 1959, the appellant joined Vijaya Bank (which merged with the

                   respondent in the year 2019) as a clerk.
ii.       Between 1959 and 1998, the appellant was promoted several times.
At the relevant time, the appellant was the ‘Zonal Head’ of the Delhi

                   Zonal Office of Vijaya Bank.
iii.      On 4th of January, 1999, the appellant was served with a notice issued

                   by his disciplinary authority. It was alleged that the appellant was
8
High Court
9
impugned order
4
responsible for certain irregularities and lapses committed in

             approving temporary overdrafts (TOD) on the accounts of various

             parties involving substantial amounts. The notice also alleged that the

             appellant had instructed the Assistant General Manager at the

             Barakhamba Branch of Vijaya Bank to grant a TOD of Rs. 15,00,000/-
to one M/s Kunal Travels Pvt. Ltd. via telephone. Another notice was

             sent on 22nd January, 1999 in respect of a separate incident

             containing more or less similar allegations.
iv.    Appellant replied to the said notices through letters dated 1st

             February, 1999 and 24th February, 1999.
v.    On 30th January, 2001, disciplinary proceedings under Regulation 6 of

             the   Vijaya   Bank   Officer   Employees’     (Discipline   and   Appeal)

             Regulations, 198110 were drawn up by issuing a charge sheet.
Appellant replied to the said charge sheet vide letter dated 17 th

             February, 2001 denying the charges.
vi.    The disciplinary authority of the appellant appointed an officer holding

             the post of General Manager of Vijaya Bank as the Inquiry Officer.
vii.   The report of the inquiry officer dated 28th November, 2001 was

             submitted to the Disciplinary Authority holding that the charges

             against the appellant stand proved.
viii.   Vide an order dated 17th May, 2002, the Disciplinary Authority held

             that though the appellant was due to retire upon superannuation on

             30th June, 2002, disciplinary proceedings initiated against him vide
10
1981 Regulations
5
chargesheet dated 30th January, 2001 would continue. It was further

             ordered that the appellant shall not be entitled to any retirement

             benefits till final orders are passed in the disciplinary proceedings.
ix.     Appellant superannuated from service on 30th January, 2006.
x.      Vide an order dated 4th July, 2002, the Disciplinary Authority imposed

             on the appellant the punishment of ‘dismissal from service’.
xi.     Aggrieved by the punishment imposed on him, the appellant

             approached the Appellate Authority by presenting an appeal. It was

             dismissed vide an appellate order dated 27th March, 2003.
xii.       Appellant then challenged this order of the Appellate Authority before

             the High Court in its writ jurisdiction. A Single Judge of the High Court

             allowed the writ petition vide judgment and order dated 24th February,

             2009. The order of dismissal stood quashed and the appellant held

             entitled to “consequential benefits on his having attained the age of

             superannuation, to which he would have been entitled in the usual

             course and in law”.
xiii.       Vijaya Bank, aggrieved by the judgment and order of the Single

             Judge, carried the same in a writ appeal before the Division Bench

             which, as noted above, succeeded. While the appellant’s writ petition

             stood dismissed, the order of dismissal passed by the Disciplinary

             Authority against the appellant was, thus, confirmed.
IMPUGNED ORDER
9.         The Division Bench of the High Court framed two issues for its

           determination: (i) whether the denial of the preliminary investigation
6
report prejudiced the charged officer (appellant before us) and vitiated

         the proceedings and (ii) whether the stipulation of generally questioning

         the charged officer regarding the circumstances appearing against him

         in the evidence was a mandatory requirement under Regulation 6(17) of

         the 1981 Regulations.
10.      While deciding issue (i), reliance was placed by the High Court on the

         decisions of this Court in
Vijay Kumar Nigam v. State of MP11
and
Syndicate Bank & Ors. v. Venkatesh Gururao Kurati
12 to hold that

         the preliminary report is only to decide and assess whether it would be

         necessary to take any disciplinary action against the delinquent officer

         and it does not form any foundation for passing the order. The High
Court

         further held
that since all the documents relied upon by the Inquiry

         Officer had been made available to the appellant and the appellant’s

         representative    having   cross-examined   the   sole   witness   for   the

         management in extenso, furnishing of the preliminary investigation

         report was not necessary; hence, no prejudice to the appellant was

         caused thereby.
11.      Regarding issue (ii), the Division Bench held: first, Regulation 6(17) of

         the 1981 Regulations is pari materia Rule 8(19) of the All India Services

         (Discipline & Appeal) Rules, 1955; hence, the decision of this Court in
Sunil Kumar Banerjee
(supra), which has since been followed by this

         Court in the decision in
Alok Kumar
(supra) is squarely applicable and

         compliance with such a regulation is merely directory and not
11
(1996) 11 SCC 599.
12
(2006) 3 SCC 150.
7
mandatory. Secondly, the High Court held, on facts, that the Inquiry

        Officer had asked the appellant if he wished to make any submission and

        in pursuance thereof, he did utilise the opportunity by making detailed

        submissions; hence, though the appellant was not generally questioned

        as required by Regulation 6(17), such provision had been substantially

        complied with.
12.     As a sequitur, the High Court allowed the writ appeal and set aside the

        order of the Single Judge.
CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES
13.     The appellant has laid siege to the impugned order on, inter alia, the

        following grounds:
a. The High Court did not consider the decision rendered by this Court

               in
ECIL v. B. Karunakar13
and
UCO Bank v. Rajinder Lal

               Capoor14
.
b. The High Court erroneously interpreted the principles of law
laid

               down in
Venkatesh Gururao Kurati
(supra).
c. The High Court did not consider that non-furnishing of the report

               of preliminary inquiry has itself caused prejudice to the appellant

               as the appellant was unable to defend himself in respect of the

               charges against him.
d. Reliance placed by the High Court on
Sunil Kumar Banerjee
(supra) was misplaced. The said decision, rendered by a three-
Judge Bench referred to coordinate Bench decisions in K.C.
13
(1993) 4 SCC 727.
14
(2007) 6 SCC 694.
8
Mathew v. State of Travancore-Cochin15
and
Bibhuti Bhusan

             Das Gupta v. State of W.B.16
without, however, noticing an

             earlier decision of a four-Judge Bench in
Tara Singh v. State17
where it was held to be important to faithfully and fairly observe

             Section 342 of the 1898 Code, the object whereof was to afford

             the accused a fair and proper opportunity of explaining the

             circumstances which appear against him. Though it was held that

             every error or omission would not vitiate a trial and that the

             question in each case would depend on the degree of the error and

             upon whether prejudice had been occasioned or likely to have been

             occasioned, in the present case, the degree of error was at its peak

             since the Inquiry Officer did not put a single question to the

             appellant in respect of the circumstances appearing in the

             evidence against him and the High Court failed to consider that

             calling upon the appellant to place his version does not in any

             manner amount to compliance of Regulation 6(17) of the 1981

             Regulations, not to speak of substantial compliance.

         e. The authorities could not have considered the appellant to be

             “deemed to be in service” post superannuation and ordering him

             to be dismissed from service in the absence of any regulation in

             the 1981 Regulations permitting such course of action is absolutely

             illegal.
15
AIR 1956 SC 241
16
AIR 1969 SC 381
17
1951 SCC 903
9
f. The actions of the appellant of giving oral sanctions for the TOD

            was normal practice and was done in good faith.
14.   Based on the aforesaid contentions, Mr. Nuli, learned senior counsel for

      the appellant ably assisted by Ms. Akhila Wali, learned counsel urged

      that the entire disciplinary proceedings including the order of dismissal

      and the appellate order be set aside and the respondent be ordered to

      release to the appellant full benefits as if he had never been dismissed.
15.   Per contra, Mr. Patil, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respondent, defended the administrative actions challenged in the writ

      petition and the impugned order on, inter alia, the following grounds:
a. The High Court rightly decided that since the report of preliminary

            inquiry was only to assess and decide whether disciplinary

            proceedings should be initiated or not and had not formed the

            foundation for passing the order of dismissal from service, denial

            of the same to the appellant did not prejudice him.
b. The author of the preliminary inquiry report was the sole witness

            for the management in the inquiry and whatever was recorded by

            such witness in the preliminary inquiry report was spoken to by

            him in course of the inquiry; whereafter the appellant had cross-
examined extensively. There was, thus, no question of the

            appellant to feel aggrieved by non-furnishing of the report of

            preliminary inquiry.
c. Qua Regulation 6(17) of the 1981 Regulations, the appellant has

            not demonstrated any prejudice; moreover, the appellant utilised
10
the opportunity of making submissions when called upon by the

           Inquiry Officer and, therefore, the High Court was right in holding

           that the concerned regulation is not mandatory and requires only

           to be substantially complied with.
d. The appellant did not ever raise any grievance in course of the

           inquiry and even subsequently, in his representation against the

           inquiry report or the appeal petition that non-compliance with

           Regulation 6(17) of the 1981 Regulations had prejudiced him in

           his defence. For the first time, the appellant raised such a

           grievance in the writ petition which is nothing but an afterthought.
e. The decision in
Tara Singh
(supra) and
Sunil Kumar Banerjee
(supra) operate in different legal domains and, therefore,
Tara

           Singh
(supra) being a decision rendered in the criminal appellate

           jurisdiction is not applicable in the present proceedings; on the

           contrary,
Sunil Kumar Banerjee
(supra) is pat on the point and

           propriety demands that we follow the same.
f. Continuation of disciplinary proceedings even after the appellant

           had attained superannuation cannot be faulted because the

           appellant was continued in service till such time the final order of

           dismissal from service was passed and this is a permissible course

           of action, not warranting interdiction.
ISSUES
16.   Three broad issues emerge for decision:
11
(i) Whether denial of the report of preliminary inquiry prepared by the

         officer entrusted by Vijaya Bank to conduct such inquiry, who happened

         to be the sole management witness, was sufficient to vitiate the regular

         inquiry that followed against the appellant?
(ii) Whether the failure/omission of the Inquiry Officer to generally

         question the appellant on the circumstances appearing against him in

         the evidence, as per Regulation 6(17) of the 1981 Regulations, vitiated

         the inquiry?
(iii) Whether continuation of disciplinary proceedings against the

         appellant beyond superannuation was a permissible course of action

         under the 1981 Regulations?
17.      If indeed the answer to any or all the aforesaid issues is in favour of the

         appellant, the relief that he could be entitled would then fall for our

         consideration.
ANALYSIS
18.      We begin with issue no.1. Unlike the extensive jurisprudence available

         on the furnishing of the final enquiry report, our research reveals that

         there is significantly less jurisprudence on the issue of furnishing a

         preliminary inquiry report. However, the decisions referred to below

         provide sufficient light for us to rule on the question before us.
19.      At the outset, we refer to the Constitution Bench decision in
Champaklal

         Chimanlal Shah v. Union of India18
. The said decision succinctly
18
1963 SCC OnLine SC 42
12
delineates the purpose of a preliminary inquiry, albeit in the context of

government employees. Hon’ble K.N. Wanchoo, J. (as the Chief Justice

then was) speaking for the Bench observed as follows:
“13. Generally therefore a preliminary enquiry is usually held to
      determine whether a prima facie case for a formal departmental enquiry
      is made out, and it is very necessary that the two should not be
      confused. Even where government does not intend to take action by way
      of punishment against a temporary servant on a report of bad work or
      misconduct a preliminary enquiry is usually held to satisfy government
      that there is reason to dispense with the services of a temporary
      employee or to revert him to his substantive post, for as we have said
      already government does not usually take action of this kind without any
      reason. Therefore when a preliminary enquiry of this nature is held in
      the case of a temporary employee or a government servant holding a
      higher rank temporarily it must not be confused with the regular
      departmental enquiry (which usually follows such a preliminary enquiry)
      when the government decides to frame charges and get a departmental
      enquiry made in order that one of the three major punishments already
      indicated may be inflicted on the government servant. Therefore, so far
      as the preliminary enquiry is concerned there is no question of its being
      governed by
Article 311(2)
for that enquiry is really for the satisfaction
      of government to decide whether punitive action should be taken or
      action should be taken under the contract or the rules in the case of a
      temporary government servant or a servant holding higher rank
      temporarily to which he has no right. In short a preliminary enquiry is
      for the purpose of collection of facts in regard to the conduct and work
      of a government servant in which he may or may not be associated so
      that the authority concerned may decide whether or not to subject the
      servant concerned to the enquiry necessary under
Article 311
for
      inflicting one of the three major punishments mentioned therein.
Such a
      preliminary enquiry may even be held ex parte, for it is merely for the
      satisfaction of government, though usually for the sake of fairness,
      explanation is taken from the servant concerned even as such an
      enquiry. But at that stage he has no right to be heard for the enquiry is
      merely for the satisfaction of the government and it is only when the
      government decides to hold a regular departmental enquiry for the
      purpose of inflicting one of the three major punishments that the
      government servant gets the protection of
Article 311
and all the rights
      that that protection implies as already indicated above. There must
      therefore be no confusion between the two enquiries and it is only when
      the government proceeds to hold a departmental enquiry for the purpose
      of inflicting on the government servant one of the three major
      punishments indicated in
Article 311
that the government servant is
      entitled to the protection of that Article. That is why this Court
      emphasised in
Parshotam Lal Dhingra
case [(1958) SCR 828] and
      in
Shyam Lal v. State of Uttar Pradesh
[(1955) 1 SCR 26] that the
      ‘motive or the inducing factor which influences the government to take
      action under the terms of the contract of employment or the specific
      service rule is irrelevant’.”
13
20.      A coordinate Bench in
Krishna Chandra Tandon v. Union of India19
incontrovertibly held that there is no requirement to furnish a

         preliminary inquiry report when the enquiry officer has not relied upon

         the same to reach the conclusions recorded in the inquiry report after a

         regular inquiry. The relevant passage reads as follows:
“16. … It is very necessary for an authority which orders an enquiry to
               be satisfied that there are prima facie grounds for holding a disciplinary
               enquiry and, therefore, before he makes up his mind he will either
               himself investigate or direct his subordinates to investigate in the matter
               and it is only after he receives the result of these investigations that he
               can decide as to whether disciplinary action is called for or not.
               Therefore, these documents of the nature of inter-departmental
               communications between officers preliminary to the holding of enquiry
               have really no importance unless the Enquiry Officer wants to rely on
               them for his conclusions. In that case it would only be right that copies
               of the same should be given to the delinquent. It is not the case here
               that either the Enquiry Officer or the CIT relied on the report of Shri R.N.
               Srivastava or any other officer for his finding against the appellant.
               Therefore, there is no substance in this submission.”
21.      The concept of a preliminary inquiry and its ramifications have been

         neatly summed up in
Chandrama Tewari v. Union of India20
. There,

         a coordinate Bench of this Court held that:
“4. We have given our anxious consideration to the submissions made
               on behalf of the appellant and we have further considered the aforesaid
               authorities referred to by the learned counsel for the appellant but we
               do not find any merit in the appellant's submissions to justify
               interference with the High Court's judgment.
Article 311
of the
               Constitution requires that reasonable opportunity of defence must be
               afforded to a government servant before he is awarded major
               punishment of dismissal. It further contemplates that disciplinary
               enquiry must be held in accordance with the rules in a just and fair
               manner. The procedure at the enquiry must be consistent with the
               principles of natural justice. Principles of natural justice require that the
               copy of the document if any relied upon against the party charged should
               be given to him and he should be afforded opportunity to cross-examine
               the witnesses and to produce his own witnesses in his defence. If findings
               are recorded against the government servant placing reliance on a
               document which may not have been disclosed to him or the copy whereof
19
(1974) 4 SCC 374
20
1987 Supp SCC 518
14
may not have been supplied to him during the enquiry when demanded,
that would contravene principles of natural justice rendering the enquiry,
and the consequential order of punishment illegal and void. These
principles are well settled by a catena of decisions of this Court. We need
not refer to them. However, it is not necessary that each and every
document must be supplied to the delinquent government servant facing
the charges, instead only material and relevant documents are
necessary to be supplied to him. If a document even though mentioned
in the memo of charges is not relevant to the charges or if it is not
referred to or relied upon by the enquiry officer or the punishing
authority in holding the charges proved against the government servant,
no exception can be taken to the validity of the proceedings or the order.
If the document is not used against the party charged the ground of
violation of principles of natural justice cannot successfully be raised.
The violation of principles of natural justice arises only when a document,
copy of which may not have been supplied to the party charged when
demanded is used in recording finding of guilt against him. On a careful
consideration of the authorities cited on behalf of the appellant we find
that the obligation to supply copies of a document is confined only to
material and relevant documents and the enquiry would be vitiated only
if the non-supply of material and relevant documents when demanded
may have caused prejudice to the delinquent officer.
***
9. It is now well settled that if copies of relevant and material documents
including the statement of witnesses recorded in the preliminary enquiry
or during investigation are not supplied to the delinquent officer facing
the enquiry and if such documents are relied in holding the charges
framed against the officer, the enquiry would be vitiated for the violation
of principles of natural justice. Similarly, if the statement of witnesses
recorded during the investigation of a criminal case or in the preliminary
enquiry is not supplied to the delinquent officer that would amount to
denial of opportunity of effective cross-examination. It is difficult to
comprehend exhaustively the facts and circumstances which may lead
to violation of principles of natural justice or denial of reasonable
opportunity of defence. This question must be determined on the facts
and circumstances of each case. While considering this question it has
to be borne in mind that a delinquent officer is entitled to have copies of
material and relevant documents only which may include the copy of
statement of witnesses recorded during the investigation or preliminary
enquiry or the copy of any other document which may have been relied
on in support of the charges. If a document has no bearing on the
charges or if it is not relied on by the enquiry officer to support the
charges, or if such document or material was not necessary for the cross-
examination of witnesses during the enquiry, the officer cannot insist
upon the supply of copies of such documents, as the absence of copy of
such document will not prejudice the delinquent officer. The decision of
the question whether a document is material or not will depend upon the
facts and circumstances of each case.”
15
22.   A        three-Judge   Bench     of   this   Court    in
Narayan      Dattatraya

      Ramteerthakhar v. State of Maharashtra21
observed that:
“3. … It is then contended that the preliminary enquiry was not properly
                conducted and, therefore, the enquiry is vitiated by principles of natural
                justice. The preliminary inquiry has nothing to do with the enquiry
                conducted after issue of charge-sheet. The former action would be to
                find whether disciplinary enquiry should be initiated against the
                delinquent. After full-fledged enquiry was held, the preliminary enquiry
                had lost its importance.”
23.   Considering the aforesaid decisions as well as other decisions, a

      coordinate Bench in
Nirmala J. Jhala v. State of Gujarat22
held that:
“45. In view of the above, it is evident that the evidence recorded in
                preliminary inquiry cannot be used in regular inquiry as the delinquent
                is not associated with it, and opportunity to cross-examine the persons
                examined in such inquiry is not given. Using such evidence would be
                violative of the principles of natural justice.”
24.   We may also profitably refer to the decision in
Manoj Kumar v. State

      of U.P.23
wherein it was held:
“6. …The order also states that a preliminary inquiry was held to
                determine if a full-fledged departmental enquiry was required after
                which the charge memo was served with full opportunity of defence. The
                non-furnishing of the preliminary inquiry report has therefore not
                prejudiced the appellant in any manner or vitiated the departmental
                proceedings.”
25.   The upshot of the aforesaid decisions is that:
i.    A preliminary inquiry is conducted for the purposes of determining

                whether regular disciplinary proceedings are called for or not;
ii.      A preliminary inquiry report is an internal document;
iii.     A preliminary inquiry report or the findings therein cannot be used

                to come to conclusions recorded in the report of inquiry if such
21
(1997) 1 SCC 299
22
(2013) 4 SCC 301
23
(2018) 13 SCC 161
16
preliminary inquiry report/findings are based on oral and/or

            documentary evidence which are obtained behind the back of the

            charged employee and such oral/documentary evidence are not

            presented in the inquiry in the presence of such employee;
iv.   If a preliminary inquiry report or the findings therein are sought to

            be relied on, the witnesses whose evidence was relied on in

            preparing the same ought to be brought before the inquiry officer

            and the charged officer afforded an opportunity to cross-examine

            them;
v.   If a preliminary inquiry report is sought to be relied upon in the

            inquiry report, then such preliminary inquiry report must be

            provided to the delinquent employee;
vi.   Once a chargesheet is drawn up and has been provided to the

            charged officer detailing the charges, the preliminary inquiry

            report is of no consequence and need not be provided to him.
26.   Having noted the purpose and reason for conducting a preliminary

      inquiry, we now proceed to answer the question as to whether non-

      furnishing of the report to the appellant led to the disciplinary

      proceedings being vitiated.
27.   In the instant case, a perusal of the inquiry report reveals that no

      reliance upon the preliminary inquiry report has been placed by the

      inquiry officer. Therefore, non-furnishing of the inquiry report to the

      appellant is inconsequential.
17
28.   However, an interesting argument that has been made is that the non-
furnishing of the preliminary inquiry report has caused prejudice to the

      appellant because such non-furnishing of the report disabled him to

      effectively cross-examine the witness. This argument, while novel, is not

      impressive. We come to this ineluctable conclusion since the appellant

      was duly provided with the deposition of the witness as per the rules,

      was allowed to cross-examine the witness on the basis of the statements

      made by him and the inquiry officer placed no reliance upon the

      preliminary inquiry report, but only upon the statements of such witness

      recorded during chief examination and cross-examination.
29.   We, therefore, find no violation of the principles of natural justice; also,

      no prejudice has been caused to the charged officer for non-furnishing

      of the preliminary inquiry report.
30.   This conclusion, is however, premised on the caveat that no rule,

      statutory or otherwise, mandates the furnishing of the preliminary

      inquiry report in this particular case.
31.   We now proceed to answer the next question which is central to the

      dispute, i.e., what is the nature of duty that Regulation 6(17) of the 1981

      Regulations casts on an Inquiry Officer? Is the provision directory or

      mandatory, or is it both directory and mandatory depending on the fact

      situation in each case?
32.
In
Sunil Kumar Banerjee
(supra), a three-Judge Bench of this Court

      had the occasion to consider Rule 8(19) of the All India Services
18
(Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 196924, which is pari materia Rule 6(17)

      of the 1981 Regulations. A point having been taken before the Bench by

      the delinquent officer that Rule 8(19) was observed in the breach by the

      Inquiry Officer, it was ruled by Hon’ble O. Chinappa Reddy, J. as follows:
“3. … It may be noticed straightway that this provision is akin to
Section
                342
of the Criminal Procedure Code of 1898 and
Section 313
of the
                Criminal Procedure Code of 1973. It is now well established that mere
                non-examination or defective examination under
Section 342
of the
                1898 Code is not a ground for interference unless prejudice is
                established, vide,
K.C. Mathew v. State of Travancore-Cochin
(AIR 1956
                SC 241);
Bibhuti Bhusan Das Gupta v. State of W.B.
(AIR 1969 SC 381).
We are similarly of the view that failure to comply with the requirements
                of Rule 8(19) of the 1969 Rules does not vitiate the enquiry unless the
                delinquent officer is able to establish prejudice. In this case the learned
                Single Judge of the High Court as well as the learned Judges of the
                Division Bench found that the appellant was in no way prejudiced by the
                failure to observe the requirement of Rule 8(19). The appellant cross-
                examined the witnesses himself, submitted his defence in writing in
                great detail and argued the case himself at all stages. The appellant was
                fully alive to the allegations against him and dealt with all aspects of the
                allegations in his written defence. We do not think that he was in the
                least prejudiced by the failure of the Enquiry Officer to question him in
                accordance with Rule 8(19).”
33.   It follows from the above passage that the Bench in
Sunil Kumar

      Banerjee
(supra), while overruling the contention of the delinquent

      officer, held that (i) Rule 8(19) of the 1969 Rules was akin to
Section

      342
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 189825 and
Section 313
of the

      Code of Criminal Procedure, 197326; and (ii) in terms of the law
laid

      down in
K.C. Mathew
(supra) and
Bibhuti Bhusan Das Gupta
(supra),

      mere non-examination or defective examination under
Section 342
of

      the 1898 Code is not a ground for interference unless prejudice is
24
1969 Rules
25
1898 Code
26
1973 Code
19
established. On facts, the Bench was of the opinion that though the

      Inquiry Officer had not examined the delinquent officer, he was not

      prejudiced at all thereby since he was alive to the allegations against

      him, had cross-examined the witnesses himself, submitted his defence

      in writing in great detail and argued the case himself at all stages.
34.
Sections 342
and
313
of the 1898 and 1973 Codes, respectively, though

      bear close resemblance, are not exactly the same. We may, for ease of

      understanding, quote the same below:
342. (1) For the purpose of enabling the accused to explain any
            circumstances appearing in the evidence against him, the court may, at
            any stage of any inquiring or trial without previously warning the
            accused, put such questions to him as the court considers necessary,
            and shall, for the purpose aforesaid, question him generally on the case
            after the witnesses for the prosecution have been examined and before
            he is called on for his defence.
(2) The accused shall not render himself liable to punishment by refusing
            to answer such questions, or by giving false answers to them; but the
            court and the jury (if any) may draw such inference from such refusal or
            answers as it thinks just.
(3) The answers given by the accused may be taken into consideration
            in such inquiry or trial, and put in evidence for or against him in any
            other inquiry into or trial for, any other offence which such answers may
            tend to show he has committed.
(4) No oath shall be administered to the accused when he is examined
            under sub-section (1).
313. Power to examine the accused.—
            (1) In every inquiry or trial, for the purpose of enabling the accused
            personally to explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence
            against him, the Court—
(a) may at any stage, without previously warning the accused put
                  such questions to him as the Court considers necessary;
(b) shall, after the witnesses for the prosecution have been
                  examined and before he is called on for his defence, question him
                  generally on the case: Provided that in a summons-case, where
                  the Court has dispensed with the personal attendance of the
                  accused, it may also dispense with his examination under clause
(b).
(2) No oath shall be administered to the accused when he is examined
            under sub-section (1).
(3) The accused shall not render himself liable to punishment by refusing
            to answer such questions, or by giving false answers to them.
20
(4) The answers given by the accused may be taken into consideration
           in such inquiry or trial, and put in evidence for or against him in any
           other inquiry into, or trial for, any other offence which such answers may
           tend to show he has committed.
(5) The Court may take help of Prosecutor and Defence Counsel in
           preparing relevant questions which are to be put to the accused and the
           Court may permit filing of written statement by the accused as sufficient
           compliance of this section.
35.
In
K.C. Mathew
(supra), a three-Judge Bench while considering the

      impact of breach of
Section 342
of the 1898 Code observed as follows:
“7. The next argument was that the examination of each accused under
Section 342
of the Criminal Procedure Code was defective and that that
           caused prejudice. We agree that the examination was not as full or as
           clear as it should have been but we are not satisfied that there was any
           prejudice.
8. It is to be noted that the question of prejudice was not raised in either
           of the courts below nor was it raised in the grounds of appeal to this
           Court. The point was taken for the first time in the arguments before us
           and even there counsel was unable to say that his clients had in fact
           been prejudiced; all he could urge was that there was a possibility of
           prejudice.
9. We agree that the omission to take the objection in the grounds of
           appeal is not necessarily fatal; everything must depend on the facts of
           the case; but the fact that the objection was not taken at an earlier
           stage, if it could and should have been taken, is a material circumstance
           that will necessarily weigh heavily against the accused particularly when
           he has been represented by counsel throughout. The Explanation to
Section 537
of the Criminal Procedure Code expressly requires the Court
           to
                   ‘have regard to the fact whether the objection could and should
                   have been raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings’.
10. Another strong circumstance is this : the petition for appeal does not
           set out the questions that, according to the appellants, they should have
           been asked nor does it indicate the answers that they would have given
           if they had been asked. Again, though that is not necessarily fatal
           ordinarily it will be very difficult to sustain a plea of prejudice unless the
           Court is told just where the shoe pinches. It is true that in certain
           exceptional cases prejudice, or a reasonable likelihood of prejudice, may
           be so patent on the face of the facts that nothing more is needed; but
           that class of case must be exceptional. After all, the only person who can
           really tell us whether he was in fact prejudiced is the accused; and if
           there is real prejudice he can at once state the facts and leave the Court
           to judge their worth. But if the attitude of the accused, whether in person
           or through the mouth of his counsel, is: ‘I don’t know what I would have
           said. I still have to think that up. But I might have said this, that or the
           other’, then there will ordinarily be little difficulty in concluding that there
           neither was, nor could have been, prejudice. Here, as elsewhere, the
           Court is entitled to conclude that a person who deliberately withholds
           facts within his special knowledge and refuses to give the Court that
21
assistance which is its right and due, has nothing of value which he can
           disclose and that if he did disclose anything that would at once expose
           the hollowness of his cause.”
                                                                    (emphasis ours)
36.
Bibhuti Bhusan Das Gupta
(supra) is also a decision of a three-Judge

      Bench. The question arising for decision is neatly summed up in

      paragraph 4, reading as follows:
“4. … The point in issue is whether the pleader can represent the accused
           for purposes of
Section 342
and whether the examination of the pleader
           in place of the accused is sufficient compliance with the section in a case
           where the Magistrate has dispensed with the personal attendance of the
           accused and permitted him to appear by a pleader. On this question
           there is a sharp conflict of judicial opinion. Most of the decisions up to
           1962 are referred to in
Prova Debi v. Mrs Fernandes
(AIR 1962 Cal 203).
           In that case a Full Bench of the Calcutta High Court by a majority
           decision held that the Magistrate may in his discretion examine the
           pleader on behalf of the accused under
Section 342
. This view is
           supported by numerous decisions of other High Courts, but from time to
           time many judges expressed vigorous dissents and came to the opposite
           conclusion.
The two sides of the question are ably discussed in the
           majority and minority judgments of the Calcutta case. After a full
           examination of all the decided cases on the subject, we are inclined to
           agree with the minority opinion.”
                                                                     (emphasis ours)
37.
Section 342
of the 1898 Code was considered and it was explained in

      the following words:
“5. Sub-section (1) of
Section 342
consists of two parts. The first part
           gives a discretion to the court to question the accused at any stage of
           an inquiry or trial without previously warning him. Under the second part
           the court is required to question him generally on the case after the
           witnesses for the prosecution have been examined and before he is
           called for his defence. The second part is mandatory and imposes upon
           the court a duty to examine the accused at the close of the prosecution
           case in order to give him an opportunity to explain any circumstances
           appearing against him in the evidence and to say in his defence what he
           wants to say in his own words. He is not bound to answer the questions
           but if he refuses to answer or gives false answers, the consequences
           may be serious, for under sub-section (2) the court may draw such
           inference from the refusal or the false answer as it thinks fit. Under sub-
           section (3) the answers given by the accused may be taken into
           consideration in the inquiry or trial. His statement is material upon which
           the court may act, and which may prove his innocence, (see
State of
           Maharashtra v. Laxman Jairam
(1962 Supp 3 SCR 230). Under sub-
           section (4) no oath is administered to him. The reason is that when he
           is examined under
Section 342
, he is not a witness. … ”
22
(emphasis ours)
38.   Having read the extracted passages of the larger Bench decisions in

      between the lines, it appears to us imperative to highlight certain points.
In
K.C. Mathew
(supra), the plea of defective examination was raised

      for the first time in course of arguments before this Court and not at any

      previous stage, though fully available to be raised since the accused

      were being represented by a counsel. The Bench, having expressly

      referred to the provision in Section 537 of the 1898 Code, which was

      akin to
Section 465(1)
of the 1973 Code, considered the inability of the

      accused to demonstrate the prejudice suffered by him in the process of

      conviction and sentence as one of the grounds for declining relief.
Obviously, on the face of Section 537 of the 1898 Code, a failure of

      justice had to occasion by any error or irregularity for being interdicted

      which was not the case in
K.C. Mathew
(supra).
Similarly in
Bibhuti

      Bhusan Das Gupta
(supra), this Court observed that mere non-

      examination or defective examination under
Section 342
is not a ground

      for interference unless prejudice is established and, therefore, even
in

      that case
, since such plea of prejudice was not raised in previous rounds

      of litigation and the non-examination under
Section 342
did not cause

      any prejudice, the conviction and sentence was not interfered with

      looking to the facts
in that case
. What is important and stands out for

      the present case is that the second limb of
Section 342
of the 1898 Code

      was interpreted by the three-Judge Bench to be mandatory.
39.   This interpretation of
Section 342
of the 1898 Code in
Bibhuti Bhusan

      Das Gupta
(supra) also appears to align with the previous larger Bench
23
decision of four Judges in
Tara Singh
(supra) wherein, Hon’ble Vivian

Bose, J. (as His Lordship then was) speaking for the Bench, had the

occasion to explain in detail the requirements of examination of an

accused under
Section 342
. The relevant passage is extracted below:
“18. It is important therefore that an accused should be properly
     examined under
Section 342
and, as their Lordships of the Privy Council
     indicated in
Dwarkanath Varma v. Emperor
(AIR 1933 PC 124), if a point
     in the evidence is considered important against the accused and the
     conviction is intended to be based upon it, then it is right and proper
     that the accused should be questioned about the matter and be given an
     opportunity of explaining it if he so desires. This is an important and
     salutary provision and I cannot permit it to be slurred over. I regret to
     find that in many cases scant attention is paid to it, particularly in the
     Sessions Courts. But whether the matter arises in the Sessions Court or
     in that of the Committing Magistrate, it is important that the provisions
     of
Section 342
should be fairly and faithfully observed.
23.
Section 342
requires the accused to be examined for the purpose of
     enabling him “to explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence
     against him”. Now it is evident that when the Sessions Court is required
     to make the examination under this section, the evidence referred to is
     the evidence in the Sessions Court and the circumstances which appear
     against the accused in that court. It is not therefore enough to read over
     the questions and answers put in the Committing Magistrate’s Court and
     ask the accused whether he has anything to say about them. In the
     present case, there was not even that. The appellant was not asked to
     explain the circumstances appearing in the evidence against him but was
     asked whether the statements made before the Committing Magistrate
     and his answers given there were correctly recorded. That does not
     comply with the requirements of the section.
38. The whole object of
Section 342
is to afford the accused a fair and
     proper opportunity of explaining circumstances which appear against
     him. The questioning must therefore be fair and must be couched in a
     form which an ignorant or illiterate person will be able to appreciate and
     understand. Even when an accused person is not illiterate, his mind is
     apt to be perturbed when he is facing a charge of murder. He is therefore
     in no fit position to understand the significance of a complex question.
Fairness therefore requires that each material circumstance should be
     put simply and separately in a way that an illiterate mind, or one which
     is perturbed or confused, can readily appreciate and understand. I do
     not suggest that every error or omission in this behalf would necessarily
     vitiate a trial because I am of opinion that errors of this type fall within
     the category of curable irregularities. Therefore, the question in each
     case depends upon the degree of the error and upon whether prejudice
     has been occasioned or is likely to have been occasioned.
24
39. In my opinion, the disregard of the provisions of
Section 342
,
               Criminal Procedure Code, is so gross in this case that I feel there is grave
               likelihood of prejudice. But this is not the only error. … ”
40.      Further reference can profitably be made to the decision of another

         three-Judge Bench in
Rama Shankar Singh v. State of West Bengal27
where the scope of
Section 342
of the 1898 Code was examined in the

         light of the relevant Sessions Judge rolling up several distinct matters of

         evidence in a single question. It was held thus:
“15. In our view, the learned Sessions Judge in rolling up several distinct
               matters of evidence in a single question acted irregularly.
Section 342
of
               the Code of Criminal Procedure by the first sub-section provides, insofar
               as it is material: “For the purpose of enabling the accused to explain any
               circumstances appearing in the evidence against him, the Court … shall
               … question him generally on the case after the witnesses for the
               prosecution have been examined and before he is called on for his
               defence”. Duty is thereby imposed upon the Court to question the
               accused generally in a case after the witnesses for the prosecution have
               been examined to enable the accused to explain any circumstance
               appearing against him. This is a necessary corollary of the presumption
               of innocence on which our criminal jurisprudence is founded. The object
               of the section is to afford to the accused an opportunity of showing that
               the circumstance relied upon by the prosecution which may be prima
               facie against him, is not true or is consistent with his innocence. The
               opportunity must be real and adequate. Questions must be so framed as
               to give to the accused clear notice of the circumstances relied upon by
               the prosecution, and must give him an opportunity to render such
               explanation as he can of that circumstance. Each question must be so
               framed that the accused may be able to understand it and to appreciate
               what use the prosecution desires to make of the evidence against him.
               Examination of the accused under
Section 342
is not intended to be an
               idle formality, it has to be carried out in the interest of justice and
               fairplay to the accused : by a slipshod examination which is the result of
               imperfect appreciation of the evidence, idleness or negligence the
               position of the accused cannot be permitted to be made more difficult
               than what it is in a trial for an offence.”
                                                                         (emphasis ours)
41.      At this juncture, it would be worthwhile to notice the decision of another

         three-Judge Bench of this Court in
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State
27
AIR 1962 SC 1239
25
of Maharashtra28, where
Section 313
of the 1973 Code was considered

         and it was held by Hon’ble S. Murtaza Fazal Ali, J. (as His Lordship then

         was) that it is vital that any circumstance adverse to the accused must

         be put to him under
Section 313
; otherwise it must be completely

         excluded from consideration because the accused did not have any

         chance to explain them. Much the same view was expressed by Hon’ble

         A. Varadarajan, J. (as His Lordship then was) in his concurring opinion

         to the effect that the circumstances not put to the appellant in his

         examination under
S. 313
of the 1973 Code have to be completely

         excluded from consideration.
42.      Quite recently, another three-Judge Bench in Maheshwar Tigga v.
State of Jharkhand29 had the occasion to rule that:
“8. It stands well settled that circumstances not put to an accused under
Section 313
CrPC cannot be used against him, and must be excluded
                from consideration. In a criminal trial, the importance of the questions
                put to an accused are basic to the principles of natural justice as it
                provides him the opportunity not only to furnish his defence, but also to
                explain the incriminating circumstances against him. A probable defence
                raised by an accused is sufficient to rebut the accusation without the
                requirement of proof beyond reasonable doubt.”
43.      Mr. Patil is correct that
Sunil Kumar Banerjee
(supra) is a precedent

         that   provides   adequate     guidance    for   deciding   the   point   under

         consideration, since it dealt with a pari materia provision applicable in

         course of a departmental inquiry. Obviously, he hinted that we are bound

         by such precedent and there is no way a different view could be taken.
28
(1984) 4 SCC 116
29
(2020) 10 SCC 108
26
44.   In normal circumstances, there could be little reason not to accept such

      a contention being bound by the precedent of a larger bench. However,

      the vast and expansive development of law in the field of administrative

      law in our country since the time
Sunil Kumar Banerjee
(supra) was

      decided (almost four and half decades back), especially on the rule of

      fairness in administrative action which is now acknowledged in the

      Indian context as the third limb of natural justice, cannot be overlooked.
Coupled with that is the decision in
S.L. Kapoor
(supra), authored by

      none other than Hon’ble O. Chinappa Reddy, J. himself and the

      subsequent trio of Constitution Bench decisions in
Olga Tellis
(supra),
Tulsiram Patel
(supra) and
A. R. Antulay
(supra) upholding that

      violation of a mandatory provision of law relating to fair hearing is in

      itself prejudice to the person proceeded against and no need to

      demonstrate prejudice would arise. It is of particular importance when

      His Lordship frowned that “it ill comes from a person who has denied

      justice that the person who has been denied justice is not prejudiced.”

      (emphasis ours). It is indeed paradoxical for someone who has denied

      justice to a person to claim that that person, who was denied justice, is

      not prejudiced.
45.   With the utmost respect and reverence at our command for the three-
Judge Bench that had the occasion to decide
Sunil Kumar Banerjee
(supra), our analysis of the legal position reveals that the precedential

      value of
the said decision
stands significantly diminished for reasons
27
more than one and that such decision must be treated to be an authority

      for what it decided based on the reasons assigned therein.
46.   First, there was no independent consideration of Rule 8(19) of the 1969

      Rules in the context of the procedural safeguards that delinquent officers

      under   such   relevant       rules   are   entitled   to   claim   and   enforce.

      Consequently, and most significantly, the impact of the words “may” and

      “shall” appearing in the same provision do not appear to have been

      considered. We propose to interpret
Regulation 6(17)
of the 1981

      Regulations a little later.
47.   Secondly, the approach of the larger Bench in interpreting Rule 8(19) of

      the 1969 Rules was completely based on consideration of
Section 342
of

      the 1898 Code and the decisions in
K.C. Mathew
(supra) and
Bibhuti

      Bhusan Das Gupta
(supra). The law on
Section 313
of the 1973 Code,

      which replaced
Section 342
of the 1898 Code, and the rights of an

      accused have been explained in detail in several subsequent decisions

      of this Court, some of which are noticed above. Since examination under
Section 313
of the 1973 Code has been recognised as a part of natural

      justice, failure of the court to place the circumstances appearing in the

      evidence to the accused by putting appropriate questions resulting in his

      improper examination in a given case could result in the trial being held

      to be vitiated. To make the examination under
Section 313
of the 1973

      Code more effective, the Parliament has even amended such provision

      on the last day of the year 2009. In view thereof and by passage of time,

      the prejudice theory in criminal trials qua
Section 313
, Cr. PC
28
examination seems to have suffered some dilution; however, since we

      are not dealing with an appeal arising out of a criminal trial, we may not

      be understood to have laid down any law in this judgment that could be

      cited as a precedent before courts trying criminal offences.
Nonetheless,

      we hold that
K.C. Mathew
(supra) was not the only decision providing

      guidance.
There were other decisions of high authority which might not

      have been cited before the Bench in
Sunil Kumar Banerjee
(supra).
48.   Thirdly, assuming that the prejudice theory does have relevance, it is

      reasonable to assume that the principle on the basis of which
Rama

      Shankar Singh
(supra) and
K.C. Mathew
(supra) were decided by

      Their Lordships must have been predicated on a consideration of Section

      537 of the 1898 Code in terms whereof, it has to be demonstrated by

      the accused, to secure a declaration that the trial or inquiry stood

      vitiated, that a failure of justice had occasioned arising out of the

      procedure adopted by the court. Insofar as the 1969 Rules or the 1981

      Regulations are concerned, there is no such provision therein like Section

      537 of the 1898 Code or
Section 465
of the 1973 Code. This marks a

      significant distinction in trials under the 1898 Code/1973 Code and

      inquiries under the 1969 Rules/1981 Regulations. In our considered

      opinion, this vital aspect cannot be excluded from our consideration.
49.
Fourthly, Bibhuti Bhusan Das Gupta
(supra) is a decision which

      appears to have been referred only in passing in
Sunil Kumar Banerjee
(supra) without noting the law declared therein. The trial was held to be

      vitiated for breach of
Section 342
of the 1898 Code since the court had
29
examined the counsel for the accused instead of the accused.
Additionally, the decision in
Bibhuti Bhusan Das Gupta
(supra) spelt

      out in clear terms which parts of
Section 342
were directory and which

      parts were mandatory.
Section 342
, as explained by the Bench in such

      decision, would have a bearing on our thought process as would be

      evident from the discussions that follow.
50.   Fifthly, the still larger Bench decision in
Tara Singh
(supra) went

      unnoticed in
Sunil Kumar Banerjee
(supra).
51.   Fifthly, it cannot escape notice that in a criminal trial, fate of the accused

      is decided by a judicial officer who is an impartial and neutral arbiter

      whereas, more often than not, fate of a delinquent officer/employee

      hangs on the decisions of inquiry officers who are members of the same

      organisation and function under the same employer. Not that we are

      sceptical of members of the same organisation functioning as inquiry

      officers, which could be dictated by necessity, but the level of impartiality

      and neutrality can, in certain cases, be questionable. This is a vital

      circumstance which does not appear to have been considered.
52.   Finally, and most importantly, there is a significant difference between

      the stages where
Section 342
, 1898 Code/
Section 313
, 1973 Code on

      the one hand and Rule 8(19) of the 1969 Rules/
Regulation 6(17)
of the

      1981 Regulations on the other, apply. In a criminal trial, putting

      questions to the accused by the court to enable him to explain any

      circumstance appearing in the evidence against him under the relevant

      provision (
Sections 342
/
313
) is contemplated at two stages – (a) before
30
the prosecution concludes its evidence and (b) after evidence is

concluded by the prosecution but before the accused leads evidence in

defence. While in respect of (a) above it is discretionary for the court to

question the accused, qua (b) above, it is mandatory for the court – as

explained in
Bibhuti Bhusan Das Gupta
(supra). However, the

procedure is not exactly the same in a domestic inquiry of the nature

under consideration. In terms of the procedure for holding inquiry, the

examination of the nature contemplated by
Regulation 6(17)
is not to be

resorted to in the midst of evidence being led by the management. After

the management closes its evidence, the charged officer has to be given

opportunity to lead evidence in defence. The charged officer is under no

obligation to lead evidence but if he opts therefor, he does so at his own

risk and peril and has to bear the consequences, viz. he cannot then

claim that the Inquiry Officer is bound to question him generally on the

circumstances available in the evidence against him. If the charged

officer elects to lead defence evidence, it could include witnesses other

than the charged officer; or, it could include him as well along with the

other witnesses. The charged officer may even opt not to examine any

other witness but only himself. After the evidence of the defence

witnesses is recorded and evidence of the defence stands closed, the

stage for
Regulation 6(17)
of the 1981 Regulations, or for that matter

Rule 8(19) of the 1969 Rules, is reached. The difference is significant,

as we presently propose to explain in the light of the aforesaid options

available to the charged officer.
31
53.   Interestingly,
Regulation 6(17)
as well as Rule 8(19) refers to both ‘may’

      and ‘shall’. While the first part of
Regulation 6(17)
refers to ‘may’, the

      second part refers to ‘shall’. To enable the charged officer to explain

      circumstances in the evidence appearing against him, the provision

      confers a discretion on the Inquiry Officer as well as imposes a

      mandatory duty on him. It is discretionary for the Inquiry Officer, to put

      questions to the charged officer if he is himself a witness for the defence,

      whereas, if the charged officer has not examined himself as a witness

      for the defence, the mandate of the law is that the Inquiry Officer shall

      generally question the charged officer on the circumstances appearing

      in the evidence against him.
54.   The use of ‘may’ and ‘shall’ in the same provision does imply that
Regulation 6(17)
means what it says. The words ‘may’ and ‘shall’ have

      been used to mean ‘may’ and ‘shall’, respectively, and we cannot

      possibly conceive of any rule of construction which would lead us to

      assume that the framers intended that ‘shall’ in the second part of
Regulation 6(17)
should also be read and understood as ‘may’. Use of

      the word ‘shall’, in our opinion, is deliberate to denote that it is not

      interchangeable with ‘may’; if it were so, the framers would have

      straightaway used ‘may’ instead of ‘shall’ having known that ‘may’ has

      been used in the first part. Couching of the provision in such language

      with ‘may’ and ‘shall’ having distinct connotations and consequences and

      bringing about different outcomes in the course of one and the same
32
inquiry unhesitatingly signals that while the first part of
Regulation 6(17)
is directory, the second part thereof is mandatory.
55.      We, therefore, unhesitatingly hold that the Inquiry Officer by not

         generally questioning the appellant on the circumstances available in the

         evidence, which were unfavourable or adverse to such officer, failed to

         perform a mandatory duty. Any such circumstance, which was

         unfavourable or adverse to the appellant, should have been excluded

         from the Inquiry Officer’s consideration. It would not commend

         acceptance that though the Inquiry Officer acted in derogation of the

         1981 Regulations, nevertheless, his action must to be upheld on the

         specious ground that the appellant has failed to demonstrate prejudice.
Neither Sunil Kumar Banerjee
(supra) nor
Alok Kumar
(supra)

         examined the issue from our standpoint and in view of the trio – the

         Constitution Bench decisions in
Tulsiram Patel
(supra),
Olga Tellis
(supra) and
A.R. Antulay
(supra) - which were rendered after
Sunil

         Kumar Banerjee
(supra) and were not noticed in
Alok Kumar
(supra),

         the ratio of the latter decisions may not bind us.
Alok Kumar
(supra)

         relied on
Haryana Financial Corporation v. Kailash Chandra

         Ahuja30
.
In
Ram Prakash Singh
(supra), we have considered the

         entire issue of the prejudice theory threadbare and articulated, as per

         our understanding, how incomplete reading of the Constitution Bench

         decision in
B. Karunakar
(supra) has resulted in dilution of its ratio.
True it is, the High Court was bound by
Sunil Kumar Banerjee
(supra)
30
(2008) 9
SCC 31
33
and Alok Kumar
(supra) but, in our opinion, the said decisions cannot

      come to the aid of the respondent.
56.   We have considered the reasoning of the High Court that the appellant

      was extended an opportunity by the Inquiry Officer to make his

      submissions before the evidence was closed. However, such an

      opportunity does not really match the nature of duty cast on the Inquiry

      Officer under
Regulation 6(17)
. Such regulation requires the Inquiry

      Officer to question the charged officer, if he has not examined himself in

      defence, on the circumstances appearing in the evidence that are

      unfavourable or adverse to him. The purpose thereof is to extend an

      opportunity to the charged officer to explain away such unfavourable or

      adverse circumstances. This is one of the several procedural safeguards

      that the 1981 Regulations envisages. The duty cast and the opportunity

      extended are not equivalent. The inquiry under
Regulation 6
being quasi-

      judicial in nature,
Regulation 6(17)
places an onerous duty on the

      Inquiry Officer (who is generally untrained in law) to seriously apply his

      mind to the evidence on record and to indicate to the charged officer, as

      part of the process of his decision making, that circumstances exist

      which could weigh in his mind while arriving at the final findings in the

      report of inquiry. Once indicated, the charged officer may or may not

      explain away the circumstances but to offer an opportunity to have his

      say recorded without indication of the circumstances existing does not

      and would not amount to substantial compliance of
Regulation 6(17)
.
34
57.   Having said that, we cannot be oblivious of the fact that the appellant

      did not raise any effective objection as to the failure of the Inquiry Officer

      to strictly adhere to
Regulation 6(17)
at any stage prior to invoking the

      writ jurisdiction of the High Court. There being a failure of the Inquiry

      Officer to question the charged officer, the appellant ought to have

      raised the same before the disciplinary authority at the first instance;

      and, even if he did not so raise, he ought to have raised such objection

      before the appellate authority while he presented his appeal. If such an

      objection is not raised at any of the two tiers and the omission to do so

      is not explained in the writ petition, the court may infer that the charged

      officer was not seriously affected by non-adherence to
Regulation 6(17)
and it would be open to it to pass an appropriate order based on the

      inference drawn.
58.   In the present case, the appellant did not raise any objection in this

      behalf before the disciplinary authority but raised the point, generally,

      of non-adherence to
Regulation 6
before the appellate authority.

      Unfortunately, the issue was missed and not addressed because, as we

      propose to elaborately refer in the following paragraphs, the appellate

      authority devoted its attention more to deal with another significant

      objection raised by the appellant and negatived it by assigning lengthy

      reasons which, however, do not appeal to us to be convincing. Be that

      as it may, the appellant is justified in voicing a grievance before us that

      he had not been extended fair, reasonable and adequate opportunity to
35
defend himself in terms of
Regulation 6
which, in turn, infringed his right

           protected by
Article 14
of the Constitution.
59.        The other important aspect, which merits our consideration and touched

           upon by us in the earlier paragraph in very brief, admittedly, was not

           argued before us by Mr. Nuli. We have noted that such point was raised

           before the Single Judge, but, without success. However, we had the

           appeal listed once again after reserving judgment to ascertain Mr. Patil’s

           view on such point bearing in mind the power of an appellate court under

           Order XLI Rule 33,
Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908. The appellant had

           vehemently contended before the appellate authority that initially, the

           disciplinary authority had proposed to impose upon the appellant the

           penalty of compulsory retirement from service. The Chief Vigilance

           Officer31 concurred with such proposal of the disciplinary authority. The

           file was then placed before the Central Vigilance Commission 32.

           However, the CVC rejected the proposal of both the disciplinary authority

           and the CVO and instead recommended that the charged officer be not

           shown any leniency since he has been found guilty of financial

           irregularities and, therefore, be ‘dismissed’ from service. According to

           the appellant, the disciplinary authority acting on the dictates of the CVC

           proceeded to dismiss him from service. Appellant’s gravamen was that

           the recommendation of the CVC was never made available to him,

           affecting his right to a fair opportunity of defence. When challenged

           before the appellate authority, such challenge was rejected on the
31
CVO
32
CVC
36
ground that the CVC recommendation is a privileged document and that

         the appellant has violated the expected code of conduct by referring to

         such internal documents which he could not have accessed in normal

         due course.
60.
In
SBI v. D.C. Aggarwal33
, the question arising for decision was noted

         in paragraph 1. The same reads:
“Can disciplinary authority while imposing punishment, major or minor,
               act on material which is neither supplied nor shown to the delinquent is
               the only issue of substance, which arises for consideration in this appeal,
               filed by …?
61.      In a case almost identical to the present one, this Court while answering

         the aforesaid question held that when the disciplinary authority accepts

         the recommendation of the CVC which is at variance with the original

         proposal of the disciplinary authority, it is incumbent upon the authority

         to furnish a copy of the CVC recommendation to the charged employee

         before acting on such recommendation. It was held thus:
“5. Reliance was placed on sub-rule (5) of Rule 50 which reads as under:
‘(5) Orders made by the Disciplinary Authority or the Appointing
                      Authority as the case may be under sub-rules (3) and (4) shall be
                      communicated to the employee concerned, who shall also be
                      supplied with a copy of the report of inquiry, if any.’
               It was urged that copy of the inquiry report having been supplied to the
               respondent the rule was complied with and the High Court committed an
               error in coming to conclusion that principle of natural justice was
               violated. Learned Additional Solicitor General urged that the principle of
               natural justice having been incorporated and the same having been
               observed the Court was not justified in misinterpreting the rule. The
               learned counsel urged that the Bank was very fair to the respondent and
               the disciplinary authority after application of mind and careful analysis
               of the material on record on its own evaluation, uninfluenced by the CVC
               recommendation passed the order. It was emphasised that if the
               exercise would have been mechanical the disciplinary authority would
               not have disagreed with CVC recommendations on punishment. Learned
               counsel submitted that, in any case, the disciplinary authority having
               passed detailed order discussing every material on record and the
               respondent having filed appeal there was no prejudice caused to him.
33
(1993) 1 SCC 13
37
None of these submissions are of any help. The order is vitiated not
               because of mechanical exercise of powers or for non-supply of the
               inquiry report but for relying and acting on material which was not only
               irrelevant but could not have been looked into. Purpose of supplying
               document is to contest its veracity or give explanation. Effect of non-
supply of the report of Inquiry Officer before imposition of punishment
               need not be gone into nor it is necessary to consider validity of sub-rule
               (5). But non-supply of CVC recommendation which was prepared behind
               the back of respondent without his participation, and one does not know
               on what material which was not only sent to the disciplinary authority
               but was examined and relied on, was certainly violative of procedural
               safeguard and contrary to fair and just inquiry. From the letter produced
               by the respondent, the authenticity of which has been verified by the
               learned Additional Solicitor General, it appears the Bank turned down
               the request of the respondent for a copy of CVC recommendation as ‘The
               correspondence with the Central Vigilance Commission is a privileged
               communication and cannot be forwarded as the order passed by the
               appointing authority deals with the recommendation of the CVC which is
               considered sufficient’. Taking action against an employee on confidential
               document which is the foundation of order exhibits complete
               misapprehension about the procedure that is required to be followed by
               the disciplinary authority. May be that the disciplinary authority has
               recorded its own findings and it may be coincidental that reasoning and
               basis of returning the finding of guilt are same as in the CVC report but
               it being a material obtained behind back of the respondent without his
               knowledge or supplying of any copy to him the High Court in our opinion
               did not commit any error in quashing the order. Non-supply of the
               Vigilance report was one of the grounds taken in appeal. But that was so
               because the respondent prior to service of the order passed by the
               disciplinary authority did not have any occasion to know that CVC had
               submitted some report against him. The submission of the learned
               Additional Solicitor General that CVC recommendations are confidential,
               copy of which, could not be supplied cannot be accepted.
               Recommendations of Vigilance prior to initiation of proceedings are
               different than CVC recommendation which was the basis of the order
               passed by the disciplinary authority.”
                                                                         (emphasis ours)
62.      A similar principle was reiterated in
Mohd. Quaramuddin v. State of

         A.P.34
as follows:
“3. On merits the tribunal came to the conclusion that the principle of
               natural justice had been violated in that the delinquent was not supplied
               a copy of the Vigilance Commission Report although it formed part of the
               record of the enquiry and material which the disciplinary authority had
               taken into consideration. The tribunal observed that where such a
               material which the disciplinary authority relies on is not disclosed to the
               delinquent it must be held that he was denied the opportunity of being
34
(1994) 5 SCC 118
38
heard, meaning thereby that the audi alteram partem rule had been
               violated. In the present case the tribunal found that the directions to this
               effect found in the Government Memorandum No. 821/Services-C/69-8
               dated 30-3-1971 had not been adhered to. Had the tribunal not come to
               the conclusion that the suit was barred by limitation, it would have
               allowed the appeal preferred by the delinquent.”
63.
In an even earlier decision, i.e.,
Brij Nandan Kansal v. State of U.P.35
,

         this Court was seized of a similar question. The brief facts therein were

         that the appellant, Brij Nandan Kansal, was in the service of the State of

         Uttar Pradesh as a member of the U.P. Civil Service (Executive Branch).

         He was posted as Regional Transport Magistrate at Bareilly between June

         1962 to October 1964. A number of charges were framed against the

         appellant and the State Government referred the matter to the U.P.

         Administrative    Tribunal    constituted    under     the   U.P.   Disciplinary

         Proceedings (Administrative Tribunal) Rules, 1947 for enquiry into those

         charges. Out of six charges framed against the appellant therein, the

         Tribunal recorded the finding that the first charge was not proved but it

         recorded findings against the appellant therein in respect of the

         remaining five charges. The Governor issued a show-cause notice to the

         appellant therein calling upon him to show cause as to why he should

         not be dismissed from service. A detailed reply was submitted by the

         appellant commenting on the findings recorded by the Tribunal on each

         and every charge. The Tribunal considered the reply to the show-cause

         notice and the comments on the findings recorded by it earlier on the

         charges and thereupon it submitted detailed findings to the Governor.
35
1988 Supp SCC 761
39
In that report, on a detailed analysis of the evidence recorded, the

Tribunal the finding that there was no convincing evidence to uphold the

charges framed against the appellant. On receipt of the report of the

Tribunal, the State Government appears to have referred the matter to

the Legal Remembrancer for his opinion. The Legal Remembrancer

disagreed with the findings recorded by the Tribunal in its report, and

opined that there was in fact sufficient evidence on record to hold

Charges 2 to 5 against the appellant to have been established. In view

of the opinion submitted by the Legal Remembrancer, the Governor

disregarded the findings recorded by the Tribunal and issued the

impugned order dismissing the appellant from service. This Court,

allowing the appeal, held that:
“7. …The Tribunal was entrusted with the primary duty of making inquiry
      and record its findings on the charges. In that process it could enter into
      adequacy, insufficiency or credibility of evidence on record. The Legal
      Remembrancer was of the opinion that the Tribunal could not enter into
      the realm of adequacy or sufficiency of evidence and for that purpose he
      relied upon the well established principles of judicial review of
      administrative actions. The Tribunal was not discharging the functions of
      a court but on the other hand it was acting as the inquiring authority and
      it had full power to reappraise the evidence and record its findings and
      in that process it was open to it to hold that the evidence on record was
      not sufficient to sustain the charges against the appellant. The whole
      approach of the Legal Remembrancer was misconceived as a result of
      which he opined that the findings recorded by the Tribunal in appellant's
      favour could be ignored. We are of opinion that the State Government
      could not ignore the findings of the Tribunal applying the principles of
      judicial review of administrative actions by a court of law. The State
      Government committed serious error of law in ignoring the findings of
      the Tribunal without giving an opportunity to the appellant to showcause
      against the proposed view of the government and passing the impugned
      order on the basis of the report of the Legal Remembrancer. The
      Tribunal's findings dated 7-7-1970 clearly indicated that there was no
      evidence to sustain the charges against the appellant and in that view
      the impugned order of dismissal could not legally be passed against the
      appellant.
(emphasis ours)
40
64.   We are certain that the CVC recommendation weighed heavily enough

      upon the disciplinary authority so as to convince him to alter the

      proposed punishment of compulsory retirement to dismissal of the

      appellant. Receipt of the CVC recommendation behind the back of the

      appellant and no opportunity having been provided to him to plead for a

      lesser punishment, the inquiry stood vitiated. The CVC recommendation

      constituted material which was considered by the disciplinary authority

      at least for the purpose of deciding on the punishment that needed to

      be imposed on the appellant. Once such recommendation fell for

      consideration of the disciplinary authority, a copy of the same could not

      have been denied to the appellant. That being said, we do not propose

      to inculcate a standing requirement upon all disciplinary authorities that

      a hearing, before punishment is imposed, should be provided if such

      requirement is not present in the relevant rules. What we are insisting

      upon is compliance with the principles of natural justice which, in view

      of   the   Constitution   Bench   decision   in
B.   Karunakar
(supra),

      acknowledges and asserts that a charged officer cannot be denied any

      material that the disciplinary authority looks into for imposing

      punishment. Such officer is entitled to access any document that was

      either used to determine his blameworthy conduct amounting to

      misconduct or considered while imposing punishment.
65.   We now turn to deal with another important aspect, i.e., the claim of

      privilege made by the appellate authority in defending non-disclosure of

      the CVC recommendation to the appellant. While the Indian Evidence
41
Act, 187236 is not applicable to disciplinary proceedings, the principles

         enshrined therein can provide sufficient guidance on the validity of the

         claim.
In
State of Punjab v. Sodhi Sukhdev Singh37
, this Court had

         the opportunity to trace the colonial law on the point and its development

         in Indian law. The relevant passages read as follows:
“13. The principle on which this departure can be and is justified is the
               principle of the overriding and paramount character of public interest. A
               valid claim for privilege made under
Section 123
proceeds on the basis
               of the theory that the production of the document in question would
               cause injury to public interest, and that, where a conflict arises between
               public interest and private interest, the latter must yield to the former.
               No doubt the litigant whose claim may not succeed as a result of the
               non-production of the relevant and material document may feel
               aggrieved by the result, and the court, in reaching
the said decision
, may
               feel dissatisfied; but that will not affect the validity of the basic principle
               that public good and interest must override considerations of private
               good and private interest. Care has, however, to be taken to see that
               interests other than that of the public do not masquerade in the garb of
               public interest and take undue advantage of the provisions of Section
123. Subject to this reservation the maxim silus populi est supreme
               les which means that regard for public welfare is the highest law is the
               basis of the provisions contained in
Section 123
. Though
Section 123
does not expressly refer to injury to public interest that principle is
               obviously implicit in it and indeed is its sole foundation.
14. Whilst we are discussing the basic principle underlying the provisions
               of
Section 123
, it may be pertinent to enquire whether fair and fearless
               administration of justice itself is not a matter of high public importance.
Fair administration of justice between a citizen and a citizen or between
               a citizen and the State is itself a matter of great public importance; much
               more so would the administration of justice as a whole be a matter of
               very high public importance; even so, on principle, if there is a real, not
               imaginary or fictitious, conflict between public interest and the interest
               of an individual in a pending case, it may reluctantly have to be conceded
               that the interest of the individual cannot prevail over the public interest.
               If social security and progress which are necessarily included in the
               concept of public good are the ideal then injury to the said ideal must on
               principle be avoided even at the cost of the interest of an individual
               involved in a particular case. That is why courts are and ought to be
               vigilant in dealing with a claim of privilege made under
Section 123
.
15. If under
Section 123
a dispute arises as to whether the evidence in
               question is derived from unpublished official records that can be easily
               resolved; but what presents considerable difficulty is a dispute as to
               whether the evidence in question relates to any affairs of State. What
               are the affairs of State under
Section 123
? In the latter half of the
36
Evidence Act
37
1960 SCC OnLine SC 38
42
nineteenth century affairs of State may have had a comparatively narrow
content. Having regard to the notion about governmental functions and
duties which then obtained, affairs of State would have meant matters
of political or administrative character relating, for instance, to national
defence, public peace and security and good neighbourly relations. Thus,
if the contents of the documents were such that their disclosure would
affect either the national defence or public security or good neighbourly
relations they could claim the character of a document relating to affairs
of State. There may be another class of documents which could claim
the said privilege not by reason of their contents as such but by reason
of the fact that, if the said documents were disclosed, they would
materially affect the freedom and candour of expression of opinion in the
determination and execution of public policies. In this class may
legitimately be included notes and minutes made by the respective
officers on the relevant files, opinions expressed, or reports made, and
gist of official decisions reached in the course of the determination of the
said questions of policy. In the efficient administration of public affairs
Government may reasonably treat such a class of documents as
confidential and urge that its disclosure should be prevented on the
ground of possible injury to public interest. In other words, if the proper
functioning of the public service would be impaired by the disclosure of
any document or class of documents such document or such class of
documents may also claim the status of documents relating to public
affairs.
16. It may be that when the Act was passed the concept of
governmental functions and their extent was limited, and so was the
concept of the words ‘affairs of State’ correspondingly limited; but, as is
often said, words are not static vehicles of ideas or concepts. As the
content of the ideas or concepts conveyed by respective words expands,
so does the content of the words keep pace with the said expanding
content of the ideas or concepts, and that naturally tends to widen the
field of public interest which the section wants to protect. The inevitable
consequence of the change in the concept of the functions of the State
is that the State in pursuit of its welfare activities undertakes to an
increasing extent activities which were formerly treated as purely
commercial, and documents in relation to such commercial activities
undertaken by the State in the pursuit of public policies of social welfare
are also apt to claim the privilege of documents relating to the affairs of
State. It is in respect of such documents that we reach the marginal line
in the application of
Section 123
; and it is precisely in determining the
claim for privilege for such border-line cases that difficulty arises.
17. It is, however, necessary to remember that where the legislature
has advisedly refrained from defining the expression ‘affairs of State’ it
would be inexpedient for judicial decisions to attempt to put the said
expression into a straight jacket of a definition judicially evolved. The
question as to whether any particular document or a class of documents
answers the description must be determined in each case on the relevant
facts and circumstances adduced before the court. ‘Affairs of State’,
according to Mr Seervai, are synonymous with public business and he
contends that
Section 123
provides for a general prohibition against the
production of any document relating to public business unless permission
for its production is given by the head of the department concerned. Mr
Seervai has argued that documents in regard to affairs of State
43
constitute a genus under which there are two species of documents, one
            the disclosure of which will cause no injury to public interest, and the
            other the disclosure of which may cause injury to public interest. In the
            light of the consequence which may flow from their disclosure the two
            species of documents can be described as innocuous and noxious
            respectively. According to Mr Seervai the effect of
Section 123
is that
            there is a general prohibition against the production of all documents
            relating to public business subject to the exception that the head of the
            department can give permission for the production of such documents
            as are innocuous and not noxious. He contends that it is not possible to
            imagine that the section contemplates that the head of the department
            would give permission to produce a noxious document. It is on this
            interpretation of
Section 123
that Mr Seervai seeks to build up similarity
            between
Section 123
and the English law as it was understood in 1872.
            In other words, according to Mr Seervai the jurisdiction of the court in
            dealing with a claim of privilege under
Section 123
is very limited and in
            most of the cases, if not all, the court would have to accept the claim
            without effective scrutiny.
18. On the other hand it has been urged by Mr Sastri that the expression
            ‘documents relating to any affairs of State’ should receive a narrow
            construction; and it should be confined only to the class of noxious
            documents. Even in regard to this class the argument is that the court
            should decide the character of the document and should not hesitate to
            enquire, incidentally if necessary, whether its disclosure would lead to
            injury to public interest. This contention seeks to make the jurisdiction
            of the court wider and the field of discretion entrusted to the department
            correspondingly narrower.
19. It would thus be seen that on the point in controversy between the
            parties three views are possible. The first view is that it is the head of
            the department who decides to which class the document belongs; if he
            comes to the conclusion that the document is innocuous he will give
            permission to its production; if, however, he comes to the conclusion
            that the document is noxious he will withhold such permission; in any
            case the court does not materially come into the picture. The other view
            is that it is for the court to determine the character of the document,
            and if necessary enquire into the possible consequences of its disclosure;
            on this view the jurisdiction of the court is very much wider. A third view
            which does not accept either of the two extreme positions would be that
            the court can determine the character of the document, and if it comes
            to the conclusion that the document belongs to the noxious class it may
            leave it to the head of the department to decide whether its production
            should be permitted or not; for it is not the policy of
Section 123
that in
            the case of every noxious document the head of the department must
            always withhold permission. In deciding the question as to which of these
            three views correctly represents the true legal position under the Act it
            would be necessary to examine
Section 162
. Let us therefore, turn to
            that section.
66.   A summary of the decision leads us to one irresistible conclusion – that

      the overriding interest must be of a public nature and only in such cases
44
can the claim of privilege be sustained. The claim of privilege cannot be

         invoked as a matter of reflexive recourse but must be limited to

         instances wherein an actual concern to public interest is envisaged. Each

         instance must be evaluated on a case-by-case basis and the State must

         be wholly convinced that the disclosure of the documents would cause

         grave harm and injury to public interest.
67.      We further refer to
Amar Chand Butail v. Union of India38
where

         Hon’ble P.B. Gajendragadkar, CJI. speaking for this Court held that a

         claim for privilege cannot be made merely because it would go against

         the defence of the State. A claim for privilege can therefore only be made

         if it strictly meets the requirements present in the
Evidence Act
, failing

         which, if the Court after a preliminary enquiry is convinced that the claim

         of privilege cannot be sustained, the State may be directed to disclose

         the said document.
68.
In
State of U.P. v. Raj Narain39
, this Court held that public interest

         which demands that evidence be withheld is to be weighed against the

         public interest in the administration of justice that courts should have

         the fullest possible access to all relevant materials. When public interest

         outweighs the latter, the evidence cannot be admitted. The Court also

         held that it must proprio motu exclude evidence the production of which

         is contrary to public interest.
38
AIR 1964 SC 1658
39
(1975) 4 SCC 428
45
69.      Moving closer to this century, this Court in People's Union for
Civil

         Liberties v. Union of India40
while dealing with the disclosure of

         certain sensitive information under the
Atomic Energy Act, 1962
laid

         down the indicative criteria required to be fulfilled for the claim of

         privilege. The instructive passage on the issue reads as under:
“70. For determining a question when a claim of privilege is made, the
               Court is required to pose the following questions:
(1) whether the document in respect of which privilege is claimed,
                      is really a document (unpublished) relating to any affairs of State;
                      and
                      (2) whether disclosure of the contents of the document would be
                      against public interest?
71. When any claim of privilege is made by the State in respect of any
               document, the question whether the document belongs to the privileged
               class has first to be decided by the court. The court cannot hold an
               enquiry into the possible injury to public interest which may result from
               the disclosure of the document in question. The claim of immunity and
               privilege has to be based on public interest.
72. The section does not say who is to decide the preliminary question
               viz. whether the document is one that relates to any affairs of State, or
               how it is to be decided, but the clue in respect thereof can be found in
Section 162
. Under
Section 162
a person summoned to produce a
               document is bound to
                      ‘bring it to the court, notwithstanding any objection which there
                      may be to its production or to its admissibility. The validity of any
                      such objection shall be decided on by the court’.
It further says that:
‘The court, if it seems fit, may inspect the document, unless it
                      refers to matters of State, or take other evidence to enable it to
                      determine on its admissibility.’
73. In order to claim immunity from disclosure of unpublished State
               documents, the documents must relate to affairs of the State and
               disclosure thereof must be against interest of the State or public
               interest.”
70.      In the present case, the appellate authority did not deny that there was

         indeed a recommendation of the CVC. However, the recommendation

         was denied by claiming privilege. We are inclined to the view that the

         claim of privilege was utterly misconceived. The recommendation of the
40
(2004) 2 SCC 476
46
CVC did not have anything to do with the “affairs of the State” or, if one

        were not to be guided by
Section 123
of the Evidence Act, anything to

        do with national security; at least, no such attempt was made by Mr.

        Patil. We appreciate his predicament that at this distance of time (the

        appellate order having been made on 27th March, 2003) and Vijaya Bank

        having merged in the respondent in 2019, it is well-nigh difficult for him

        and the respondents to lay their hands on such recommendation. Yet, it

        cannot be ignored that the appellate order apart from claiming that the

        recommendation is a privileged document does not go further to assign

        any reason, far less cogent reason, as to how the same could at all be

        withheld from the appellant. Reasons that have been assigned are

        neither here nor there. Whether or not such a recommendation did exist

        was the question, not whether the appellant could have premised his

        challenge on such recommendation being an internal document.
71.     We are ad idem with the view expressed in
D.C. Aggarwal
(supra) that

        the proposed punishment of compulsory retirement could not have been

        altered to dismissal from service based on the CVC recommendation

        without furnishing the same to the appellant. To this extent, the

        appellate order is legally flawed and cannot be sustained.

      CONCLUSION
72.     In normal circumstances, the obvious direction that could follow the

        foregoing discussions is a remand to the disciplinary authority to re-start

        the inquiry from the stage the same stood vitiated, i.e., requiring the

        Inquiry Officer to scrupulously follow
Regulation 6(17)
of the 1981
47
Regulations. However, there are circumstances that impede an order for

      remand. The foremost being the lack of accessibility to the records

      because of the merger of Vijaya Bank with the respondent and the

      distance of time since the disciplinary proceedings came to a close. It is

      also to be noted that the disciplinary proceedings were continued beyond

      the date on which the appellant attained the age of superannuation.

      Because of the ultimate order we propose to make, we have not dealt

      with the third question noted in paragraph 16 (supra) and such question

      is kept open. No useful purpose, therefore, would be served in ordering

      a remand.
73.   Considering the age of the appellant (he is now an octogenarian) as well

      as the fact that there were other disciplinary proceedings pending

      against him which were not taken to its logical conclusion because he

      stood dismissed from service, in our considered view, interest of justice

      would be sufficiently served if we make the following directions:
(i)     the appellant shall not be entitled to any terminal

                          benefits except to the extent indicated hereafter;
(ii)    he shall only be entitled to a lump-sum amount equal

                          to the quantum of gratuity which would have been

                          payable to him had he not been fastened with the

                          order of dismissal;
(iii)   such lump-sum amount may be released in favour of

                          the appellant within a period of eight weeks from

                          date;
48
(iv)      no amount on account of interest shall be payable to

                          the appellant on the said amount;
(v)       however, interest @ 9% p.a. shall be payable on

                          such amount if not released within the period

                          stipulated above; and

                (vi)      the order of dismissal, in the circumstances, shall

                          stand quashed.

74.   It is ordered accordingly.
75.   In the above result, the impugned order of the High Court is also set

      aside.
76.   The appeal is disposed of on the above terms, without any order as to

      costs.
77.   Criminal proceedings, if any, pending against the appellant may be taken

      to its logical conclusion in accordance with law.
………………………………….……J.
                                                  (DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                             …………………….…………………J.
                                             (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 19, 2025.
49