[Cites
55
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vijay Krishnaswami @ Krishnaswami ... vs The Deputy Director Of Income Tax ... on 28 August, 2025
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
2025 INSC 1048                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.                OF 2025
                            (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NOS. 3618-3620 OF 2024)


            VIJAY KRISHNASWAMI
            @ KRISHNASWAMI VIJAYAKUMAR                                   …..APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS

            THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF
            INCOME TAX (INVESTIGATION)                               ..…
            RESPONDENT(S)


                                                  JUDGMENT
J.K. MAHESHWARI, J.
1.              Leave granted.
2.              The appellant invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court 1 in

            Crl. OP. No. 28763 of 2018 for quashing of the proceedings of

            EOC No. 242 of 2018 initiated by the Revenue, before the

            Additional             Chief     Metropolitan   Magistrate   (E.O.II),   Egmore,

            Chennai, for the offence under Section 276C(1) 2 of the Income
Signature Not Verified
Tax Act, 1961, (in short “
IT Act
”) for assessment year 2017-
Digitally signed by
Gulshan Kumar Arora
Date: 2025.08.28
20:56:48 IST
Reason:
1 High Court of Judicature at Madras.
2 Wilful attempt to evade tax, etc.
1
2018. The High Court vide the impugned judgement dismissed

the quashing petition filed by the appellant. Challenging the

same, he has knocked the doors of this Court preferring the

instant appeals. The consequence of the dismissal of quashing

petition has led to the appellant facing trial for an offence in

which settlement was entered by the Revenue with the appellant,

granting him immunity from levy of penalty.
3.     Shorn of unnecessary details, the facts are that, on

24.04.2016, search under
Section 132
3
of the IT Act was

conducted at the residence of the appellant, and unaccounted

cash of Rs. 4,93,84,300/- was seized. After taking statement of

the appellant under
Section 132(4)
of the IT Act, a show-cause

notice was issued on 31.10.2017 as to why prosecution should

not be initiated against him. On assailing the same in the writ

petition filed by the appellant, it was dismissed on 17.11.2017

being premature, observing that issuance of show-cause notice is

an administrative act and in absence of reply, it cannot be

questioned in the writ petition. The said order was put to

challenge in Writ Appeal No. 1617 of 2017 which was dismissed

as    infructuous       vide   order   dated   06.09.2020   taking   into

3 Search and seizure.
2
consideration the subsequent developments and the order of the

Settlement Commission passed on 26.11.2019. The Division

Bench observed that the complaint filed in furtherance to show-

cause notice was not challenged before the learned Single Judge

in a writ petition, therefore, the said issue cannot be looked into

in this appeal, leaving it open to be decided in the appropriate

proceedings. During pendency, the Principal Director Income Tax

(Investigation), Chennai, (in short “PDIT”) exercised power under
Section 279(1)
4
of the IT Act, and vide order dated 21.06.2018,

accorded       sanction       to    Deputy        Director      of    Income        Tax

(Investigation), Chennai, (in short “DDIT”) to initiate prosecution

against      the     appellant.       Thereafter,       respondent-DDIT            filed

complaint on 11.08.2018 against the appellant for an offence

under
Section 276C(1)
alleging wilful attempt to evade tax with

respect to assessment year 2017-2018 and for not filing the

correct return of income.
4.     Being aggrieved, the appellant filed quashing petition under
Section 482
of Code of Criminal Procedure (in short “
CrPC
”)

being Crl. O.P. No. 28763 of 2018 along with Crl. M.P. Nos. 16786

and 16787 of 2018 praying for quashing of the complaint and
4 Prosecution to be at instance of Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner] or
Principal Commissioner or Commissioner.
3
pending proceedings. Pertinently, the appellant also filed an

application under
Section 245C
5
of the IT Act on 07.12.2018

before the Settlement Commissioner, Additional Bench, Chennai,

(in short “Settlement Commission”) disclosing the entire

additional income and sought immunity from levy of penalty as

well as prosecution in the matter of alleged evasion of proposed

tax. The Settlement Commission in exercise of powers under
Section 245D(4)
6
of IT Act, partly allowed the said application

vide order dated 26.11.2019 and granted immunity from levy of

penalty, refraining itself to grant immunity from prosecution due

to pendency of quashing petition before the High Court of

Madras.
5.     By the order impugned, the High Court dismissed the

quashing petition and referring the averments of the complaint

observed that for the assessment year 2017-2018, the amount

seized has not been shown in earnings, which may amount to

evasion of proposed tax. The defence put forth by the appellant

was that the seized amount was an earning of the assessment

year 2016-2017 and not of assessment year 2017-2018 for which


5 Application for settlement of cases.
6 Procedure on receipt of an application under
Section 245
C.
4
settlement has been arrived at as per the order of the Settlement

Commission. The said defence did not find favour on the pretext

that it can be taken by the appellant during trial. It was also

observed that the complaint was filed prior and the application

before the Settlement Commission was subsequent, therefore, the

stand of the appellant indicating that the seized amount was

income of the assessment year 2016-2017 may also be looked

into during trial. The question of competence of DDIT to initiate

the prosecution against the appellant under
Section 279(1)
of the

IT Act also did not turn in favour of the appellant in the order

impugned.
ARGUMENTS OF THE APPELLANT
6.   Mr. Preetesh Kapur, learned senior counsel for the appellant

has strenuously urged that the order passed by the Settlement

Commission in exercise of power under Sub-Section (4) of
Section

245D
shall be conclusive unless reopened as per
Section 245D(6)
within the time specified in sub-section (6B) of IT Act. In the

present case, on receiving an application under
Section 245C
, the

Settlement Commission passed an order granting immunity

against levy of penalty in favour of the appellant, though rejected
5
the plea for immunity from prosecution due to pendency of quash

petition before the High Court. It is urged that the order of the

Settlement Commission is conclusive in terms of
Section 245-I
7
,

with respect to the matters specified therein.
7.     It is further urged that the guidelines dated 24.04.2008

issued by Ministry of Finance, Government of India, for

‘streamlining the procedure and to identify the cases for

processing to lodge prosecution under Direct Tax law – matter

reg.’, (in short “2008 circular”), has not been complied with by

DDIT. Referring to clause (iii), it is said that in all cases where

the penalty under
Section 271(1)(C)
exceeding Rs. 50,000/- is

imposed and confirmed by Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (in

short “ITAT”), the complaints may be filed within a period of 60

days of the receipt of the order of ITAT and not prior. Further, as

per the ‘Prosecution Manual, 2009’, Clause 1.4 of Chapter III

clearly stipulates when can prosecution be initiated. As per the

Manual, it was advised that the initiation of prosecution under
Section 276C(1)
shall be only after confirmation of concealment

and penalty by the ITAT. Recently on 09.09.2019, the Ministry of

Finance, Government of India, issued another notification laying

7 Order of settlement to be conclusive.
6
down ‘procedure for identification and processing of cases for

prosecution   under Direct Tax Laws-reg.’ (in short          “2019

circular’), whereby if the tax liability is below Rs. 25 lakhs, such

cases shall not be processed for prosecution except with the

previous administrative approval of the Collegium consisting of

CCIT/DGIT rank officers and only after confirmation of the order

imposing penalty by the ITAT.
8.   In the instant case, the prosecution is with respect to the

assessment year 2017-2018. As per the order of the Settlement

Commission, the total undisclosed income has been shown as Rs.

61,50,000/-, to which the tax liability would come to less than

Rs. 25 lakhs, therefore, without the permission of the Collegium,

lodging of prosecution for the allegation below the said threshold

lacked competence. Lastly, it is urged that after grant of immunity

from the penalty by the Settlement Commission, continuation of

the prosecution in violation of the guidelines would amount to

gross abuse of the process of law, therefore, order impugned

passed by the High Court may be set-aside quashing the

complaint lodged by Revenue.
ARGUMENTS OF THE RESPONDENTS
7
9.     Per contra, Ms. Nisha Baghchi, learned senior counsel for

the revenue has vociferously contended that the complaint was

filed by the respondent-DDIT prior to filing of application under
Section 245C
of the IT Act, therefore, in terms of the first proviso

to
Section 245H(1)
8
, appellant cannot be given any immunity

from the prosecution. It is urged that the prosecution under
Section 276C(1)
against a person is for wilful attempt to evade

any tax imposable or penalty or interest chargeable under the
IT

Act
, and is penal in nature. In the facts of the present case,

unaccounted cash was found at the residence of the appellant

which was not disclosed in the return of the assessment year

2017-2018. Therefore, even after passing an order by the

Settlement Commission, prosecution initiated prior to filing an

application under
Section 245C
of IT Act are saved from granting

immunity and can be proceeded with, however, the High Court

was justified in dismissing the quash petition filed by the

appellant.
ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION




8 Power of Settlement Commission to grant immunity from prosecution and penalty.
8
10. On the basis of the submissions as advanced by the learned

senior counsel for the parties, in our view on the facts, the

following questions fall for consideration:
i)    Whether continuation of the prosecution initiated by the

            revenue under
Section 276C(1)
against the appellant

            after passing an order by the Settlement Commission,

            would amount to abuse of process of Court?
ii)   Whether in the facts of the present case, the High Court

            was justified to dismiss the quashing petition filed by

            the appellant, and if not, what relief can be granted?
ANALYSIS AND APPRECIATION
11. Since both the said questions are inter-connected, therefore,

the facts and legal points are appreciated simultaneously. In this

relation, some of the relevant provisions of the
IT Act
are required

to be referred, which are reproduced as under –

     “276C. Wilful attempt to evade tax, etc.—(1) If a person
     wilfully attempts in any manner whatsoever to evade any tax,
     penalty or interest chargeable [or imposable, or under reports his
     income,] under this Act, he shall, without prejudice to any penalty
     that may be imposable on him under any other provision of this
     Act, be punishable,—
(i)  in a case where the amount sought to be evaded [or
            tax on under-reported income] exceeds [twenty-five
            hundred thousand rupees], with rigorous imprisonment for
9
a term which shall not be less than six months but which
           may extend to seven years and with fine;
(ii)  in any other case, with rigorous imprisonment for a
           term which shall not be less than three months but which
           may extend to [two years] and with fine.
(2)    If a person wilfully attempts in any manner whatsoever to
     evade the payment of any tax, penalty or interest under this Act,
     he shall, without prejudice to any penalty that may be imposable
     on him under any other provision of this Act, be punishable with
     rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
     three months but which may extend to [two years] and shall, in
     the discretion of the court, also be liable to fine.

     Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, a wilful attempt
     to evade any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable
     under this Act or the payment thereof shall include a case where
     any person—
(i)   has in his possession or control any books of
           account or other documents (being books of account or
           other documents relevant to any proceeding under this Act)
           containing a false entry or statement; or
(ii)  makes or causes to be made any false entry or
           statement in such books of account or other documents; or
(iii) wilfully omits or causes to be omitted any relevant
           entry or statement in such books of account or other
           documents; or
(iv)   causes any other circumstance to exist which will
           have the effect of enabling such person to evade any tax,
           penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act
           or the payment thereof.”
12. From the above, it is clear that
Section 276C
deals with two

situations. Sub-section (1) pertains to a wilful attempt to evade

tax, penalty, or interest that is ‘chargeable’, ‘imposable’, or related
10
to ‘under-reporting of income’. In contrast, sub-section (2)

addresses the wilful attempt to evade the ‘payment’ of any tax,

penalty, or interest under the Act. Therefore, both sub-sections

operate   in   separate   spheres   and    different   stages.   The

fundamental distinction between the applicability of sub-section

(1) and sub-section (2) lies to the stage at which the offence

allegedly occurs.
Section 276C(1)
is primarily intended to deter

and penalize wilful and deliberate attempts by an assessee for

evasion of taxes, penalties and interest prior to their imposition

or charging. The provision applies where there is a conscious and

intentional effort to evade tax liability, distinguishing such

conduct from bona-fide errors or differences in interpretation.

The gist of the offence under sub-section (1) of
Section 276C
lies

in the wilful attempt to evade the very imposition of liability, and

what is made punishable under this sub-section is not the

‘actual evasion’ but the ‘wilful attempt’ to evade as described in

the proviso to
Section 276C
.
13. For the allegations as alleged against appellant, prosecution

under
Section 279(1)
was initiated by respondent-DDIT in

accordance with sanction given by PDIT. The appellant also

challenged the jurisdiction of the DDIT before the High Court,
11
contending that she was not competent to initiate prosecution

under
Section 279(1)
of the IT Act. In the said context, it is

relevant to refer
Section 279
of IT Act, which is reproduced below

for ready reference as thus:
“279. Prosecution to be at instance of Principal Chief
      Commissioner or Chief Commissioner or Principal
      Commissioner or Commissioner. —

      (1) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence
      under
section 275A
, [
section 275B
,]
section 276
,
section 276A
,
section 276B
,
section 276BB
,
section 276C
,
section
      276CC
,
section 276D
,
7
[
section 277
,
section 277A
or
section
      278
] except with the previous sanction of the [Principal
      Commissioner or Commissioner] or Commissioner (Appeals) or
      the appropriate authority:
Provided that the [Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
      Commissioner] or, as the case may be, [Principal Director
      General or Director] General may issue such instructions or
      directions to the aforesaid income-tax authorities as he may
      deem fit for institution of proceedings under this sub-section.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “appropriate
      authority” shall have the same meaning as in clause (c) of
section 269UA
.]

      (1A) A person shall not be proceeded against for an offence
      under
section 276C
or
section 277
in relation to the assessment
      for an assessment year in respect of which the penalty imposed
      or imposable on him under [
section 270A
or] clause (iii) of sub-
section (1) of
section 271
has been reduced or waived by an
      order under
section 273A
.]

      (2) Any offence under this Chapter may, either before or after
      the institution of proceedings, be compounded by the [Principal
      Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner] or a [Principal
      Director General or Director General].
12
(3) Where any proceeding has been taken against any person
      under sub-section (1), any statement made or account or other
      document produced by such person before any of the income-tax
      authorities specified in [clauses (a) to (g)] of
section 116
shall
      not be inadmissible as evidence for the purpose of

      such proceedings merely on the ground that such statement
      was made or such account or other document was produced in
      the belief that the penalty imposable would be reduced or
      waived, [under
section 273A
] or that the offence in respect of
      which such proceeding was taken would be compounded.

      [Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
      that the power of the Board to issue orders, instructions or
      directions under this Act shall include and shall be deemed
      always to have included the power to issue instructions or
      directions (including instructions or directions to obtain the
      previous approval of the Board) to other income-tax authorities
      for the proper composition of offences under this section.]”
14. From the above, in addition to the other offences, looking to

the allegations of the present case, the prosecution under
Section

276C
may be lodged with permission of the PDIT. Sub-section (1)
(a) creates a bar that the person shall not be proceeded under
Section 276C
in relation to the assessment for the assessment

year of which penalty imposed or imposable on him, has been

reduced or waived.
15. It is also pertinent to refer that the
IT Act
envisages a robust

settlement mechanism under Chapter XIXA, which is titled –

‘Settlement of Cases’. It was inserted by means of the
Taxation

Laws (Amendment) Act, 1975
(41 of 1975) w.e.f. 01.04.1976. The
13
said amendment was brought pursuant to the recommendations

of the ‘Direct Taxes Enquiry Committee’, popularly known as the

‘Wanchoo Committee’, report of December, 1971. ‘Chapter 2’ of

the said report, titled ‘Black Money and Tax Evasion’, in

particular paragraphs 2.32 to 2.34 can be gainfully referred to in

order to understand the intent and purpose behind setting up a

settlement mechanism under the
IT Act
:
“Settlement Machinery

      2.32         This, however, does not mean that the door for
      compromise with an errant taxpayer should forever remain
      closed. In the administration of fiscal laws, whose primary
      objective is to raise revenue, there has to be room for
      compromise and settlement. A rigid attitude would not only
      inhibit a one-time tax-evader or an unintending defaulter from
      making a clean breast of his affairs, but would also
      unnecessarily strain the investigational resources of the
      Department in cases of doubtful benefit to revenue, while
      needlessly proliferating litigation and holding up collections. We
      would, therefore, suggest that there should be a provision in the
      law for a settlement with the taxpayer at any stage of the
      proceedings. In the United Kingdom, the 'confession' method has
      been in vogue since 1923. In the U.S. law also, there is a
      provision for compromise with the taxpayer as to his tax
      liabilities. A provision of this type facilitating settlement in
      individual cases will have this advantage over general
      disclosure schemes that misuse thereof will be difficult and the
      disclosure will not normally breed further tax evasion. Each
      individual case can be considered on its merits and full
      disclosures not only of the income but of the modus operandi of
      its buildup can be insisted on, thus sealing off chances of
      continued evasion through similar practices.
14
2.33        To ensure that the settlement is fair, prompt and
     independent, we would suggest that there should be a high-
level machinery for administering the provisions, which would
     also incidentally relieve the field officer of an onerous
     responsibility and the risk of having to face adverse criticism
     which, we are told, has been responsible for the slow rate of
     disposal of disclosure petitions. We would, therefore,
     recommend that settlements may be entrusted to a separate
     body within the Department, to be called the Direct Taxes
     Settlement Tribunal. It will be a permanent body with three
     members. The strength of the Tribunal can be increased later,
     depending on the work-load. To ensure impartial and quick
     decisions, and to encourage officers with integrity and wide
     knowledge and experience to accept assignments on the
     Tribunal, we recommend that its members should be given the
     same status and emoluments as the members of the Central
     Board of Direct Taxes.
Any taxpayer will be entitled to move a petition before the
     Tribunal for settlement of his liability under the direct tax laws.
     We do not think that it is necessary to provide for cases being
     referred to the Tribunal by the Department. However, we wish
     to emphasize that the Tribunal will proceed with the petition
     filed by a taxpayer only if the Department raises no objection to
     its being so entertained. We consider that this will be a salutary
     safeguard, because otherwise the Tribunal might become an
     escape route for tax evaders who have been caught and who
     are likely to be heavily penalised or prosecuted. Once a case is
     admitted for adjudication, the Tribunal will have exclusive
     jurisdiction over it and it will no longer be open to the taxpayer
     to withdraw the petition. The Tribunal will take a decision after
     hearing both the assessee and the Department. The Tribunal
     should be vested with full powers as regards discovery and
     inspection, enforcing the attendance of any person, compelling
     production of books of account or any other documents and
     issuing commissions. It should also have the power to
     investigate cases by itself or, in the alternative, to have
     investigation carried out on any specific point or generally, in
     any case through the Income-tax Department. The terms of the
     award will be set down in writing and it will be open to the
     Tribunal to determine not only the amount of tax, penalty or
     interest but also to fix a date or dates of payment. The quantum
15
of penalty and interest will be in the discretion of the Tribunal.
Similarly, the Tribunal may also in its discretion grant immunity
      from criminal prosecution in suitable cases. The award will be
      binding both on the petitioner and on the Department. The
      application of its decisions on questions of law, will, however,
      be confined to the case under settlement and will not in any
      way interfere with the interpretation of law in general. No
      appeal will lie against the decision of the Tribunal by the
      petitioner or the Department, whether on questions of fact or of
      law.
2.34        The success of this measure will, to a very large
      extent, depend on the confidence which this Tribunal can
      inspire in the minds of the taxpayers as to its fairness and
      impartiality. For this reason, we consider it to be of paramount
      importance that only persons who are known for their integrity
      and high sense of justice and fairness are selected for
      appointment on the Tribunal.”
16. In    furtherance      to   recommendations         of   the    Wanchoo

Committee, an amendment was brought adding
Section 245H
,

specifying the power of the Settlement Commission to grant

immunity from prosecution and penalty. The said provision is

relevant, therefore, reproduced as thus:
“245H. Power of Settlement Commission to grant
      immunity from prosecution and penalty.— (1) The
      Settlement Commission may, if it is satisfied that any person
      who made the application for settlement under
section 245C
has co-operated with the Settlement Commission in the
      proceedings before it and has made a full and true disclosure of
      his income and the manner in which such income has been
      derived, grant to such person, subject to such conditions as it
      may think fit to impose [for the reasons to be recorded in
      writing], immunity from prosecution for any offence under this
      Act or under the
Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860) or under any
      other Central Act for the time being in force [and also (either
16
wholly or in part) from the imposition of any penalty] under this
      Act, with respect to the case covered by the settlement:
[Provided  that no such immunity shall be granted by the
      Settlement Commission in cases where the proceedings for the
      prosecution for any such offence have been instituted before the
      date of receipt of the application under
section 245C
:]

      [Provided further that the Settlement Commission shall not
      grant immunity from prosecution for any offence under the
Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860) or under any Central Act other
      than this
Act and the Wealth-tax Act, 1957
(27 of 1957) to a
      person who makes an application under
section 245C
on or
      after the 1st day of June, 2007.]
17. Bare reading of the above and the recommendations of the

Wanchoo Committee, it is clear that the assessee from whom the

recovery of the unaccounted money has been allegedly reported,

may apply before the Settlement Commission disclosing full and

true income and the manner in which such income was derived.

On such application, the Commission as it thinks fit, may grant

immunity from penalty and prosecution of any offence under the
IT Act
or under the
Indian Penal Code
or under any other Central

Act on such terms and conditions with respect to the subject

matter covered under the settlement. Indeed, the proviso to
Section 245H(1)
is an exception from granting immunity in case

where the complaint has been lodged before the date of receipt of

application for settlement. At the same time, we cannot lose sight

that the prosecution in either situation of
Section 276C(1)
ought
17
to be for wilful attempt to evade or pay tax. On literal

construction of the first proviso, the prosecution initiated before

the date of receipt of the application under
Section 245C
is saved,

and the second proviso restrict the Settlement Commission to

grant immunity from the prosecution as specified therein.
18. The aforesaid provisions do not, in any manner, affect the

basic principles of criminal law that the prosecution has to prove

the case on its own. In the facts, for an offence under
Section

276C(1)
, for which a prosecution was lodged, wilful attempt to

evade tax or penalty, which may be imposable or chargeable,

mens rea of the assessee is required to be proved. In absence,

lodging such prosecution would result into futility. Therefore, the

ancillary question which arises is about the efficacy of the

continuation of the complaint lodged, even though saved under

the first proviso to
Section 245H
, hampering the power of the

Settlement Commission to grant immunity from prosecution.
19. Mr. Preetesh Kapur, learned senior counsel, submits that as

per the order of the Settlement Commission, it is clear that the

assessee has disclosed all the facts, material for computation of

his additional income without any suppression of account,
18
therefore, in exercise of order passed under
Section 245D(4)
,

immunity from levy of penalty was granted. It is not a case

wherein due to the fraud or misrepresentation, the case of the

appellant was reopened as per
Section 245D(6)
within the time as

specified. In such circumstances, there cannot be any mens rea

or wilful attempt to evade tax, which may be brought against the

appellant to prove the allegation as alleged by prosecution.

Learned senior counsel referring to
Section 245-I
of the IT Act

submits, the order of the Settlement Commission shall be

conclusive as to the matters stated therein.
Section 245-I
is

relevant, which reads thus:
“245-I. Order of settlement to be conclusive.—Every
        order of settlement passed under sub-section (4) of
section
        245D
shall be conclusive as to the matters stated therein
        and no matter covered by such order shall, save as
        otherwise provided in this Chapter, be reopened in any
        proceeding under this Act or under any other law for the
        time being in force.”
20. Perusing the backdrop, from the recommendations of

Wanchoo Committee till the date amendment was brought

introducing
Section 245H
in the
IT Act
granting power of

immunity to Settlement Commission, the Revenue was facing the

challenge of minimal prosecution and also for effectively proving
19
the prosecution, what recourse ought to be taken was an issue

before them. Simultaneously, the assessee who in bona-fide

manner had disclosed the excess earning specifying the source

without any suppression, were facing unnecessary prosecution.

Therefore, to streamline the said situation the revenue has issued

guidelines time and again. In the guidelines, it was specified that

when an assessee is making an attempt to evade tax or its

payment or penalty, if established, it is incumbent on the officers

of the revenue to lodge the prosecution. In this regard, circular

dated 24.04.2008 was published. Clause 3.3.1(iii) of the said

circular deals with the offences under
Section 276C(1)
of IT Act.

The relevant clause of the said circular is reproduced as under: -
“(iii) Offences
u/s 276C(1)
: Wilful attempt to evade taxes
           All cases where penalty
u/s 271(1)(C)
exceeding
      Rs.50,000/- is imposed and confirmed by the ITAT (if any
      second appeal has been filed) shall be processed for filing
      prosecution complaint.
The case for prosecution under this section shall be
      processed by the A.O. preferably within 60 days of receipt of the
      ITAT’s order, if any.”


     The intent of the above scheme is indicative of the fact that

the Department shall proceed to file prosecution/complaint only

in those cases wherein penalty exceeding Rs. 50,000/- has been

imposed by ITAT, within 60 days from the date of order of ITAT.
20
21. The Directorate of Income Tax, (PR PP & OL) has also

published      the   Prosecution       Manual,   2009,     prescribing     the

‘procedure for launching prosecution’. In Clause 1.4 of Chapter

III, specifying when the prosecution can be initiated. The said

clause is relevant hence reproduced as under:
“1.4 When can prosecution be initiated?
A case should be processed for launching prosecution
       immediately after the commission of offence comes to the notice
       of the authority concerned. However, if some more evidences
       can be gathered during any proceedings, it would be advisable
       to complete such proceedings to gather all relevant evidences
       before initiating the prosecution. The Apex Court has laid down
       that if penalty for concealment fails then the prosecution
       initiated on same material/basis must also fail (M/s
K.C.
       Builders Ltd Vs CIT
[265 ITR 344]). Therefore, it is advisable to
       initiate prosecution under
section 276C(1)
only after
       confirmation of concealment penalty by the ITAT.
xx    xx     xx   xx”
22. The said guideline was based on a judgment of ‘M/s
K.C.

Builders Ltd. Vs. CIT’9
, wherein this Court laid down that if

penalty for concealment fails, the initiation of the prosecution on

the basis of the same material also fails, therefore, it was advised

that after confirmation of concealment of penalty by ITAT, the

prosecution may be lodged in terms as specified in the above

circular dated 24.04.2008.
9 (2004) 2 SCC 731
21
23. Similarly, on 09.09.2019, the Central Board of Direct Taxes

(in short “CBDT”) in exercise of power under
Section 119
of IT

Act issued clarification qua the criteria to be followed for

launching prosecution in respect of certain categories of offence

under the
IT Act
, including
Section 276C(1)
. The relevant portion

is referred as under –

      “iii. Offences
u/s 276C(1)
: Wilful attempt to evade tax,
      etc.
           Cases where the amount sought to be evaded or tax on
      under-reported income is Rs. 25 Lakhs or below, shall not be
      processed for prosecution except with the previous
      administrative approval of the Collegium of two CCIT/DGIT
      rank officers as mentioned in Para 3.
Further, prosecution under this Section shall be launched
      only after the confirmation of the order imposing penalty by the
      Income Tax Appellate Tribunal.”
24. As such, the departmental circular dated 24.04.2008,

Prosecution    Manual,      2009,     and     CBDT’s      circular       dated

09.09.2019, provide when the prosecution ought to be lodged by

Revenue. The said Circulars have been issued to regulate the

lodging of prosecution in genuine cases and to weed out the

problems of the tax payers, and also to understand when can the

prosecution for
Section 276
ought to be lodged and continued.

The said circular and clarification have been brought after the

statutory scheme of
Section 245H(1)
and the appended proviso.
22
In this situation, it is imperative for us to understand the binding

nature of the departmental circular, Prosecution Manual, 2009,

and CBDT’s clarification.
25. Reflecting on the said issue, in ‘Ranadey Micronutrients

Vs. CCE’10, while dealing with a case concerning interpretation of

circulars providing for classification of micronutrients for the

purpose of imposition of excise duty, this Court held –

        “15.         There can be no doubt whatsoever, in the
        circumstances, that the earlier and later circulars were issued
        by the Board under the provisions of Section 37-B, and the fact
        that they do not so recite does not mean that they do not bind
        Central Excise officers or become advisory in character. There
        can be no doubt whatsoever that after 21-11-1994, excise duty
        could be levied upon micronutrients only under the provisions of
        Heading 31.05 as “other fertilisers”. If the later circular is
        contrary to the terms of the statute, it must be withdrawn. While
        the later circular remains in operation the Revenue is bound by
        it and cannot be allowed to plead that it is not valid.
16.         We reject the submission to the contrary made by
        the learned counsel for the Revenue and in the affidavit by M.K.
        Gupta, working as Director in the Department of Revenue,
        Ministry of Finance. One should have thought that an officer of
        the Ministry of Finance would have greater respect for circulars
        such as these issued by the Board, which also operates under
        the aegis of the Ministry of Finance, for it is the Board which is,
        by statute, entrusted with the task of classifying excisable
        goods uniformly. The whole objective of such circulars is to
        adopt a uniform practice and to inform the trade as to how a
        particular product will be treated for the purposes of excise
        duty. It does not lie in the mouth of the Revenue to repudiate a
        circular issued by the Board on the basis that it is inconsistent
        with a statutory provision. Consistency and discipline are of far


10 (1996) 10 SCC 387
23
greater importance than the winning or losing of court
        proceedings.”
26. Further, in
‘Paper Products Ltd. Vs. CCE’11
, where the

dispute related to classification of products for the purpose of tax,

in the context of circulars issued and in that regard, this Court

observed as thus –

        “4. The question for our consideration in these appeals is :
what is the true nature and effect of the circulars issued by the
        Board in exercise of its power under
Section 37-B
of the Central
        Excise Act, 1944? This question is no more res integra in view of
        the various judgments of this Court. This Court in a catena of
        decisions has held that the circulars issued under Section 37-B
        of the said Act are binding on the Department and the
        Department cannot be permitted to take a stand contrary to the
        instructions issued by the Board. These judgments have also
        held that the position may be different with regard to an
        assessee who can contest the validity or legality of such
        instructions but so far as the Department is concerned, such
        right is not available.”
27. Likewise, in
‘UCO Bank Vs. CIT’12
, this Court while dealing

with the question as to whether there can be interest on the loan

whose recovery is doubtful, and whether such can be included in

the income of the assessee, observed as under –

        “12.
A similar view of CBDT circulars has been taken in
        the case of
K.P. Varghese v. ITO
[(1981) 4 SCC 173 (at p. 188)]
        by a Bench of two Judges consisting of P.N. Bhagwati and E.S.
        Venkataramiah, JJ. The Bench has held that circulars of the
        Central Board of Direct Taxes are legally binding on the
        Revenue and this binding character attaches to the circulars
11 (1999) 7 SCC 84
12 (1999) 4 SCC 599
24
even if they be found not in accordance with the correct
        interpretation of the section and they depart or deviate from
        such construction.
Citing the decision of
Navnit Lal C. Javeri v.
        K.K. Sen
[AIR 1965 SC 1375] this Court observed that circulars
        issued by the Central Board of Direct Taxes under
Section 119
of the Act are binding on all officers and persons employed in
        the execution of the Act even if they deviate from the provisions
        of the Act.
In
Keshavji Ravji and Co. v. CIT
[(1990) 2 SCC 231] a
        Bench of three Judges of this Court has also taken the view that
        circulars beneficial to the assessee which tone down the rigour
        of the law and are issued in exercise of the statutory powers
        under
Section 119
are binding on the authorities in the
        administration of the Act. The benefit of such circulars is
        admissible to the assessee even though the circulars might have
        departed from the strict tenor of the statutory provision and
        mitigated the rigour of the law. This Court, however, clarified
        that the Board cannot pre-empt a judicial interpretation of the
        scope and ambit of a provision of the Act. Also a circular cannot
        impose on the taxpayer a burden higher than what the Act
        itself, on a true interpretation, envisages. The task of
        interpretation of the laws is the exclusive domain of the courts.
        However, the Board has the statutory power under
Section 119
to tone down the rigour of the law for the benefit of the assessee
        by issuing circulars to ensure a proper administration of the
        fiscal statute and such circulars would be binding on the
        authorities administering the Act.”
28. The Constitution Bench in the case of
‘Commissioner of

Central Excise, Bolpur Vs. Ratan Melting & Wite Industries,13
on a reference made by three Judge Bench, addressing the

conflict of difference of interpretation of a circular by the Central

Board of Excise and Customs, and by this Court coupled with

binding nature of the same, observed as follows –



13 (2008) 13 SCC 1
25
“7. Circulars and instructions issued by the Board are no
        doubt binding in law on the authorities under the respective
        statutes, but when the Supreme Court or the High Court
        declares the law on the question arising for consideration, it
        would not be appropriate for the court to direct that the circular
        should be given effect to and not the view expressed in a
        decision of this Court or the High Court. So far as the
        clarifications/circulars issued by the Central Government and
        of the State Government are concerned they represent merely
        their understanding of the statutory provisions. They are not
        binding upon the court. It is for the court to declare what the
        particular provision of statute says and it is not for the
        executive. Looked at from another angle, a circular which is
        contrary to the statutory provisions has really no existence in
        law.”
29. Similarly,         in
‘J.K.   Lakshmi        Cement       Limited      Vs.

Commercial Tax Officer, Pali’14
, this Court while dealing with a

case where the assessee was a cement company seeking

advantage of a 1986 notification granting partial tax exemption

and a 2000 notification offering a lower tax rate of 6% but also

explicitly stating that any dealer using its benefit would be

ineligible for the 1986 exemption, harmoniously construed both

and observed that circulars are binding on tax authorities. The

Court observed as follows –

        “31.        Circulars issued under tax enactments can tone
        down the rigour of law, for an authority which wields power for
        its own advantage is given right to forego advantage when
        required and considered necessary. This power to issue
        circulars is for just, proper and efficient management of the
        work and in public interest. It is a beneficial power for proper

14 (2016) 16 SCC 213
26
administration of fiscal law, so that undue hardship may not be
        caused. Circulars are binding on the authorities administering
        the enactment but cannot alter the provision of the enactment,
        etc. to the detriment of the assessee. Needless to emphasize
        that a circular should not be adverse and cause prejudice to the
        assessee.
(See
UCO Bank v. CIT [UCO Bank
v. CIT, (1999) 4
        SCC 599])”
30.
In       the      recent    pronouncement        of    this     Court    in
‘Commissioner of Central Excise and Service Tax, Rohtak

Vs. Merino Panel Product Limited’15
, in an appeal against order

passed by CESTAT which had set-aside the show-cause notice

issued by the Revenue, placing reliance on the judgements in

Ranadey        (supra)    and
Paper    Products        Ltd.
(supra)   and

considering the binding nature of circulars, in paragraph 22

observed as follows:
“22.         Thus, the starting point of our analysis on this
        question is that the CBEC Circular of 1-7-2002 is binding on the
        Revenue. If the show-cause notice issued by the Revenue is
        found to be contrary to the Circular, it would prima facie result
        in abrogation of the uniformity and consistency which is
        strongly emphasised upon in
Ranadey Micronutrients [Ranadey
        Micronutrients v. CCE
, (1996) 10 SCC 387] . It goes without
        saying that the Revenue's stance against its own circular can
        potentially lead to a chaotic situation where, with one hand, the
        Revenue would lay down instructions on how to interpret the
        relevant statutes and rules, and with the other hand, it would
        promptly     disobey those very          directions.
Maintaining
        predictability in taxation law is of utmost importance and, for
        this reason, the Court should not accept an argument by the

15 (2023) 2 SCC 597
27
Revenue that waters down its own Circular as this would fall
      squarely within the contours of the prohibition outlined in
Paper
      Products [Paper Products Ltd. v. CCE
, (1999) 7 SCC 84].”
31. From the above precedents, this Court unambiguously held

that that the circulars issued by the Revenue are binding on the

authorities, and can tone down the rigour of the statutory

provision. Therefore, it can be concluded that the circulars as

discussed above are binding on the authorities who are

administering the provisions of the
IT Act
.
32. After perusal of the provisions of the
IT Act
, various

circulars issued by the department and also the judgments

referred hereinabove, it can be safely culled out that if an

assessee has made suppression of income without disclosing the

manner in which the excess amount was earned and concealed

the account making wilful attempt to evade the tax which may be

imposable and chargeable or payable, he/she is required to be

prosecuted. Therefore, the recourse to lodge prosecution was

made permissible subject to the department’s circular dated

24.04.2008 which provided for confirmation by ITAT in case the

penalty   imposed     under
Section    276C(1)
is   exceeding     Rs.

50,000/-. It is relevant here to note that the said circular was in
28
vogue on the date of the grant of sanction by PDIT to DDIT for

lodging the prosecution against the appellant. The said circular

has been reaffirmed by the Prosecution Manual, 2009 and the

clarification issued by the CBDT in 2019. As such, the circulars

discussed above, were binding on the authorities and required to

be adhered to while lodging the prosecution by the Revenue.
33. Admittedly, in the present case, the complaint was filed by

DDIT after sanction of PDIT before the Additional Chief

Metropolitan   Magistrate    (E.O.II),   Egmore,   Chennai,    on

11.08.2018. Application under
Section 245(C)
was filed by the

appellant before the Settlement Commission later. On the date of

lodging the prosecution, the finding of concealment of income or

imposition of the penalty of more than Rs. 50,000/- has not been

recorded by the ITAT. Nothing has been brought on record to

show that any wilful attempt to evade the payment of tax by

assessee was made. No explanation has been put forth by

Revenue to demonstrate as to why PDIT or DDIT did not comply

the procedure while lodging prosecution in this case. Therefore,

in our view, the act of the authority in continuing prosecution is

in blatant disregard to their own binding circular dated

24.04.2008 and in defiance to the guidelines of the Department.
29
34. In contradistinction, the Settlement Commission passed an

order under
Section 245D(4)
on 26.11.2019. The said order is

relevant, therefore, reproduced as thus:
“GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
                    INCOME TAX SETTLEMENT COMMISSION
                                     ADDITIONAL BENCH
             640, ANNA SALAI, NANDANAM, CHENNAI-600 035.
******
         PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE ADDITIONAL BENCH OF THE
              INCOME TAX SETTLEMENT COMMISSION, CHENNAI
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-
Settlement Application No. :                      TN/CN54/2018-19/53-IT
          Date of filing of the application                  :        07.12.2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-
xx      xx       xx        xx
      PRAYER:
      Immunity from penalty and prosecution
6.1 The applicant has prayed for grant of immunity from levy
      of penalty and prosecution. It could be seen that proceedings
      u/s 276C(1) of the
Income Tax Act, 1961
are pending before the
      Hon’ble High Court of Madras. In the circumstances, the
      applicant cannot be granted immunity waiver from prosecution,
      for the assessment years which are settled in this order.
6.2 However, the applicant has co-operated during the
      settlement proceedings. The applicant has disclosed all the
      facts, material to the computation of his additional income.
Thus, the applicant has fully satisfied the provisions of
section
      245H
. The overall additional income is not on account of any
      suppression of any material facts in the application. The
      additional income offered does not disclose any variance from
      the manner in which the additional income had been earned.
      Hence, the applicant is entitled to immunity from penalties
      under the
Income-tax Act
for the assessment years which are
      settled in this order.
30
6.3 Immunity granted to the applicant by this order may be
      withdrawn, if he fails to pay including interest within the time
      and the manner as specified in this order or fails to comply with
      other conditions, if any, subject to which the immunity is
      granted and, thereupon, the provisions of the
Income-tax Act
shall apply as if such immunity had not been granted.

      6.4 Immunity granted to the applicant, may at any time be
      withdrawn, if the Commission is satisfied that the applicant
      had, in the course of settlement proceedings, concealed any
      particulars, material to the settlement or had given false
      evidence and, thereupon, the applicant may be tried for the
      offence with respect to which the immunity was granted or for
      any other offence of which the applicant appear to have been
      guilty in connection with the settlement, and the applicant shall
      become liable to the imposition of any penalty and/or
      prosecution under the Act, to which the applicant would have
      been liable had not such immunity been granted.
7.    The order shall be void
u/s 245D(6)
if it is subsequently
      found that it has been obtained by fraud or misrepresentation
      of facts.
Sd-                                          Sd-
       (ASHOK KUMAR SINHA)                  (T.P. KRISHNAKUMAR)
            MEMBER                                 VICE CHAIRMAN

                                                     Date: 26.11.2019
                           xx    xx    xx     xx”
35. Perusal of the said order makes it clear that in the

settlement proceedings, assessee has disclosed all the facts

material to the computation of his additional income and fully

satisfied the provisions of
Section 245H
. The Commission

recorded a finding that overall additional income is not on

account of any suppression of any material facts and it does not
31
disclose any variance from the manner in which the said income

had been earned. As such the immunity from penalty under
IT

Act
was granted in exercise of powers under
Section 245H
. From

perusal of
Section 245-I
, it is clear that every order of settlement

shall be conclusive as to the matters stated therein and no matter

covered by such order shall, save as otherwise provided, be

reopened in any proceeding under the Act or under any other law

for the time being in force.
36. In view of the foregoing discussions in conclusion we can

safely hold that the prosecution lodged with the help of proviso to

sub-section (1) to
Section 245H
was in defiance to the circular

dated 24.04.2008, which was in vogue. It was the duty of the

PDIT and DDIT to look into the facts that in absence of any

findings of imposition of penalty due to concealment of fact, the

said prosecution cannot be proved against the assessee. It seems,

even after passing the order by the Settlement Commission on

26.11.2019, it was brought to the notice of the High Court, but

the authorities were persistent to pursue the prosecution without

looking into the procedural lapses on their part. Such an act

cannot be construed in right perspective and the Revenue have

acted in blatant disregard to binding statutory instructions. Such
32
willful non-compliance of their own directives reflects a serious

lapse, and undermines the principles of fairness, consistency,

and accountability, which in any manner cannot be treated to be

justified or lawful.
37. It must also be noted that, in terms of
Section 245-I
, the

findings of the Settlement Commission are conclusive with

respect to the matters stated therein. Once such an order was

passed, it was incumbent upon the authorities to inform the High

Court that continuation of the prosecution would amount to an

abuse of the process of law, in particular when the Settlement

Commission did not record any finding of wilful evasion of tax by

the appellant. Even otherwise, it was the duty of the High Court

to examine the facts of the case in their right context and assess

whether, in light of the above circumstances, the continuation of

the   prosecution      would   serve   any   meaningful   purpose   in

establishing the alleged guilt. Upon a holistic consideration of the

matter, we are of the view that the conduct of the authorities

lacks fairness and reasonableness, and the High Court’s

approach appears to be entirely misdirected, having failed to

appreciate the factual and legal position in right earnest.
33
38. In view of the foregoing discussions, we are constrained to

allow these appeals setting aside the order impugned passed by

the High Court. It is directed that prosecution lodged by the

Revenue against the appellant shall stand quashed. In the facts

and circumstances of the case as discussed hereinabove, we are

inclined to impose costs against the Revenue which is quantified

at   Rs.   2,00,000/-    payable     to   the      appellant.   Pending

application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
..………….……………….J.

                                          (J.K. MAHESHWARI)




                                          ..………….……………….J.
                                            (VIJAY BISHNOI)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 28th, 2025.
34