[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
A. Karunanithi vs The State Represented By Inspector Of ... on 12 August, 2025
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
2025 INSC 967                                                             REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.             OF 2025
                                (arising out of S.L.P. (Crl.) No. 9964 OF 2019


                         A. KARUNANITHI                                 …APPELLANT(S)

                                                    VERSUS

                         THE STATE REPRESENTED BY
                         INSPECTOR OF POLICE                           …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                       WITH

                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.             OF 2025
                                (arising out of S.L.P. (Crl.) No. 7442 OF 2019)

                         P. KARUNANITHI                                 …APPELLANT(S)

                                                    VERSUS

                         THE STATE REPRESENTED BY
                         INSPECTOR OF POLICE                           …RESPONDENT(S)


                                               JUDGMENT
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.   Leave granted in both the special leave petitions.
2.   Heard learned counsel for the parties.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2025.08.12
17:44:20 IST
Reason:
1
3.       The Special Court under the Prevention of Corruption Act,

                19881 in Special Case No. 2 of 2011 vide judgment and

                order dated 23.11.2011 convicted accused No. 1 and

                accused No. 2, namely, A. Karunanithi and P. Karunanithi

                respectively under Section 13 and Section 7 of the Act.

                A-1 was awarded three years RI with fine of Rs. 10,000/-

                under Section 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the Act

                and 2 years RI with fine of Rs. 5,000/- under Section 7 of

                the Act and in the event of non-payment of fine with SI of

                3 months each. Similarly, A-2 was awarded sentence of

                1.5 years of RI with fine of Rs. 2,000/- under Section

                13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the Act and 1 year RI

                with fine of Rs. 2,000/- under Section 7 of the Act and in

                the event of default in payment of fine with SI of 3 months

                each.
4.       The aforesaid judgment and order of conviction and

                sentence was challenged by both the accused persons

                independently by separate appeals before the High Court.

                Both the appeals were decided by the High Court by a

                common judgment and order dated 05.12.2018 and were
1
Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’
2
dismissed. Thus, the conviction and sentence awarded by

     the trial court was upheld.
5.   The above common judgment and order passed by the

     High Court is under challenge in the present appeals.
6.   A-1 was serving as Village Administrative Officer at

     Selvalur and A-2 was working as a Village Assistant in the

     same office. The complainant, V. Rengasamy (PW-2) had

     applied to the Tehsildar for a Community Certificate for the

     purposes of joining Government service. His application

     was returned with an endorsement to approach A-1 for a

     report. When the complainant approached A-1 on

     09.11.2004, he allegedly demanded Rs. 500/- as a bribe

     for processing the papers. The complainant approached A-

     1 again on 27.11.2004 whereupon he reiterated his

     demand as aforesaid.
7.   Subsequently, the complainant lodged a complaint with

     the Inspector of Police, Vigilance and Anti-Corruption

     Corruption Department with regard to demand of Rs.

     500/- as a bribe by A-1. A trap was arranged on

     03.12.2004 where currency notes were treated with

     phenolphthalein powder and given to the complainant.

     After the trap was laid, the complainant approached A-1
3
again, whereupon he reiterated his demand for Rs. 500/-
as bribe and instructed A-2 to collect the money. The

     complainant handed the marked currency notes to A-2

     who counted the same and kept it, as directed by A-1. On

     the signal of the complainant, Police entered, seized the

     currency notes and conducted the phenolphthalein test on

     the hands of A-2 which turned pink, confirming contact

     with the pre-treated currency notes. The seized currency

     notes were sent for chemical analysis which confirmed that

     they contained phenolphthalein.
8.   It was in this background, the criminal machinery was set

     into motion and an FIR Crime No. 8 of 2004 was registered

     under the Act. Upon investigation, a chargesheet was

     submitted on 29.06.2006 under Section 7 and Section

     13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the Act citing 11

     witnesses. Thereafter, the trial commenced and both the

     accused were found guilty and sentenced, which judgment

     and order was affirmed by the High Court.
9.   Shri S. Nagamuthu, learned senior counsel for the

     appellants argued for the reduction of sentence to A-1 and

     for setting aside conviction of A-2. He submitted that the

     High Court failed to consider that the age of A-1 is 68 years
4
and that he was involved in a case pertaining to a petty

    amount of Rs.500/- as bribe and that too in the year 2004.

    Therefore, keeping in mind the time elapsed and the small

    amount of the bribe, the sentence imposed upon him is

    excessive and it could be reduced to the statutory

    minimum sentence of one year.
10. In context with A-2, he submitted that his conviction is

    illegal in the absence of evidence that there was demand of

    illegal gratification by him or that he was present when

    A-1 originally demanded the bribe. Therefore, unless there

    is demand and receipt of the bribe, he cannot be convicted.
11. A further argument was raised by him that A-2 cannot be

    convicted for merely accepting the money as there was no

    specific charge of abetment or allegation that A-1 was the

    abettor of the crime.
12. In defence, counsel for the State had submitted that the

    case stands duly proved against A-1 by the oral evidence

    of   PW-1   (Revenue    Divisional   Officer)   and   PW-2

    (complainant). The Courts have repeatedly emphasised

    that the punishment under the Act ought to be deterrent

    in order to maintain public trust and prevent corruption.
5
Therefore, no leniency should be shown to A-1 by reducing

               the punishment.
13. It has also been submitted that offence has also been

               proved against A-2 as he had accepted the illegal

               gratification on behalf of the A-1. He had knowingly

               accepted the money on behalf of A-1. He was aware that it

               was a bribe money. He had a fair trial, therefore, the

               absence of a formal charge of abetment would not vitiate

               his conviction.
14. A Constitution Bench of this Court in
Neeraj Datta vs

               State (NCT of Delhi
)2 has held that for recording a

               conviction under Section 7 and Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii)

               of the Act, the prosecution has to prove the demand and

               acceptance of illegal gratification either by direct evidence

               which can be in the nature of oral evidence or

               documentary evidence or circumstantial evidence. In other

               words, to convict a person under the aforesaid provision

               demand and acceptance of illegal gratification is a sine qua

               non.
2
(2023) 4 SCC 731
6
15. We first take up the case of A-2. It is no one’s case that A-
2 ever demanded any illegal gratification. He undoubtedly

     accepted the money on the directions of A-1 and kept the

     same with him. So, there was no demand of illegal

     gratification on his part. The demand made by A-1 cannot

     be attributed to A-2 as no evidence was adduced which

     could establish that A-2 was a habitual offender working

     in aid with A-1 or was facilitating A-1 in demanding and

     receiving illegal gratification. Accordingly, in the absence

     of any allegation or evidence that A-2 demanded bribe from

     the complainant or he was acting in connivence with A-1,

     he cannot be prosecuted for the commission of the crime

     of demanding and receiving illegal gratification.
16. Admittedly, A-2 was not charged with the abetment of the

     aforesaid crime. He had accepted the money on the

     direction of A-1 only. He could have received the money

     innocently on the direction of A-1 or he may have received

     it knowingly. Both the views are possible. However, as no

     evidence was adduced to prove that both of them have

     connived to demand and accept the bribe, even if a fair trial

     may have been given to the A-2, it cannot be said with any

     certainty that he was an accomplice to the crime.
7
Accordingly, in the absence of charge of abetment and the

               proof of connivance between A-1 and A-2, we are of the

               opinion that A-2 could not have been convicted.
17.
In
Mahendra Singh Chotelal Bhargad vs. State of

               Maharashtra
& ors.3, this Court had an occasion to deal

               with the case where the bribe was demanded by one

               person and was accepted and recovered from a third

               person. The conviction of the said third person was set

               aside, holding that accepting money on behalf of another

               person may certainly constitute an abetment of an offence,

               but in the absence of a charge of abetment, the person

               accepting the bribe is not liable to be convicted.

               Accordingly, the Trial Court as well as High Court

               manifestly erred in convicting him for an offence under

               Section 7 and 13 of the Act.
18. Now, coming to the conviction of A-1. The evidence on

               record amply proves that he demanded bribe from the

               complainant not only once but twice, and thereafter when

               the trap was laid. The bribe on his behalf was accepted by

               A-2. The evidence proves that A-2 accepted the money on
3
(1998) 2 SCC 357
8
the dictates of A-1. Therefore, both the ingredients of

    demand and receipt stand duly proved against A-1. The

    evidence in this regard of PW-1 and PW-2, despite some

    minor contradictions stand unshaken. Therefore, in our

    opinion, his conviction as held by the Trial Court and

    affirmed by the High Court is not liable to be interfered

    with.
19. The submission that the imposition of the punishment of

    three years RI and two years RI respectively for the offences

    under Section 13(1) read with Section 13(2) and under

    Section 7 of the Act upon A-1 is harsh and ought to be

    reduced to the minimum of one year on the basis of the

    age of the A-1 and on account of the petty amount of Rs.

    500/- involved in the bribe.
20. There is no dispute to the fact that the offence was

    allegedly committed in the year 2004 and it involved a

    small amount of Rs. 500/-. A-1 had suffered on account of

    the pendency of the trial and appeal for all these years. The

    long time that has elapsed during the trial and the appeals

    coupled with the fact that the amount involved is small, it

    appears just and proper to award the minimum sentence

    prescribed under the Act.
9
21.   The argument that the Court cannot show compassion to

      reduce the sentence by exercising powers under
Article

      142
of the Constitution is misconceived as the Court is not

      showing leniency by overriding or going beyond the

      statutory provisions. The reduction of sentence is within

      the scope of the statute which provides for a minimum

      sentence of one year.
22. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we

      confirm the conviction of A-1 but reduce his sentence from

      three and two years respectively to the minimum of one

      year for both the offences as prescribed under the Act. The

      judgment and order of the High Court as regards A-1

      stands modified accordingly and his appeal is allowed in

      part.
23. The judgment and order of the Trial Court and the High

      Court insofar they convict A-2 are set aside. His appeal

      stands allowed.
.……………………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)


                                   .……………………………….. J.
(PRASANNA B. VARALE)
 NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 12, 2025
10