[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Motilal Agarwala vs State Of West Bengal on 28 August, 2025
1

                                                                       REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 1062
                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            CIVIL APPEAL No.4480 OF 2016


     M/S. MOTILAL AGARWALA                                          … APPELLANT

                                         Versus


     STATE OF WEST BENGAL     & ANR.                              … RESPONDENTS
O   R   D   E   R
1.     This appeal arises from the judgment and order passed by the

     High    Court   at   Calcutta   (Civil      Appellate   Jurisdiction),   dated

     01.03.2016, in F.M.A. No. 4576/2015, by which the order passed by

     the District Court in Miscellaneous Case No.12/2014, came to be set

     aside thereby holding that the Section 34 application, preferred by

     the State against the arbitral award, was time-barred.
2. We need not delve much into the facts of this litigation as we

     are in a position to affirm the impugned judgment and order passed

     by the High Court on a neat question of law.
3. Here is a case in which an arbitral award came to be passed in

     favour of the appellant herein dated 12.11.2013. The State having

     suffered an award challenged the same invoking
Section 34
of the

     Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short, `the Act 1996’).

     The period of limitation prescribed for the purpose of preferring
Section 34
application is 90 days.           Going by the date of the award

     and the receipt of the xerox copy of the award by the authorised

     representative of the State, the period of limitation could be said
2
to have expired on 12.02.2014.            It is the case of the State that

till 12.02.2014, it had no idea at all about the passing of the

arbitral award.         It is only when the appellant herein initiated

execution proceedings that they came to know about the same.                        In

such        circumstances,   they    immediately        preferred
Section     34
application      on   20.03.2014.   On   03.04.2014,     the   State    addressed    a

letter to the learned Arbitrator to provide for a certified copy of

the arbitral award dated 12.11.2013.             The letter upon which reliance

has been placed by the State reads thus:
“GOVERNMENT OF WEST BENGAL
                         IRRIGATION & WATERWAYS DIRECTORATE
                         OFFICE OF THE EXECUTIVE ENGINEER
                            TEESTA CANAL DIVISION NO.1
                            ISLAMPUR, UTTAR DINAJPUR

       From
              The Executive Engineer
              Teesta Canal Division No.1
              Teesta Pally, Islampur
              Uttar Dinajpur

       To
              Justice Kalyanmoy Ganguli
              High Court (Retd.)
              51/4, Biren Roy Road (West)
              Kolkata – 700008

       Sub: Prayer     for certified      copy    of   the   arbitral    award
       passed on        12/11/2013

       Ref. A.P. No. - 200 of 2002 in the matter of Arbitration
       between M/s Motilal Agrawal – vs – The State of West
       Bengal & Others

       Sir,

       You are requested to provide a certified copy of the
       arbitral award passed by your kind self on 12/11/2013 as
       sole arbitrator in the above cited   reference   at   the
       earliest possible. It is urgently required for filing the
       same before the Ld. District Judge, District Court, Uttar
       Dinajpur before 29.04.2014 which is the next date fixed
3
for filing the certified copy of Arbitration award in the
     matter of Misc.12/2014 (Arbitration) –
State of West
     Bengal Vs. M/S Motilal Agarwal
.
In this context, I would like to inform you that
     certified copy of the said award was not delivered to the
     undersigned or the department from your end on 12/11/2013.
     Charges for certified copy, if any, will be paid to you.
Thanking you,

                                                 Yours sincerely,


                                               (NRAJ KUMAR SINGH)
                                               Executive Engineer
                                          Teesta Canal Division No.1
                                         Islampur,   Uttar   Dinajpur”
4. The
Section 34
application being time-barred, according to the

District Court, was not entertained and in such circumstances, the

Miscellaneous Case No.12/2014 came to be dismissed.
5.   The   State   being   dissatisfied   with   the   order   passed   by   the

District Court dismissing the application being Miscellaneous Case

No.12/2014 went before the High Court by way of F.M.A. No.4576/2015.

The High Court, by its impugned judgment and order, allowed the FMA,

preferred by the State, and thereby set aside the order passed by

the District Court
,
referred to above
. The High Court while allowing

the FMA, preferred by the State, observed as under:
“In our view, limitation under
Section 34(3)
would start running from the date on which the party
           applying for setting aside of the arbitral award
           received a signed copy of the award from the Arbitral
           Tribunal. Such copy need not necessarily be signed in
           original by the Arbitrator/majority of the Arbitrators.
           An authentic photo copy along with signatures would
           suffice. This issue is covered by a judgment dated 28th
           August, 2015 of this Bench in APOT 337 of 2015 (National
           Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India
           Ltd. vs. M/s R. Piyarelal Import & Export Ltd.).
The award made over by the learned Arbitrator to
           Sri Pradip Saha, Assistant Engineer was a signed copy.
4
However, the question is whether the period of
limitation for making an application under
Section 34
of
the 1996 Act, would start running from the date on which
the signed copy was received by Mr. Pradip Saha,
Assistant Engineer.
In
State of Maharashtra Vs. ARK Builders
reported
in (2011) 4 SCC 616, cited by Mr. Sen, the issue was,
whether the period of limitation for making an
application under
Section 34
of the 1996 Act, for
setting aside an arbitral award, was to be reckoned from
the date on which a copy of the award was received by
the applicant by any means or source, or whether it was
to start running from the date a signed copy of the
award was delivered to the applicant by the Arbitrator.
The Supreme Court held that the period of
limitation prescribed under
Section 34(3)
of the 1996
Act, could only commence from the date on which the
award was received by the applicant in the manner
prescribed by law and/or in other words, in the manner
for service of the award prescribed in
Section 31(5)
of
the 1996 Act.
In
ARK Builders
(supra) the Arbitrators had not
supplied a copy of the award to the appellants. The
award holder had, however, forwarded a photocopy of the
award to the appellant and claimed payment in terms of
the award. The Supreme Court held that limitation would
run from the time the award duly signed, was received by
the appellant, from the Arbitrator.
In
ARK Builders
(supra) the Supreme Court did not
consider the question of whether the copies served by
the Arbitrators to the parties concerned, would all have
to actually and separately be signed by the Arbitrators
themselves. However, the Supreme Court clearly held that
limitation would start running from the date on which a
copy of the award was received by the applicant from the
Arbitral Tribunal.
In
Benarsi Krishna Committee & Ors. Vs. Karmyogi
Shelters Private Limited
reported in (2012) 9 SCC 496
the Supreme Court held that the expression 'party' as
defined in
Section 2(i)(h)
of the 1996 Act clearly
indicates a person who is a party to an arbitration
agreement. The said definition is not clarified in any
way so as to include the agent of the party to such
agreement. Any reference, therefore, made in
Section
31(5)
and
Section 34(2)
of the 1996 Act could only mean
the party himself and not his or her agent or advocate
empowered to act on the basis of a vakalatnama. In the
aforesaid case, the award had been served on the
5
advocate.
In this case, Sri Pradip Saha, Assistant Engineer
         was not a party to the arbitration. The State of West
         Bengal, represented through the Secretary, Irrigation
         and Waterways Department and the Executive Engineer were
         parties. Copies of the award should have been served on
         the Secretary, Irrigation and Waterways Department, and
         the Executive Engineer.
The award not having been served on the
         Secretary, Irrigation and Waterways Department, or the
         Executive Engineer, it cannot be said that limitation
         had started running. The application under
Section 34(2)
for setting aside of the arbitral award cannot be held
         to have been barred by limitation.
The appeal is therefore, allowed.
The order under appeal is set aside. The learned
         Court is directed to hear and dispose of the application
         under
Section 34
of the 1996 Act on merits, at the
         earliest preferably within 6 months from the date of
         communication of this order.”
6. Thus, it appears on a plain reading of the impugned order passed

by the High Court that what weighed with the High Court was the fact

that   the award        was not     served on    the Secretary,        Irrigation and

Waterways Department or the Executive Engineer. According to the

High   Court,     it    is   only   the   Secretary,   Irrigation      and   Waterways

Department      or     the   Executive    Engineer,    who     could   be    termed   as

“party”,     as      defined   in
Section     2(1)(h)
of    the    Act   1996.    An

authorised representative of the State, who might have participated

in the proceedings before the Arbitrator and who might have also

received a xerox copy of the award cannot be said to be falling

within the expression “party”.
7. Mr. Ajit Kumar Sinha, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for

the appellant would vehemently submit that the High Court committed

an error in passing the impugned order. The principal argument of

the learned Senior Counsel is that the authorised representative,
6
who actually participated in the arbitral proceedings and was in

complete knowledge of every fact of the proceedings, had collected

the xerox copy of the award duly signed by the Arbitrator and in

such      circumstances,       it   could      be    said    that     the   State     had    the

knowledge of passing of such award on 12.11.2013.                             He would argue

that this Court may take the view that the authorised representative

in full knowledge of the entire litigation would fall within the

expression “party”, as defined under the Act 1996.
8. In such circumstances
,
referred to above
, the learned Senior

Counsel prayed that there being merit in his appeal, the same may be

allowed     and the
Section 34
application be        declared to          be time-

barred.
9.   On    the    other    hand,    Ms.    Madhumita        Bhattacharjee,      the    learned

counsel appearing for the State, would submit that no error, not to

speak of any error in law, could be said to have been committed by

the High Court in passing the impugned order.                        She fairly submitted

that      the    State    is   unable     to   run   away     from    the     fact    that   the

authorised        representative        had    collected      the     xerox    copy    of    the

arbitral award, duly signed by the Arbitrator, on 12.11.2013 but

unfortunately the authorised representative never brought it to the

notice of the State that such award had been passed.                            According to

her, it is only when the execution proceedings were initiated by the

award-holder, i.e., the appellant herein and a notice was issued to

the State that for the first time, the State came to learn about the

passing     of such       award. Having        learnt about          the passing       of such

award, immediately on 20.03.2014,
Section 34
application was filed.

Since there was delay, an application was filed before the District
7
Court.     According to her, the District Court was in error in taking

the view that the
Section 34
application was time-barred.
10. In the last, she submitted that the authorised representative of

the State would not fall within the ambit of “party”, as defined

under the Act 1996.
11.   In such circumstances
,
referred to above
, she prayed that there

being no merit in this appeal, the same may be dismissed.

ANALYSIS
12.   Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and

having gone through the materials on record, the only question that

falls    for   our   consideration     is    whether   the     delivery    of    the

true/xerox copy of the Arbitral Award duly signed by the Arbitrator

to an authorised representative of the State on 12.11.2013 would

constitute delivery upon the respondent herein in accordance with
Section 31(5)
of the Act 1996?
13.   The limitation period under the Act 1996 for the
Section 34
application    is    three   months   from   the   date   of   “receipt”    of    an

Arbitral Award or from the date on which request under
Section 33
of

the Act is disposed.
14. The proviso to sub-section (3) gives an additional 30 days to a

party provided it can satisfy the Court that it was prevented in

filing on time for sufficient reasons. Sub-section (1) and Sub-

section (3) of
Section 34
of the Act 1996 are reproduced below:
“34. Application for setting aside arbitral award- (1)
         Recourse to a Court against an arbitral award may be made
         only by an application for setting aside such award in
         accordance with subsection (2) and sub-section (3)
         ……..
(3) An application for setting aside may not be made
8
after three months have elapsed from the date on which
         the party making that application had received the
         arbitral award or, if a request had been made under
section 33
, from the date on which that request had been
         disposed of by the arbitral tribunal:
Provided that if the Court is satisfied that the
         applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making
         the application within the said period of three months it
         may entertain the application within a further period of
         thirty days, but not thereafter.”
                                               (emphasis supplied)
15.
Section 31(1)
and (5) of the Act 1996 respectively read as

under:
“31. Form and contents of arbitral award.—(1) An arbitral
         award shall be made in writing and shall be signed by the
         members of the arbitral tribunal.
xxx                  xxx                  xxx

         (5) After the arbitral award is made, a signed copy shall
         be delivered to each party.”
16.    Thus,
Section   31
of   the     Act   1996    sets   forth    the    form    and

content of an Arbitral Award. Sub-section (1) of
Section 31
states

that    an     arbitral   Award     shall    be   drawn    out    in     the    manner    as

prescribed by the Section and is to be signed by all members of the

Arbitral Tribunal.
17.    Sub-section (5) of
Section 31
of the Act 1996 provides that

once an Award is made, a signed copy shall be delivered to each

‘party’.
18. A “party” is defined by Clause (h) of sub-section (1) of
Section

2
of the Act 1996 as a party to an Arbitration Agreement.
19. The analysis of the provisions above shows that an Application

for setting aside an Arbitral Award may be made by such party within

three months from the date of its receipt unless the proviso is
9
applicable and that limitation under Sub-section (3) of
Section 34
of the Act 1996 commences on the date when the party has received

the Arbitral Award.
20. The facts are not in dispute.              At the cost of repetition, we

state that the authorised representative, in fact, had collected a

xerox copy of the award on 12.11.2013 and that too, duly signed by

the   Arbitrator.      But     the   fact      remains    that    the    authorised

representative   in this       case would      not fall    within the     ambit of

“party” as defined by Clause (h) of Sub-Section (1) of
Section 2
of

the   Act 1996   to an       arbitration agreement.        The    application for

setting aside an arbitral award in accordance with the provisions of

the Act 1996 has to be preferred by such party within three months

from the date of its receipt unless the proviso is applicable and

that limitation, under Sub-
section 3
of
Section 34
of the Act 1996

commences from the date when the party has received the arbitral

award.
21.   What   exactly     constitutes       a   “party”,    in    the    context   of

Government, has been interpreted by this Court in
Union of India vs.

Tecco Trichy Engineers & Contractors
, reported in                (2005) 4 SCC 239.

In
the said decision
, this Court held that in order to constitute an

effective service, a copy of an award, where such party is the

Ministry of a particular Department, is to be delivered to a person

who has the knowledge and is the best person to understand and

appreciate an award and more particularly, to take decision for its

challenge. We are of the view that the authorised representative of

the State could not have taken the final decision to challenge the

award.   It is only the Secretary of the concerned Department or the
10
Executive Engineer, who could be said to be the competent authority

to take a decision as to whether the award could be challenged or

not.
22.    As held by this Court, the delivery of an arbitral award under

sub-section (5) of
Section 31
is not a matter of mere formality.

It is a matter of substance.               The delivery by the Arbitral Tribunal

and    receipt   by    the   party         sets    in    motion       several    periods     of

limitation such as an application for correction and interpretation

of an award within 30 days under
Section 33(1)
, an application for

making an additional award under
Section 33(4)
and an application

for setting aside an award under
Section 34(3)
and so on.                                   The

delivery of the copy of the award has the effect of conferring

certain    rights     on   the   party       bringing       to   an    end   the    right   to

exercise    those     rights     on    expiry       of    the    prescribed        period   of

limitation which would be calculated from that date, the delivery

of the copy of the award by the Tribunal the receipt thereof by

each    party    constitutes          an    important       stage       in   the    arbitral

proceedings.
23.    This Court has held that the award should be received in the

context of huge organisations by the person who has knowledge of

the proceedings and who would be the best person to understand and

appreciate the arbitral award as also to take a decision in the

matter of moving appropriate applications.
In this context, the

following    paragraphs      from
Tecco       Trichy    Engineers       &   Contractors
(supra) are relevant and repays close study:-
“6. Form and contents of the arbitral award are provided
      by
Section 31
of the Act. The arbitral award drawn up in
      the manner prescribed by
Section 31
of the Act has to be
11
signed and dated. According to sub-section (5), “after the
arbitral award is made, a signed copy shall be delivered
to each party”. The term “party” is defined by clause (h)
of
Section 2
of the Act as meaning “a party to an
arbitration agreement”. The definition is to be read as
given unless the context otherwise requires. Under sub-
section (3) of
Section 34
the limitation of 3 months
commences from the date on which “the party making that
application” had received the arbitral award. We have to
see what is the meaning to be assigned to the term “party”
and “party making the application” for setting aside the
award in the context of the State or a department of the
Government, more so a large organisation like the
Railways.
7. It is well known that the Ministry of Railways has a
very large area of operation covering several divisions,
having different divisional heads and various departments
within the division, having their own departmental heads.
The General Manager of the Railways is at the very apex of
the division with the responsibility of taking strategic
decisions, laying down policies of the organisation,
giving administrative instructions and issuing guidelines
in the organisation. He is from elite managerial cadre
which runs the entire organisation of his division with
different departments, having different departmental
heads. The day-to-day management and operations of
different departments rests with different departmental
heads. The departmental head is directly connected and
concerned with the departmental functioning and is alone
expected to know the progress of the matter pending before
the Arbitral Tribunal concerning his department. He is the
person who knows exactly where the shoe pinches, whether
the arbitral award is adverse to the department's
interest. The departmental head would naturally be in a
position to know whether the arbitrator has committed a
mistake in understanding the department's line of
submissions and the grounds available to challenge the
award. He is aware of the factual aspect of the case and
also the factual and legal aspects of the questions
involved in the arbitration proceedings. It is also a
known fact and the Court can take judicial notice of it
that there are several arbitration proceedings pending
consideration concerning affairs of the Railways before
arbitration. The General Manager, with executive workload
of the entire division cannot be expected to know all the
niceties of the case pending before the Arbitral Tribunal
or for that matter the arbitral award itself and to take a
decision as to whether the arbitral award deserves
challenge, without proper assistance of the departmental
head. The General Manager, being the head of the division,
at best is only expected to take final decision whether
the arbitral award is to be challenged or not on the basis
of the advice and the material placed before him by the
12
person concerned with arbitration proceedings. Taking a
final decision would be possible only if the subject-
matter of challenge, namely, the arbitral award is known
to the departmental head, who is directly concerned with
the subject-matter as well as arbitral proceedings. In
large organisations like the Railways, “party” as referred
to in
Section 2(h)
read with
Section 34(3)
of the Act has
to be construed to be a person directly connected with and
involved in the proceedings and who is in control of the
proceedings before the arbitrator.
8. The delivery of an arbitral award under sub-section (5)
of
Section 31
is not a matter of mere formality. It is a
matter of substance. It is only after the stage under
Section 31
has passed that the stage of termination of
arbitral proceedings within the meaning of
Section 32
of
the Act arises. The delivery of arbitral award to the
party, to be effective, has to be “received” by the party.
This delivery by the Arbitral Tribunal and receipt by the
party of the award sets in motion several periods of
limitation such as an application for correction and
interpretation of an award within 30 days under
Section
33(1)
, an application for making an additional award under
Section 33(4)
and an application for setting aside an
award under
Section 34(3)
and so on. As this delivery of
the copy of award has the effect of conferring certain
rights on the party as also bringing to an end the right
to exercise those rights on expiry of the prescribed
period of limitation which would be calculated from that
date, the delivery of the copy of award by the Tribunal
and the receipt thereof by each party constitutes an
important stage in the arbitral proceedings.
9. In the context of a huge organisation like the
Railways, the copy of the award has to be received by the
person who has knowledge of the proceedings and who would
be the best person to understand and appreciate the
arbitral award and also to take a decision in the matter
of moving an application under sub-section (1) or (5) of
Section 33
or under sub-section (1) of
Section 34
.
10. In the present case, the Chief Engineer had signed the
agreement on behalf of the Union of India entered into
with the respondent. In the arbitral proceedings the Chief
Engineer represented the Union of India and the notices,
during proceedings of the arbitration, were served on the
Chief Engineer. Even the arbitral award clearly mentions
that the Union of India is represented by the Deputy Chief
Engineer/Gauge Conversion, Chennai. The Chief Engineer is
directly concerned with the arbitration, as the subject-
matter of arbitration relates to the department of the
Chief Engineer and he has direct knowledge of the arbitral
proceedings   and  the   question   involved  before   the
arbitrator. The General Manager of the Railways has only
referred the matter for arbitration as required under the
contract. He cannot be said to be aware of the question
13
involved in the arbitration nor the factual aspect in
      detail, on the basis of which the Arbitral Tribunal had
      decided the issue before it, unless they are all brought
      to his notice by the officer dealing with that arbitration
      and who is in charge of those proceedings. Therefore, in
      our opinion, service of the arbitral award on the General
      Manager by way of receipt in his inwards office cannot be
      taken to be sufficient notice so as to activate the
      department to take appropriate steps in respect of and in
      regard to the award passed by the arbitrators to
      constitute the starting point of limitation for the
      purposes of
Section 34(3)
of the Act. The service of
      notice on the Chief Engineer on 19-3-2001 would be the
      starting point of limitation to challenge the award in the
      Court.
11. We cannot be oblivious of the fact of impersonal
      approach in the government departments and organisations
      like Railways. In the very nature of the working of
      government departments a decision is not taken unless the
      papers have reached the person concerned and then an
      approval, if required, of the competent authority or
      official above has been obtained. All this could not have
      taken place unless the Chief Engineer had received the
      copy of the award when only the delivery of the award
      within the meaning of sub-section (5) of
Section 31
shall
      be deemed to have taken place.”
24.   In the present case, it is averred in the counter affidavit

and is not disputed by the appellant that the contract was executed

between the Superintending Engineer, Mahananda Baraj Circle (I&W)

DTE   and   M/s   Motilal    Agarwala,        the   appellant.     The    Executive

Engineer, Teesta Canal Division No.1, Islampur was also a party to

the arbitration.      Admittedly and as is clear from the letter dated

08.08.2014 of the Arbitrator, Annexure P-11 to the Civil Appeal the

signed copy of the award was delivered to SDO/AE – TCS D-2 Islampur

who   was   present   at    the   meeting      on   behalf   of   the   respondent.

Applying the dictum in
Tecco Trichy Engineers & Contractors
(supra)

a delivery to the Assistant Engineer who was not “a party to the

arbitration” and who was not in a decision-making capacity to take

further recourses on the award would not be a valid service of the
14
award.
25. We take notice of the fact that
Tecco Trichy
(supra) has been

relied upon by this Court in
Benarsi Krishna Committee and others v.

Karmyogi Shelters Private Limited
, reported in (2012) 9 SCC 496,

wherein this Court held that the expression “party”, as defined in
Section 2(1)(h)
of the 1996 Act would be a person who is a “party”

to an arbitration agreement.
The relevant extract from the decision

in
Benarsi    Krishna   Committee
(supra),       more   particularly     the

observations made in para 15 therein reads thus:
“15. Having taken note of the submissions advanced on
         behalf of the respective parties and having particular
         regard to the expression “party” as defined in
Section
         2(1)(h)
of the 1996 Act read with the provisions of
Sections 31(5)
and
34(3)
of the 1996 Act, we are not
         inclined to interfere with the decision of the Division
         Bench of the Delhi High Court impugned in these
         proceedings. The expression “party” has been amply dealt
         with in Tecco Trechy Engineers’s case (supra) and also
         in
ARK Builders (P) Ltd.
case (supra), referred to
         hereinabove. It is one thing for an advocate to act and
         plead on behalf of a party in a proceeding and it is
         another for an Advocate to act as the party himself. The
         expression “party”, as defined in
Section 2 (1)(h)
of
         the 1996 Act, clearly indicates a person who is a party
         to an arbitration agreement. The said definition is not
         qualified in any way so as to include the agent of the
         party to such agreement. Any reference, therefore, made
         in
Section 31(5)
and
Section 34(2)
of the 1996 Act can
         only mean the party himself and not his or her agent, or
         advocate empowered to act on the basis of a Vakalatnama.
         In such circumstances, proper compliance with
Section 31
         (5)
would mean delivery of a signed copy of the Arbitral
         Award on the party himself and not on his advocate,
         which gives the party concerned the right to proceed
         under
Section 34(3)
of the aforesaid Act.”
                                          (emphasis supplied)
26.   In   the   overall   view   of   the   matter,    we    have   reached   the

conclusion that we should not disturb the impugned judgment and

order passed by the High Court.
15
27. In the result, this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.
28.   This   litigation   is   now   almost   12   years   old.   In   such

circumstances, there should not be any further delay in hearing the
Section 34
application filed by the State. We request the District

Court to take up the appeal of the State and see to it that the same

is decided on its own merit within a period of six months from the

date of receipt of a copy of this order.
.........................J.
                                          (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                          ..............…….........J.
                                          (K.V. VISWANATHAN)

NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 28, 2025.