[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Pawan Kumar Tiwary vs Jharkhand State Electricity Board (Now ... on 19 August, 2025
Author:
Aravind Kumar
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
J.K. Maheshwari
2025 INSC 1000                                                                        REPORTABLE



                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO(S).                of 2025
                            SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO(S).26860-26863 OF 2023


                            PAWAN KUMAR TIWARY AND OTHERS                       …APPELLANT(S)


                                                           VERSUS


                            JHARKHAND STATE ELECTRICITY BOARD
                            (NOW JHARKHAND URJA VIKAS NIGAM
                            LIMITED) AND OTHERS             …RESPONDENT(S)



                                                       JUDGMENT
ARAVIND KUMAR, J.
1.     Leave granted.
2.     The present appeals arise from the common order dated 22.12.2021

                            passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi in

                            LPA Nos. 512 and 647 of 2018, whereby the Division Bench allowed the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Deepak Guglani
Date: 2025.08.20
appeals of the respondents and set aside the appellants’ appointments to
   17:09:29 IST
   Reason:
Class III posts, reversing the relief granted to them by the learned Single
1
Judge in W.P. (S) Nos. 1248 and 1269 of 2010. Civil Review Nos. 5 and 6

of 2022 filed thereafter also came to be dismissed by order dated 07.08.2023.

Hence, the appellants/writ petitioners are before this court assailing the

correctness of the said orders.
The brief facts necessary for adjudication of the present appeals are set forth

below:
3.       The appellants, namely, Pawan Kumar Tiwary, Hemant Kumar

Choubey, and Amar Kumar, were appointed to Class IV posts in the

Jharkhand State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as "JSEB") during

the years 2004–2006.
4.       On 07.01.1999, the Bihar State Electricity Board, Patna issued

Standing Order No. 812 regarding appointment to Non-Technical Class III

posts through internal advertisement. The said Standing Order referred to

Resolution No. 7305 dated 02.12.1998, wherein the Board resolved to fill

up vacant posts of non-technical Class III by departmental candidates. The

Standing Order explicitly stated that the percentage of vacancies against

sanctioned posts to be filled through departmental candidates should not

exceed the percentage indicated against each post.
5.       Pursuant thereto, the Director, Personnel, JSEB vide Letter No. 1341

dated 25.06.2008 invited applications for appointment to the posts of
2
Routine Clerks, Junior Accounts Clerk, Lower Division Assistant and other

posts through internal process as per the qualifications prescribed for the

relevant posts. Subsequently, vide Letter No. 144 dated 19.01.2009, it was

notified that candidates who have applied for Correspondence Clerk/Junior

Accounts Clerk, may also apply for appointment to the post of Lower

Division Assistant, if interested. The appellants submitted their applications

in the prescribed format for the posts of Routine Clerk and Lower Division

Assistant and thereafter they appeared in the examination conducted by the

Board. On 15.02.2009, the Board published the list of successful candidates.

Appellant No.1(Pawan Kumar Tiwary) and Appellant No.3 (Amar Kumar)

figured in the list of successful candidates for the post of Routine Clerk

(hereinafter referred to as “RC”), and Appellant No.2 (Hemant Kumar

Choubey) figured in the list of successful candidates for the post of Lower

Division Assistant (hereinafter referred to as “LDA”). Subsequently, their

appointments were made vide Office Orders No. 758 and 759 dated

24.04.2009 and the appellants joined their respective posts and started

working.
6.      The Secretary of JSEB vide office order No.860 dated 07.05.2009

stated that implementation of all orders related to internal appointments on

the post of RC, LDA and other posts stood adjourned i.e., stayed without

assigning any reason. The present appellants along with other appointees
3
made representations through their service association before the competent

authority for redressal of their grievances. However, no response was

received.
7.     Thereafter, on 27.05.2009, JSEB constituted a three-member

Enquiry Committee to enquire about all the internal appointments made,

citing certain irregularities and illegalities. On 27.06.2009, the Enquiry

Committee submitted its report stating appointments were not made in

adherence to the prescribed rules of qualification, and additionally, the

appointments were made beyond the sanctioned vacancies for internal

appointments. Accordingly, the Enquiry Committee held all the

appointments made through various office orders to be unconstitutional,

including Office Order No. 758 and 759 dated 24.04.2009 through which

present appellants were appointed.
8.     After the release of the Enquiry Report, the Chairman of JSEB

issued a directive on 07.10.2009, to take action against the administrative

personnel responsible for causing the irregular and illegal appointments

beyond prescribed qualifications and sanctioned strength. In the same

directive, the Chairman declared three officers responsible and cancelled the

appointments made internally.
4
9.      The present appellants made multiple representations for restoring

the appointments made, however, there was no response from JSEB. On

22.07.2010, vide Office Order No.881, JSEB cancelled the appointments of

the appellants citing the appointments were irregular and not in accordance

with appointment and reservation rules.
10.     The appellants along with other appointees whose appointments

stood cancelled filed W.P. (S) No. 1248 of 2010 praying for quashing of

Office Order dated 07.05.2009 whereby their appointments were stayed. The

Writ Petition came to be amended later to include the prayer to quash Office

Order No. 881 dated 22.07.2010 whereby the appellants’ appointment stood

cancelled. It is important to note here that another W.P. (S) No. 1269 of 2010

was filed by other aggrieved appointees whose appointments were cancelled

for being in contravention of the sanctioned strength. Both the writ petitions,

namely, W.P. (S) No. 1248 and 1269 of 2010 came to be disposed of by a

common judgment/order dated 14.08.2018 passed by the Single Judge of

High Court of Jharkhand.
11.     The Single Judge partly allowed the Writ Petitions and quashed the

orders impugned therein, namely, Office Orders dated 07.05.2009 and

22.07.2010 and directed JSEB to issue fresh order of appointment on their

promotional post on which they were earlier promoted/decision was taken
5
to promote, whichever is applicable. However, the Single Judge held that

their appointment shall for all intent and purpose be treated as fresh

appointment and they would not be entitled for any back wages, seniority or

other benefit based on their earlier appointment/promotion. The Single

Judge placed reliance on Vikas Pratap Singh & Others. v. State of

Chhattisgarh & Others1 wherein this Court had held that where a wrongful

or irregular appointment is made without any mistake on the part of the

appointee and upon discovery of such error or irregularity, the appointee is

terminated, taking a sympathetic view, order of termination ought to be

quashed, and appointee should be reinstated. Accordingly, the Single Judge

observed that candidates/appointees have not committed fraud, and having

fulfilled all eligibility criteria their appointment cannot be held to be

unconstitutional or illegal.
12.     The findings of the Single Judge were challenged by both JSEB as

well as the appellants. While JSEB in L.P.A. No. 647 of 2018 sought to

challenge the direction of fresh appointments to the appellants, the

appellants in L.P.A. No.512 of 2018 challenged the denial of consequential

benefits such as seniority and back wages. The Division Bench by its

order/judgement dated 22.12.2021 allowed L.P.A. No. 647 of 2018 and

dismissed L.P.A. No.512 of 2018. The Division Bench was of the view that


1 (2013) 14 SCC 494
6
even though there is no element of fraud but if the process of selection has

been found to suffer from unfairness and malpractice, then the entire

selection process is required to be cancelled. Further, it held that

appointments were held to be illegal since they were beyond the sanctioned

strength, and in such a situation there is no question of consideration of the

element of fraud. The Division Bench also distinguished between irregular

and illegal appointment and reiterated that appointment made beyond

sanctioned strength is illegal as it is an encroachment upon the quotas of

posts to be filled up from direct recruitment.
13.     The appellants took exception to the above order dated 22.12.2021

and preferred Civil Review No. 5 & 6 of 2022 to assail the findings of the

Division Bench. The High Court in exercise of its review jurisdiction

dismissed the review petitions on the ground that no new facts were made

out by the appellants and as such, the scope of review is extremely limited,

and finding no infirmity with the Division Bench’s order dated 22.12.2021,

the High Court vide Order dated 07.08.2023 dismissed the Civil Review

No.5 & 6 of 2022 filed by the appellants. Hence, the appellants are now

before us.
7
14.      We have heard Shri Gopal Shankarnarayanan and Shri Puneet Jain,

learned Senior Counsels appearing for the appellants and Shri Navaniti

Prasad Singh, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents.
15.     Shri Gopal Shankarnarayanan, the learned Senior Counsel

appearing for the appellants No.1 and No.3 challenged the findings of the

Division Bench on various grounds. It was submitted that appointment of

the appellants Nos.1 and 3 to promoted Class III posts was not beyond the

cadre strength and even the report of the Enquiry Committee found that

appointment of Routine Clerk was not beyond the cadre strength. The cadre

strength of routine clerk posts was 23, out of which 22 were lying vacant

and 50% were to be filled through in-service candidates through internal

advertisement which would come to 11 posts. He would also contend that

appellants had also fulfilled the criteria of two years’ experience which is

very much evident from the date of joining of appellants. It was further

submitted that orders of cancellation of appointment are hit by principles of

natural justice as before issuance of said orders, appellants were not given

any notice or show cause. It was also contended that it is not a case where

any misconduct is alleged to have been committed by the appellants, but for

no fault on part of the appellants, they are subjected to suffer. Additionally,

Shri Puneet Jain, the Learned Senior Counsel appearing for appellant No.2

submitted that for Lower Division Assistant (LDA) 5 posts were available
8
as per rules and the approval was given for 25 posts by the Secretary in the

interest of JESB due to extreme shortage of LDA, and that the approval was

with the knowledge of the Chairman. Further, it was submitted that 10% of

the vacant posts were allocated for internal recruitment, and 51 posts were

vacant, hence 10% of that would be minimum 5 posts which was within the

cadre strength. It was further urged that appellant No.2 has attained the age

of 50 years and has lost his eligibility to appear in any departmental

examination once he attained the age of 50 years, hence this was his last

opportunity for promotion.
16.     Per contra, Shri Navaniti Prasad, learned Senior Counsel for the

respondents urged that the findings of the Division Bench which were

confirmed in Review did not call for any interference. It was also urged that

no substantial question of law was raised in the present appeals.
17.     We have given our thoughtful consideration to the present appeals

and considered the submissions of the rival parties and perused records. It is

relevant to note that while the Enquiry Report held various appointments

unconstitutional, namely 537 posts which were filled up through internal

appointment in different cadres such as Routine Clerk, Lower Division

Assistant, Correspondence Clerk, Junior Accounts Clerk, Manpower and

Branch Clerk, and Writ Petitions and LPAs were preferred by various
9
appointees, our findings and observations are confined only to the appellants

herein, namely, Pawan Kumar Tiwary, Hemant Kumar Choubey, and Amar

Kumar.
18.        The questions that arise for our consideration are as below:
I.       Whether the findings of the Division Bench with respect to

               illegality in the appointment of appellants warrant interference?

      II.      If the appointment is held to be legal, whether they are entitled

               to any consequential benefits?
RE: POINT 1
19.        The primary basis on which the Division Bench set aside the

appellants’ appointments was on the basis of conclusion having been arrived

at that appointments were made beyond the sanctioned strength. However,

we find this conclusion to be factually incorrect and legally unsustainable as

evident from the analysis that follows.
20.        The contention that there was an “excess appointment” namely it

was beyond the sanctioned strength was not substantiated by any reliable

material by the respondent – Board. No contemporaneous record has been

shown that contradicts the sanctioned strength status at the time of

appointments. In fact, the Standing Order No.812 highlights the posts were
10
duly sanctioned and advertised through proper channels, followed by

selection through established norms of scrutiny.
21.    Evidently, the Enquiry Report itself records that appointments to the

post of Routine Clerk were within the sanctioned strength. Specifically, out

of 23 sanctioned posts, 22 were vacant, and internal recruitment was

permitted for 50%, i.e., 11 posts. The appellants Pawan Kumar Tiwary and

Amar Kumar were appointed within this quota. Similarly, in the case of

Hemant Kumar Choubey, the post of LDA had 51 vacancies, and the 10%

quota allowed for at least 5 appointments, which were duly approved by the

competent authority. Despite this, the Division Bench broadly stated that

appointments were made beyond sanctioned strength and hence illegal,

without distinguishing between individual cases. During oral arguments,

this Court demanded an explanation regarding this specific finding in the

Enquiry Report, at which point the learned Senior Counsel for the

respondents fairly submitted that the appointments of the present appellants

was within prescribed sanctioned strength. At the outset, this admission

during the course of hearing would deter us from going into every factual

aspect, however, given that the Division Bench and the Review Court has

overlooked these glaring facts, we deem it necessary to satisfy our

conscience and make our detailed observations.
11
22.     The Division Bench also placed reliance on the procedural deviation

     from the regular advertisement process, by observing that the internal notice

     issued by the Chief Engineer did not amount to a proper recruitment

     notification. While procedural irregularities, if proven to be mala fide or

     substantially affecting fairness, may vitiate a selection process, in the present

     case, the selection was conducted through tests and interviews overseen by

     a selection committee. The entire process culminated in formal appointment

     letters being issued. As held by this Court in
Secretary, State of Karnataka

     and Others v. Umadevi
(3) and Others2, mere technical irregularities in

     appointment processes and in the absence of evidence of illegality,

     arbitrariness or fraud cannot be a ground to undo appointments, especially

     when the appointees are not at fault.
23.     The Division Bench appears to have blurred the distinction between

     irregular and illegal appointments. In Vikas Pratap Singh (supra), this Court

     held that an appointment made without following every procedural formality

     may be irregular, but it does not become illegal unless it violates statutory

     provisions or is made without the existence of a post. This Court observed

     that if the appointment is to a sanctioned post, made by a competent

     authority, and not tainted by fraud or deceit, it cannot be labelled illegal



2 (2006) 4 SCC 1
12
merely due to some procedural lapse. The facts of the present case are

squarely covered by this reasoning. The posts were sanctioned, the

appellants were duly qualified, and the appointments were made by the

competent authority after following due process of selection and at worst,

any infirmity could only render the appointments irregular, not illegal.
In
R.S. Garg v. State of U.P. and Others3
, this Court held that appointments

made within sanctioned strength, even if temporary or irregular, do not

automatically become illegal unless shown to be in violation of statutory

rules. There is no evidence or even a finding that the posts were not

available or were created in violation of recruitment rules.
24.       It is by now well settled in service jurisprudence that the validity of

an individual appointment must be assessed on the basis of the appointee's

own merit, eligibility, and conformity to the applicable rules. Courts must

resist the tendency to issue blanket invalidations of entire batches of

appointments merely on the basis of procedural infirmities that affect only a

portion of the appointments. The principles of fairness, proportionality, and

individual justice are foundational to administrative law and demand that a

case-by-case analysis be undertaken before issuing sweeping orders of

cancellation.
3   (2006) 6 SCC 430
13
25.     This Court has in several decisions, including
State of Bihar v.

Upendra Narayan Singh and Others4
, emphasized that when appointments

are found to be irregular, the inquiry must focus on whether such irregularity

amounts to illegality, and whether the appointee had any role or knowledge

of the deviation. If not, and the appointee was otherwise eligible, qualified,

and appointed against a sanctioned vacancy, there is no justification for

nullifying such appointment. The present appellants, as evidenced by record,

fulfilled all eligibility conditions, were appointed within the sanctioned

strength, and underwent the requisite selection process.
26.     It is here that the doctrine of severability assumes great significance.

The rule is grounded in equity and legal logic: where bad can be separated

from good, the good must not perish with the bad. The doctrine, though

largely applied in constitutional and statutory interpretation, has gained

considerable traction in service jurisprudence where a set of appointments

are sought to be invalidated en masse.
27.     The doctrine of severability is not merely a tool of constitutional

adjudication but a principle of fairness. In service law, it protects deserving

employees from the fallout of administrative missteps not attributable to

them.
4 (2009) 5 SCC 65
14
28.
In
Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi and Others v. State of U.P. and

Others5
, this Court has emphasized that the State, even in contractual or

administrative matters, cannot act arbitrarily and must be guided by

constitutional values. These observations gain special relevance in cases

where authorities, rather than conducting granular scrutiny, proceed to

cancel entire appointments in a sweeping manner.
29.     The case in hand presents a textbook scenario where the appellants'

appointments were lumped together with others without individualized

examination. The Enquiry Report itself conceded that appointments of

Routine Clerks were within the cadre strength, and there is no dispute that

the appellants fulfilled the prescribed qualifications and eligibility norms.

There is also no suggestion of mala fides, misrepresentation or procedural

breach on their part. At this juncture, it is pertinent to mention, that learned

Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents during the course of hearing

fairly submitted that the appointments of the present appellants fell within

the sanctioned strength.
30.     The right to employment, though not a fundamental right, is

nevertheless protected under
Article 14
and
16
of the Constitution insofar as




5 (1991) 1 SCC 212
15
it requires fair, just, and non-arbitrary treatment of similarly situated

individuals. The appellants' dismissal, without issuing a show cause or

opportunity of hearing, is a clear violation of principles of natural justice,

and falls afoul of the law
laid down in
Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India

and Another6
, wherein it was held that “even an administrative order which

involves civil consequences must be made consistently with the rules of

natural justice.”
31.     The    jurisprudence   around irregular versus illegal appointments

must not be blurred. An irregular appointment is one where procedure is not

strictly followed but the appointee is otherwise qualified and the post is

sanctioned. An illegal appointment, on the other hand, is void ab initio, such

as where the appointee is ineligible or the post does not exist. When

appointments are questioned on grounds of irregularity, the inquiry must not

end with detecting the infirmity but must proceed further to distinguish those

whose appointments are unimpeachable. Justice demands separation, not

erasure.
6 (1978) 1 SCC 248
16
32.      The High Court failed to apply the test of individual scrutiny, which

is now a bedrock requirement in service jurisprudence. When appointments

of large numbers of persons are questioned, courts and authorities must:
(i)     Separate the legally sustainable from the unsustainable
(ii)    Apply the test of eligibility and sanctioned strength
(iii)   Assess whether there was fraud or misrepresentation
(iv)    Provide an opportunity of hearing before cancellation
33.      The action of the Board in cancelling the appellants’ appointments

en masse without affording them an opportunity of hearing and without

considering the legality of each appointment separately reflects not only a

violation of principles of natural justice but also abdication of the duty to

make reasoned, individualized decisions.
34.      As discussed hereinabove, facts upon being evaluated in their

entirety, reveal that the appellants were appointed against sanctioned

vacancies, pursuant to an internal selection process, and were fully eligible

for the posts in question. There is neither any suggestion nor proof of fraud,

collusion, or misrepresentation on their part. At best, the process suffers

from procedural lapses not attributable to the appointees. Such infirmities,

however, render the appointments irregular, not illegal.
17
35.     It must be underscored that the jurisprudential divide between

irregular and illegal appointments is neither artificial nor academic. An

appointment may be irregular if it deviates from established procedure, but

it crosses into the realm of illegality only where it violates statutory

mandates, is made without the existence of a sanctioned post, or is tainted

by fraud. Conflating the two categories leads to manifest injustice,

particularly when individuals, who have no role in the procedural defect, are

visited with the severest consequence of termination.
36.     There is also an urgent need to discourage the mechanical

application of cancellation orders affecting large groups of appointees

without differentiation. Service jurisprudence in India must evolve to reflect

a nuanced, fact-specific approach that separates the legally sustainable

appointments from those that are vitiated. It is neither just nor desirable to

extinguish the careers of deserving employees merely for administrative

convenience or to avoid the labour of segregation. A practice of

indiscriminately declaring entire batches of appointments as void

undermines not only the morale of sincere employees but also the credibility

of the public administration. This Court deems it necessary to underscore

that in all future cases of large-scale appointment irregularities, authorities

and courts must mandatorily consider the possibility of segregation and
18
apply the doctrine of severability before taking the extreme step of

cancellation.
37.     Courts, therefore, must exercise heightened care and adopt a

calibrated approach, especially in matters involving mass appointments. The

doctrine of severability must not be relegated to a post-facto exercise; it

ought to inform the judicial inquiry from the threshold. Early-stage

discernment of whether appointments can be segregated based on sanctioned

strength, eligibility, and absence of wrongdoing, enables the court to

preserve what is lawful while excising only what is vitiated. Such an

approach aligns with constitutional morality, protects institutional

credibility, and ensures that administrative missteps do not culminate in

judicial overcorrection.
38.     In the present case, each appellant: (i) fulfilled the eligibility

conditions; (ii) was appointed through a transparent internal selection

process; (iii)was within the sanctioned cadre strength; (iv) was not found

guilty of any misconduct or fraud. To uphold the Division Bench's order

would be to punish the innocent for faults not attributable to them. This

would be a miscarriage of justice.
39.     The present case, resting as it does on demonstrably sanctioned posts

and unblemished individual merit, deserves protection under these
19
principles. Accordingly, we have intervened and the impugned orders passed

by the Division Bench and confirmed in review are set aside to the extent

they relate to the appellants herein. The appointments of the appellants vide

Office Orders dated 24.04.2009 are declared to be legal and valid.
40.       Before concluding, we are constrained to clarify that the

observations made in the present case, particularly our invocation of the

doctrine of severability and the imperative of individualized scrutiny, must

not be construed as laying down an inflexible rule of universal application.

We are fully cognizant of the cautionary principles articulated by this Court

in State of West Bengal v. Baishakhi Bhattacharyya (Chatterjee) and

Others7, wherein, after an exhaustive analysis of precedent and the

evidentiary record, this Court observed:
“19. The following principles emerge from the aforesaid
         discussion:
• When an in-depth factual inquiry reveals systemic
         irregularities, such as malaise or fraud, that undermine the
         integrity of the entire selection process, the result should be
         cancelled in its entirety. However, if and when possible,
         segregation of tainted and untainted candidates should be done
         in consonance with fairness and equity.
• The decision to cancel the selection en masse must be based
         on the satisfaction derived from sufficient material collected
         through a fair and thorough investigation. It is not necessary
         for the material collected to conclusively prove malpractice
         beyond a reasonable doubt. The standard of evidence should be
         reasonable certainty of systemic malaise. The probability test
         is applicable.
• Despite the inconvenience caused to untainted candidates,
         when broad and deep manipulation in the selection process is
7
(2025) SCC OnLine SC 719
20
proven, due weightage has to be given to maintaining the purity
       of the selection process.
• Individual notice and hearing may not be necessary in all
       cases for practical reasons when the facts establish that the
       entire selection process is vitiated with illegalities at a large
       scale.”
41.    The Baishakhi principle       rightly   recognizes     that   where   the

recruitment process is irredeemably marred by pervasive fraud or

institutional malaise, the Court may be compelled albeit reluctantly to

nullify the entire selection process in the larger interest of constitutional

integrity. In such cases, exception to the principle of natural justice would

not lead to potential injustice to untainted candidates and the necessity of

maintaining public confidence in institutional processes ought to take

precedence.
42.    However, the case at hand stands on a demonstrably different factual

and legal footing. There is neither any allegation nor proof of fraud,

impersonation, or collusion by the appellants. The internal recruitment

process in question, albeit allegedly irregular in procedural respects, was

conducted through a structured examination and selection mechanism

pursuant to duly sanctioned vacancies. The selection was made by a

competent authority, and the appointments were not impugned on grounds

of mala fides, corruption, or extraneous considerations.
21
43.     It is precisely this material distinction that warrants a calibrated

approach. To mechanically apply the drastic remedy of en masse

cancellation in such a scenario where the appointments are otherwise

regular, fall within the sanctioned strength, and are untainted by illegality,

would be to conflate irregularity with illegality, and to punish the innocent

for administrative lapses they neither caused nor participated in. The

doctrine of severability is not only available but must be invoked to uphold

the constitutional guarantee of equal treatment under
Articles 14
and
16.
44.     Thus, while we draw guidance from the Baishakhi judgment as to

the outer limits of judicial tolerance in the face of systemic corruption, we

hold that in the absence of demonstrable malaise and where individual

appointments are legally sustainable, we must lean in favour of preservation,

not obliteration.
RE: POINT 2
45.     While we have held that the appellants’ appointments were legal and

within the sanctioned strength, we are also mindful of the settled principle

that in the absence of actual service rendered, back wages are not ordinarily

granted, particularly where the employee did not discharge any duties during

the period of cancellation. Accordingly, while the appellants shall be entitled

to continuity in service and restoration of seniority with effect from the date
22
of their initial appointment on 24.04.2009, they shall not be entitled to

arrears of salary for the period they were out of service. However, to protect

their future service rights, they shall be granted notional fixation of pay and

other consequential benefits subject to applicable rules such as increments

and promotion eligibility.
46.      We refer to the principles laid down in
Union of India and Others

v. K.V. Jankiraman and Others8
, where this Court held that seniority and

other service benefits can be protected through notional fixation, even if

back wages are not granted. Similarly, in Gowramma C. (Dead) by legal

representatives v. Manager (Personnel), Hindustan Aeronautical Limited

and Another 9, it was held that the doctrine of "no work, no pay" does not

preclude the grant of notional service benefits, particularly where the fault

lies not with the employee but with the administration.
47.       Thus, the appellants shall be deemed to have continued in service

from the date of their original appointments for the purpose of seniority,

promotion, and pensionary benefits, but shall not be entitled to actual back

wages for the intervening period. Their pay shall be notionally fixed as per

rules, and future emoluments shall be computed accordingly.



8   (1991) 4 SCC 109
9 (2022) 11 SCC 794
23
48.     At the cost of repetition, we reiterate that our findings and

observations made herein above are limited and confined to the appellants

only and it does not apply to none else of these proceedings.
49.    We reiterate for future guidance that where multiple appointments

are challenged on general grounds, authorities and courts must undertake a

detailed fact-specific analysis before concluding that all such appointments

are void. The doctrine of severability must not remain a mere theoretical

doctrine but must guide real administrative action and judicial reasoning in

service matters.
50.    In consequence to the above discussion, the appeals stand allowed

and the appointments of the appellants made by Office Order Nos.758 and

759 dated 24.04.2009 are declared to be legal and valid by quashing the

Office Order No.860 dated 7.05.2009 and the Office Order No.881 dated

22.07.2010 insofar as appellants are concerned. In the light of the facts of

this case, we make no order as to costs.
51.    We have also considered I.A. No. 184914 of 2024 seeking

impleadment. The lis before us is confined to the appellants, namely, Pawan

Kumar Tiwary, Hemant Kumar Choubey and Amar Kumar, whose

appointments have been examined in detail above and found sustainable

only because they were within the sanctioned strength. The scope of these
24
appeals is thus case-specific and limited to them alone. The applicants in the

present I.A. are not necessary parties for the adjudication of the issues

arising here, and their rights, if any, are not concluded by this judgment.

They are at liberty to pursue the remedies available to them in accordance

with law and no opinion is expressed in that regard. Accordingly, the I.A.

stands dismissed.
.……………………………., J.
[J.K. MAHESHWARI]



                                             .……………………………., J.
[ARAVIND KUMAR]

New Delhi;
August 19, 2025.
25