[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kavin vs P. Sreemani Devi on 22 August, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 1028                                                                    REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3132-3133 OF 2023

            KAVIN                                                            APPELLANT(S)
                                                          VERSUS
            P. SREEMANI DEVI & ORS.                                          RESPONDENT(S)


                                                    JUDGMENT
ATUL S. CHANDURKAR, J.
1.              The appellant-claimant is aggrieved by the judgment of the Division

                            Bench of the Madras High Court in C.M.A. Nos.902 of 2020 and 677

                            of 2021 as a result of which the amount of compensation that was

                            awarded to the claimant by the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal

                            came to be reduced.
2.              It is the case of the claimant that on 03.07.2011, he was travelling in

                            an Omni bus bearing registration No.KA 20A 6604 as a passenger

                            from Coimbatore to Chennai. There were 22 co-passengers travelling

                            with him. At about 10:15 PM, the said bus that was being driven by

                            one Mr. Balaji gave a dash to a tamarind tree that was at the left side
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
of the road. As a result of the said accident, various passengers
   Jayant Kumar Arora
   Date: 2025.08.22
   17:50:13 IST

                            suffered grievous injuries. Insofar as the claimant is concerned, he
   Reason:
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3132-3133 OF 2023                                                  1
too suffered serious injuries resulting in 100% permanent disability.
He was required to undergo treatment for a considerable period of

     time. When the accident occurred, the claimant was aged about 21

     years and was pursuing the degree course in Arts. In view of the

     aforesaid accident, the claimant filed M.C.O.P. No.962 of 2011

     seeking compensation of an amount of Rs. 1 crore under
Section 166
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for short ‘the Act of 1988’).
3.   Along with the aforesaid claim petition, various other claim petitions

     were filed by other injured passengers who were travelling in the said

     Omni bus. All the claim petitions were tried together. After considering

     the affidavits filed by the contesting respondents as well as the

     evidence led by the parties, the learned Member of the Claims

     Tribunal held that the offending vehicle was owned by the second

     respondent. The said vehicle was insured with the third respondent-

     insurance company. It was also held that the accident occurred on

     account of rash and negligent driving of the first respondent. On these

     findings, the liability of paying compensation was saddled on the

     insurance company. While determining the amount of compensation

     to be awarded to the claimant, the Claims Tribunal noted that the

     claimant had suffered 100% permanent physical disability. On the

     basis of documentary material on record, it granted compensation

     under various heads including medical expenses, future prospects,
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3132-3133 OF 2023                                        2
loss of income, future medical expenses, attendant charges as well

     as towards pain and suffering of family members. An amount of

     Rs.67,83,866/- came to be awarded as compensation to the claimant.
4.   The claimant as well as the insurance company were aggrieved by

     the award dated 30.08.2019 passed by the Claims Tribunal. While

     the claimant preferred C.M.A. No.902 of 2020 seeking enhancement

     in the amount of compensation, the insurance company preferred

     C.M.A. No.677 of 2021 challenging the quantum of compensation as

     awarded. Both the appeals were heard together and by the judgment

     dated 16.08.2022, the Division Bench of the Madras High Court

     affirmed the findings as regards rash and negligent driving by the first

     respondent and ownership of the offending vehicle as regards the

     second respondent. The liability of the insurance company to satisfy

     the claim for compensation was also accepted. However insofar as

     the amount of monetary compensation is concerned, the High Court

     was of the view that future medical expenses and attendant charges

     had been granted on a higher side. The amounts granted under these

     heads were thus reduced. Insofar as compensation granted towards

     permanent disability, loss of enjoyment of life and amenities as well

     as towards pain and sufferings of family members came to be set

     aside. As a consequence, the amount of compensation as granted by

     the Claims Tribunal came to be reduced by an amount of Rs. 19 lacs.
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3132-3133 OF 2023                                        3
Consequently, it was held that the claimant was entitled to

     compensation of Rs.48,83,866/-. The appeal preferred by the

     claimant was thus dismissed while the appeal preferred by the

     insurance company was partly allowed. The claimant being

     aggrieved by the reduction in the amount of compensation as well as

     the refusal to enhance the amount of compensation has thus come

     up in appeal.
5.   Ms. Harsha Tripathi, learned counsel appearing for the claimant

     submitted that the High Court was not justified in reducing the amount

     of compensation by Rs. 19 lacs. There was no justification

     whatsoever to hold that the evidence on record was insufficient to

     support the claim for future medical expenses. As the claimant had

     suffered 100% permanent disability it was obvious that he would be

     required to undertake medical treatment for his entire life. There was

     no justification for the High Court to have reduced the amount of

     compensation under these heads. In fact, the High Court ought to

     have awarded a higher amount than that granted by the Claims

     Tribunal.
The learned counsel further submitted that the amount of

     Rs. 3 lacs granted towards permanent disability came to be set aside

     by the High Court without any justifiable reason. Merely because

     compensation was granted towards loss of income, the same would

     not justify non-grant of compensation for permanent disability.
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3132-3133 OF 2023                                      4
Similarly, there was no legal basis for setting aside the amount of

     compensation granted towards loss of enjoyment of life and

     amenities as well as pain and suffering of family members. Relying

     upon the decision of this Court in
K.S. Muralidhar v. R.

     Subbulakshmi and another
, 2024 INSC 886, it was submitted that

     the claimant as well as his family members were entitled to be

     granted compensation under the head “family pain and sufferings.”

     In fact, the amount of Rs. 3 lacs as granted by the Claims Tribunal

     was on a lower side. The High Court was also not justified in reducing

     the compensation that was granted by the Claims Tribunal towards

     attendant charges. In the light of injuries suffered by the claimant

     resulting in permanent disability, it was obvious that the claimant

     would require the services of an attendant for his entire life.
In that

     regard reliance was placed on the decisions of this Court in
Kajal v.

     Jagdish Chand and others
, 2020
INSC 135 and Sri. Benson

     George v. Reliance General Insurance Co. Ltd. and another
, 2022

     INSC 235. It was thus submitted that the High Court not only erred in

     reducing the amount of compensation that was granted by the Claims

     Tribunal but also failed to enhance that amount despite substantial

     evidence on record. It was thus prayed that the entire amount as

     claimed in the claim petition be granted to the claimant and that the

     appeals be allowed.
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3132-3133 OF 2023                                       5
6.   On the other hand, Ms. Prerna Mehta, learned counsel appearing for

     the insurance company supported the impugned judgment and

     opposed the prayer made by the claimant. It was submitted that the

     High Court rightly found that as the claim for compensation towards

     loss of income had been granted there was no justification for

     granting a sum of Rs. 3 lacs towards permanent disability. As the

     claimant failed to lead any evidence in respect of future medical

     expenses, the amount of Rs. 9 lacs as awarded by the Claims

     Tribunal was rightly reduced to Rs. 2 lacs. Same was the case with

     regard to compensation towards attendant charges. There was no

     basis whatsoever for granting the amount of Rs. 6 lacs as awarded

     by the Claims Tribunal. The reasons for setting aside the

     compensation towards pain and suffering of the family members were

     also correct and the same did not call for any interference. In any

     event, it was submitted that considering the nature of evidence

     brought on record by the claimant, the High Court was justified in

     reducing the amount of compensation from that which was granted

     by the Claims Tribunal. The learned counsel further submitted that

     there was no case made out to further enhance the amount of

     compensation as sought by the claimant. It was therefore urged that

     there was no merit in the appeals and same were liable to be

     dismissed.
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3132-3133 OF 2023                                    6
Mr. Nikhil Swami, learned counsel appearing for the owner of the

     vehicle also opposed the appeals.
7.   We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and with

     their assistance we have also perused the documentary material on

     record. At the outset, it may be stated that the findings recorded by

     the Claims Tribunal as regards occurrence of the accident, the

     offending vehicle being driven by the first respondent, ownership of

     the offending vehicle as well as the liability of the insurance company

     to satisfy the claim for compensation have been affirmed by the High

     Court. These findings are not under challenge by any of the

     respondents in these appeals. It is only the claimant who is aggrieved

     by the reduction in the amount of compensation from that which was

     granted by the Claims Tribunal. Thus, the only aspect to be

     considered in these appeals is the prayer for enhancement of

     compensation as made by the claimant by treating all other findings

     as recorded being accepted by the respondents.
8.   Having perused the material on record, we find that the High Court

     was not justified in reducing the quantum of compensation that was

     awarded by the Claims Tribunal. It may be noted that the fact that the

     claimant had suffered 100% disability and that he was in a vegetative

     state was not questioned by the owner of the vehicle or the insurance

     company. The age of the claimant was 21 years when the accident
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3132-3133 OF 2023                                       7
took place. He was pursuing his education at that point of time.
Considering the nature of injuries suffered by the claimant, the Claims

     Tribunal was of the view that even after being discharged from

     hospital, he would be required to undergo periodical medical check-

     ups. Future medical expenses were calculated at the rate of

     Rs. 3,000/- per month for a duration of 25 years and on that basis an

     amount of Rs. 9 lacs came to be awarded. The High Court was of the

     opinion that the aforesaid amount as granted was excessive though

     it was of the view that the claimant would require some amount for

     such expenses. It is for this reason that the amount granted towards

     future medical expenses was reduced from Rs. 9 lacs to Rs. 2 lacs.
9.   We find that this reduction in the amount granted towards future

     medical expenses is totally unjustified. Though the figure of

     Rs. 3,000/- per month as granted appears to be reasonable, in our

     view restricting the amount of future medical expenses only for a

     period of 25 years appears to be unjustified. As noted above, the

     claimant was aged about 21 years when the accident took place. If

     the amount of future medical expenses is restricted only for a further

     duration of 25 years, it would meet such expenses till the claimant

     attains the age of 46 years. In our view, the amount granted towards

     future medical expenses deserves to be enhanced keeping in view

     the average life expectancy. Taking an overall view of the matter, an
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3132-3133 OF 2023                                       8
amount of Rs. 15 lacs towards future medical expenses would meet

     the ends of justice. Part of the said amount if invested by the claimant

     on its receipt would earn interest and would enable the claimant to

     tide over future expenses in the latter part of his life. Accordingly, the

     amount of compensation granted towards future medical expenses

     stands enhanced to Rs. 15 lacs.
10. The Claims Tribunal granted an amount of Rs. 3 lacs towards loss of

     enjoyment of life and amenities. This amount however has been set

     aside by the High Court without assigning any reason whatsoever. It

     cannot be gathered from the impugned judgment as to what weighed

     with the High Court while setting aside the grant of compensation

     under this head. In the light of the permanent disability suffered by

     the claimant, the said amount of compensation as awarded did not

     warrant any interference. The award of an amount of Rs. 3 lacs

     towards loss of enjoyment of life and amenities thus stands restored.
11. Coming to the grant of compensation towards attendant charges, the

     Claims Tribunal was of the view that an amount of Rs. 6 lacs could

     be granted under the said head. The High Court however was

     pleased to reduce the aforesaid amount to Rs. 3 lacs by observing

     that Rs. 6 lacs appeared to be excessive. In our view, the claimant

     having suffered permanent physical disability to the extent of 100%,

     he would definitely require assistance during his further life. It has
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3132-3133 OF 2023                                          9
come in the evidence of the claimant that he was required to use a

     water bed for his comfort considering his handicap. He was also

     required to use a wheelchair even for attending natures’ call. On that

     basis, an amount of Rs. 2,000/- per month for a period of 25 years

     came to be awarded. In our view, again considering the nature of

     disability suffered by the claimant he would require the services of an

     attendant for the rest of his life. The claimant being aged only 21

     years when the accident took place, a lumpsum grant of Rs. 10 lacs

     towards attendant charges for the rest of his life would meet the ends

     of justice. As noted above, if the claimant invests part of this amount

     of compensation, he would receive interest on such invested amount

     that would take care of his future expenses under this head.

     Accordingly, an amount of Rs. 10 lacs is granted towards attendant

     charges.
12. The Claims Tribunal was pleased to award an amount of Rs. 3 lacs

     towards pain and suffering to the family members of the claimant.

     This was done after relying upon the decision of the Division Bench

     of Madras High Court in
Dhamodaran (deceased) and others vs.

     Bhaskar Sekar and another
(C.M.A. Nos. 1646 of 2015 and 1301

     of 2017 dated 19.12.2018). The High Court however was pleased to

     set aside the grant of compensation under this head, again without

     assigning any reason. When the Claims Tribunal had awarded
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3132-3133 OF 2023                                      10
compensation under the head of pain and suffering of family

     members by relying upon the judgment of the High Court, another co-

     ordinate Bench of the same High Court could not have ignored
the

     said judgment
while setting aside the grant of such compensation by

     the Claims Tribunal. We do not find any reason whatsoever to deny

     the claimant the grant of compensation under this head. Accordingly,

     the compensation of Rs. 3 lacs towards pain and suffering of family

     members stands restored.
13. The Claims Tribunal further granted an amount of Rs. 3 lacs towards

     permanent disability suffered by the claimant. This was after taking

     into consideration the 100% disability suffered by the claimant. The

     High Court however set aside the grant of compensation under this

     head by observing that as compensation towards loss of income had

     been granted, further amount of Rs. 3 lacs towards permanent

     disability was not admissible. We do not find any basis whatsoever

     for this approach of the High Court. The grant of compensation for

     loss of future income is a distinct head from the one under which

     compensation is granted for permanent disability. In the light of the

     fact that the claimant suffered 100% permanent disability and was

     living in a vegetative state, the High Court was not justified in setting

     aside the grant of compensation under this head. In our view,
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3132-3133 OF 2023                                        11
considering the nature of disability suffered by the claimant, he would

     be entitled to amount of Rs. 5 lacs under this head.
14. In the light of the aforesaid discussion, the findings recorded by the

     High Court for reducing the amount of compensation to the extent of

     Rs. 19 lacs from what was awarded by the Claims Tribunal are

     unsustainable and thus set aside. Instead, it is held that the claimant

     would be entitled to an amount of Rs. 82,83,866/- as compensation

     under
Section 166
of the Act of 1988. The unpaid amount of

     compensation shall be paid to the appellant within a period of four

     weeks from today with interest at the rate of 7.5% per annum as

     directed by the Claims Tribunal.
15. The civil appeals are allowed in the aforesaid terms leaving the

     parties to bear their own costs.
…………………………....J.
                                                   [N. V. ANJARIA]


                                               …………………………....J.
                                               [ATUL S. CHANDURKAR]
NEW DELHI,
AUGUST 22, 2025.
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3132-3133 OF 2023                                      12