[Cites
66
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Devendra Kumar vs The State (Nct Of Delhi) on 20 August, 2025
2025 INSC 1009                                                     REPORTABLE



                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 12373 OF 2025




          DEVENDRA KUMAR                                         ...PETITIONER(S)



                                              VERSUS



          THE STATE (NCT OF DELHI) & ANR.                        ...RESPONDENT(S)




                                           JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Date: 2025.08.20
18:22:36 IST
Reason:
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.:
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided in the following parts: -
INDEX
A. BRIEF FACTUAL MATRIX ...........................................................................2

B. IMPUGNED ORDER .......................................................................................8

C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER .............................10

D. ANALYSIS ....................................................................................................... 11

   i.
Section 186
of the I.P.C. ................................................................................15

   ii.
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. ..............................................................................23

E. CONCLUSION................................................................................................47
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                                                    Page 1 of 50
1. This petition arises from the judgment and order passed by the High Court of

     Delhi dated 12th September 2024 in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 2047 of 2013

     and connected Criminal Miscellaneous Application No. 18861 of 2013 by which

     the writ petition along with the connected application came to be rejected,

     thereby affirming the order dated 28.11.2018 passed by the Chief Metropolitan

     Magistrate directing registration of the FIR against the petitioner-herein for the

     offence punishable under
Sections 186
and
341
respectively of the
Indian Penal

     Code
, 1860 (for short, “
I.P.C
”).
A.     BRIEF FACTUAL MATRIX
2. It appears from the materials on record that the respondent no. 2 herein at the

     relevant point of time was serving as a Process Server, Nazarat Branch,

     Shahdara. He was assigned the duty to serve warrants and, in this connection, he

     had to visit the Nand Giri police station on 03.10.2013. It is the case of the

     respondent no. 2 that few police officials, more particularly, the petitioner-herein

     misbehaved with him when he insisted for a receipt of the summons. According

     to him, he was detained in the police station till 4:30 PM. It is only after the

     arrival of the Head Constable that the warrants were accepted.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                            Page 2 of 50
3. The respondent no. 2 brought the alleged misconduct on part of the petitioner to

   the notice of the District and Sessions Judge of Shahdara in the form of voluntary

   obstruction said to have been caused in the discharge of his public functions. The

   District and Sessions Judge assigned the complaint to the Administrative Civil

   Judge who in turn lodged a private complaint in the court of the Chief

   Metropolitan Magistrate, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi.
4. The Chief Metropolitan Magistrate vide order dated 28.11.2013 directed the

   registration of FIR under
Sections 186
and
341
respectively of the
I.P.C
. The

   order passed by CMM, Shahdara, Delhi dated 28.11.2013 reads thus:
“The present complaint case was filed
u/s. 195
Cr.P.C. by Ld. ACJ,
          Shahdara.
Allegations of Shri Ravi Dutt Sharma (Process Server) are that one
          warrant issued by the court of Shri Sharad Gupta, Ld. MM and one
          summon issued by the court of Shri Arvind Kumar, Ld. AD) were
          assigned to him to be served to SHO PS Nand Nagri. On 3.10.2013
          he reached PS Nand Nagri at about 12.30 P.M. One Ct Sanjay
          Kumar Sharma was present in the room of 5-8. The said constable
          received the processes but signed as HC Brahmjeet. Process Server
          Ravi Dutt asked him not to do so. Upon this Ct. Sanjay cut the
          signatures made by him in the name of HC Brahmjeet and took the
          processes to the Reader of SHO who also refused to receive the
          processes. The process server went to duty officer who also refused
          to take the processes.
The process server went to SHO Insp. Devender Kumar and told
          him all the facts. The said SHO kept the processes and abused the
          process server badly. SHO asked process server to stand there
          raising his hands and wait till the Havaldar/Head Constable comes.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                        Page 3 of 50
For about half an hour process server stood there, raising his hands
          as a punishment. He was also made to sit on the floor for about 3-4
          hours as punishment. The process server begged SHO to allow him
          to go as he had to serve other processes also and told him that, he
          would come after serving other processes. The SHO, however, did
          not allow the process server to go. At about 4.30 p.m. one head
          constable come who took the processes and gave receipt.
From these allegations offence U/s. 106, 341 and 342
IPC
are
          clearly made out. The conduct of the SHD PS Nand Nagri cannot
          be tolerated. This case carrot be taken lightly.
Hence, U/s. 156(3)
Cr.P.C
., it is ordered that FIR be registered
          against SHO P.S. Nangi for the above said offence. The FIR be
          registered at PS Nand Negri itself as the offence took place within
          the premises of PS Nand Nagri itself. Investigation be conducted by
          Officer of the rank of ACP and under direct supervision of Addl. CP
          concerned.
Copy of this order be sent to CCP and Addl. CP concerned for
          immediate compliance. Put up for status report on 14.12.2023.”

                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
5. The aforesaid order came to be challenged by the petitioner-herein in the court

   of the Sessions Judge, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi by filing Criminal Revision

   Application No. 174 of 2013. The revision application came to be rejected vide

   order dated 03.12.2013. The order reads thus:
“10. A perusal of the record reveals that the Process Server Mr. Ravi
          Dutt Sharma posted at Nazarat Branch, Karkardooma Court, Delhi
          has submitted his complaint dated 10/10/13, to Ld. District &
          Sessions Judge, Shahdara, Delhi. Ld. District & Sessions Judge,
          Shahdara had made an endorsement dated 14/10/13 assigning the
          said complaint to Ld. Administrative Civil Judge, Shahdara to deal
          with the matter. Shri Neeraj Qaur, Ld. Administrative Civil Judge,
          Shahdara District. Karkardooma Court, Delhi, thereafter made a
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                         Page 4 of 50
complaint dated 15/10/13 U/s 195
Cr.P.C
to the Ld. Chief
          Metropolitan Magistrate, Shahdara District, Karkardooma Courts,
          Delhi enclosing, the original complaint made by the Process Server.
          In the said complaint he had observed that allegations made in the
          complaint prima facie constitute offences U/s 186
IPC
and U/s 341
IPC
.
11. Ld. CMM on receipt of the complaint had issued notice to the
          DCP for 29/10/13 vide order dated 17/10/13. On 29/10/13, ACP
          Seemapuri had appeared and sought adjournment for filing the
          report and the matter was adjourned for 13/11/13. On that day,
          further time was sought by ACP and matter was adjourned to
          28/11/13. On 28/11/13, report was filed on behalf of Addl. DCP vide
          letter No. 179/13 dated 27/11/l3 submitting that inquiry into the
          matter was got conducted by ACP Seemapuri wherein fault on the
          part of the Inspector Devender Kumar, SHO, PS Nand Nagri was
          established. In the impugned order, Ld. Trial Court has reproduced
          the contents of the complaint wherein allegations were made
          against the SHO concerned and the staff and after considering the
          complaint, Ld. Trial court had observed: that from the allegations
          made in the complaint offences U/s 186, 341 and 342
IPC
are
          clearly made out. Therefore, Ld. Trial court has substantially
          compiled with the guidelines issued by Hon'ble High Court in
          authority: reported as
Subhash Manchanda v State & Anr.
, 2013 II
          AD (Delhi) 277 and Subhkaran Luharuka and Shree Ram Mills Ltd.
v State (Govt of NCT of Delhi) and Utility Premises Pvt Ltd. It Is
          pertinent to mention here that in the present case, the complainant
          is a Process Server posted at Karkardooma Court who had gone to
          PS Nand Nagri to serve the summons issued from the court of Shri
          Arvind Kumar, Ld. ADJ and warrants-issued from the court-of Shri
          Sharad Gupta, Ld. MM but he faced the difficulty in execution of
          the process at police station. He has narrated the entire episode in
          his complaint which reflects that in VB Room, one person disclosed
          his identity as Ct. Sanjay Kumar, who received the processes and
          signed as HC Brhamjeet and on protest by the complainant, he
          struck off the signatures made by him and took the complainant to
          Reader of SHC and then to Duty Officer who both refused to receive
          the processes. He was thereafter, produced before the revisionist to
          whom facts were disclosed, whereupon he started misbehaving by
          remarking whatever has" been done by Ct. Sanjay, Reader and Duty
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                        Page 5 of 50
Officer was correctly done and that he would, teach complainant
          how to do service; that complainant is below a Constable and he
          being fourth class employee was nobody to teach them work and
          made him to stand up for half an hour with hands up and was made
          to sit on floor for 3-4 hours as punishment. He also asked his staff
          to bring DD register and remarked that complainant should be
          confined (band karo) and then he would see as to what the Judge of
          complainant would do and that he (complainant) should make the
          revisionist talk on phone with the Judge then he would see as to
          what a Judge can do as Judge is also an officer so is revisionist.
          Despite request of complainant to let him go and come back after
          executing the court work, complainant was not allowed.
          Complainant has placed on record the photocopies of the process
          bearing the cuttings allegedly done by the Constable who had put
          the signatures of other Head Constable and subsequently the
          signatures were struck off. The original or copy of the process was
          not delivered to the Process Server but he was provided only
          photocopy, thereof. He was allegedly illtreated, wrongly confined,
          punished by making him stand hands-up and was also allegedly
          asked to sit on the floor for about 3-4 hours, He has made the
          complaint against the SHO concerned, the revisionist herein. Under
          the circumstances, he could not have been expected to have first
          approached the revisionist against whom he had the grievance and
          therefore the contention that he could not have made the complaint
          directly to the court has no merit.
12. The contention raised by Ld. Counsel for the revisionist that the
          complaint U/s 195
Cr.P.C
by Ld. ACJ to the court of Ld. CMM could
          only be filed subsequent to holding an inquiry U/s 340
Cr.P.C
is not
          tenable because the question of holding an inquiry U/s 340
Cr.P.C
would arise only when the offence referred to falls in clause (b) of
          Sub-section (1) of
Section 195
Cr.P.C which appears to have been
          committed in or in relation to a proceeding In that court or as the
          case may be in respect of a document produced or given in evidence
          in a proceeding in that Court. The complainant Process Server Ravi
          Dutt Sharma is a public servant and being employee in the court he
          was administratively subordinate to Ld. Administrative Civil Judge,
          who had made the complaint U/s 195
Cr.P.C
and therefore in the
          complaint he had formed a view after considering the contents of
          the complaint that from the allegations made therein prima facie
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                         Page 6 of 50
offence U/s 186 IRC and U/s 341
IPC
are constituted and therefore
          there was no illegality in the complaint. The question of obtaining
          sanction against the offender being a police officer, is to be
          appreciated at the time of taking cognizance of offence or filing of
          chargesheet and contention in this regard is pre-mature at this
          juncture.
13. The impugned order has been passed by Ld. CMM, Shahdara
          and PS Nand Nagri falls in the territorial jurisdiction of District
          Shahdara, Delhi and therefore Ld. Trial Court was competent and
          had territorial jurisdiction to pass the impugned order.
14. The contention that Ld. Trial court has completely failed to
          appreciate the distinction between Chapters XV and XXVI has no
          merit.
In authority reported as
Baru Ram v State of Haryana
1990
          Cr.L.J NOC 153, it was held that if cognizance of offence has not
          been taken by the Magistrate U/s 190(1)(a)
Cr.P.C
on receipt of
          complaint, he can direct investigation U/s 156(3)
Cr.P.C
after
          registration of the case.
In authority reported as
Minu Kumari &
          Anr v State of Bihar and Ors
(2006) 4 Supreme Court Cases 359,
          It was held that the Magistrate is not bound to follow the procedure
laid down in
sections 200
and
202
of the Code for taking cognizance
          of a case U/s 190(1)(i)(a)
Cr.P.C
.
15. It cannot be said that -the complaint made by Ld. Administrative
          Civil Judge to Ld. CMM U/s 195
Cr.P.C
accompanied with the
          complaint of Process Server is abuse of court process or of
          provisions of law. The contention that allegations made by the
          Process Server are improbable and absurd cannot be outrightly
          rejected or disbelieved rather the photocopies of the warrant and
          summons placed by him on record prima facie support his
          allegations. The letter No. 179/13 dated 27/11/13 submitted by Mr.
          Rajender Singh Sagar, Additional DCP, N/E District, Delhi also
          supports the complainant as it has been reported that in the inquiry
          conducted by ACP Seemapuri fault on the part of Inspector
          Devender Kumar SHO, PS Nand Nagri was established.
16. There is no doubt that a Magistrate cannot direct investigation
          to be conducted by an officer of a particular rank, However, in the
          present case the complainant had made the allegations against the
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                        Page 7 of 50
SHO, PS Nand Nagri, (the revisionist herein) and therefore an order
             directing investigation to be conducted by an Officer of the rank of
             ACP cannot be said to be illegal because investigation by a superior
             officer alone can serve the purpose of inquiry or investigation.
17. In my considered view there appears no illegality, irregularity
             or impropriety in the Impugned order. The revision is therefore
             dismissed. Copy of order alongwith trial court record be sent to the
             Ld. Trial Court. Revision file be consigned to Record Room.”

                                                       (Emphasis supplied)

B.     IMPUGNED ORDER
6. The aforesaid order passed by the Additional Sessions Judge came to be

     challenged before the High Court. The High Court declined to interfere and

     rejected the writ petition. The impugned order passed by the High Court reads

     thus:
“31. Prima facie; it is established that there was indeed an
             obstruction/delay caused by the Police Officials of P.S. Nand Nagri
             in execution of the court duties of the Complainant in the service of
             the summon/warrants.
32. The first plea of the Petitioner that the Ld. CMM could not be
             specifically directed registration of FIR
u/s 186
/
341
/
342
IPC, 1860
             is not tenable for the simple reason that the observations are that
             these offences are prima facie made put, but it does not curtail the
             investigations to be confined only to these offences. The I.O. is
             obligated, to conduct investigations fair and the submit the final
             report on the offences if any, are established on the basis of the
             investigations.
33. The second ground taken is that direct registration of FIR in
             non-cognizable offences
u/s 186
IPC, 1860 in the absence of any
             complaint by the Court, is in contravention of
S.195
Cr.P.C. This
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                            Page 8 of 50
argument is totally fallacious for the simple reason that firstly, the
          complainant/Process Server who is a public servant and as an
          employee of the court, is administratively subordinate to the
          Learned Administrative Civil Judge, who filed the complaint under
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. to the Ld. CMM who in turn forwarded it
          by endorsing the prima facie commission of the offences and
          directing the investigations. Secondly, the alleged misconduct of the
          Petitioner, by no stretch of imagination, can be termed as acts in
          discharge of his official duties. Thirdly, the Complaint under
S.195
Cr.P.C. is required for taking cognizance on the charge sheet; the
          issue of obtaining sanction is premature at this stage. Thus, the
          Ld.ASJ has rightly observed that there is no illegality in the
          complaint and the need for sanction against the accused, a police
          officer, should be addressed when taking cognizance or filing the
          chargesheet.
34. The Third challenge is to the directions by the Ld. CMM for the
          investigations to be conducted by officers of Rank of ACP.
Considering that the complainant has made allegations against the
          SHO of PS Nand Nagri, it has been rightly ordered that the
          investigation be carried out by an officer of the rank of ACP. Such
          directions cannot be held illegal, as only an investigation conducted
          by a higher-ranking officer can effectively serve the purpose of a
          proper inquiry or investigation.
35. Fourth ground to challenge the Impugned Order was that a
          Preliminary Enquiry should have been conducted before directing
          registration of an FIR against a government servant. However, the
          holding of an inquiry
u/s. 340
Cr.P.C. does not arise in the present
          case as the Ld. CMM had filed a complaint
u/s. 195(1)(a)(i)
Cr.P.C.
          along with the complaint of the respondent no. 2 for the offence
          under
s. 186
IPC. The Ld. ASJ has rightly observed that the question
          of Preliminary enquiry under
s. 340
Cr.P.C. would have arisen only
          when the offence referred falls within
s. 195(1)(b)
Cr.P.C. and does
          not pertain to the offence under
s.186
IPC.
36. The Fifth contention raised by the Petitioner that the Ld. ASJ
          has failed to discuss the Enquiry Report dated 25.11.2013 of ACP,
          is completely misplaced as the Ld. ASJ has not only discussed and
          referred to the Inquiry report dated 25.11.2013 but has concluded
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                         Page 9 of 50
that the same clearly establishes the fault of the Petitioner: The
           reliance of the Petitioner on this Report self-destructive as the same
           clearly highlights the misconduct of the Petitioner who used harsh
           words against the process server on being provoked.
37. In light of the foregoing discussion, it is held that there is no
           infirmity in the Order dated 28.11.2018 of the Ld. CMM, directing
           registration of the FIR against the concerned police officials which
           is upheld by the Ld. ASJ vide the Order dated 03.12.2013 and the
           same warrant no inference by this Court.
38. The Petition, along with pending application(s) if any, are
           hereby dismissed.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
7. In such circumstances
referred to above
, the petitioner is here before this Court

     with the present petition.
C.     SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
8. Mr. Nikilesh Ramachandran, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner

     vehemently submitted that even if the entire case put up in the FIR is believed

     to be true or accepted to be true, none of the ingredients to constitute the offence

     punishable under
Section 186
of the I.P.C. could be said to be disclosed. In other

     words, the counsel contends that the whole of the complaint even if taken to be

     true does not reveal the commission of any offence by the petitioner-herein. He

     would submit that the contents of the complaint even if read together as true

     would not attract
Section 186
of the I.P.C. far from
Section 341
of the I.P.C.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                            Page 10 of 50
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, mere obstruction is not

     enough unless it is accompanied by use of some criminal force.
9. The learned counsel vehemently submitted that no order could have been passed

     in exercise of powers under
Section 156(3)
of the Cr.P.C. for the registration of

     an offence under
Section 186
of the I.P.C. as the same is encompassed within
Section 195(1)(a)
of the Cr.P.C. and cognizance of the offence punishable under
Section 186
of the I.P.C. can only be taken upon a complaint as defined under
Section 2(d)
of the Cr.P.C.
10. In such circumstances
referred to above
, it was prayed that there being merit in

     this petition, the same may be allowed and the First Information Report be

     quashed.
D.     ANALYSIS
11. We could have disposed of the present petition by just observing that the

     petitioner may avail appropriate legal remedy before an appropriate forum in

     accordance with law if at all at the end of the investigation a chargesheet is filed.

     However, there is one issue which needs a little clarification at our end.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                             Page 11 of 50
12. It is not in dispute that the Administrative Civil Judge upon instructions from the

    District and Sessions Judge, Shahdara lodged a private complaint in the court of

    the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi. This was in tune

    with the procedure prescribed under
Section 195(1)(a)
of the Cr.P.C. that it is

    either the public servant concerned or some other public servant to whom he is

    administratively subordinate, who would be allowed to file a complaint in

    writing. To the extent of filing a private complaint everything proceeded in

    accordance with law. However, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate should have

    straightaway taken cognizance upon the said complaint and issued process to the

    petitioner-herein. Asking the police to investigate the complaint under
Section

    156(3)
of the Cr.P.C. was a very serious error that the Chief Metropolitan

    Magistrate could be said to have committed. What was the need to involve the

    police in a complaint lodged by a Civil Judge for the offence punishable under
Sections 186
and
341
respectively of the
I.P.C
.?
13. If an accused person, in situations such as the present, obstructs a public servant

    in the discharge of his public function, the accused person commits two offences.

    One offence committed by him is the alleged obstruction which comes within
Section 186
I.P.C. and the other offence committed by him is the offence of

    having been guilty of undermining the authority of the court. In our view,
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                          Page 12 of 50
therefore, if an accused is alleged to have committed an offence within
Section

   186
, he would seem to have committed also an offence of contempt of court.
14. In the facts of the present case, the right thing to do for the Chief Metropolitan

   Magistrate should have been to take cognizance and issue process under
Section

   204
of the Cr.P.C. In the present case, there is no other serious offence or any

   offence figuring under
Section 195(1)(b)(ii)
of the Cr.P.C. that perhaps would

   have required the assistance of the police. In the case in hand, the dignity of the

   court was at stake. There is lot of sanctity attached to a complaint lodged by none

   other than a civil judge. In a complaint lodged by a public servant, even

   verification of the contents of the complaint on oath is not required. In such

   circumstances, we do not approve of the order of police investigation under
Section 156(3)
of the Cr.P.C.
15. It would be argued that as the FIR was registered for non-cognizable offences;

   Section(s) 186 and 341 of the
I.P.C
., respectively, and even if
Section 341
of the

   I.P.C. is to be treated as a distinct offence being not covered under
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C., the police report if at all filed in future, insofar as the offence

   under
Section 186
of the I.P.C. is concerned, may be treated as a “complaint” in
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                         Page 13 of 50
view of the explanation to
Section 2(d)
of the Cr.P.C.
Section 2(d)
Cr.P.C. reads

   as follows:
“(d) “complaint” means any allegation made orally or in writing
          to a Magistrate, with a view to his taking action under this Code,
          that some person, whether known or unknown, has committed an
          offence, but does not include a police report.
Explanation.—A report made by a police officer in a case which
          discloses, after investigation, the commission of a non-cognizable
          offence shall be deemed to be a complaint; and the police officer by
          whom such report is made shall be deemed to be the complainant;”

                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
16. As per the explanation appended to the definition clause, a police report

   disclosing a non-cognizable offence (
Sections 186
and
341
I.P.C. respectively in

   the present case) shall be deemed to be a complaint and the police offer shall be

   deemed to be the complainant. Even then, the legal embargo under
Section 195
Cr.P.C., so far as
Section 186
of the I.P.C. is concerned is not dispelled as the

   legal fiction deems the police officer and not the aggrieved public servant as the

   complainant. [See:
Umashankar Yadav and Another v. State of U.P.
, 2025 SCC

   OnLine SC 1066]
17. The entire trial would have been over within a period of three months from the

   date of filing of the complaint in writing, had the CMM taken cognizance on the

   very first day and issued process under
Section 204
of the Cr.P.C. Having not
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                        Page 14 of 50
done so at the right time and in the right manner, it has been now twelve years

     that this litigation is still pending.
18. Look at the mess created by one and all over a period of twelve years. We are

     talking about upholding and maintaining the dignity of court. This entire

     prosecution for the alleged offence is to uphold the dignity of court. However, it

     has been twelve years but no one has been able to uphold the dignity of the court

     by proceeding in the right direction.
i.
Section 186
of the I.P.C.
19. Before proceeding further to discuss as to whether mere obstruction itself would

     be enough or the act of obstruction is to be accompanied by use of some criminal

     force, it may be necessary to notice one particular allegation made against the

     petitioner herein in the complaint. In the complaint the allegations are:
“one warrant issued by the court of Shri Sharad Gupta, Ld. MM and
            one summons issued by the court of Shri Arvind Kumar, Ld. AD)
            were assigned to him to be served to SHO PS Nand Nagri. On
            3.10.2013 he reached PS Nand Nagri at about 12.30 P.M. One Ct
            Sanjay Kumar Sharma was present in the room of 5-8. The said
            constable received the processes but signed as HC Brahmjeet.
Process Server Ravi Dutt asked him not to do so. Upon this Ct.
            Sanjay cut the signatures made by him in the name of HC Brahmjeet
            and took the processes to the Reader of SHO who also refused to
            receive the processes. The process server went to duty officer who
            also refused to take the processes.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                          Page 15 of 50
The process server went to SHO Insp. Devender Kumar and told
          him all the facts. The said SHO kept the processes and abused the
          process server badly. SHO asked process server to stand there
          raising his hands and wait till the Havaldar/Head Constable comes.
          For about half an hour process server stood there, raising his hands
          as a punishment. He was also made to sit on the floor for about 3-4
          hours as punishment. The process server begged SHO to allow him
          to go as he had to serve other processes also and told him that, he
          would come after serving other processes. The SHO, however, did
          not allow the process server to go. At about 4.30 p.m. one head
          constable come who took the processes and gave receipt.”
20.
In
Nishi Kanta Pal v. Emperor
reported in AIR 1917 Calcutta 180, the accused

   who were not parties to a suit in which a public right of way was claimed, did

   not allow a Munsif, in whose Court the suit was pending, to pass in a boat

   through a ditch which was their private property, when the Munsif wanted to

   pass through it for the purpose of making a local inspection in connection with

   the suit. The Calcutta High Court held that the accused did not commit any

   offence under
Section 186
of the I.P.C. The Court took the view that there was

   no right of way as such and to pass through it for the purpose of making a local

   inspection and therefore, the accused are right in obstructing the Munsif from

   passing through their lands.
21.
In
Jaswant Singh v. King Emperor
reported in AIR 1925 Lahore 139, the

   Lahore High Court held that the use of the word voluntarily in
Section 186
of
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                        Page 16 of 50
I.P.C
. indicates that the Legislature contemplated the commission of some overt

   act of obstruction, and did not intend to render penal mere passive conduct.
The

   Allahabad High Court in
Phudki v. State
reported in AIR 1955 All. 104, held

   that the word obstruction in
Section 186
connotes some overt act in the nature

   of violence or show of violence. It cannot be said that a man obstructed another

   if that man runs away from arrest or if he does not actually submit to the arrest.
The Patna High Court in
Janki Prasad Tibrewal v. The State of Bihar
reported

   in 1975 Crl. L.J. 575 (Patna) while construing the expression ‘obstruct’ used in
Section 186
observed that the expression obstruct envisages actual resistance

   and obstacle in the way of public servant and it implies the use of criminal force.
However, the Patna High Court in
Diljam Sahu v. Emperor
reported in AIR

   1937 Patna 633 observed that sufficient indication that any attempt to effect

   attachment by a public servant having warrant of attachment would be resisted

   by force is quite enough to constitute obstruction within the meaning of Section

   186 of the Act. Mere resistance of warrant of attachment by a public servant

   would be an offence punishable under
Section 186
of I.P.C.
22. The Bombay High Court in
Emperor v. Sideman Abba
reported in AIR 1935

   Bom.
24 also took the similar view that mere obstruction or prevention of

   discharge of duties may be enough to constitute an offence under
Section 186
of
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                         Page 17 of 50
the
I.P.C
. A Division Bench of Bombay High Court in
State v. Babulal

   Gaurishanker Misar
reported in AIR 1957 Bombay 10 held that to constitute

   ‘obstruction’ within
Section 186
of the I.P.C., it is not necessary that there should

   be actual criminal force. It is sufficient if there is either a show of force or threat

   or any act preventing the execution of the process of the civil Court. It was held

   by the Court that if an accused obstructs a public servant in the discharge of his

   public function (execution of a warrant of possession) he commits two offences.

   One offence committed by him is the alleged obstruction which comes within
Section 186
and the other offence committed by him is the offence of having

   been guilty of undermining the authority of the Court.
23. “Obstructing” the police is not confined to physical obstruction. [See:

   Sykes v. Director of Public Prosecutions, 1962 A.C. 528]
24. The word ‘obstruction’ in
Section 186
of the I.P.C is not confined to physical

   obstruction only. Threats of violence made in such a way as to prevent the public

   servant from carrying out his duty might easily amount to an obstruction of the

   public servant.
25.
In
Santosh Kumar Jain v. The State
reported in 1951 SCC 190, the General

   Manager of the Jagdishpur Zamindary Co. who were the lessees of a sugar
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                            Page 18 of 50
factory, was prosecuted for obstructing the District Magistrate and the Special

   Officer of Rationing, Patna, in the discharge of their official functions when they

   went to the factory on 06.12.1947 to remove, 5,000 maunds of sugar which had

   been seized out of the stock held by the Company pursuant to an order of the

   Government of Bihar dated 05.12.1947. The named officers went to the Factory

   on 06.12.1947 to carry out the order of the Government. The Officers were told

   by the accused General Manager that he would do everything possible to obstruct

   the removal of the sugar and accordingly it was found that the sugar godowns

   had been locked and the road leading to them blocked by heaps of coal, firewood

   and tins placed across, so as to make vehicular traffic impossible. As a result of

   such obstruction, the officers had to seek the aid of armed police to break open

   the locks, repair the railway line and clear the road block before the sugar could

   be removed from the factory. The main defense of the accused was that on a

   proper construction of
Section 3
of the Essential Supplies (Temporary powers)

   Act, 1946 it was not competent for the Government to pass the order dated

   05.12.1947, which was consequently illegal and void and that obstruction to the

   execution of that order could not constitute an offence under
Section 186
I.P.C.

   The contention was rejected by the Court below and the accused was convicted

   and sentenced to imprisonment for a term of three weeks under
Section 186
of

   I.P.C. The Patna High Court confirmed the conviction and the sentence. The
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                         Page 19 of 50
revision came up before this Court. This Court observed that the seizure of the

   Company's sugar must therefore be regarded as duly authorized and lawful and

   the accused by obstructing its removal committed an offence under
Section 186
of I.P.C.
26.
In
Collector of Customs and Central Excise v. Paradip Port Trust
reported in

   (1990) 4 SCC 250, this Court while construing the expression obstruction' used

   in
Section 133
of the Customs Act, 1962 observed that:
“On the authority of Hinchliffe v. Sheldon [(1955) 1 WLR 1207],
          it can be said that obstruction is not confined to physical
          obstruction and it includes anything which makes it more difficult
          for the police or public servant to carry out their duties.”

                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
27. It may be necessary to have a look at
Section 133
of the Customs Act, 1962

   which is analogous to
Section 186
of the I.P.C.
Section 133
reads thus: -
“133. Obstruction of officer of customs. —
          If any person intentionally obstructs any officer of customs in the
          exercise of any powers conferred under this Act, such person shall
          be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
          six months, or with fine, or with both.”
28. Now let us compare
Section 133
of the Customs Act, 1962 with
Section 186
of

   the I.P.C.
Section 186
of I.P.C. reads:
“186. Obstructing public servant in discharge of public
          functions.—
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                       Page 20 of 50
Whoever voluntarily obstructs any public servant in the discharge
          of his public functions, shall be punished with imprisonment of
          either description for a term which may extent to three months, or
          with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both”.
29. Under Section 186, the expression “whoever voluntarily obstructs any public

   servant in the discharge of his public functions” is used and whereas in
Section

   133
of the Customs Act, 1962 the expression “if any person intentionally

   obstructs any officer of customs” is used. In our considered opinion, the

   expression ‘intentionally’ used in
Section 133
of the Customs Act and the

   expression ‘voluntarily’ used in
Section 186
of I.P.C. connote the same meaning.

   The decision of this Court in
Collector of Customs
(supra) concludes and

   decides the issue. Therefore, we hold that the expression ‘obstruction’ used in
Section 186
of the I.P.C. is not confined to physical obstruction. It need not

   necessarily be an act of use of criminal force. The act need not be a violent one.

   It is enough if the act complained of results in preventing a public servant in

   discharge of his lawful duties. Any act of causing impediment by unlawfully

   preventing public servant in discharge of his functions would be enough to

   attract
Section 186
of the I.P.C. Any other interpretation would be to encourage

   people to take the law into their hands, frustrate the investigation of the crimes

   and thwart public justice. Such an interpretation cannot be commended by the

   Courts.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                        Page 21 of 50
30. We have already noticed the averments made in the complaint against the

    petitioner herein and others. Their acts prima facie, in our considered opinion,

    amount to obstructing the public servant in the discharge of their public

    functions. Therefore, the complaint itself, in our considered opinion does not

    suffer from any legal infirmity.
31. It is entirely a different matter altogether that the allegations levelled against the

    petitioner may be true or not. The same has to be enquired into by the trial court,

    in accordance with law, uninfluenced by the observations relating to the acts

    themselves, as this Court has not expressed any opinion whatsoever on the merits

    of the case. But if the allegations are true and established as is required in law,

    they would certainly constitute an offence punishable under
Section 186
of the

    I.P.C.
32. The aforesaid is one view of the matter. The courts should be mindful of the

    position of law that we have explained as aforesaid.
33. We now proceed to consider the matter from a different angle with a view to

    decide whether we should interfere with the impugned judgment passed by the

    High Court or not.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                            Page 22 of 50
ii.
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C.
34.
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. reads thus:
“195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public servant,
           for offences against public justice and for offences relating to
           documents given in evidence.–

           (1) No Court shall take cognizance -
(a) (i) of any offence punishable under sections 172 to 188 (both
                 inclusive) of the
Indian Penal Code
, or
(ii) of any abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence, or
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit such offence,

                   except on the complaint in writing of the public servant
              concerned or of some other public servant to whom he is
              administratively subordinate;
(b) (i) of any offence punishable under any of the following sections
                  of the
Indian Penal Code
, namely, sections 193 to 196 (both
                  inclusive), 199, 200, 205 to 211 (both inclusive) and 228, when
                  such offence is alleged to have been committed in, or in relation
                  to, any proceeding in any Court, or
(ii) of any offence described in section 463, or punishable under
                 section 471, section 475 or section 476, of the said Code, when
                 such offence is alleged to have been committed in respect of a
                 document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in any
                 Court, or
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit,
                 or the abetment of, any offence specified in sub-clause (i) or
                 sub-clause (ii),
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                            Page 23 of 50
except on the complaint in writing of that Court or by such officer
      of the Court as that Court may authorise in writing in this behalf, or of
      some other Court to which that Court is subordinate.
(2) Where a complaint has been made by a public servant under clause
(a) of sub-section (1) any authority to which he is administratively
              subordinate may order the withdrawal of the complaint and send a
              copy of such order to the Court; and upon its receipt by the Court,
              no further proceedings shall be taken on the complaint:
Provided that no such withdrawal shall be ordered if the trial
             in the Court of first instance has been concluded.
(3) In clause (b) of sub-section (1), the term "Court" means a Civil,
              Revenue or Criminal Court, and includes a tribunal constituted by
              or under a Central, Provincial or State Act if declared by that Act
              to be a Court for the purposes of this section.
(4) For the purposes of clause (b) of sub-section (1), a Court shall be
              deemed to be subordinate to the Court to which appeals ordinarily
              lie from the appealable decrees or sentences of such former Court,
              or in the case of a Civil Court from whose decrees no appeal
              ordinarily lies to the principal Court having ordinary original civil
              jurisdiction within whose local jurisdiction such Civil Court is
              situate:
Provided that-
(a) where appeals lie to more than one Court, the Appellate Court
                 of inferior jurisdiction shall be the Court to which such Court
                 shall be deemed to be subordinate;
(b) where appeals lie to a Civil and also to a Revenue Court, such
                 Court shall be deemed to be subordinate to the Civil or Revenue
                 Court according to the nature of the case or proceeding in
                 connection with which the offence is alleged to have been
                 committed.”
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                            Page 24 of 50
35. As a general rule, any person, having knowledge of commission of an offence

    may set the law in motion by a complaint, even though he is not personally

    interested or affected by the offence. There are exceptions to this general rule, as

    evident from Sections 195 and 196 respectively of the
Cr.P.C
. Section 195 is one

    of those sections, which prohibits a court from taking cognizance of certain

    offences unless and until a complaint has been made by some particular authority

    or person. The other sections, with similar prescriptions, are
sections 196
to
199
of the Cr.P.C. respectively.
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. has been enacted as a

    safeguard against the irresponsible and reckless prosecutions by the private

    individuals in respect of the offences, which relate to the administration of justice

    and contempt of lawful authority.
36. It is true that
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. does not bar the trial of an accused for a

    distinct offence disclosed by the same set of facts and is not so stated therein.
Section 195 also does not provide further that if in the course of the commission

    of that offence, other distinct offences are committed, the court concerned is

    debarred from taking cognizance in respect of those offences as well. However,

    having said so, if the perusal of the first information report makes it clear that

    the offence under
Section 186
of the I.P.C. is closely interconnected with another

    distinct offence(s), which in this case is
Section 341
of the I.P.C. and it cannot
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                            Page 25 of 50
be split up, then in such circumstances, the bar of
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. will

   apply to such other distinct offence also.
37. In the aforesaid context, we may refer to the following decisions of this Court;
(i)    In the case of
State of U.P. v. Suresh Chandra Srivastava & Ors.
, reported

          in AIR 1984 SC 1108 a three-judge bench very succinctly explained the

          provisions of
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. and stated that if the other distinct

          offences form an integral part of the offences as enumerated under
Section

          195
Cr.P.C so as to fall under the same transaction, then those distinct

          offences would also be covered under the ambit of
Section 195
Cr.P.C.

          The relevant observations are as under: -
“6. In these circumstances, therefore, it is not necessary for
                us to go into the broader question as to whether if offences
                under
Sections 467
,
471
and
120-B
IPC are committed, the
                complaint could proceed or not. The law is now well settled
                that where an accused commits some offences which are
                separate and distinct from those contained in section 195,
                section 195 will affect only the offences mentioned therein
                unless such offences form an integral part so as to amount to
                offences committed as a part of the same transaction, in
                which case the other offences also would fall within the ambit
                of sec. 195 of the Code.”

                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
(ii)   In the case of
State of Karnataka vs. Hemareddy & Anr.
reported in

          AIR 1981 SC 1417, this Court held that in the cases where in the

          course of the same transaction, an offence, for which, no complaint by a
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                           Page 26 of 50
court is necessary under
Section 195(1)(b)
of the Cr.P.C., and an

           offence, for which, a complaint of a Court is necessary under that

           sub-section, are committed, it is not possible to split up and hold that

           the prosecution of the accused for the offences not mentioned in
Section

           195(1)(b)
, Cr.P.C. should be upheld. We may quote the observation as

           contained in para 8. The same reads as under: -
“8. We agree with the view expressed by the learned Judge
                 and hold that in cases where in the course of the same
                 transaction an offence for which no complaint by a court is
                 necessary under
s. 195(1)(b)
of the Code of Criminal
                 Procedure and an offence for which a complaint of a court is
                 necessary under that sub-section, are committed, it is not
                 possible to split up and hold that the prosecution of the
                 accused for the offences not mentioned in
s. 195(1)(b)
of the
                 Code of Criminal Procedure should be upheld.”

                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
(iii)   In the case of
Saloni Arora vs. State of NCT of Delhi, [ Criminal

           Appeal No.64
of 2017], decided on 10.01.2017, this Court explained

           the object of
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C., observing as under: -
“10. As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the
                 parties on the strength of law
laid down by
this Court in the
                 case of
Daulat Ram vs. State of Punjab
, (AIR 1962 SC 1206)
                 that in order to prosecute an accused for an offence
                 punishable under
Section 182
IPC, it is mandatory to follow
                 the procedure prescribed under Section 195 of the Code else
                 such action is rendered void ab initio.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                         Page 27 of 50
11. It is apposite to reproduce the law
laid down by
this
                Court in the case of
Daulat Ram
(supra) which reads as
                under:
There is an absolute bar against the Court taking seisin of the
                case under
S.182
I.P.C. except in the manner provided by
S.195
Cr.P.C. Section 182 does not require that action must
                always be taken if the person who moves the public servant
                knows or believes that action would be taken. The offence
                under S.182 is complete when a person moves the public
                servant for action. Where a person reports to a Tehsildar to
                take action on averment of certain facts, believing that the
                Tehsildar would take some action upon it, and the facts
                alleged in the report are found to be false, it is incumbent, if
                the prosecution is to be launched, that the complaint in
                writing should be made by the Tehsildar, as the public servant
                concerned under S.182, and not leave it to the police to
                put a charge-sheet. The complaint must be in writing by the
                public servant concerned.
The trial under S.182 without the Tehsildars complaint in
                writing is, therefore, without jurisdiction ab initio.
12. It is not in dispute that in this case, the prosecution while
                initiating the action against the appellant did not take
                recourse to the procedure prescribed under Section 195 of
                the Code. It is for this reason, in our considered opinion, the
                action taken by the prosecution against the appellant insofar
                as it relates to the offence under
Section 182
IPC is
                concerned, is rendered void ab initio being against the law
laid down in
the case of
Daulat Ram
(supra) quoted
                above.”

                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
38. Thus, what is discernible from the decisions
referred to above
is that if in truth

   and substance, an offence falls in the category of Section 195, it is not open to
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                          Page 28 of 50
the court to undertake the exercise of splitting them up and proceeding further

   against the accused for the other distinct offences. This would depend on the

   facts of each case. However it cannot be laid as a straitjacket formula that the

   Court cannot undertake the exercise of splitting up. It would depend upon the

   nature of the allegations and the materials on record.
39.
In
Basir-ul-huq and others v. State of West Bengal
reported in (1953) 1 SCC

   637, a three-judge bench of this Court held that the magistrate would not be

   debarred from taking cognizance of the distinct offences not falling within the

   ambit of Section 195(1)(a), thereby, effectively stating that the offences falling

   under Section 195(1)(a) and those not falling under Section 195(1)(a) can be

   split up. Therein, one of the appellants had lodged an information at the police

   station that one D had beaten and throttled his mother to death. While the funeral

   pyre was in flames, the appellants therein along with the police arrived at the

   cremation ground, extinguished the fire and sent the body of the deceased for

   post-mortem examination. However, no injury was found on the body of the

   deceased. Upon investigation, the sub-inspector reached the conclusion that a

   false complaint had been made against D. Therefore, an offence under
Section

   182
I.P.C. was made out. However, D had separately instituted a complaint

   against the appellants and they stood convicted for having committed the offence
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                        Page 29 of 50
under
Sections 297
and
500
of the I.P.C. respectively. It was in such a

   circumstance that this Court stated that the Magistrate could take cognizance of

   the distinct offences i.e.,
Sections 297
and
500
of the I.P.C. respectively despite

   the facts also disclosing the commission of an offence under
Section 182
I.P.C.
for which a complaint by the proper authority under
Section 195
Cr.P.C would

   be a pre-requisite. Opining so, it was observed as follows:
“12.
Section 195
CrPC, on which the question raised is grounded,
          provides, inter alia, that no court shall take cognizance of an
          offence punishable under Sections 172 to 188IPC, except on the
          complaint in writing of the public servant concerned, or some other
          public servant to whom he is subordinate. The statute thus requires
          that without a complaint in writing of the public servant concerned
          no prosecution for an offence under Section 182 can be taken
          cognizance of. It does not further provide that if in the course of the
          commission of that offence other distinct offences are committed,
          the Magistrate is debarred from taking cognizance in respect of
          those offences as well. The allegations made in a complaint may
          have a double aspect, that is, on the one hand these may constitute
          an offence against the authority of the public servant or public
          justice, and on the other hand, they may also constitute the offence
          of defamation or some other distinct offence. The section does not
          per se bar the cognizance by the Magistrate of that offence, even if
          no action is taken by the public servant to whom the false report has
          been made. It was however argued that if on the same facts an
          offence of which no cognizance can be taken under the provisions
          of Section 195 is disclosed and the same facts disclose another
          offence as well which is outside the purview of the section and
          prosecution for that other offence is taken cognizance of without the
          requirements of Section 195 having been fulfilled, then the
          provisions of that section would become nugatory and if such a
          course was permitted those provisions will stand defeated. It was
          further said that it is not permissible for the prosecution to ignore
          the provisions of this section by describing the offence as being
          punishable under some other section of the Penal Code.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                          Page 30 of 50
13. In our judgment, the contention raised by the learned counsel
          for the appellants is without any substance so far as the present case
          is concerned. The charge for the offence under Section 297IPC,
          could in no circumstance, as pointed out by the High Court, be
          described as falling within the purview of
Section 195
CrPC. The
          act of trespass was alleged to have been committed subsequent to
          the making of the false report and all the ingredients of the offence
          that have been held to have been established on the evidence
          concern the conduct of the appellants during the post-report period.
In these circumstances, no serious contention could be raised that
          the provisions of Section 195 would stand defeated by the
          Magistrate having taken cognizance of the offence under that
          section.
14. As regards the charge under Section 500IPC, it seems fairly
          clear both on principle and authority that where the allegations
          made in a false report disclose two distinct offences, one against the
          public servant and the other against a private individual, that other
          is not debarred by the provisions of Section 195 from seeking
          redress for the offence committed against him. Section 499IPC,
          which mentions the ingredients of the offence of defamation gives
          within defined limits immunity to persons making depositions in
          court, but it is now well settled that that immunity is a qualified one
          and is not absolute as it is in English law. Under Section 198CrPC,
          1898, a complaint in respect of an offence under Section 499IPC,
          can only be initiated at the instance of the person defamed, in like
          manner as cognizance for an offence under Section 182 cannot be
          taken except at the complaint of the public servant concerned. In
          view of these provisions there does not seem in principle any
          warrant for the proposition that a complaint under Section 499 in
          such a situation cannot be taken cognizance of unless two persons
          join in making it i.e. it can only be considered if both the public
          servant and the person defamed join in making it, otherwise the
          person defamed is without any redress. The statute has prescribed
          distinct procedure for the making of the complaints under these two
          provisions of the Penal Code and when the prescribed procedure
          has been followed, the court is bound to take cognizance of the
          offence complained of.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                          Page 31 of 50
40.
In
Durgacharan Naik and Others v. State of Orissa
reported in AIR 1966 SC 1775,

   a process server had to execute a writ of attachment against the judgment-debtors,

   however, there was some resistance when he reached their village. After the arrival

   of police, the judgment-debtors paid the decretal dues to the process server.

   However, when the process server and the police were leaving the village and were

   crossing a nearby river in a boat, the appellant along with 10-12 persons threatened

   to assault them if their money were not returned. The situation had de-escalated upon

   the intervention of some outsiders and subsequently, on the next morning, the ASI

   lodged an FIR against the appellants. While the trial court had acquitted the

   appellants, the High Court set aside the order of acquittal and convicted them for the

   offence under
Section 353
I.P.C. As regards the charge under
Section 186
I.P.C., the

   High Court observed that the prosecution was barred under
Section 195
Cr.P.C.

   Finding no infirmity in the judgment of the High Court and allowing the offences to

   be split up, this Court observed as follows:
“5. We pass on to consider the next contention of the appellants that
          the conviction of the appellants under
Section 353
of the Indian Penal
          Code is illegal because there is a contravention of
Section 195(1)
of
          the Criminal Procedure Code which requires a complaint in writing by
          the process server or the ASI It was submitted that the charge under
Section 353
of the Indian Penal Code is based upon the same facts as
          the charge under
Section 186
of the Indian Penal Code and no
          cognizance could be taken of the offence under
Section 186
of the
          Indian Penal Code unless there was a complaint in writing as required
          by
Section 195(1)
of the Criminal Procedure Code. It was argued that
          the conviction under
Section 353
of the Indian Penal Code is
          tantamount, in the circumstances of this case, to a circumvention of the
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                           Page 32 of 50
requirement of
Section 195(1)
of the Criminal Procedure Code and the
          conviction of the appellants under
Section 353
of the Indian Penal
          Code by the High Court was, therefore, vitiated in law. We are unable
          to accept this argument as correct. It is true that most of the allegations
          in this case upon which the charge under
Section 353
of the Indian
          Penal Code is based are the same as those constituting the charge
          under
Section 186
of the Indian Penal Code but it cannot be ignored
          that
Sections 186
and
353
of the Indian Penal Code relate to two
          distinct offences and while the offence under the latter section is a
          cognizable offence, the one under the former section is not so. The
          ingredients of the two offences are also distinct.
Section 186
of the
          Indian Penal Code is applicable to a case where the accused
          voluntarily obstructs a public servant in the discharge of his public
          functions but under
Section 353
of the Indian Penal Code the
          ingredient of assault or use of criminal force while the public servant
          is doing his duty as such is necessary. The quality of the two offences
          is also different. Section 186 occurs in Chapter X of the
Indian Penal
          Code
dealing with contempts of the lawful authority of public servants,
          while Section 353 occurs in Chapter XVI regarding the offences
          affecting the human body. It is well established that
Section 195
of the
          Criminal Procedure Code does not bar the trial of an accused person
          for a distinct offence disclosed by the same set of facts but which is not
          within the ambit of that section. [...]
6. In the present case, therefore, we are of the opinion that
Section 195
of the Criminal Procedure Code does not bar the trial of the appellants
          for the distinct offence under
Section 353
of the Indian Penal Code,
          though it is practically based on the same facts as for the prosecution
          under
Section 186
of the Indian Penal Code.”

                                                        (Emphasis supplied)
41. While deciding whether the distinct offences can be split up, courts must remain

   circumspect. It is agreed that, the law is not that once the facts of a given case

   disclose an offence falling within the scope of
Section 195
Cr.P.C. and also other

   offences, prosecution can be launched regarding the latter only upon the
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                              Page 33 of 50
complaint of the court or the lawfully authority concerned. To hold otherwise

   would be to extend the scope of
Section 195
Cr.P.C. to regions and horizons not

   contemplated by the legislature. The facts in a case may give rise to distinct

   offences including offences against the authority of public servants or against

   public justice, as also offences against private individuals; the bar under
Section

   195
of the Cr.P.C. cannot, in such circumstances, affect the offences other than

   those against public authority or public justice. Prosecution for such other

   offences does not require the instrumentality of the public authority or court.

   However, the position may be different when during the course of the same

   transaction offences falling within the two categories are committed. In such

   cases, it may not be possible to split up the transaction, and to hold that there can

   be valid prosecution for offences not mentioned in
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C.,

   without the written complaint of the public authority or the court, as the case

   may be. Courts must be able to see through any attempt to render
Section 195
of

   the Cr.P.C. nugatory by hiding the real nature of the transaction by verbal

   jugglery. If in principle and substance the offence alleged falls within the

   categories mentioned in Section 195, the operation of the bar cannot be avoided;

   if in essence the alleged offence falls outside the categories, the bar would not

   operate. At the same time, if the facts give rise to distinct offences, some
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                           Page 34 of 50
attracting the operation of Section 195 and others not so, the bar can operate only

   regarding the former and not regarding the latter.
42. Therefore, the courts must ascertain whether during the course of a single

   transaction, the offences falling within both the categories are committed, in

   which case it would be difficult to split up the offences or, whether there are two

   different transactions which occur successively, nevertheless separately and

   distinctively, in which case the offences may be split up. One another aspect that

   may be looked into is whether, apart from the offences committed in contempt

   of lawful authority of public servants, or against public justice or, relating to

   documents given in evidence which fall under the scope of
Section 195
Cr.P.C.,

   the other distinct offences are of such a nature that private individuals are

   aggrieved. In such a scenario, it would not be reasonable to bar a private

   prosecution by the aggrieved individual for the reason that the public official or

   the court concerned has also not instituted a complaint.
43.
Section 195(1)(a)(i)
of the Cr.P.C. bars the court from taking cognizance of the

   offence punishable under
Section 186
I.P.C., unless there is a written complaint

   by the public servant for voluntarily obstructing him from discharge of his public

   functions. The object of this provision is to provide for a particular procedure
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                         Page 35 of 50
in a case of voluntarily obstructing a public servant from discharging his public

   functions. The court lacks competence to automatically take cognizance in

   certain types of offences enumerated therein. The legislative intent behind such

   a provision has been that an individual should not face criminal prosecution

   instituted upon insufficient grounds by persons actuated by malice, ill-will or

   frivolity of disposition and also to save the time of the criminal courts being

   wasted by endless prosecutions. This provision has been carved out as an

   exception to the general rule contained under
Section 190
Cr.P.C. that any person

   can set the law in motion by making a complaint, as it prohibits the court from

   taking cognizance of certain offences until and unless a complaint has been

   made by some particular authority or person. Other provisions in the
Cr.P.C
.

   like sections 196 and 198 respectively do not lay down any rule of procedure,

   rather, they only create a bar that unless some requirements are complied with,

   the court shall not take cognizance of an offence described in those Sections.

   [See:
Govind Mehta v. The State of Bihar
, AIR 1971 SC 1708;
Patel Laljibhai

   Somabhai v. The State of Gujarat
, AIR 1971 SC 1935;
Surjit Singh & Ors v.

   Balbir Singh
, (1996) 3 SCC 533;
State of Punjab v. Raj Singh & Anr.
, (1998)

   2 SCC 391; K. Vengadachalam v. K.C. Palanisamy & Ors., (2005) 7 SCC 352;
Iqbal Singh Marwah & Anr. v. Meenakshi Marwah & Anr.
, AIR 2005 SC

   2119]
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                       Page 36 of 50
44. The test of whether there is evasion or non-compliance of
Section 195
Cr.P.C. or not, is whether the facts disclose primarily and essentially an offence

   for which a complaint of the court or of a public servant is required.
In
Basir-ul-Haq & Ors.
(supra) and
Durgacharan Naik & Ors.
(supra), this Court

   cautioned that the provisions of this Section cannot be evaded by describing the

   offence as one being punishable under some other sections of
I.P.C
., though

   in truth and substance, the offence falls in a category mentioned in
Section 195
Cr.P.C. Thus, cognizance of such an offence cannot be taken by mis-describing

   it or by putting a wrong label on it.
45.
In
M.S. Ahlawat v. State of Haryana & Anr.
reported in AIR 2000 SC 168, this

   Court considered the matter at length and held as under: -
"[...] Provisions of
Section 195
Cr.P.C. are mandatory and no court
          has jurisdiction to take cognizance of any of the offences mentioned
          therein unless there is a complaint in writing as required under that
          section."
(Emphasis supplied)
46.
In
Sachida Nand Singh & Anr. v. State of Bihar & Anr.
reported in (1998)

   2 SCC 493, this Court while dealing with this issue observed as under: -
"7. Section 190 of the Code empowers "any magistrate of the first
          class" to take cognizance of "any offence" upon receiving a
          complaint, or police report or information or upon his own
          knowledge. Section 195 restricts such general powers of the
          magistrate, and the general right of a person to move the court with
          a complaint to that extent curtailed. It is a well- recognised canon
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                         Page 37 of 50
of interpretation that provision curbing the general jurisdiction of
          the court must normally receive strict interpretation unless the
          statute or the context requires otherwise."
(Emphasis supplied)
47.
In
Daulat Ram v. State of Punjab
reported in AIR 1962 SC 1206, this Court

   considered the nature of the provisions of
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. In the said

   case, cognizance had been taken on the police report by the Magistrate and the

   appellant therein had been tried and convicted, though the concerned public

   servant i.e., the Tahsildar, had not filed any complaint. This Court held as

   follows: -
"The cognizance of the case was therefore wrongly assumed by the
          court without the complaint in writing of the public servant,
          namely, the Tahsildar in this case. The trial was thus without
          jurisdiction ab initio and the conviction cannot be maintained.
The appeal is, therefore, allowed and the conviction of the
          appellant and the sentence passed on him are set aside."
(Emphasis supplied)
48. Thus, in view of the above, the law can be summarized to the effect that there

   must be a complaint by the public servant who was voluntarily obstructed in the

   discharge of his public functions. The complaint must be in writing. The

   provisions of
Section 195
Cr.P.C. are mandatory. Non-compliance of it would

   vitiate the prosecution and all other consequential orders. The Court cannot
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                        Page 38 of 50
assume the cognizance of the case without such complaint. In the absence of

    such a complaint, the trial and conviction will be void ab initio being without

    jurisdiction.
49. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner would submit that the bar

    of
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C., so far as the offence punishable under
Section 186
of

    the I.P.C. is concerned, is absolutely unlike
Section 195 (1)(b)
of the Cr.P.C. In other

    words, Section 195(1)(b) would apply provided certain conditions are fulfilled, and

    if those conditions are not applicable, then it is open for the police to carry out the

    investigation after registering an F.I.R.
50. The heading of Chapter XIV of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
is "Conditions

    Requisite for Initiation of Proceedings". The first provision in this Chapter is Section

    190 and it deals with the power of the Magistrate to take cognizance of the offences.

    There are some other provisions in this Chapter which create an embargo on the

    power of the Court to take cognizance of offences committed by persons enumerated

    therein except on the complaint in writing of certain specified persons or with the

    previous sanction of certain specified authorities.
51. A plain reading of
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. would indicate that no Court can take

    cognizance of an offence punishable under
Section 186
of the I.P.C., except upon a

    complaint in writing of the public servant concerned or of some other public servant
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                              Page 39 of 50
to whom he is administratively subordinate. The opening words of the Section are

   “No Court shall take cognizance”, and consequently, the bar created by the

   provisions is against taking of cognizance by the Court. There is no bar

   against the registration of a criminal case or investigation by the police agency

   or submission of a report by the police on completion of the investigation, as

   contemplated by
Section 173
of the Cr.P.C.
52. This Court in
Iqbal Singh Marwah v. Meenakshi Marwah
reported in AIR 2005

   SC 2119, while interpreting
Section 195
Cr.P.C. has held as follows: -
“9. [...] This being the scheme of two provisions or clauses of
          Section 195, viz., that the offence should be such which has direct
          bearing or affects the functioning or discharge of lawful duties of a
          public servant or has a direct correlation with the proceedings in a
          court of justice, the expression "when such offence is alleged to have
          been committed in respect of a document produced or given in
          evidence in a proceeding in a Court" occurring in clause (b)(ii)
          should normally mean commission of such an offence after the
          document has actually been produced or given in evidence in the
          Court. The situation or contingency where an offence as
          enumerated in this clause has already been committed earlier and
          later on the document is produced or is given in evidence in Court,
          does not appear to be in tune with clauses (a)(i) and (b)(i) and
          consequently with the scheme of
Section 195
Cr.P.C. This indicates
          that clause (b)(ii) contemplates a situation where the offences
          enumerated therein are committed with respect to a document
          subsequent to its production or giving in evidence in a proceeding
          in any Court.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                         Page 40 of 50
53. This Court, referred to its earlier decision in
Sachida Nand Singh
(supra),

   wherein it had been held that
Section 195
Cr.P.C. is invoked where the offences

   affected the administration of justice. It is for that reason, that only the concerned

   Court can take cognizance, and the procedure under
Section 340
Cr.P.C. also

   empowers the same Court before whom the offence is committed in respect of

   documents produced or given in evidence before that Court.
The reason why

   the jurisdiction to take cognizance of such an offence is restricted to the

   concerned Court is also noted by this Court and the same is culled out from

   the previous decision in
Patel Lalji Bhai Samabhai
(supra). The purpose

   underlying Section 195(1)(b) seems to be to control the temptation on the part

   of the private parties to start criminal prosecution on frivolous, vexations or

   insufficient grounds inspired by a revengeful desire to harass or spite their

   opponents. These offences have been selected for the court's control because of

   their direct impact on the judicial process. It is the judicial process or the

   administration of public justice which is the direct and immediate object or the

   victim of these offences. As the purity of the proceedings of the court is

   directly sullied by the crime, the court is considered to be the only party entitled

   to consider the desirability of complaining against the guilty party. The private

   party who might ultimately suffer can persuade the Civil Court to file the

   complaint.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                           Page 41 of 50
54.
In
Iqbal Singh Marwah
(supra), this Court took note of the legal position that

   in view of the language used in
Section 340
of the Cr.P.C., the Court is not

   bound to make a complaint regarding commission of an offence referred to

   Section 195(1)(b), as the Section is conditioned by the words “court is of

   opinion that it is expedient in the interest of justice”. The concerned Court

   would file a complaint only if the interest of justice so requires and not in

   every case. Even before making the complaint, the Court would hold a

   preliminary enquiry and record a finding to the effect that it is expedient in

   the interest of justice that enquiry should be made into any of the offences

   referred to Section 195(1)(b). This expediency would be judged by the Court

   by weighing not the magnitude of injury suffered by the person affected by

   such forgery or forged documents, but having regard to the effect or impact

   that such commission of offence as upon administration of justice. It is

   possible that such forged documents or forgery may cause very serious or

   substantial injury to a person, inasmuch as, it may deprive him of very

   valuable property or status or the like. If it is held that in a case it would be

   the concerned Court alone, which would be entitled to lodge the complaint, it

   would render the victim of such forgery or forged documents remediless. This

   Court held that any interpretation which leads to such a situation where a victim

   of a crime is rendered remediless has to be discarded. This Court also took a
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                       Page 42 of 50
note of the fact that the holding of a preliminary inquiry under
Section 340
of the Cr.P.C. by the concerned Court would normally get unduly delayed.

   This important aspect also dissuaded this Court from accepting the broad

   interpretation sought to be placed on
Section 195(1)(b)(ii)
of the Cr.P.C. to the

   effect that Section 195 is a bar to private prosecution. This Court held that an

   enlarged interpretation to Section 195(1)(b)(ii), whereby the bar created by the

   said provision would also operate where after commission of an act of forgery,

   the document is subsequently produced in Court, is capable of great misuse.

   After preparing a forged document or committing an act of forgery, a person

   may manage to get the proceeding instituted in any civil, criminal or revenue

   Court either by himself or someone set up by him, or simply file the document

   in the said proceeding. If the broad interpretation to Section 195(1)(b)(ii) is

   accepted, he would be protected from prosecution either at the instance of a

   private party or the police, until the concerned Court, where the document is

   filed, itself chooses to file a complaint. Such an interpretation would be highly

   detrimental to the interest of the society at large. This Court also took notice

   of the fact that the Courts are generally reluctant in directing filing of a criminal

   complaint and such a course is rarely adopted. The Court held that it would not

   be fair and appropriate to give an interpretation which leads to a situation where

   a person alleged to have committed an offence of the type enumerated in
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                           Page 43 of 50
Clause (b)(ii) is not placed for trial on account of non-filing of a complaint or

   if a complaint is filed, the same does not come to its logical end. Such a

   broad interpretation would also lead to impracticable results, which should

   be avoided.
55.
In
State of Punjab v. Raj Singh
reported in AIR 1998 SC 768, this Court further

   stated that
Section 195(1)(b)(ii)
of the Cr.P.C. cannot be seen as prohibiting the

   entertainment of, and investigation into the offence(s) by the police. The bar

   comes into operation only when the Court intends to take cognizance of the

   offence under
Section 190
Cr.P.C. In other words, the statutory power of the

   police to investigate under the
Cr.P.C
. is not in any way controlled or

   circumscribed by
Section 195
Cr.P.C. The legal position was elaborated in the

   following words: -
“2. We are unable to sustain the impugned order of the High Court
          quashing the F.I.R. Lodged against the respondents alleging
          commission of offences under
Sections 419
,
420
,
467
and
468
I.P.C.
          by them in course of the proceeding of a civil suit, on the ground
          that
Section 195(1)(b)(ii)
Cr.P.C. prohibited entertainment of and
          investigation into the same by the police. From a plain reading of
Section 195
Cr.P.C. it is manifest that it comes into operation at the
          stage when the Court intends to take cognizance of an offence
          under Section 190(1) Cr. P.C.; and it has nothing to do with the
          statutory power of the police to investigate into an F.I.R. which
          discloses a cognizable offence, in accordance with Chapter XII of
          the Code even if the offence is alleged to have been committed in,
          or in relation to, any proceeding in Court.
In other words, the
          statutory power of the Police to investigate under the Code is not
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                         Page 44 of 50
in any way controlled or circumscribed by
Section 195
Cr.P.C. It is
          of course true that upon the charge-sheet (challan), if any, filed on
          completion of the investigation into such an offence the Court would
          not be competent to take cognizance thereof in view of the embargo
          of Section 195(1)(b) Cr. P.C., but nothing therein deters the Court
          from filing a complaint for the offence on the basis of the F.I.R. (filed
          by the aggrieved private party) and the materials collected during
          investigation, provided it forms the requisite opinion and follows
          the procedure
laid down in
section 340
Cr.P.C. [...]”

                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
56. A more elaborate discussion is found in
M. Narayandas v. State of Karnataka
reported in AIR 2004 SC 555, wherein this Court has held as follows: -
“8. [...] The question whether
Sections 195
and
340
of the Criminal
          Procedure Code affect the power of the police to investigate into a
          cognizable offence has already been considered by this Court in the
          case of
State of Punjab v. Raj Singh
reported in 1998(2) SCC 391
          [...] Not only are we bound by this judgment but we are also in
          complete agreement with the same. Sections 195 and 340 do not
          control or circumscribe the power of the police to investigate,
          under the
Criminal Procedure Code
. Once investigation is
          completed then the embargo in Section 195 would come into play
          and the Court would not be competent to take cognizance.
          However that Court could then file a complaint for the offence on
          the basis of the FIR and the material collected during investigation
          provided the procedure
laid down in
Section 340
Criminal
          Procedure Code is followed. Thus no right of the Respondents,
          much less the right to file an appeal under Section 341, is affected.
xxx              xxx           xxx
10. The law on the point is clear. At the stage of investigation
          Section 195 has no application. We are therefore not concerned
          with the question whether Section 195 applies to documents
          forged/fabricated prior to their being produced in Court. That
          question only arises after the Court takes cognizance. At this stage
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                            Page 45 of 50
the only question is whether the investigation should be permitted
          to proceed or not. As stated above there is no ground or reason on
          which the complaint/FIR can be quashed.”

                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
57. We may note that the decision of the Constitution Bench in
Iqbal Singh Marwah
(supra) does not in any way express its disagreement with the view in
Raj Singh
(supra) and
M. Narayandas
(supra).
On the contrary, a perusal of
Iqbal Singh

   Marwah
(supra) shows that the Court has leaned in favour of giving an

   interpretation, which limits the scope of
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. There is

   no contradiction in invocation of
Section 156(3)
by the learned Magistrate, the

   registration of the F.I.R. and the conduct of the investigation by the police, with

   Section 195 read with
Section 340
Cr.P.C. As noticed in
M. Narayandas
(supra) once the investigation is completed, then the embargo under Section 195

   would come into play and the Court would not be competent to take cognizance.

   However, the concerned Court could then file the complaint for the offence

   mentioned in Section 195(1)(b)(ii) on the basis of the F.I.R. and the material

   collected during investigation and by following the procedure
laid down in
Section 340
Cr.P.C.
58. The procedure contemplated under sub-section (1) of
Section 340
of the Cr.P.C.

   is limited to such cases, as are provided in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                         Page 46 of 50
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. only.
Section 340
of the Cr.P.C. does not envisage

     a procedure with reference to an offence described in
Section 195(1)(a)
of the

     Cr.P.C. However, the observations made in
Raj Singh
(supra) and
M.

     Narayandas
(supra), more specifically that
Section 195
Cr.P.C does not have any

     application at the stage of investigation holds good as regards both
Section

     195(1)(a)
and
195(1)(b)
of the Cr.P.C. respectively. The overall bar contemplated

     under Section 195 could be said to kick in only at the stage of cognizance.
E.         CONCLUSION

59. We may summarize our final conclusion as under:

     (i)
Section 195(1)(a)(i)
of the Cr.P.C. bars the court from taking cognizance
of any offence punishable under Sections 172 to 188 respectively of the
I.P.C
., unless there is a written complaint by the public servant concerned

             or his administrative superior, for voluntarily obstructing the public

             servant from discharge of his public functions. Without a complaint from

             the said persons, the court would lack competence to take cognizance in

             certain types of offences enumerated therein.
(ii)    If in truth and substance, an offence falls in the category of Section

             195(1)(a)(i), it is not open to the court to undertake the exercise of splitting
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                               Page 47 of 50
them up and proceeding further against the accused for the other distinct

           offences disclosed in the same set of facts. However, it also cannot be laid

           down as a straitjacket formula that the Court, under all circumstances,

           cannot undertake the exercise of splitting up. It would depend upon the

           facts of each case, the nature of allegations and the materials on record.
(iii)   Severance of distinct offences is not permissible when it would effectively

           circumvent the protection afforded by
Section 195(1)(a)(i)
of the Cr.P.C.,

           which requires a complaint by a public servant for certain offences against

           public justice. This means that if the core of the offence falls under the

           purview of Section 195(1)(a)(i), it cannot be prosecuted by simply filing

           a general complaint for a different, but related, offence. The focus should

           be on whether the facts, in substance, constitute an offence requiring a

           public servant’s complaint.
(iv)    In the aforesaid context, the courts must apply twin tests. First, the courts

           must ascertain having regard to the nature of the allegations made in the

           complaint/FIR and other materials on record whether the other distinct

           offences not covered by Section 195(1)(a)(i) have been invoked only with

           a view to evade the mandatory bar of
Section 195
of the I.P.C. and
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                           Page 48 of 50
secondly, whether the facts primarily and essentially disclose an offence

          for which a complaint of the court or a public servant is required.
(v)    Where an accused is alleged to have committed some offences which are

          separate and distinct from those contained in Section 195, Section 195 will

          affect only the offences mentioned therein. However, the courts should

          ascertain whether such offences form an integral part and are so

          intrinsically connected so as to amount to offences committed as a part of

          the same transaction, in which case the other offences also would fall

          within the ambit of
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. This would all depend on

          the facts of each case.
(vi)   Sections 195(1)(b)(i)(ii) & (iii) and 340 of the
Cr.P.C
. respectively do not

          control or circumscribe the power of the police to investigate, under

          the
Criminal Procedure Code
. Once investigation is completed then the

          embargo in Section 195 would come into play and the Court would not

          be competent to take cognizance. However, that Court could then file a

          complaint for the offence on the basis of the FIR and the material collected

          during investigation, provided the procedure
laid down in
Section 340
of

          the Cr.P.C. is followed.
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                         Page 49 of 50
60. In view of the aforesaid, we dispose of this petition leaving it open to the

   petitioner to raise the contention as regards the bar of
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C.

   before the trial court if at all, at the end of the investigation, chargesheet is filed

   for the offences enumerated above in the FIR.
61. Registry shall circulate one copy each of this judgment to all the High Courts.
.................................................... J.
(J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                                   .................................................... J.
(R. MAHADEVAN)



New Delhi;
20th August, 2025
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12373 of 2025                                      Page 50 of 50