[Cites
42
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Partha Das vs The State Of Tripura on 28 August, 2025
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
J.K. Maheshwari
2025 INSC 1049                                                       REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4426-4466 OF 2023


            PARTHA DAS & ORS.                                       ….APPELLANT(S)


                                                  VERSUS


             THE STATE OF TRIPURA & ORS.                          ....RESPONDENT(S)


                                                   WITH


                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4473-4479 OF 2023


            SUJAN ROY & ORS.                                        ….APPELLANT(S)


                                                  VERSUS


             THE STATE OF TRIPURA & ORS.                          ....RESPONDENT(S)


                                              JUDGMENT
J.K. Maheshwari J.
Signature Not Verified
1.              Questioning the validity of the judgment dated 03.10.2019
Digitally signed by
Gulshan Kumar Arora
Date: 2025.08.28
20:56:49 IST
Reason:
of the Division Bench of the High Court of Tripura commonly
1
passed in a batch of writ petitions, two set of Civil Appeal Nos.

4426-4466 of 2023 and 4473-4479 of 2023 have been filed. The

issue involved in these appeals relates to cancellation of the

ongoing recruitment process of ‘Enrolled Followers’ midway on

the pretext of a policy decision of the State Government.
2.    The subject matter in dispute is appointment on the post of

Enrolled Followers in Tripura State Rifles Battalions. In the State

of Tripura, the recruitment of Enrolled Followers is governed by

the
Tripura State Rifles Act, 1983
(hereinafter referred to as “TSR

Act”) read with the Tripura State Rifles (Recruitment) Rules,

1984 (hereinafter referred to as “TSR Rules”). For the sake of

convenience, some pertinent provisions of the TSR Act, which

govern the recruitment of Enrolled Followers, are referred.

2.1
Section 3(s)
defines ‘the Rifles’ as Tripura State Rifles.
Section 3(g)
defines ‘Enrolled Followers’ as any person appointed

to do the work of a cook, masalchi, water-carrier, mess-servant,

ward-boy, washerman, cobbler, barber, sweeper, helper or cleaner.
Section 4
specifies that the State Government shall constitute a

force called Tripura State Rifles and
Section 5
grants power to the

Commandant to appoint Enrolled Followers. As per
Section 9
, the
2
State Government is vested with the power of superintendence

and control over Tripura State Rifles, and that its administration

shall be done by the State Government as per the provisions of

TSR Act and the rules made thereunder through Director General

of Police, Inspector General or such Deputy Inspector General or

other officers as the State Government may so appoint. Section

22 confers power on the State Government to make rules to carry

out the purpose of the TSR Act. Thus, the TSR Act is a complete

code in itself which provides for constitution of and recruitment

in Tripura State Rifles and confers power on the State

Government to frame rules.
3.   In furtherance of the power under Section 22 of TSR Act,

State Government enacted TSR Rules, wherein Rule 3 talks about

powers of State Government and certain officers, i.e., Inspector

General, the Deputy Inspector-General and Commandant of

Tripura State Rifles. Further, it confers powers on Inspector

General, the Deputy Inspector-General and Commandant to

supervise and control Tripura State Rifles. Rule 6 categorises

Tripura State Rifles into ranks wherein Enrolled Followers are

defined at serial no. xii as non-gazetted, class-IV. Rule 8

prescribes the method of appointment of the members of the
3
Rifles and the appointing authority. The said rule is relevant,

therefore, reproduced hereunder:
“8. Method of appointment of the members of the Rifles:
(1)         The members of the Rifles shall be appointed by one or
                  more of the following methods-
(a) Direct recruitment;
(b) Promotion;
(c) Re-employment of ex-services or ex-Central Police
                        Organization personnel; and
(d)   Deputation or transfer of the personnel of Armed
                         Forces of the Union or Central Police Organization or
                         Police Organization of any State.
(2)         75% of direct recruitment in all ranks shall be make from
                  within Tripura and the remaining 25% of such direct
                  recruitment shall be made from states and Union
                  Territories outside Tripura.
(3)         The appointing authorities for members of the Rifles shall
                  be as follows:
Sl. No.                    Rank                   Authority competent
            (i)                Subedar                   Inspector-General
        (ii)                 Naib Subedar                  Commandant
        (iii)                  Havildar                    Commandant
        (iv)                     Naik                      Commandant
        (v)                   Lance Naik                   Commandant
        (vi)                   Riflemen                    Commandant
        (vii)             Enrolled Followers               Commandant
4.   The present matter relates to recruitment to the post of

Enrolled Followers, for which Rule 24 is also relevant, the same is

reproduced hereunder:
“24. Recruitment            Rules     for   the     Posts   of   Enrolled
           Followers:
4
Recruitment to the post of enrolled followers shall be made
          from amongst person who satisfy the following conditions,
          namely-
(a)   should be in the age group of 18-21 years as on 1st
                day of July of the year in which advertisement for
                recruitment is made;
(b)   should possess good physique;
(c)   should be able to read and write a simple passage
                in their mother tongue; and
(d)   should have proficiency in the work for which they
                are to be engaged; and
(e)   should pass such test as may be specified by the
                Inspector-General in writing.”
5.   As per Rule 24(e), it is the Inspector-General, who has the

power to specify the tests to be undertaken for recruitment of the

Enrolled Followers. However, on perusal of records, the Draft

Recruitment Programmes finalised by the Chairman of both the

Recruitment Boards and sent for approval to Police Head

Quarters, Tripura (hereinafter referred to as “PHQ”), were

approved by Director General of Police (Tripura State Rifles)

(hereinafter referred to as “DGP”). When an explanation was

sought from the learned counsel for the respondent-State, it was

fairly stated that Inspector-General has been replaced by DGP

vide the Tripura State Rifles (Second Amendment) Act, 2006. As

such, the drafts sent by the Chairman of Recruitment Board are

now being approved by DGP, specifying the lists which are to be
5
cleared.   Thus, the procedure as explained is having statutory

backing.
FACTS RELEVANT FOR THE MATTER:
6.   It is not in dispute, that as per Rule 8 of TSR Rules and vide

communication of the PHQ, the recruitment process for total 506

vacancies of Enrolled Followers in the Tripura State Rifles was

bifurcated in two categories – “inside-state quota” and “outside-
state quota”, specifying the number of posts for respective

categories, which is the subject matter in this case.


Inside-State Quota

6.1. PHQ     on   05.11.2014   sent   a   communication    to   the

Government of Tripura (Home) Department (hereinafter referred

to as “Home Department”) indicating the number of total

vacancies of Enrolled Followers in Tripura State Rifles Battalions.

The same was approved by the Home Department directing

initiation of the recruitment process vide communication dated

30.07.2015. Pursuant to the same, on 14.03.2016, a draft

proposal was sent by PHQ to the Home Department for

constitution of a Recruitment Board. The Home Department

approved the same on 18.06.2016. The Draft Recruitment
6
Programme by Chairman of the Recruitment Board, was sent to

PHQ for approval on 26.08.2016 and the same was approved by

DGP and communicated to the Chairman on 07.09.2016. After

the   approval,   the   Chairman       issued   an   advertisement   on

09.09.2016 for filling up 372 vacancies of Enrolled Followers in

the inside-state quota.
6.2. Subsequently,      recruitment       rallies    were   held   from

24.09.2016 to 07.12.2016. The proceedings of recruitment were

submitted to the PHQ on 23.04.2017 by the Recruitment Board.

The same were forwarded to the Home Department by PHQ on

12.05.2017, for approval and for starting the process of character

verification. The same were approved by Home Department for

further course of action on 29.05.2017. On 09.06.2017, a

communication was sent by the PHQ to the Commandant, 2nd

Battalion, Tripura State Rifles to complete necessary steps

towards issuing appointment offers.
Outside-State quota

6.3. PHQ on 05.11.2014 sent a communication to the Home

Department indicating the number of total vacancies of Enrolled

Followers in Tripura State Rifle Battalions. The same was
7
approved by the Home Department directing to initiate the

recruitment process vide communication dated 30.07.2015.

Pursuant to the same, on 14.03.2016, a draft proposal was sent

by the PHQ to the Home Department for constitution of a

Recruitment Board. The Home Department approved the same on

18.06.2016. The Draft Recruitment Programme by Chairman of

Recruitment Board was sent to PHQ for approval on 02.09.2016

and the same was approved by DGP and communicated to the

Chairman on 08.09.2016. After the approval, the Chairman

issued an advertisement on 14.09.2016 for filling up 134

vacancies of Enrolled Followers in the outside-state quota.

6.4. Subsequently,    recruitment     rallies   were   held   from

23.10.2016 to 15.11.2016. The proceedings of recruitment were

submitted to the PHQ on 20.12.2016 by the Recruitment Board.

PHQ on 21.12.2016 forwarded the same to the Home Department

for its necessary approval for starting the process of character

verification. The same was approved by the Home Department for

further course of action on 30.12.2016. On 09.06.2017, a

communication was sent by the PHQ to the Commandant, 2nd

Battalion, Tripura State Rifles to complete necessary steps

towards issuing appointment offers.
8
7.   The record pertaining to recruitment indicates that on

13.07.2017, the Commandant, 2nd Battalion, Tripura State Rifles

requested for more time to complete the verification process of the

prospective selectees in both quotas for which three months’ time

was granted by the DGP on 26.07.2017 with request to complete

such process early. The Commandant, 2nd Battalion, Tripura

State Rifles on 17.10.2017 requested PHQ to suspend issuance of

offers of appointment until verification reports are received, with

the intention to avoid any complicacy, which was allowed because

in process of verification some forged certificates were noticed.

The PHQ forwarded this to the Secretary, LR & Law, Government

of Tripura (hereinafter referred to as “Secretary, LR & Law”),

who vide noting dated 31.10.2017 opined that appointment offers

shall be issued only after completion of verification. In case of any

delay, appointment offers could be issued excluding those cases

where the verification report had not been received. This was

further approved by the DGP on 15.11.2017.
8.   That being so, during the ongoing recruitment process, the

State of Tripura was occupied with the elections of Legislative

Assembly. After the elections, new government was formed on

03.03.2018.   On    14.03.2018,       a   memorandum   no.   F.20(1)-
9
GA(P&T)/18       (hereinafter      referred      to    as      “Abeyance

Memorandum”) was issued stating that for the purpose of

reviewing the recruitment process, all the ongoing recruitment by

all the departments/autonomous bodies under Government shall

be kept in abeyance until further orders. As a consequence of

this, the recruitment process in the present case came to a halt.

The said notification is quoted hereinbelow:
“NO. F.20(1)-GA(P&T)/18
                       GOVERNMENT OF TRIPURA
         GENERAL ADMINISTRATION (PERSONNEL & TRAINING)
                         DEPARTMENT

                               Dated, Agartala, the 14th March 2018.
MEMORANDUM

      Sub: -     Recruitment/selection process in all Department
      kept in abeyance.
The undersigned is directed to state that the State
      Government has decided that the recruitment process of the
      Government shall be reviewed and pending such review, all the
      ongoing recruitment/selection processes in Departments/
      autonomous bodies etc. under the Government, shall be kept in
      abeyance with immediate effect. However, the recruitment
      process initiated on the directions of Hon’ble Supreme
      Court/High Court or any other court within the State shall not
      be stopped without obtaining specific orders from the concerned
      court in this regard.
2.   All Departments/ Heads of Departments, Autonomous
      bodies are, therefore, requested to comply the same and make
      necessary arrangement for further circulation of the aforesaid
      instruction to their subordinate offices also for necessary
      compliance.
10
Sd/-
(Santosh Das)
                                           Additional Secretary to the
                                              Government of Tripura”
9.   On 05.06.2018, the State Government vide notification no.

F-20(1)-GA(P&T)/18, issued a new recruitment policy (hereinafter

referred to as “NRP”) applicable to all the establishments under

administrative control of the State Government. For ready

reference, the same is reproduced hereunder:
“Subject: New Recruitment Policy for all establishments under
      administrative control of the Government of Tripura.

      In supersession of all earlier instructions in connection with
      selection/recruitment of different categories of candidates by
      direct recruitment for government employment under the
      administrative control of Government of Tripura, the State
      Government has decided the following principles:-
1. Written test should be the primary means to test suitability
      of    candidates for Government Jobs. The test should be
      designed in such a manner that the required skills and
      competencies can be tested in an online mode. For such posts
      where special skills are required, separate proficiency/
      personality test may be taken in a transparent manner.
      1.2. Interview should be completely abolished for Group-D
      posts, however soft skill test may be taken.
      1.3. Interview should ordinarily, not be taken for B and C
      category of posts. However, only in exceptional circumstances,
      for certain categories of Group B and C posts, where
      justification is given by the Department concerned, provision for
      interview/ skill test may be kept with prior approval of the
      Cabinet. Further, wherever such a provision is kept, the
      weightage for interview/ skill test should not exceed 10% of
      total marks and the interview should be video graphed.
11
1.4. The Group A, Group-B and C posts which are at present
covered by TPSC will continue to be filled as per the existing
practice. However, weightage for the interview should not
exceed 10% of total marks. In exceptional case weightage of
interview may be increased beyond 10% with the approval of
cabinet, if sufficient justification exists.
1.5. There are certain Group-A posts, which are at present
outside the purview of TPSC. For the time being, this system
may continue subject to the condition that the processes shall
be made more fair, open and transparent. Adequate changes
shall be made in the recruitment process/rules for these posts
so that selection is done on the basis of written exam followed
by interview with weightage of latter not being more than 10%.
Further, review should be taken up by the concerned
Departments to narrow down this category so that over a period
of time, as far as practicable, all such posts are filled through
recruitment conducted by TPSC.
1.6. Keeping in view the need to have a highly professional
cadre at higher positions in the Government, recruitment for the
left over (remaining Group-B) posts should also be taken up by
TPSC.
1.7. The posts in Police, Fire Service and Jail Department which
are currently outside the purview of TPSC should be filled by
the respective Departments subject to the overall principles
proposed at Para -1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 above.
1.8. There is a need to revise existing Recruitment Rules (RRs)
such that there is proper mapping/correlation between the
qualification, competencies and job profile. Further, in such
cases where there is similarity in the nature of jobs or jobs are
common across various Departments, the RRs have to be
suitably revised to bring in a greater degree of uniformity so as
to facilitate common recruitment as far as practicable.
1.9. For the posts where there is intake by both direct
recruitment and promotion, the intake ratio from each stream
(direct and promotion) should, to the extent possible, be kept
uniform across all the Departments.
1.10. The role of TPSC may be expanded and suitable
manpower and resources may be placed at its disposal to
enable it to ensure recruitment following the recruitment
principles mentioned above.
12
1.11. A new institution may be set up which may take up the
       recruitments for all Group-B, C and D posts, excluding the posts
       covered in Para 1.4 above. This body may function within the
       broad principles proposed at Para 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3. For this,
       further follow up action may be taken by GA (P&T) Department.
2. All the above recommendations will be applicable with the
       prospective effect only.
3. The Revised General Employment Guidelines for all
       Departments of the State Government for selection of
       candidates by open interview for Group-C and Group-D posts to
       be filled up by direct recruitment issued vide Memorandum
       No.F.23(8)-GA(P&T)/14 dated 23rd July, 2016 is hereby
       repealed and replaced by this Notification.
By the order of the Governor
                                                                   Sd/-
(Santosh Das)
                                                    Additional Secretary
                                          to the Government of Tripura.”
10. With respect to the said policy, the State Government vide

memorandum no. F.20(1)-GA(P&T)/18 dated 20.08.2018 decided

to make all new appointments under NRP, and all the existing

recruitment processes initiated by the respective departments

were   directed    to   be   cancelled      (hereinafter    referred   to   as

“Cancellation        Memorandum”).            The      said     Cancellation

Memorandum as challenged is reproduced hereunder:
“NO.F. 20(1)-GA(P&T)/18
                        GOVERNMENT OF TRIPURA
          GENERAL ADMINISTRATION (PERSONNEL & TRAINING)
                          DEPARTMENT

                                Dated, Agartala, the 20th August, 2018
13
MEMORANDUM

Subject:     Recruitment/Selection     process    as    per    New
Recruitment Policy.
Attention is invited to this Department’s Memorandum of
even    number       dated     14.03.2018     wherein    all  the
recruitment/selection processes were kept in abeyance w.e.f.
14.03.2018 until further orders.
2.      The State Government has now notified a New Recruitment
Policy vide this Department’s Notification of even number dated
05.06.2018. Accordingly, the Memorandum issued vide No. F.20(1)-
GA(P&T)/18 dated 14.03.2018 now stands superseded.
3.      The competent authority in the State Government has
decided that in view of the New Recruitment Policy approved by the
Government, all new appointments should be made as per the New
Recruitment Policy and all existing recruitment processes initiated
by the respective Departments or the TPSC, hereby, stand cancelled
excepting ongoing recruitment of Tripura Judicial Service Grade-III
only for which specific exemption has been accorded in
consultation with the Hon’ble High Court of Tripura.
4.       As regards the candidates who had participated in the
cancelled recruitment processes, they are to be given one time
relaxation in upper age limit to enable them to participate once in
the fresh recruitment process subject to providing documentary
evidence of their participation in the earlier recruitment processes
for the same post(s).
5.     It is also directed that henceforth, all direct recruitment
should be made strictly as per guidelines contained in the New
Recruitment Policy issued vide Notification No.F.20(1)-GA(P&T)/18
dated 05.06.2018 together with prior concurrence of the Finance
Department, the GA(P&T) Department and the approval of the
Council of Ministers.
6.      All Departments are, therefore, advised to strictly comply
with these decisions.
Sd/-
14
(Vishwasree B)
                                                   Joint Secretary to
                                         the Government of Tripura”


     Aggrieved by such cancellation, multiple writ petitions were

filed before High Court challenging Abeyance and Cancellation

Memorandums, and seeking direction for completion of the

ongoing recruitment process.
FINDINGS OF HIGH COURT IN THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT:
11. By a common impugned judgment dated 03.10.2019, High

Court dismissed all the writ petitions. While dismissing, the

Court noted the change in the political dispensation in the State

after elections. The new government had taken a policy decision

to keep all the ongoing recruitment processes in abeyance,

following which NRP was notified, which led to issuance of the

Cancellation Memorandum. The High Court, while referring to

the TSR Act and TSR Rules, observed that the administrative

instructions cannot prevail over statutory rules. It further

observed   that   neither   the        NRP   nor    the    Cancellation

Memorandum has overriding effect over the statutory rules nor

the government had any intention to do so, because to bring any
15
change, rules have to be reframed to bring them in sync with the

policy decision.
12. In the latter part of the judgement, it was observed that NRP

was introduced by the State Government to bring more

transparency and fairness in the process of recruitment in larger

public interest and to bring greater uniformity. In such situation,

the Court observed that interference in the policy decision of the

State is not warranted. Further, it was said that the present case

does not attract principles of promissory estoppel and legitimate

expectation as claimed by the appellants. It was also observed

that mere completion of process of selection to the post of

Enrolled Followers does not confer any indefeasible right of

appointment on the appellants. As such, it was concluded that

interjection in the ongoing recruitment process was not because

of the change of the government or political dispensation, but due

to change of policy in larger public interest.
13. Some of the writ petitioners had filed these appeals

challenging the judgment of the High Court while some of the

appellants who were affected by the impugned judgment sought
16
permission to challenge the same as such these appeals assailing

the judgment of the High Court have been heard together.
CONTENTIONS OF THE APPELLANTS AND RESPONDENTS:
14. Learned          senior        counsel,   Mr.   Pallav   Shishodia   has

vehemently argued and submitted that appellants had applied for

the post of Enrolled Followers and participated in the selection

process. On completion of the selection process, they were

granted tokens and             called to concerned police stations for

character      verification.       The   said   recruitment    process   was

undertaken as specified by TSR Act and TSR Rules. Thus,

cancelling such process of selection in the wake of NRP, without

amending the TSR Act and TSR Rules, is not based on valid

statutory backing which is arbitrary and illegal. It was submitted

that once a recruitment process begins, it cannot be changed

midway by executive instructions, i.e., by bringing the NRP and

issuing the Cancellation Memorandum for ongoing recruitment

process.
In support of his contentions, reliance has been placed

on the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in
Tej Prakash

Pathak and Others vs. Rajasthan High
Court and Others 1. It

was also submitted, that as per Clause (2) of NRP, its
1 (2025) 2 SCC 1, 2024 INSC 847.
17
applicability is prospective hence it cannot be made applicable on

the pending recruitment processes.
15. It was also contended that once a recruitment process is in

progress in terms of the relevant statute, no policy decision can

stall and/or cancel the process of recruitment. In the facts of this

case, when selection process was completed, and appellants were

selected provisionally, they have a legitimate expectation of

appointment, which is not against the public policy. To buttress

the said contention, reliance has been placed on the Constitution

Bench judgment of this Court in
Sivanandan C.T. and Others

vs. High
Court of Kerala and Others 2.
16. In view of the foregoing, appellants submit that Abeyance

Memorandum dated 14.03.2018 and Cancellation Memorandum

dated 20.08.2018 be quashed and direction be issued to complete

the recruitment process within a time frame.
17. Per        contra,       learned        senior   counsel,   Col.   R.

Balasubramanaian appearing for the State has vociferously

contended that High Court has rightly dismissed the writ

petitions giving cogent reasons. It is not disputed by the State

that the process of recruitment for the post of Enrolled Followers
2 (2024) 3 SCC 799, 2023 INSC 709.
18
was conducted in accordance with TSR Act and TSR Rules. In the

meantime, new government was formed, which issued Abeyance

Memorandum            and     subsequently,   cancelled   the   ongoing

recruitment processes vide Cancellation Memorandum which was

in larger public interest.
18. It was contended that the decision to cancel the ongoing

recruitment process was taken consciously relying upon the NRP,

which was well within the competence of the State. The decision

was taken with the intention to bring more transparency and

fairness in the process of selection. It was further contended that

recruitment process was still ongoing as no final merit list was

published. Thus, mere participation in the recruitment process

will not confer any indefeasible right of appointment on the

appellants. Further, there can be no legitimate expectation in

their favour.
In support of their contention, reliance has been

placed on the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in the

case of
Shankarsan Dash vs. Union of India3
.
19. Learned senior counsel also contended that Clause (2) of

NRP has been wrongly interpreted by the appellants. The intent

of Clause (2) of NRP was for the policy not to apply to those

3 (1991) 3 SCC 47, 1991 INSC 120.
19
recruitments which have been completed prior to the issuance of

NRP. In the present case, as the recruitment process was still

ongoing, NRP will apply. It is therefore submitted that the High

Court has rightly dismissed the writ petitions and no interference

is warranted by this Court.
ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION:
20. After hearing learned counsel for the parties at length and

on perusal of the facts and material placed on record, the

following issues arise for consideration:
(1)   Whether the Abeyance Memorandum dated 14.03.2018

          and    Cancellation   Memorandum      dated   20.08.2018

          purportedly issued in the wake of change of policy of the

          State in larger public interest, under the executive

          instructions, and in consequence, the cancellation of

          recruitment process as specified in TSR Act and TSR

          Rules for the post of Enrolled Followers after preparation

          of the provisional selection list, is justified and has any

          sanction of law?
20
(2)   Whether the State’s decision to apply NRP to the ongoing

          recruitment process of Enrolled Followers under the

          pretext of the Cancellation Memorandum would amount

          to changing the rules of the game after the game has

          begun, i.e., the recruitment process has commenced?
(3)   Whether in the context of this case, the principle of

          legitimate expectation is attracted; and in the facts, what

          relief can be granted?
ANALYSIS OF ISSUE NOS. 1 AND 2:
Issue nos. 1 and 2 posed above are interlinked, hence, the

contentions are being appreciated and answered collectively.
21. The dispute in the present case revolves around the

challenge to Abeyance Memorandum dated 14.03.2018, and

Cancellation Memorandum dated 20.08.2018 pursuant to the

decision to apply NRP in the ongoing recruitment process for

Enrolled Followers in Tripura State Rifles. The pertinent factual

backdrop leading to
the said decision
needs to be referred.
22. The Council of Ministers in exercise of powers under Rule

20(2) of the Rules of Executive Business of the Government of the

State of Tripura, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as “Rules of
21
Executive      Business”),   on   10.03.2018,   decided   that   the

recruitment process is required to be reviewed and pending such

review, all ongoing recruitment / selection processes in all

Departments / autonomous bodies etc. under the control of

Government shall be kept in abeyance.
In pursuance of
the said

decision
of the Cabinet, the Abeyance Memorandum dated

14.03.2018 was issued by the General Administration (Personnel

& Training) Department, under the signature of the Additional

Secretary to the Government of Tripura.
23. While process of review was undertaken, the Review

Committee recommended that interviews for Group–D posts

should    be    completely   abolished.   The   Review    Committee

pertinently made the recommendation that recruitment rules

need to be amended / revised in order to bring about uniformity

in posts and to facilitate common recruitment. In consequence,

NRP dated 05.06.2018 was notified for and on behalf of the

Governor of the State, styled as ‘New Recruitment Policy for all

establishments under administrative control of the Government

of Tripura’.
22
24. On 02.08.2018, in a meeting of the Council of Ministers, in

furtherance to the publication of NRP, it was decided that all

existing recruitment processes (except for Tripura Judicial

Service) whether undertaken by the Tripura Public Service

Commission or the respective departments, will be cancelled and

all new appointments shall be made as per NRP providing the age

relaxation to the participants of the ongoing recruitment

processes. The decision of the Council of Ministers dated

02.08.2018 fructified in the form of Cancellation Memorandum

dated 20.08.2018, whereby the ongoing recruitment processes

were cancelled in the above terms.
25. The meeting of the Council of Ministers dated 10.03.2018,

which is the inception of the series of events detailed above was

conducted under the Rules of Executive Business framed in

exercise of the powers conferred under
Article 166(2)
and
166(3)
of the Constitution of India. As per the Second Schedule of the

said Rules read with Rules 8, 14 and 31, proposals for making or

amending rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of

service of persons appointed to the public service and posts in

connection with the State and proposals involving any important
23
change of policy or practice, are to be brought before the Council

of Ministers.
26. From the above conspectus, we can safely conclude that the

NRP dated 05.06.2018 is an executive instruction of the State

issued under
Article 166(1)
of the Constitution of India, following

the meeting of the Council of Ministers. It was in the nature of a

general policy decision to bring about a change in recruitment

process of the State. It did not have a statutory and legislative

backing, rather it was a decision taken solely in the exercise of

the   power     vested   in   the   executive.   As   such,   Abeyance

Memorandum and Cancellation Memorandum are also issued in

exercise of the executive power of the State by issuing executive

orders.
Status of the recruitment process of enrolled followers
27. The present appeals concern two categories of candidates,

i.e., citizens within Tripura and residents of other states. For

both, two separate advertisements were issued and recruitment

processes were undertaken separately, although they were for the

same post of Enrolled Followers in Tripura State Rifles. We have

examined the voluminous record and documents supplied by the
24
Respondent pertaining to both the advertisements and as

discussed in paras 6.1 to 6.4 and 7 of this judgment, without an

iota of doubt it can be said that in both the recruitment

processes, selection lists were prepared and significant progress

was made up to the stage of character verification which was in

process.
28. In the recruitment for inside-state candidates for the

citizens    within    Tripura,      advertisement     was     issued    on

09.09.2016. Various recruitment rallies were conducted all

across     Tripura   on   various    dates   between       24.09.2016   to

07.12.2016. During the said recruitment rallies, candidates

having required physical standards as well as other eligibility

criteria, were put through a physical / endurance test. Qualified

candidates in the physical test were allowed to sit for a written

test, and those candidates who had qualified both the physical /

endurance test and written test were then allowed to appear for a

‘viva - voce’. In total, 2,388 candidates of the inside-state quota

participated    in   recruitment     process,   out   of    which   1,696

candidates were found to be qualified after completion of the

physical test, written test and viva-voce. Out of the combined
25
merit list of 1,696 candidates, the Board recommended only for

filling up 350 vacant posts.
29. In the recruitment for outside-state quota candidates,

advertisement was issued on 14.09.2016, recruitment rallies

were conducted between 23.10.2016 to 15.11.2016 in Kotdwar

(North India), Ranchi (Central India) and Vishakhapatnam (Vizag)

(South India) on different dates. During the said recruitment

rallies, candidates having required physical standards as well as

other eligibility criteria, were put through a physical / endurance

test. Qualified candidates in the physical test were allowed to sit

for a written test and those candidates who had qualified both

the physical / endurance test and the written test were allowed to

appear   for   a   ‘viva-voce’.   In    total,   1,429   candidates   were

preliminarily shortlisted at the recruitment rallies, where 372

candidates were qualified after completing the physical test,

written test and viva voce. Out of the combined merit list of 372

candidates, the Board recommended only for filling up 134

vacant   posts,    and    the     remaining       238    candidates   were

recommended to be kept on a panel list / waiting list.
26
30. As such, it is needless to say, the process of recruitment

was not at a nascent stage. Much prior to the issuance of

Abeyance        Memorandum       dated     14.03.2018,       NRP   dated

05.06.2018 and Cancellation Memorandum dated 20.08.2018,

the recruitment process for the post of Enrolled Followers either

inside-state quota or outside-state quota in Tripura State Rifles

had reached the stage of preparation of the final merit list after

completion of the recruitment process as specified.


Statutory Rules vs. Executive Order
31. At this juncture, it is pertinent to note that the recruitment

for the post of Enrolled Followers in Tripura State Rifles was

carried out under TSR Act and TSR Rules. The relevant

provisions have already been discussed in the factual part in

paras 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this judgement. The said facts have not

been disputed by the Respondents in their counter affidavit.
32. Under TSR Act read with TSR Rule 24(e), the mandate is for

the candidate to pass such test as may be specified by the DGP in

writing.   In    respect   of   the    advertisement   for   inside-state

candidates, the DGP accorded his approval for a ‘physical test,

written test and viva voce’ on 07.09.2016, whereas for outside-
27
state candidates, approval was accorded for ‘physical test, written

test, practical, interview’ on 08.09.2016. Such a stipulation was

plainly   reflected   in   both        advertisements,   and   after

commencement of the recruitment process, it was carried out

keeping in mind the stipulation in the TSR Rules.
33. As per Cancellation Memorandum dated 20.08.2018, the

reasoning for cancellation of ongoing recruitment processes was

to implement NRP, and in particular, in the context of the present

two advertisements, to completely abolish interviews in the

recruitment for Group-D posts. As such, the ancillary question

which arises for our consideration is whether a policy decision in

general, notified by way of executive instructions, can override

the mandate of TSR Act and TSR Rules.
34. While appreciating the said question it is to be recorded that

the recruitment for the post of Enrolled Followers, within the

inside State quota or outside State quota, was at the verge of

completion. Undisputedly, it is not rebutted by the Government

that the said process was not carried out under TSR Act and TSR

Rules, or that the character verification of the candidates who

found place in the panel, had not been initiated. From the record,
28
it reveals that the appointment orders were to be issued subject

to verification of the documents. In the meantime, legislative

assembly elections were notified and after elections there was a

change in the political landscape of the State. Immediately upon

assuming the functioning of the government by the new political

dispensation, a decision to review the recruitment process of all

departments was taken on the pretext of making the process

more fair, open and transparent. From the record of the selection

or as per averments in the counter affidavit, nothing can be

elucidated as to why the existing process of selection was not fair

and transparent. For the recruitment to the post of Enrolled

Followers, the process undertaken was as per the provisions of

TSR Act and TSR Rules framed thereunder, having statutory

backing. It is not contended in the counter affidavit that the

pending recruitment process for Enrolled Followers, has in any

manner violated the provisions of the TSR Act and/or TSR Rules,

and was not transparent or unfair in any manner. In the said

context, it can safely be observed that if recruitment process was

carried out as per the TSR Act and TSR Rules framed thereunder,

deviation was not permitted by way of executive instructions in

the wake of policy decision of the government, otherwise it would
29
amount to overriding the recruitment process carried out under

the aforesaid Act and Rules by means of executive instructions.

For clarity, it is to be observed that where the subject and the

field is occupied by the statute and the rules, the executive

instructions      cannot     supplant          the   same;   they   can   only

supplement, otherwise it would render the act done under the

statute to be void. It cannot be lost sight of the fact that Enrolled

Followers is a Class–IV (Group–D) post and as per policy decision

of NRP, interview for Class–IV (Group–D) post is to be completely

abolished. However, no such amendment to that effect has been

brought either in the statute and/or in the rules yet. Under such

circumstances, merely because of a new recruitment policy, the

recruitment process under the Act and Rules cannot be

cancelled.
35. This Court has had the occasion to examine similar legal

issue in multiple cases. The Constitution Bench in
Sant Ram

Sharma vs. State of Rajasthan
4, while dealing with an office

memorandum of the Central Government in respect of promotion

under the
All India Services Act, 1951
and the Indian Police

Service (Fixation of Seniority) Rules, 1954, held:
4 1967 SCC OnLine SC 16, 1967 INSC 167.
30
“7. We proceed to consider the next contention of Mr N.C.
        Chatterjee that in the absence of any statutory rules governing
        promotions to selection grade posts the Government cannot
        issue administrative instructions and such administrative
        instructions cannot impose any restrictions not found in the
        Rules already framed. We are unable to accept this argument as
        correct. It is true that there is no specific provision in the Rules
        laying down the principle of promotion of junior or senior grade
        officers to selection grade posts. But that does not mean that till
        statutory rules are framed in this behalf the Government cannot
        issue administrative instructions regarding the principle to be
        followed in promotions of the officers concerned to selection
        grade posts. It is true that Government cannot amend or
        supersede statutory rules by administrative instructions, but if
        the rules are silent on any particular point Government can fill
        up the gaps and supplement the rules and issue instructions
        not inconsistent with the rules already framed.”
36. This Court in the case of
A.B. Krishna and Ors. vs. State

of Karnataka and Ors.5
, observed as under:
“8. The Fire Services under the State Government were
        created and established under the
Fire Force Act, 1964
made by
        the State Legislature. It was in exercise of the power conferred
        under
Section 39
of the Act that the State Government made
        Service Rules regulating the conditions of the Fire Services.
        Since the Fire Services had been specially established under an
        Act of the legislature and the Government, in pursuance of the
        power conferred upon it under that Act, has already made
        Service Rules, any amendment in the Karnataka Civil Services
        (General Recruitment) Rules, 1977 would not affect the special
        provisions Validly made for the Fire Services. As a matter of
        fact, under the scheme of
Article 309
of the Constitution, once a
        legislature intervenes to enact a law regulating the conditions of
        service, the power of the Executive, including the President or
        the Governor, as the case may be, is totally displaced on the
        principle of “doctrine of occupied field”. If, however, any matter
        is not touched by that enactment, it will be competent for the



5 (1998) 3 SCC 495, 1998 INSC 22.
31
Executive to either issue executive instructions or to make a rule
       under
Article 309
in respect of that matter.”
37.
In
Jaiveer Singh and Ors. vs. State of Uttarakhand and

Ors.6
, while deciding a similar legal issue, this Court observed as

follows:
“49.        It can thus be seen that it is a trite law that the
       Government cannot amend or supersede statutory rules by
       administrative instructions, but if the rules are silent on any
       particular point, it can fill up the gaps and supplement the rules
       and issue instructions not inconsistent with the rules already
       framed. It is a settled proposition of law that an authority
       cannot issue orders/office memorandum/executive instructions
       in contravention of the statutory rules. However, instructions
       can be issued only to supplement the statutory rules but not to
       supplant it.”
38.
In
Bank of Baroda and Another vs. G. Palani and Others
7

where an executive instruction by the name of ‘joint note’ was

issued to change pensionary benefits provided to the employees

under
Banking Companies Act, 1970
and Regulations of 1995

made
u/s 19
of the Act, it was held that such an executive

instruction cannot supplant the provisions of the statute. The

relevant paragraph is reproduced below as thus:
“14.         First we come to the rigour of the regulations, The
       regulations have statutory force, having framed in exercise of
       the powers under
section 19(2)(f)
of the 1970 Act and are
       binding. They could not have been supplanted by any executive
       fiat, order or joint note, which has no statutory basis. The joint

6 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1584, 2023 INSC 1024.
7 (2022) 5 SCC 612.
32
note of the officers also had no statutory force behind it and
       could not have obliterated any of the provisions of 1970 act or
       the existing regulations. Thus, joint notes could not have taken
       away the rights that were available under the 1995 pension
       regulations to the officer.”
39. Recently, in
R. Ranjith Singh and Others vs. State of

Tamil Nadu and Others8
, service rules were framed under the

relevant state Act and
Article 309
of the Constitution of India and

various government orders were issued by the State without

amending the relevant rules to give 20% reservation to in-service

candidates in direct recruitment posts and for maintenance of

their seniority. It was held by this Court that the government

orders had the effect of supplanting the statutory rules instead of

supplementing them, which is not permissible. This Court noted

as follows:
“19.                           xxxx

       ….The State Government has certainly issued various executive
       directions from time to time for appointment under the direct
       recruitment quota providing reservation to in-service candidates
       to the extent of 20%; however, the rules were never amended till
       21.11.2017. It is a well settled proposition of law that executive
       instructions cannot supplant the statutory rules. They can
       supplement/clarify the statutory rules. In the present case, the
       executive instructions issued from time to time have in fact
       supplanted the statutory rules and such a process is unheard of
       in the field of service jurisprudence.”




8 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1009, 2025 INSC 612.
33
40. Applying the above principles of law, it can safely be

concluded that executive instructions issued under
Article 166(1)
of the Constitution of India cannot override the act done under

the statute and the rules made thereunder. The executive

instructions can only supplement the provisions of the act and

the rules in case of any ambiguity or if gaps are to be filled but

such   executive   instructions   cannot   supplant   the   specific

provisions which already occupy the field. It is not the case of the

government that to fill the gaps and to supplement the TSR Act

and TSR Rules, the NRP is relevant, therefore, Abeyance

Memorandum or Cancellation Memorandum may be upheld. In

absence of the same, in our view, the action of the government in

cancelling the process of recruitment for the post of Enrolled

Followers is not justified and would amount to arbitrary exercise

of power.
41. It is further relevant to discuss that the pretext which has

been taken to issue Cancellation Memorandum is NRP dated

05.06.2018. The said policy is based on the recommendation of

the three-members review committee constituted by the State

Government to review recruitment policy across the State and all

its departments. The recommendations of the committee were
34
plain and specific, inter-alia, observing that “all the above

recommendations will be applicable with prospective effect only”.

In addition to the discussions as made hereinabove, in absence of

the statutory backing behind the policy, the recommendations as

made for abolition of the interview of Class-IV (Group-D) posts

would apply with prospective date only. Meaning thereby, it would

not apply to the process of recruitment of Enrolled Followers, for

whom, the interviews have already been conducted. Hence,

application of NRP on the pending recruitment process is

contrary to clause (2) of the said policy.
Plea of Larger Public Interest
42. It is vehemently argued that the recruitment process was

kept in abeyance and later cancelled based on NRP which was a

bona fide decision by the Government in larger public interest. In

support of the said contention, in the Counter Affidavit, it is said

that the decision of the State shall be of benefit in the long run,

because qualified candidates shall be recruited on merit, which

may enhance overall efficiency of administration in the State.
43. Apart from this, there is no mention even in the NRP as to

how larger public interest can be achieved by abolition of
35
interviews for Group-D posts such as Enrolled Followers. It is

difficult to see how such larger public interest can be achieved in

the present context specifically where the recruitment process for

Enrolled Followers was at a significantly advanced stage and

interviews had already been conducted.
44. The Constitution bench judgement of this Court in
Tej

Prakash Pathak
(Supra) has noted the importance of interviews

in a recruitment process to assess the suitability of a candidate.

The relevant portion of the said judgement is reproduced below

as thus: -
“49.         The ultimate object of any process of selection for
      entry into a public service is to secure the best and the most
      suitable person for the job, avoiding patronage and favouritism.
      Selection based on merit, tested impartially and objectively, is
      the essential foundation of any useful and efficient public
      service. So, open competitive examination has come to be
      accepted almost universally as the gateway to public services.
      [
Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan
, (1981) 4 SCC 159, para 4 :
1981 SCC (L&S) 588] It is now well settled that while a written
      examination assesses a candidate's knowledge and intellectual
      ability, an interview test is valuable to assess a candidate's
      overall intellectual and personal qualities.
xx   xx        xx   xx
51.         What is clear from above is that the object of any
      process of selection for entry into a public service is to ensure
      that a person most suitable for the post is selected. What is
      suitable for one post may not be for the other. Thus, a degree of
      discretion is necessary to be left to the employer to devise its
      method/procedure to select a candidate most suitable for the
      post albeit subject to the overarching principles enshrined in
36
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution as also the rules/statute
      governing service and reservation.”
45. It goes without saying that certain level of discretion must

be given to the State but merely suggesting that a decision to

keep an ongoing recruitment process in abeyance and its

subsequent cancellation was in the larger public interest, is not

sufficient. The burden is on the State to justify the decision on

the anvil of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution of India and

show how its decision was in furtherance of larger public interest.
46. In our considered opinion, the State has miserably failed in

discharging such burden, and in the facts and circumstances of

this case, we are unable to agree with the contention of the State

that the decision to keep the ongoing recruitment process in

abeyance and its subsequent cancellation was in the larger public

interest.
Change of rules of the game after the game has begun
47. The recruitment process under the two advertisements

commenced on the date of their respective issuance. At the cost of

repetition and as discussed above, much water had flown after

such commencement. The State had taken active and tangible

steps such as constituting the Recruitment Board, setting up
37
different    State     teams     for   recruitment   rallies   which   were

conducted all across India, candidates were tested physically, in a

written exam and orally through an interview. A provisional merit

list was purportedly prepared in pursuance of the recruitment

process. After all this, Cancellation Memorandum was issued on

20.08.2018 which was general in nature, effectively setting the

clock back and putting the entire process at nought.
48. The reasoning behind the said cancellation, as suggested by

the State of Tripura, is that it was decided by the Government

that not only future recruitment, but also ongoing recruitment

processes must invariably be governed by the NRP. In the context

of the present case, the marked difference which would be

brought about by the NRP is that interview cannot be conducted

as a part of the procedure for recruitment given that the post of

‘Enrolled Follower’ is a Group-D post, even though the stage of

taking interviews is already over in the present case.
49. This Court in
Tej Prakash Pathak
(Supra) has affirmed the

decision in
K. Manjusree vs. State of A.P. and Another
9, and

held that the recruitment authority can devise a procedure for

selection only in absence of rules to the contrary, however, the

9 (2008) 3 SCC 512, 2008 INSC 195.
38
same should be done prior to commencement of the recruitment

process. It has been held that if benchmarks are to be
laid down

in
different steps of the recruitment process, they cannot be laid

down after the completion of that particular step, when the game

has already been played. The relevant portion of the said

judgement is reproduced below as thus: -
“52.         Thus,     in     our     view,    the      appointing
      authority/recruiting authority/competent authority, in absence
      of rules to the contrary, can devise a procedure for selection of a
      candidate suitable to the post and while doing so it may also
      set benchmarks for different stages of the recruitment process
      including written examination and interview. However, if any
      such benchmark is set, the same should be stipulated before the
      commencement of the recruitment process. But if the extant
      Rules or the advertisement inviting applications empower the
      competent authority to set benchmarks at different stages of the
      recruitment process, then such benchmarks may be set any
      time before that stage is reached so that neither the candidate
      nor the evaluator/examiner/interviewer is taken by surprise.
53.         The decision in
K. Manjusree [K. Manjusree v. State
      of A.P.
, (2008) 3 SCC 512 : (2008) 1 SCC (L&S) 841] does not
      proscribe setting of benchmarks for various stages of the
      recruitment process but mandates that it should not be set after
      the stage is over, in other words after the game has already
      been played. This view is in consonance with the rule against
      arbitrariness enshrined in
Article 14
of the Constitution and
      meets the legitimate expectation of the candidates as also the
      requirement of transparency in recruitment to public services
      and thereby obviates malpractices in preparation of select list.”
50. In the present case, not only benchmarks are being set after

the game has been played, rather the State has decided that a

portion of the game itself, the step of interview, should not have
39
been played at all. As discussed above, in pursuance of Rule 24(e)

of the TSR Rules, the DGP had approved interview as one of the

tests required to be passed. Thereafter, candidates participated in

interviews and were ranked accordingly. It can be said that the

stage of interview was over much prior to the issuance of the

Cancellation Memorandum.
51. The Constitution bench in
Tej Prakash Pathak
(Supra) has

also clarified that the procedure prescribed in the extant rules

cannot be violated and administrative instructions can only be

used to supplement and fill the gap in the Rules; they cannot be

used to supplant the Rules completely, as has been done in the

present case. These administrative instructions, in any case,

cannot be diametrically opposite to what the Rules provide. The

relevant portion of the said judgement is reproduced below as

thus: -
“62.         There can therefore be no doubt that where there are
      no rules or the rules are silent on the subject, administrative
      instructions may be issued to supplement and fill in the gaps in
      the rules. In that event administrative instructions would govern
      the field provided they are not ultra vires the provisions of the
      rules or the statute or the Constitution. But where the rules
      expressly or impliedly cover the field, the recruiting body would
      have to abide by the rules.”
40
52. In the present case, on the strength of a general policy

decision of the State, an ongoing recruitment process was first

put in abeyance and then cancelled, it has been derailed with the

intention to implement NRP when the recruitment has already

reached the stage of preparation of the merit list. The very

application of NRP to the ongoing process is illegal on three

counts – firstly, because it is an executive instruction and in the

absence of an amendment in the TSR Act and TSR Rules, the

recruitment procedure could not have been changed. Secondly,

because the application of NRP to the ongoing recruitment

process would amount to changing the rules of the game after the

game   has    already     begun,    i.e.    recruitment    process    has

commenced.     Thirdly,    as      per     clause   (2)   of   NRP,   the

recommendation to abolish interviews for Group-D posts would

only apply prospectively and it would not mean to apply in the

recruitment process wherein the interview has already taken

place. In view of the conclusions drawn as above, Issue Nos. 1

and 2 are answered in the above terms.
ISSUE NO. 3
Legitimate expectation and indefeasible right
41
53. Another aspect of the matter is the question as to whether

any absolute right of appointment has accrued in favour of the

appellants by participating in the recruitment process after

completion of the recruitment rallies and when a provisional

merit list has been prepared, or if they have a legitimate

expectation to be recruited having participated in the process. If

so, whether cancellation of the recruitment process would

impinge upon such legitimate expectation.
54. On the said issue, the State has placed heavy reliance on

the judgement in
Shankarsan Dash
(Supra) to argue that mere

participation in the selection process or even placement on the

select list would not create an indefeasible right for appointment

in favour of the appellants.
On the other side, the appellants have

placed reliance on
Sivanandan C.T.
(Supra) to argue that they

have a legitimate expectation to be appointed after having

participated in the recruitment process.
55. It is trite law, and no contest can be made in respect of the

settled proposition that mere participation in the recruitment

process or placement in a select list would not create an

indefeasible right to be appointed, even if vacancies are available.
42
The judgement in
Shankarsan Dash
(Supra) has been followed

subsequently in a plethora of decisions of this Court. The

relevant portion of
the said judgment
is quoted hereinafter:
“7. It is not correct to say that if a number of vacancies are
        notified for appointment and adequate number of candidates
        are found fit, the successful candidates acquire an indefeasible
        right to be appointed which cannot be legitimately denied.
        Ordinarily the notification merely amounts to an invitation to
        qualified candidates to apply for recruitment and on their
        selection, they do not acquire any right to the post. Unless the
        relevant recruitment rules so indicate, the State is under no
        legal duty to fill up all or any of the vacancies. However, it does
        not mean that the State has the license of acting in an arbitrary
        manner. The decision not to fill up the vacancies has to be taken
        bona fide for appropriate reasons. And if the vacancies or any
        of them are filled up, the State is bound to respect the
        comparative merit of the candidates, as reflected at the
        recruitment test, and no discrimination can be permitted.”
56. It is clear from a plain reading of the above judgement that

State may choose not to appoint a person who has been placed

on the select list. This was the specific decision of this Court also

in
State of Haryana vs. Subash Chander Marwaha and

Others10
, subsequently clarified in
Tej Prakash Pathak
(Supra)

where a select list of 40 candidates was drawn up, but against 15

vacancies available, only 7 appointments were made. In that

context, it was held that mere placement on the select list would

not create an obligation for the State to fill up all the vacancies


10 (1974) 3 SCC 220
43
and   make         appointments,     since       no     indefeasible    right    of

appointment         has    accrued      in     favour    of   the   candidates.

Simultaneously, it goes without saying that the action of the

State should not be arbitrary and decision taken for not filling the

vacancies must be bona fide.
57. However, the candidates who have taken part in a

recruitment process conducted by a public authority have a

legitimate    expectation     that      the     selection     process   will    be

conducted fairly and without arbitrariness. Consistency and

predictability are important aspects of non-arbitrariness, and the

rule of law obligates the State to only take decisions which are

rooted in fairness and equality. It was held in
Sivanandan CT
(Supra) and later clarified in
Tej Prakash Pathak
(Supra) that in

order to frustrate the legitimate expectation of candidates the

burden is on the State by placing relevant material to objectively

demonstrate that the decision taken by it was in the larger public

interest     and     not   arbitrary.        Relevant    excerpts      from     the

Constitution bench decision in Sivanandan CT are quoted

below:
“40.       The principle of fairness in action requires that
      public authorities be held accountable for their representations,
      since the State has a profound impact on the lives of citizens.
44
Good administration requires public authorities to act in a
      predicable manner and honour the promises made or practices
      established unless there is a good reason not to do so.
      In
Nadarajah [R. (Nadarajah) v. Secy. of State
for the Home
      Deptt., 2005 EWCA Civ 1363] , Laws, L.J. held that the public
      authority should objectively justify that there is an overriding
      public interest in denying a legitimate expectation. We are of the
      opinion that for a public authority to frustrate a claim of
      legitimate expectation, it must objectively demonstrate by
      placing relevant material before the court that its decision was
      in the public interest. This standard is consistent with the
      principles of good administration which require that State
      actions must be held to scrupulous standards to prevent misuse
      of public power and ensure fairness to citizens.
xx    xx        xx   xx
45.         The underlying basis for the application of the
      doctrine of legitimate expectation has expanded and evolved to
      include the principles of good administration. Since citizens
      repose their trust in the State, the actions and policies of the
      State give rise to legitimate expectations that the State will
      adhere to its assurance or past practice by acting in a
      consistent, transparent, and predictable manner. The principles
      of good administration require that the decisions of public
      authorities must withstand the test of consistency,
      transparency, and predictability to avoid being regarded as
      arbitrary and therefore violative of Article 14.”
58. In the present case, it is not that the State has decided to fill

up only some of the available vacancies, but rather it has decided

to do away with the recruitment process altogether. It goes

without saying that the State’s decision not to appoint a person

who has been placed on the select list must not be arbitrary and

must be rooted in objective reasoning. The recruitment process,

especially when it is conducted on the strength of Act and Rules,
45
cannot be left at the whims and fancies of the State to interfere,

through executive orders, without adhering to the principles of

consistency and predictability, which are warranted by the rule of

law and are pillars of non-arbitrariness.
59. As discussed above, the State has failed to prove that the

decision to apply NRP to the ongoing recruitment process was in

the larger public interest – as such, the legitimate expectation of

fairness in the recruitment process must be upheld.
60. From the discussion made hereinabove and in the facts of

this case, the appellants have participated in the process of

recruitment conducted in furtherance to the provisions of TSR

Act and TSR Rules. Undisputedly, they found place in the panel

of selection. It was only at the stage of character verification, the

process was kept in abeyance, later cancelled, in terms of NRP

which could not have been made applicable to the ongoing

recruitment process. The application of the NRP to the ongoing

recruitment process for the post of Enrolled Followers in Tripura

State Rifles was not in public interest. Therefore, the appellants

do have a legitimate expectation of completion of recruitment

process in a fair and non-arbitrary manner. The recruitment
46
process should be concluded fairly as per TSR Act and TSR Rules

and the candidates may be appointed if they are found to be

meritorious. As such, Issue No. 3 is answered accordingly.
61. In view of the discussions made hereinabove, we allow this

batch of appeals setting aside the impugned judgment passed by

the High Court. As a consequence, the writ petitions of the

appellants are allowed quashing Abeyance Memorandum dated

14.03.2018 and Cancellation Memorandum dated 20.08.2018

insofar as their application to the recruitment process for the

post of Enrolled Followers in Tripura State Rifles is concerned. It

is further directed that the recruitment process for the post of

Enrolled Followers in Tripura State Rifles shall now be finalized

and completed     by the Respondents following the provisions of

TSR Act and TSR Rules within a period of two months. Pending

application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…….…………….…………J.
                                            (J.K. MAHESHWARI)


                                          …….…………….…………J.
                                              (RAJESH BINDAL)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 28th, 2025.
47
REPORTABLE

          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


        CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4467-4468 OF 2023


THE STATE OF TRIPURA & ANR.          ….APPELLANT(S)


                        VERSUS


SAMUDRA DEBBARMA & ORS.            ....RESPONDENT(S)


                        WITH


           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4469 OF 2023


THE STATE OF TRIPURA & ANR.          ….APPELLANT(S)


                        VERSUS

DEBAPRATIM NAG & ANR.              ....RESPONDENT(S)


                        WITH


           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4471 OF 2023


CHIMAN DEBBARMA & ANR.               ….APPELLANT(S)


                        VERSUS


THE STATE OF TRIPURA & ORS.         ....RESPONDENT(S)
1
JUDGMENT

J.K. MAHESHWARI J.
1.     In this batch of appeals, Civil Appeal Nos. 4467-68 of 2023

relate to the recruitment for Tripura Civil Services (hereinafter

referred to as “TCS”), Grade-II, Group ‘A’ gazetted category posts,

which was decided by the impugned judgment dated 03.12.2019 1.

The Division Bench of the High Court of Tripura sustained the

order of the learned Single Judge with certain modifications.

Review petition filed was also dismissed vide judgment dated

13.01.20202. Aggrieved by the same, the State Government has

filed these appeals.
2.     Civil Appeal No. 4469 of 2023 relates to the recruitment to

the Tripura Police Service (hereinafter referred to as “TPS”),

Grade II, Group ‘A’ Gazetted category posts, which was decided by

the impugned judgment dated 20.01.2020 3. The Division Bench

relying upon the judgment dated 03.12.2019, which is under

challenge in Civil Appeal Nos. 4467-68 of 2023, set aside the

memorandum dated 20.08.2018 to the extent of Tripura Police
1 WA No. 142 of 2019.
2 Review Petition No. 01 of 2020.
3 WP (C) No. 1437 of 2019.
2
Service Grade-II examination with directions to complete the

recruitment process in connection with the said posts.
3.     Civil Appeal No. 4471 of 2023 also relates to Tripura Police

Service, wherein vide order dated 17.09.2021 4, the Writ Petition

filed by the candidate was allowed and disposed of, making

certain observations in view of the stay granted in C.A. Nos.

4467-4468 of 2023 and directing that the directions in C.A. Nos.

4467-4468 of 2023 shall apply.
4.     In all the above matters, the controversy revolves around the

abrupt cancellation of the recruitment process of TPS and TCS

governed by the respective rules which are pari materia to each

other. Since the recruitment for the posts of TPS and TCS had

commenced and controversy involved is similar, looking into the

similitude of the origin and controversies in all the aforesaid

appeals, we have proposed to take up all these appeals

analogously and the same are being dealt with by this common

judgment. Since the appellant in Civil Appeal Nos. 4467-48 and

4469 of 2023 is the State of Tripura and the appellant in Civil

Appeal No. 4471 of 2023 is a recruitment candidate, we shall be
4 WP (C) No. 365 of 2021.
3
referring to the candidates collectively as ‘Candidates’ and the

State of Tripura as ‘State’.
FACTS RELEVANT FOR THE MATTER:
5.   The genesis of the present appeals arises from the

recruitment notification styled as ‘Advertisement No. 04/2016’

dated 30.04.2016 published by the Tripura Public Service

Commission (hereinafter referred to as “TPSC”). By the said

advertisement and addendum dated 03.07.2017, applications

were invited for 30 posts of TCS Grade-II and 15 posts of TPS

Grade-II. Both the posts are Group ‘A’ gazetted posts and are

required to be filled up by direct recruitment. The appointments

to the post of TCS and TPS are governed by the rules known as

Tripura Civil Service Rules, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as “TCS

Rules”) and Tripura Police Services Rules (hereinafter referred to

as “TPS Rules”), respectively, which are the rules framed in

exercise of the power under the proviso to
Article 309
of the

Constitution of India. As the rules relating to TCS and TPS are

pari materia, therefore, we are referring to the TCS Rules for

ready reference. Rule 5 provides for a method of recruitment,

whereby 50% of the substantive vacancies shall be filled by direct
4
recruitment, while the remaining vacancies are to be filled by

selection from amongst the persons in service as specified

therein. The direct recruitment has been prescribed through

competitive examination specified in Rule 6, which is to be held at

such intervals as the State Government may in consultation with

the TPSC, from time to time, determine. The date and place is to

be fixed by the TPSC. The said rule is relevant, therefore,

reproduced as thus:
“6. Competitive examination – (1) A competitive examination for
      direct recruitment to the Service shall be held at such intervals
      as the Central Government may, in consultation with the
      Commission from time to time, determine. The dates on which
      and the places at which the examination shall be held shall be
      fixed by the Commission.
(2) The qualifications for admission to the examination and the
      consent thereof shall be in accordance with such regulations as
      the Central Government may, from time to time, issue in this
      behalf in constitution with the commission.”
6.   Pertaining    to    the   qualification    for   admission       to   the

examination    and      conduct    thereof,    the    same    shall   be    in

accordance with such regulations as the State Government may,

from time to time, issue in this respect in consultation with

TPSC. In exercise of the power under Rule 6 of TCS / TPS Rules,

the Governor of the State of Tripura after consultation with TPSC

had issued the Notification styled as “Tripura Civil Service and
5
Tripura Police Service (Appointment by Combined Competitive

Examination (12th Amendment)] Regulation, 2012” (hereinafter

referred to as “the Regulations”). As informed, the Regulations,

which were amended and notified on 30.06.2012, are invoked for

the purpose of recruitment of TCS and TPS.
Regulation 11(1)
which was substituted as on the date of notification, relates to

the conduct of the examination, and therefore, it is reproduced as

thus:
“11. (1) The Examination will be held in three successive stages
        namely (i) Preliminary Examination (Objective type) (ii) Main
        Examination (Conventional type-written) and (iii) Personality
        Test. A number of candidates, maximum 10 (ten) times of total
        posts (category wise) will be selected merit wise on the basis of
        the result of the Preliminary Examination, subject to securing
        minimum qualifying marks as fixed by the Commission. These
        selected candidates will be allowed to appear in the Main
        Examination. The selected candidates on the basis of the
        results of the Main Examination will be allowed to
        appear in the Personality Test. The Preliminary
        Examination, Main Examination and Personality Test will carry
        200 marks, 800 marks and 100 marks respectively.
…
(ii) Purpose of preliminary Examination

          The Preliminary Examination is meant to serve as a
          screening test only for the purpose of selection of
          candidates for the Main Examination. The marks
          obtained in this examination by the candidates will
          not be considered for final selection. Only those
          candidates who will be declared qualified at the
          Preliminary Examination will be eligible for admission to
          the TCS and TPS Main Examination.”
6
7.   The said
Regulation 11(1)(i)
specifies the scheme of the

preliminary examination; (ii) specifies the purpose of preliminary

examination     and     (iii)   describes    syllabi    for   preliminary

examination.
Regulation 11(2)
, as substituted by the said

Notification, specifies about the compulsory papers which can be

opted by the candidates for the purpose of main examination.

The Preliminary Examination is scored out of 200 marks, Main

Examination carries 800 marks and Interview (Personality Test)

carries 100 marks.         The regulation further states that the

purpose of preliminary examination is that of a screening test

and marks obtained by the candidates in the same would not be

considered for final selection.
8.   For initiation of the recruitment process to the TCS and TPS

Grade-II Group – ‘A’ Gazetted posts, TPSC issued Advertisement

No. 04/2016 dated 30.04.2016 (hereinafter referred to as

“Advertisement”). The relevant portion of the advertisement is

reproduced hereinunder:
“(ii) The final selection will be made in order of merit on the
      basis of the marks obtained by a candidate in Main
      Examination, in aggregate, adding the marks obtained in the
      Personality Test.”
7
The aforesaid clarifies that the final merit list of selected

candidates shall be prepared on the aggregate of marks obtained

in the Main Examination in addition to those obtained in the

Personality Test.
9.    The candidates in the respective cases appeared for the

Preliminary Examination held on 10.09.2017. The result of

Preliminary Examination was published on 30.09.2017, in which

they were declared successful. The Main Examination was

conducted    between   29.12.2017      and   21.01.2018.   In   the

meantime, elections to the Tripura State Legislative Assembly

were notified; however, the results of the Main Examination were

not declared. In the said election, the political landscape of the

State changed and the new Government assumed control of the

State. Consequently, on 14.03.2018, a memorandum no. F.20(1)-

GA(P&T)/18      (hereinafter    referred     to   as   “Abeyance

Memorandum”) was issued placing the recruitment process in

abeyance on the ground that a comprehensive review of the

recruitment process in the departments / autonomous bodies

under the Government was necessary. The said notification dated

14.03.2018 is quoted hereinbelow:
“NO. F.20(1)-GA(P&T)/18
8
GOVERNMENT OF TRIPURA

         GENERAL ADMINISTRATION (PERSONNEL & TRAINING)
                         DEPARTMENT

                               Dated, Agartala, the 14th March 2018.
MEMORANDUM

      Sub: -     Recruitment/selection process in all Department
      kept in abeyance.
The undersigned is directed to state that the State
      Government has decided that the recruitment process of the
      Government shall be reviewed and pending such review, all the
      ongoing recruitment/selection processes in Departments/
      autonomous bodies etc. under the Government, shall be kept in
      abeyance with immediate effect. However, the recruitment
      process initiated on the directions of Hon’ble Supreme
      Court/High Court or any other court within the State shall not
      be stopped without obtaining specific orders from the concerned
      court in this regard.
2.   All Departments/ Heads of Departments, Autonomous
      bodies are, therefore, requested to comply the same and make
      necessary arrangement for further circulation of the aforesaid
      instruction to their subordinate offices also for necessary
      compliance.
sd/-
(Santosh Das)
                                          Additional Secretary to the
                                             Government of Tripura”
10.   Thereafter, vide notification no. F-20(1)-GA(P&T)/18, a New

Recruitment Policy (hereinafter referred to as “NRP”) was notified

on 05.06.2018 with the stated objective of standardising the

recruitment procedure. In the NRP, with respect to Group – ‘A’, ‘B’
9
and ‘C’ posts, clauses 1.4 and 2 were added which are relevant,

therefore, reproduced as thus:
“Subject: New Recruitment Policy for all establishments under
      administrative control of the Government of Tripura.

      In supersession of all earlier instructions in connection with
      selection/recruitment of different categories of candidates by
      direct recruitment for government employment under the
      administrative control of Government of Tripura, the State
      Government has decided the following principles:
1. Written test should be the primary means to test suitability
      of    candidates for Government Jobs. The test should be
      designed in such a manner that the required skills and
      competencies can be tested in an online mode. For such posts
      where special skills are required, separate proficiency/
      personally test may be taken in a transparent manner.
      1.2. Interview should be completely abolished for Group-D
      posts, however soft skill test may be taken.
      1.3. Interview should ordinarily, not be taken for B and C
      category of posts. However, only in exceptional circumstances,
      for certain categories of Group B and C posts, where
      justification is given by the Department concerned, provision for
      interview/ skill test ay be kept with prior approval of the
      Cabinet. Further, wherever such a provision is kept, the
      weightage for interview/ skill test should not exceed 10% of
      total marks and the interview should be video graphed.
      1.4. The Group A, Group-B and C posts which are at present
      covered by TPSC will continue to be filled as per the existing
      practice. However, weightage for the interview should not
      exceed 10% of total marks. In exceptional case weightage of
      interview may be increased beyond 10% with the approval of
      cabinet, if sufficient justification exists.
      1.5. There are certain Group-A posts, which are at present
      outside the purview of TPSC. For the time being, this system
      may continue subject to the condition that the processes shall
      made more fair, open and transparent. Adequate changes shall
      be made in the recruitment process/rules for these posts so that
      selection is done on the basis of written exam followed by
10
interview with weightage of latter not being more than 10%.
Further, review should be taken up by the concerned
Departments to narrow down this category so that over a period
of time, as far as practicable, all such posts are filled through
recruitment conducted by TPSC.
1.6. Keeping in view the need to have a highly professional
cadre at higher positions in the Government, recruitment for the
left over (remaining Group-B) posts should also be taken up by
TPSC.
1.7. The posts in Police, Fire Service and Jail Department which
are currently outside the purview of TPSC should be filled by
the respective Departments subject to the overall principles
proposed at Para -1.1, 1.2 and 1.3 above.
1.8. There is a need to revise existing Recruitment Rules (RRs)
such that there is proper mapping/correlation between the
qualification, competencies and job profile. Further, in such
cases where there is similarity in the nature of jobs or jobs are
common across various Departments, the RRs have to be
suitably revised to bring in a greater degree of uniformity so as
to facilitate common recruitment as far as practicable.
1.9. For the posts where there is intake by both direct
recruitment and promotion, the intake ratio from each stream
(direct and promotion) should, to the extent possible, be kept
uniform across all the Departments.
1.10. The role of TPSC may be expanded and suitable
manpower and resources may be placed at its disposal to
enable it to ensure recruitment following the recruitment
principles mentioned above.
1.11. A new institution may be set up which may take up the
recruitments for all Group-B, C and D posts, excluding the posts
covered in Para 1.4 above. This body may function within the
broad principles proposed at Para 1.1, 1.2 and 1.3. For this,
further follow up action may be taken by GA (P&T) Department.
2. All the above recommendations will be applicable with the
prospective effect only.
3. The General Guidelines for all Departments of the State
Government for selection of candidates by open interview for
Group-C and Group-D posts to be filled up by direct recruitment
11
issued vide Memorandum No.F.23(8)-GA(P&T)/14 dated 23rd
       July, 2016 is hereby repealed and replaced by this Notification.
By the order of the Governor
                                                                         Sd/-
(Santosh Das)
                                                     Additional Secretary
                                            to the Government of Tripura.”
11.   In the wake of the said policy, the State Government issued

a     memorandum           F.20(1)-GA(P&T)/18            dated         20.08.2018

(hereinafter    referred    to    as    “Cancellation           Memorandum”)

cancelling     the   recruitment       processes        which     were     ongoing

including that to the posts of TPS and TCS under the

Advertisement. In the said memorandum, one time age relaxation

to the candidates affected by the Cancellation Memorandum was

allowed. The said Cancellation Memorandum, as challenged, is

reproduced as under:
“NO.F. 20(1)-GA(P&T)/18
                        GOVERNMENT OF TRIPURA

          GENERAL ADMINISTRATION (PERSONNEL & TRAINING)
                          DEPARTMENT

                                 Dated, Agartala, the 20th August, 2018

                            MEMORANDUM

       Subject:  Recruitment/Selection        process     as     per     New
       Recruitment Policy.
Attention is invited to this Department’s Memorandum of
       even    number      dated    14.03.2018    wherein   all the
12
recruitment/selection processes were kept in abeyance w.e.f.
14.03.2018 until further orders.
2.   The State Government has now notified a New
Recruitment Policy vide this Department’s Notification of even
number dated 05.06.2018. Accordingly, the Memorandum
issued vide No. F.20(1)-GA(P&T)/18 dated 14.03.2018 now
stands superseded.
3.   The competent authority in the State Government has
decided that in view of the New Recruitment Policy approved by
the Government, all new appointments should be made as per
the New Recruitment Policy and all existing recruitment
processes initiated by the respective Departments or the TPSC,
hereby, stand cancelled excepting ongoing recruitment of
Tripura Judicial Service Grade-III only for which specific
exemption has been accorded in consultation with the Hon’ble
High Court of Tripura.
4.   As regards the candidates who had participated in the
cancelled recruitment processes, they are to be given one time
relaxation in upper age limit to enable them to participate once
in the fresh recruitment processes subject to providing
documentary evidence of their participation in the earlier
recruitment processes for the same post(s).
5.   It is also directed that henceforth, all direct recruitment
should be made strictly as per guidelines contained in the New
Recruitment Policy issued vide Notification No.F.20(1)-
GA(P&T)/18 dated 05.06.2018 together with prior concurrence
of the Finance Department, the GA(P&T) Department and the
approval of the Council of Ministers.
6.   All Departments are, therefore, advised to strictly comply
with these decisions.
Sd/-
(Vishwasree B)
                                             Joint Secretary to
                                    the Government of Tripura”
13
12.    Being aggrieved by the Cancellation Memorandum dated

20.08.2018 and the NRP dated 05.06.2018, the candidates

ensued litigation by filing writ petitions seeking quashing thereof

and sought directions commanding the State of Tripura to

complete the process of recruitment of TCS Grade-II and TPS

Grade-II within a designated time frame.
13.   The State of Tripura filed two counter affidavits before the

High Court resisting the claim of the candidates, inter-alia,

contending that the Abeyance Memorandum was issued since

review of the recruitment policy by the Government was

necessary and the NRP was notified on 05.06.2018 after such

review. As such, the Cancellation Memorandum directing to

cancel the pending selection process was issued in order to make

all future recruitment in compliance with the NRP. By filing

supplementary affidavit dated 14.02.2019, it is stated that such

an action of the State is to achieve impartial, lawful, fair and

transparent process of selection. Therefore, the State Government

has   decided   to   cancel   the    existing   recruitment   policy,

substituting the same by a new policy in larger public interest. In

the context of the subject matter, the NRP provides that except in

exceptional cases, weightage of interview should not exceed 10%
14
of the total marks in respect of Group – ‘A’ posts. In view thereof,

it was contended that the pending process of selection to the TCS

Grade – II Group ‘A’ and TPS Grade - II Group ‘A’ has rightly been

cancelled issuing the Cancellation Memorandum.


FINDINGS OF LEARNED SINGLE JUDGE:
14.     Learned Single Judge of the High Court of Tripura by

judgement dated 14.05.2019, allowed the writ petition, holding

that the executive notification cannot supersede statutory rules

and observed that cancellation of recruitment process lacked

valid    justification.   The   Court   also   held   that   executive

instructions, namely NRP dated 05.06.2018 and Cancellation

Memorandum dated 20.08.2018, were subordinate to the rules

framed under
Article 309
of the Constitution of India. As the TCS

Rules and TPS Rules had not been amended by the competent

authority in consultation with TPSC, the cancellation of the

recruitment process, which was at an advanced stage, was

deemed to be without authority and was consequently quashed

insofar as it pertained to recruitment for the TCS Grade-II and

TPS Grade-II posts is concerned.
FINDINGS OF THE LEARNED DIVISION BENCH:
15
15.   Learned Division Bench of the High Court refrained to

comment upon the policy parameters
laid down by
the State

Government, particularly in the form of NRP. The Division Bench

was only called upon to decide whether such policy change could

be applied to a process of selection which had advanced to the

stage of conducting written examination (Main Examination) of

those eligible candidates, who had passed the Preliminary

examination for the purpose of screening. The Court further

examined the issue as to whether the rules of the game could be

changed after the game had begun. While analysing those issues,

the Division Bench has referred to the TCS Rules and

Regulations as framed by the Governor after consultation with

the TPSC. The Division Bench proceeded to observe that as per

the rules and the amended regulations, Preliminary Examination

was conducted which was cleared by the candidates. Thereafter,

they had appeared in the Main Examination conducted in terms

of the Rules and Regulations. While concluding in reference to

preparation of result of the Preliminary and Main Examinations,

the said marks for interview (Personality Test) is 100 which may

come to the extent of 11% of the total marks. The NRP notified

that the marks for the interview were not to exceed 10% of total
16
marks which may not be a plausible change and cause for

cancellation of the pending selection process since it was

exceeding merely 1% from the ceiling of the new policy which

does not affect the process of selection which had travelled up to

an advanced stage. As such, the contention of the State to

sustain   the   Cancellation   Memorandum     has   been   repelled

observing inter-alia that no pressing grounds were demonstrated

for taking such a drastic measure for an insignificant departure

from the policy parameters. The Court further observed that

executive discretion cannot be allowed to intervene the selection

process midway by changing the very selection criteria. It is said

that such an action gives rise to uncertainty in public selection

process. The Court further proceeded to observe that such

application of policy may be mala-fide where the rules of selection

may be changed so as to include certain wanted or to eliminate

unwanted candidates. As such, the Court held that change of

criteria would amount to change of the rules of game, which is

arbitrary. Therefore, the finding of the Single Bench to set-aside

the Cancellation Memorandum insofar as it relates to the ongoing

recruitment process to the post of TCS and TPS under the
17
Advertisement was upheld while interference with the NRP dated

05.06.2018 was declined.
16.   By filing a review petition, the State challenged the

judgment passed in the writ appeal. However, the review petition

was dismissed by the High Court on 13.01.2020.
In its order, the

High Court distinguished the writ appeal judgment concerning

TCS and TPS (Grade-II, Group – ‘A’ Gazetted posts) from its

earlier decision in
Sri Partha Das vs. State of Tripura & Others
,

dated 03.10.2019, rendered in Writ Petition No. 946 of 2018 and

batch. The High Court observed that
the said judgment
in Partha

Das — which was subsequently challenged in Civil Appeal Nos.

4426–4466 of 2023 which was decided by a separate order — was

not applicable to the TCS and TPS Grade-II posts which are

Group – A posts. Accordingly, the judgment in Partha Das was

held to have no bearing on the issues involved in the present

matter.
CONTENTIONS OF THE STATE OF TRIPURA:
17.   Col. R. Balasubramanian, learned senior counsel has

assiduously   urged   that   the        NRP   dated   05.06.2018   was

introduced by the State Government to ensure transparency and
18
fairness in public appointments. The policy decision is based on

the executive discretion of the State, interference in such policy

decisions of the State should be minimal and is not warranted

unless such decision is arbitrary and violative of
Article 14
of the

Constitution of India.          In terms of the NRP, the marks of the

interview have been reduced and should not exceed 10% of the

total marks in the competitive examination. The said decision

cannot be said to be arbitrary and does not restrain the State

Government from cancelling the pending process of selection for

compliance with the said policy decision. The process of selection

was ongoing and only the main examination was conducted

without declaring the result. In such a situation, if cancellation of

the pending process as directed by the impugned notification is

brought about, it would not amount to change of rules of the

game midway. As such, it has also been submitted by the State

that    mere      participation     in    the   recruitment process        and

completion of the preliminary examination and the main

examination        would      not   create    any   indefeasible   right    of

appointment in favour of the candidates as per the judgement of

this Court in
Shankarsan Dash vs. Union of India5
.


5 (1991) 3 SCC 47, 1991 INSC 120.
19
18.   It is urged that the State Government, while cancelling the

examination, has clearly specified in the notification that age

relaxation shall be granted to the affected candidates. It is also

contended that the judgment in the case of
Partha Das
(Supra)

the application of NRP to an ongoing recruitment process was

upheld prior to the impugned judgment, the High Court

committed an error in taking a different view and not allowing

the review petition on the said ground. It is also submitted that

merely by qualifying the preliminary examination and appearing

in the main examination, the candidates do not acquire any

indefeasible right of appointment or to seek direction to complete

the process of selection and claim appointment on the basis of

existing rules ignoring the NRP. As such the present appeals

deserve to be allowed.
CONTENTIONS OF THE CANDIDATES:
19.   On behalf of the candidates, during hearing, it was informed

that respondent No. 1, Samudra Debbarma in Civil Appeal Nos.

4467-4469 of 2023 is no longer pursuing the litigation as he has
20
secured employment elsewhere. The respondent No. 2 – Tripura

Public Service Commission (TPSC) was a proforma respondent,

which concurred with the submissions of the appellant – State.

As per the order of the Chamber Judge dated 29.07.2022, I.A. No.

148490 of 2021 being the application for impleadment filed by

candidates – similarly situated persons at par with Samudra

Debbarma was allowed and they were joined as respondent Nos.

3 to 13.    Mr. P.V. Dinesh, learned counsel appearing on their

behalf has advanced the arguments, inter-alia contending that

the recruitment for the posts of TCS and TPS is governed by the

rules framed under proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution of

India and the regulation promulgated in exercise of the power

conferred   under   Rule   6,   notified   by   the   Governor   after

consultation with the TPSC.
Therefore, the rules and the

regulations would come within the purview of subordinate

legislation. The NRP is a policy decision and in the nature of

executive instructions which cannot override the provisions of the

Rules and Regulations until amendment in rules and regulation

is made. As such, on the basis of the NRP, the rules of the game

cannot be changed midway in an ongoing recruitment process.

Reliance has been placed on the judgment of this Court in
Tej
21
Prakash Pathak and Ors. vs. High
Court of Rajasthan and

Ors.6 It is contended that the candidates who have passed the

Preliminary Examination and have appeared in the Main

Examination, will have legitimate expectation to succeed in the

process of selection.
In support of the said contention, reliance is

placed on the case of
Sivanandan C.T. and Ors. vs. High
Court

of Kerala and Ors.7
20.   In view of the aforesaid, it is urged that Cancellation

Memorandum cancelling the pending process of TCS and TPS

deserves to be quashed, maintaining the orders of the High Court

and dismissing the appeals filed by the State.
21.   In Civil Appeal No. 4471 of 2023, it is contended that on

account of the stay granted by this Court in Civil Appeal Nos.

4467-4468 of 2023, the writ petition itself has not been decided

on merits, it was allowed and disposed of subject to final outcome

of the said Appeals, therefore, the judgment delivered on merit in

two batches of appeal shall follow in this case.


ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION:
6 (2025) 2 SCC 1, 2024 INSC 847.
7 (2024) 3 SCC 799, 2023 INSC 709.
22
22.    After hearing learned counsel for the parties at length and

on perusal of the facts and material placed before us, the

following issues arise for consideration:
(1)   Whether Abeyance Memorandum dated 14.03.2018 and

            Cancellation     Memorandum         dated      20.08.2018,

            purportedly issued in the wake of change in State policy

            in larger public interest under executive instructions, and

            resulting in the cancellation of the recruitment process as

            specified in TCS and TPS Rules for the post of Grade-II,

            Group ‘A’ gazetted after the conduct of the main

            examination, are justified and have any sanction of

            law?
(2)   Whether the State’s decision to apply the NRP to an

            ongoing recruitment process of Grade-II, Group ‘A’

            gazetted posts in TCS and TPS under the pretext of

            Cancellation Memorandum would amount to changing

            the rules of the game after the game has begun, i.e., the

            recruitment process has commenced?
(3)   Whether, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the

            doctrine of legitimate expectation is attracted and if so,

            what relief, if any, are the candidates entitled to?
23
ANALYSIS OF ISSUE NOS. 1 AND 2:
Issue nos. 1 and 2 posed above are interlinked, hence, the

contentions are being dealt with and answered collectively.
23.   The dispute in the present case revolves around the

challenge to the Abeyance Memorandum dated 14.03.2018, and

the Cancellation Memorandum dated 20.08.2018 pursuant to

applying the NRP dated 05.06.2018 to the ongoing recruitment

process for the post of TCS and TPS. The pertinent factual

backdrop leading to issuance of these memorandum needs to be

referred.
24.   The Council of Ministers in exercise of Rule 20(2) of the

Rules of Executive Business of the Government of the State of

Tripura, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as “Rules of Executive

Business”), on 10.03.2018, decided that the recruitment process

is required to be reviewed and pending such review, all ongoing

recruitment   /   selection   processes   in   all   Departments   /

autonomous bodies etc. under the control of Government shall be

kept in abeyance. The Abeyance Memorandum was issued by the

General Administration (Personnel & Training) Department,
24
under   the    signature      of   the    Additional   Secretary   to   the

Government of Tripura.
25.   While process of review was undertaken, the committee

recommended that for the recruitment of Group – ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’

posts conducted by the TPSC, the weightage for interview should

not exceed 10% of the total marks, it may only exceed 10% with

the approval of the cabinet, if sufficient justification exists. The

Review Committee pertinently made the recommendation that

recruitment rules need to be amended / revised in order to bring

about uniformity in posts and to facilitate common recruitment.

As a consequence, the NRP dated 05.06.2018 was notified for and

on behalf of the Governor of the State, styled as ‘New

Recruitment Policy for all establishments under the control of the

Government of Tripura’.
26.   On 02.08.2018, the Council of Ministers, in furtherance to

the publication of the NRP, decided that all existing recruitment

processes     (except   for    Tripura      Judicial   Service)    whether

undertaken by the TPSC or the respective departments, will be

cancelled and all new appointments shall be made as per the

NRP, providing age relaxation to the participants of the ongoing
25
recruitment processes. The decision of the Council of Ministers

dated 02.08.2018 fructified in the form of the Cancellation

Memorandum       dated    20.08.2018,    whereby     the    ongoing

recruitment processes were cancelled in the above terms.
27.   The meeting of the Council of Ministers dated 10.03.2018,

which is the inception of the series of events detailed above, was

conducted under the Rules of Executive Business in exercise of

the powers conferred under
Article 166(2)
and
166(3)
of the

Constitution of India. As per the Second Schedule of the said

Rules read with Rules 8, 14 and 31, proposals for making or

amending rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of

service of persons appointed to the public service and posts in

connection with the State and proposals involving any important

change of policy or practice, are to be brought before the Council

of Ministers.
28.   From the above conspectus, we can safely conclude that

NRP dated 05.06.2018 is an executive instruction of the State

under
Article 166(1)
of the Constitution of India after a meeting of

the Council of Ministers under
Article 166(3).
It was in the nature

of a policy decision to bring about a change in recruitment
26
process of the State. It did not have legislative backing, rather it

was a decision taken solely in exercise of the power vested in the

executive.    As   such,   the   Abeyance   Memorandum     and     the

Cancellation Memorandum were also issued in exercise of the

executive power of the State Government in the shape of

executive orders.
Status of recruitment process of TCS and TPS
29.   As discussed, the present appeals concern two categories of

posts, under the TCS and the TPS for Grade - II, Group ‘A’

Gazetted     posts.   A common      advertisement   was   issued   on

30.04.2016 and the recruitment process commenced. We have

examined the voluminous record and documents supplied by the

State pertaining to the recruitment process and without an iota

of doubt it can be said that significant progress had been made in

the recruitment process. The preliminary exam was conducted

and candidates who had qualified the preliminary examination

had already appeared in the main examination as discussed in

paragraph 9 of this judgement; but the result of the main

examination has not been declared.
27
30.   As    such, it is needless to      observe,    the process of

recruitment was not at a nascent stage. Much prior to the

issuance of the Abeyance Memorandum dated 14.03.2018, NRP

dated      05.06.2018   and   Cancellation     Memorandum        dated

20.08.2018, the recruitment process had commenced and two

sets of examinations had already been completed.


Statutory Rules vs. Executive Order
31.   At this juncture, it is pertinent to note that the recruitment

for TCS and TPS is conducted by TPSC under TCS and TPS Rules

respectively, which have been framed by the State in exercise of

power under the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution of

India. The Governor has framed the Regulations in exercise of the

powers enshrined under Rule 6 thereof. On the date of the

issuance of the advertisement,
Regulation 11
quoted in para 6

above held the field which prescribes that the recruitment

process will contain a preliminary examination carrying 200

marks, main examination carrying 800 marks and personality

test carrying 100 marks. On reading
Regulation 11
it is clear that

the   preliminary   examination    is   only   for   short-listing   the

candidates for the main examination and the marks secured in
28
the preliminary examination were not to be considered for final

selection.   This   stipulation    was   also   reflected   in   the

advertisement, which mentioned that the final selection shall be

made in the order of merit on the basis of marks obtained in

main examination in aggregate, adding the marks obtained in the

personality test.
32.   As per   Cancellation Memorandum, the reasoning for

cancellation of the ongoing recruitment processes was to

implement the NRP. In the context of the present recruitment

process, it was to limit the marks for interview in recruitment for

Group – ‘A’ posts to maximum 10% of the total marks. In such a

factual situation, the ancillary question that arises for our

consideration is whether a policy decision in general, notified by

way of executive instructions, can override the mandate of the

TCS/TPS Rules and the Regulations framed thereunder.
33.   While appreciating the said question in the facts as

discussed above, it must be observed that the recruitment for

TCS and TPS had been initiated and the main examination had

been conducted and only personality test was left. In the

meantime, legislative assembly elections were notified and after
29
election there was a change in the political landscape of the

State. Immediate on assuming the office by the new political

dispensation, a decision to review the recruitment process of all

departments was taken on the pretext of making the same more

fair, open and transparent. From the record of the selection or as

per averments of the State nothing can be elucidated as to why

the process existing at that point in time was not fair or

transparent. The entire process until it was put in abeyance had

been conducted under the TCS/TPS Rules and Regulations

framed thereunder, which have statutory backing. It is not

contended by the State that the pending recruitment process in

any way violated the provisions of the TCS/TPS Rules. In the said

context, it can be safely observed that if recruitment process is

carried out under the Rules framed and under the Regulations,

deviation was not permitted in the wake of the policy decision of

the government by way of executive instructions, otherwise it

would amount to overriding the recruitment process carried out

under the Rules. For clarity, it is to be observed that where the

subject and the field is occupied by the rules, the executive

instructions   cannot   supplant     the   same;   they   can   only

supplement, otherwise it would render the act done under the
30
rules as void. It cannot be lost sight that
Regulation 11
has a

statutory backing prescribing 800 marks for main examination

and 100 marks for interview (apart from 200 marks for

preliminary examination). No amendment has been brought

either in the Rules or in the Regulations yet. In such

circumstances, merely because of a policy decision in the form of

NRP, the recruitment process which was at the verge of

completion cannot be cancelled.
34.   The TCS/TPS Rules are rules framed under the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution of India. Rule-making power

under said proviso is said to be an exercise of ‘legislative’ power

as opposed to ‘executive’ power since Legislature is competent to

exercise. Meaning thereby that, these are statutory rules in the

nature of subordinate legislation. This Court has had the

occasion to examine similar legal issue in multiple cases. The

Constitution Bench of this Court in
Sant Ram Sharma vs. State

of Rajasthan8
, while dealing with an office memorandum of the

Central Government in respect of promotion under the
All India

Services Act, 1951
and the Indian Police Service (Fixation of

Seniority) Rules, 1954 held: -
8 1967 SCC OnLine SC 16, 1967 INSC 167.
31
“7. We proceed to consider the next contention of Mr N.C.
        Chatterjee that in the absence of any statutory rules governing
        promotions to selection grade posts the Government cannot
        issue administrative instructions and such administrative
        instructions cannot impose any restrictions not found in the
        Rules already framed. We are unable to accept this argument as
        correct. It is true that there is no specific provision in the Rules
        laying down the principle of promotion of junior or senior grade
        officers to selection grade posts. But that does not mean that till
        statutory rules are framed in this behalf the Government cannot
        issue administrative instructions regarding the principle to be
        followed in promotions of the officers concerned to selection
        grade posts. It is true that Government cannot amend or
        supersede statutory rules by administrative instructions, but if
        the rules are silent on any particular point Government can fill
        up the gaps and supplement the rules and issue instructions
        not inconsistent with the rules already framed.”
35.
In
State of Haryana vs. Shamsher Jang Bahadur9
, this

Court held that where qualifications are already prescribed in the

rules framed under
Article 309
, the same may not be altered by

means of an executive instruction. The relevant portion of the

said judgement is reproduced as thus: -
“7. It may be noted that herein we are dealing only with those
        who were promoted from the cadre of clerks in the Secretariat.
        The first question arising for decision is whether the
        Government was competent to add by means of administrative
        instructions to the qualifications prescribed under the Rules
        framed under
Article 309.
The High Court and the courts below
        have come to the conclusion that the Government was
        incompetent to do so. This Court has ruled in
Sant Ram
        Shama v. State of Rajasthan
[(1968) 1 SCR 111] that while the
        Government cannot amend or supersede the statutory rules by
        administrative instructions, if the rules are silent on any
        particular point, the Government can fill up the gaps and

9 (1972) 2 SCC 188, 1972 INSC 116.
32
supplement the rules and issue instructions not inconsistent
        with the rules already framed. Hence we have to see whether
        the instructions with which we are concerned, so far as relate to
        the clerks in the Secretariat amend or they alter the conditions
        of service prescribed by the rules framed under
Article 309.
Undoubtedly the instructions issued by the Government add to
        those qualifications. By adding to the qualifications already
        prescribed by the rules, the Government has really altered the
        existing conditions of service. The instructions issued by the
        Government undoubtedly affects the promotion of concerned
        officials and therefore they relate to their conditions of service.
        The Government is not competent to alter the rules framed
        under
Article 309
by means of administrative instructions. We
        are unable to agree with the contention of the State that by
        issuing the instructions in question, the Government had merely
        filled up a gap in the rules. The rules can be implemented
        without any difficulty. We see no gap in the rules.”
36.
In
S.B. Patwardhan and Anr. vs. State of Maharashtra

and     Ors.10
,    it   was     held   that    merely     because      executive

instructions affecting conditions of service are issued ‘by order

and in the name of Governor’ they cannot be considered as rules

under
Article 309
or its proviso, but those are only executive

instructions issued under
Article 166
of the Constitution of India.

The relevant portion of the said judgement is reproduced as thus:
-
“26.        It is common ground that except the Bombay Rules
        dated September 21, 1939 and the Gujarat Notification dated
        August 21, 1965 the rest of the rules are in the nature of
        executive instructions. The Rules of 1941, 1960, 1963, 1965
        and 1970 were not framed by the State Government concerned
        in the exercise of constitutional or statutory power. The Rules of

10 (1977) 3 SCC 399, 1977 INSC 141.
33
1960 and 1970 were issued “By order and in the name of the
        Governor”, but that does not lend support to the construction
        faintly suggested on behalf of the direct recruits that the two
        sets of rules must be deemed to have been made under
Article
        309
of the Constitution. All executive action of the Government
        of a State is required by
Article 166
of the Constitution to be
        taken in the name of the Governor. The appeals have therefore
        to be disposed of on the basis that except for the Bombay rules
        dated September 21, 1939 and the Gujarat Notification dated
        August 21, 1965 the remaining rules, whether of recruitment or
        of seniority, are in the nature of executive instructions. These
        instructions, unlike rules regulating recruitment and conditions
        of service framed under the proviso to
Article 309
of the
        Constitution or
Section 241(2)(b)
of the Government of India Act,
        1935, cannot have any retrospective effect.”
37.
In
P.D. Aggarwal and Ors. vs. State of U.P. and Ors.11
, this

Court relied upon the judgement in
Sant Ram Sharma
(Supra)

and held: -
“20.         The office memorandum dated December 7, 1961
        which purports to amend the United Provinces Service of
        Engineers (Buildings and Roads Branch) Class II Rules, 1936 in
        our opinion cannot override, amend or supersede statutory
        rules. This memorandum is nothing but an administrative order
        or instruction and as such it cannot amend or supersede the
        statutory rules by adding something therein as has been
        observed by this Court in
Sant Ram Sharma v. State of
        Rajasthan
[AIR 1967 SC 1910 : (1968) 1 SCR 111 : (1968) 2
        LLJ 830] . Moreover the benefits that have been conferred on
        the temporary Assistant Engineers who have become members
        of the service after being selected by the Public Service
        Commission in accordance with the service rules are entitled to
        have their seniority reckoned in accordance with the provisions
        of Rule 23 as it was then, from the date of their becoming
        member of the service, and this cannot be taken away by giving
        retrospective effect to the rules of 1969 and 1971 as it is
        arbitrary, irrational and not reasonable.”

11 (1987) 3 SCC 622, 1987 INSC 163.
34
38.
In
K. Kuppusamy and Anr. vs. State of T.N. and Ors.
12,

while dealing with a similar legal issue, this Court held that

administrative       instructions      cannot   override     statutory       rules

merely because the government has indicated a decision to bring

about an amendment in the rules in the future. The relevant

portion of the said judgement is reproduced as thus: -
“3. The short point on which these appeals must succeed is
        that the Tribunal fell into an error in taking the view that since
        the Government had indicated its intention to amend the
        relevant rules, its action in proceeding on the assumption of
        such amendment could not be said to be irrational or arbitrary
        and, therefore, the consequential orders passed have to be
        upheld. We are afraid this line of approach cannot be
        countenanced. The relevant rules, it is admitted, were framed
        under the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution. They are
        statutory rules. Statutory rules cannot be overridden by
        executive orders or executive practice. Merely because the
        Government had taken a decision to amend the rules does not
        mean that the rule stood obliterated. Till the rule is amended,
        the rule applies. Even today the amendment has not been
        effected. As and when it is effected ordinarily it would be
        prospective in nature unless expressly or by necessary
        implication found to be retrospective. The Tribunal was,
        therefore, wrong in ignoring the rule.”
39.   This Court made a luculent pronouncement in
Ajaya

Kumar Das vs. State of Orissa and Ors.
13, that rules made

under
Article 309
of the Constitution of India cannot be tinkered




12 (1998) 8 SCC 469.
13 (2011) 11 SCC 136, 2009 INSC 978.
35
by the administrative orders. The relevant paragraphs of this

judgement are quoted herein below: -
“14.        Neither the Circular dated 18-6-1982 nor the
        subsequent Circular dated 19-3-1983 modifying the earlier
        Circular dated 18-6-1982 can override the statutory provision
        contained in Rule 74(b) of the Code if it results in reduction of
        pay of the employee on promotion. That the Orissa Service Code
        has been framed under
Article 309
of the Constitution of India
        is not in dispute. It is well settled that the statutory rules
        framed under
Article 309
of the Constitution can be amended
        only by a rule or notification duly made under
Article 309
and
        not otherwise. Whatever be the efficacy of the executive orders
        or circulars or instructions, statutory rules cannot be altered or
        amended by such executive orders or circulars or instructions
        nor can they replace the statutory rules. The Rules made under
Article 309
of the Constitution cannot be tinkered by the
        administrative instructions or circulars.”
40.
In
Bank of Baroda and Anr. vs. G. Palani and Ors.14
,

where an executive instruction by the name of ‘joint note’ was

issued to change pensionary benefits provided to the employees

under
Banking Companies Act, 1970
and Regulations of 1995

made
u/s 19
of the Act, it was held that such an executive

instruction cannot supplant the provisions of the statute. The

relevant paragraph is reproduced below: -
“14.         First we come to the rigour of the regulations, the
        regulations have statutory force, having framed in exercise of
        the powers under section 19(2)(f) of the 1970 Act and are
        binding. They could not have been supplanted by any executive
        fiat, order or joint note, which has no statutory basis. The joint
        note of the officers also had no statutory force behind it and
14 (2022) 5 SCC 612.
36
could not have obliterated any of the provisions of 1970 act or
       the existing regulations. Thus, joint notes could not have taken
       away the rights that were available under the 1995
       regulations.”
41.    Recently, in
R. Ranjith Singh and Ors. vs. State of Tamil

Nadu and Ors.15
, where service rules were framed under the

State Act and the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution of

India and various government orders were issued by the State

without amending the Rules to give 20% reservation to in-service

candidates in direct recruitment posts and for maintenance of

their seniority, it was held by this Court that the government

orders had the effect of supplanting the statutory rules instead of

supplementing them, which is not permissible. This Court noted

as follows: -
“19….The State Government has certainly issued various
       executive directions from time to time for appointment under the
       direct recruitment quota providing reservation to in-service
       candidates to the extent of 20%; however, the rules were never
       amended till 21.11.2017. It is a well settled proposition of law
       that executive instructions cannot supplant the statutory rules.
       They can supplement/clarify the statutory rules. In the present
       case, the executive instructions issued from time to time have in
       fact supplanted the statutory rules and such a process is
       unheard of in the field of service jurisprudence.”
42.   Applying the above principles of law, it can safely be

concluded that executive instructions issued under
Article 166(1)
of the Constitution of India cannot override the act done under

15 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1009, 2025 INSC 612.
37
TCS/TPS Rules framed under the proviso to
Article 309
of the

Constitution of India and the Regulations framed thereunder. The

executive instructions can be used to supplement the rules in

case of ambiguity or if gaps are to be filled but such executive

instructions cannot supplant the specific provisions of the

TCS/TPS Rules which already occupy the field. It is not the case

of the government that to fill the gaps and to supplement the

TCS/TPS Rules, NRP is relevant. In absence thereof, in our view,

the   action     of    the    government    cancelling   the   process   of

recruitment for TCS and TPS midway is not justified and is

arbitrary. It is further relevant to discuss that the pretext which

has been taken to issue the Cancellation Memorandum is the

NRP dated 05.06.2018. The said policy is based on the

recommendation of the three-member committee constituted by

the State Government to review recruitment policy across the

State and of all its departments. The recommendations of the

committee were plain and specific, inter-alia, observing that “all

the above recommendations will be applicable with prospective

effect only”. In addition to the discussions, in absence of the

statutory backing to the policy, the recommendations as made

limiting   the        marks    of   interview   at   worst   would   apply
38
prospectively. Meaning thereby, it shall not apply to the

recruitment process for TCS and TPS which had started way back

in April 2016 and the preliminary as well as main examination

has already been conducted. Hence, application of the policy

decision on the pending recruitment process is contrary to clause

(2) of the said policy.
Plea of Larger Public Interest:
43.   It is vehemently argued that the issuance of the Abeyance

and Cancellation Memorandum is because of change required

and to make the process fair, transparent in larger public

interest. It is nowhere specified as to how due to NRP, larger

public   interest    can   be   achieved.   After   bestowing   our

consideration, indeed it can be observed that the executive does

have a discretion to bring new policy and to implement the same

applying the rule of law. Once the process of the recruitment is

notified following the subordinate legislation, such general policy

cannot occupy the field which is already occupied by the

provisions of the statutory rules.
44.   Regulation 11 vividly indicates that the interview should be

of how many marks. As such the same cannot be supplanted by
39
NRP which is in the form of executive instructions and to rely

upon
the said decision
, cancellation of the process of recruitment

by issuing Cancellation Memorandum is not justified. In our view,

the claim that the policy decision was in larger public interest is

wholly unjustified, rather it is antithetical to public interest. On

the basis of the stand taken and the material placed, in our

considered opinion, the State has miserably failed to discharge

the burden to substantiate that the decision of the cancellation of

the recruitment process was in larger public interest.
Change of rules of the game after the game has begun:
45.   The recruitment process under the advertisement for

TCS/TPS commenced on the date of its issuance. At the cost of

repetition and as discussed above, much water had flown. The

TPSC had taken active and tangible steps to conduct the

preliminary examination and the main examination under the

TCS/TPS Rules and Regulations. After all this, by issuing the

Cancellation Memorandum, effectively setting the clock back and

putting the entire process at nought, under the garb of policy

decision is arbitrary.
40
46.   This Court in
Tej Prakash Pathak
(Supra) has affirmed the

decision in
K. Manjusree vs. State of A.P. and Anr.
16, and held

that the recruiting authority can devise a procedure for selection

only in absence of rules to the contrary, however the same should

be done prior to commencement of the recruitment process. The

relevant portion of the said judgement is reproduced as thus: -
“52.         Thus,     in     our     view,    the      appointing
        authority/recruiting authority/competent authority, in absence
        of rules to the contrary, can devise a procedure for selection of a
        candidate suitable to the post and while doing so it may also
        set benchmarks for different stages of the recruitment process
        including written examination and interview. However, if any
        such benchmark is set, the same should be stipulated before the
        commencement of the recruitment process. But if the extant
        Rules or the advertisement inviting applications empower the
        competent authority to set benchmarks at different stages of the
        recruitment process, then such benchmarks may be set any
        time before that stage is reached so that neither the candidate
        nor the evaluator/examiner/interviewer is taken by surprise.”
47.   In the present case, the Regulations framed under the

TCS/TPS Rules, which in turn are framed under the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution of India, have clearly laid down the

specific marking criteria – 800 marks for main examination and

100 marks for interview (personality test), which are to be

considered for the purpose of final selection. Here, the effect of
16 (2008) 3 SCC 512, 2008 INSC 195.
41
NRP    is   such   that   by   an    administrative      instruction,     the

Regulations have been rewritten, which is not permissible.
48.   The Constitution bench in
Tej Prakash Pathak
(Supra) has

also clarified that the procedure prescribed in the extant rules

cannot be violated and administrative instructions can only be

used to supplement and fill the gap in the Rules, they cannot be

used to supplant the rules completely. The relevant portion of

the said judgement is reproduced as thus: -
“62.         There can therefore be no doubt that where there are
      no rules or the rules are silent on the subject, administrative
      instructions may be issued to supplement and fill in the gaps in
      the rules. In that event administrative instructions would govern
      the field provided they are not ultra vires the provisions of the
      rules or the statute or the Constitution. But where the rules
      expressly or impliedly cover the field, the recruiting body would
      have to abide by the rules.”
49.   In the present case, on the strength of a general policy

decision of the State, an ongoing recruitment process is first put

in abeyance and later cancelled, with intent to implement the

NRP, though preliminary and main examinations have already

been conducted as per Rules. The very application of the NRP to

the ongoing process is illegal on three counts – Firstly, because it

is an executive instruction and in the absence of an amendment

in the TCS/TPS Rules or in Regulations, the recruitment
42
procedure could not have been changed. Secondly, because the

application of NRP to the ongoing recruitment process would

amount to changing the rules of the game after the game has

already begun, i.e., the recruitment process has commenced.

Thirdly, as per clause (2) of the NRP, the recommendation to limit

the interview marks for Group – ‘A’ posts to 10% of total marks

would only apply prospectively, in case, rules are amended, which

would not mean to apply the same on ongoing recruitment

process. As such Issues 1 and 2 are answered in the above terms.
ISSUE NO. 3
Legitimate expectation and indefeasible right
50.   Another aspect of the matter is the question as to whether

any absolute right of appointment or legitimate expectation has

accrued in favour of the candidates who participated in the

recruitment    process.   If   so,    whether    cancellation     of   the

recruitment    process    would      impinge    upon   such     legitimate

expectation.
51.   On the said issue, the State has placed heavy reliance on

the judgement in
Shankarsan Dash
(Supra) to argue that mere

participation in the selection process would not create an
43
indefeasible right for appointment in favour of the candidates.
On

the   other    side,   the    candidates     have     placed    reliance    on
Sivanandan C.T.
(Supra) to argue that they have a legitimate

expectation to be appointed after having participated in the

recruitment process.
52.   It is trite law, and no contest can be made in respect of the

settled proposition that mere participation in the recruitment

process or placement in a select list would not create an

indefeasible right to be appointed, even if vacancies are available.

The judgement in
Shankarsan Dash
(Supra) has been followed

subsequently in a plethora of decisions of this Court.
The

relevant portion of
Shankarsan       Dash
(Supra) is quoted

hereinafter:
“7. It is not correct to say that if a number of vacancies are
      notified for appointment and adequate number of candidates
      are found fit, the successful candidates acquire an indefeasible
      right to be appointed which cannot be legitimately denied.
      Ordinarily the notification merely amounts to an invitation to
      qualified candidates to apply for recruitment and on their
      selection, they do not acquire any right to the post. Unless the
      relevant recruitment rules so indicate, the State is under no
      legal duty to fill up all or any of the vacancies. However, it does
      not mean that the State has the license of acting in an arbitrary
      manner. The decision not to fill up the vacancies has to be taken
      bona fide for appropriate reasons. And if the vacancies or any
      of them are filled up, the State is bound to respect the
      comparative merit of the candidates, as reflected at the
      recruitment test, and no discrimination can be permitted.”
44
53.   It is clear from a plain reading of the above judgement that

State may choose not to appoint a person who has been placed

on the select list. This was the specific decision of this Court also

in
State of Haryana vs. Subash Chander Marwaha and

Ors.17
, subsequently clarified in
Tej Prakash Pathak
(Supra)

where a select list of 40 candidates was drawn up, but against 15

vacancies available, only 7 appointments were made. In that

context, it was held that mere placement on the select list would

not create an obligation for the State to fill up all the vacancies

and    make       appointments,       since     no     indefeasible       right    of

appointment           has   accrued   in      favour       of    the   candidates.

Simultaneously, it is said that the action of the State should not

be arbitrary and the decision taken for not filling the vacancies

must be bona fide.
54.   However, candidates who have taken part in a recruitment

process conducted by a public authority have a legitimate

expectation that the selection process will be conducted fairly and

without      arbitrariness.     Consistency          and        predictability    are

important aspects of non-arbitrariness and the rule of law

obligates the State to only take decisions which are rooted in

17 (1974) 3 SCC 220
45
fairness and equality. It was held in
Sivanandan C.T.
(Supra)

and later clarified in
Tej Prakash Pathak
(Supra) that in order to

frustrate the legitimate expectation of candidates the burden is

on   the   State   by    placing      relevant   material    to   objectively

demonstrate that the decision taken by it was in the larger public

interest   and     not   arbitrary.
Relevant     excerpts     from     the

Constitution bench decision in
Sivanandan C.T.
(Supra) have

been quoted below: -
“40.        The principle of fairness in action requires that
      public authorities be held accountable for their representations,
      since the State has a profound impact on the lives of citizens.
      Good administration requires public authorities to act in a
      predicable manner and honour the promises made or practices
      established unless there is a good reason not to do so. In
Nadarajah [R. (Nadarajah) v. Secy. of State
for the Home Deptt.,
      2005 EWCA Civ 1363] , Laws, L.J. held that the public
      authority should objectively justify that there is an overriding
      public interest in denying a legitimate expectation. We are of the
      opinion that for a public authority to frustrate a claim of
      legitimate expectation, it must objectively demonstrate by
      placing relevant material before the court that its decision was
      in the public interest. This standard is consistent with the
      principles of good administration which require that State
      actions must be held to scrupulous standards to prevent misuse
      of public power and ensure fairness to citizens.
xx    xx    xx   xx
45.         The underlying basis for the application of the
      doctrine of legitimate expectation has expanded and evolved to
      include the principles of good administration. Since citizens
      repose their trust in the State, the actions and policies of the
      State give rise to legitimate expectations that the State will
      adhere to its assurance or past practice by acting in a
      consistent, transparent, and predictable manner. The principles
46
of good administration require that the decisions of public
      authorities must withstand the test of consistency,
      transparency, and predictability to avoid being regarded as
      arbitrary and therefore violative of Article 14.”
55.   In the present case, it is not that the State has decided to

fill only some of the vacancies. Rather it has decided to do away

with the recruitment process altogether. It goes without saying

that the State’s decision not to appoint a person must not be

arbitrary and must be rooted in objective reasoning. The

recruitment process, especially when it is conducted under the

strength of statutory rules framed under the proviso to
Article

309
of the Constitution of India, cannot be left at the whims and

fancies of the State to interfere, through executive orders, without

adhering to the principles of consistency and predictability, which

are warranted by the rule of law and are pillars of non-
arbitrariness.
56.   As discussed above, the State has failed to prove that the

decision to apply the NRP to the ongoing recruitment process was

in larger public interest – as such, the legitimate expectation of

fairness in the recruitment process must be upheld.
57.   From the discussion made hereinabove and in the facts of

this case, the candidates have participated in the process of
47
recruitment conducted in furtherance to the TCS/TPS Rules and

Regulations framed thereunder. Undisputedly, they have cleared

the preliminary examination and also participated in the main

examination. It was only at the stage of declaration of results of

the main examination the said process was kept in abeyance,

later cancelled applying the NRP which could not have been made

applicable to the ongoing recruitment process. The application of

the NRP to the ongoing recruitment process for the TCS and TPS

was in fact arbitrary and unjust. Therefore, the candidates do

have a legitimate expectation of completion of recruitment

process in a fair, transparent and non-arbitrary manner. As such,

the recruitment process should be concluded following TCS/TPS

Rules and Regulations and the candidates may be appointed if

they found place in merit. The Issue no. 3 is answered

accordingly.
58.   In view of the discussions made hereinabove, we dismiss

Civil Appeal Nos. 4467-68 and 4469 of 2023 and the Civil Appeal

No. 4471 of 2023 is disposed of in terms of this order. The

direction of the learned Single Judge as confirmed by the

Division Bench of the High Court in the impugned judgements in

Civil Appeal Nos. 4467-68 of 2023 and 4469 of 2023 are
48
maintained. It is directed that the process of recruitment for TCS

and TPS Grade-II shall now be finalized and completed by

declaring the results of the main examination and conducting

personality test following the provisions of the TCS/TPS Rules

and Regulations within a period of four months.
59.   Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
…….…………….…………J.
                                              (J.K. MAHESHWARI)




                                         …….…………….…………J.
                                                (RAJESH BINDAL)

NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 28th 2025.
49
REPORTABLE

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4470 OF 2023


THE STATE OF TRIPURA & ORS.                               ….APPELLANT(S)


                                 VERSUS


ARUNABHA SAHA & ANR.                                  ....RESPONDENT(S)


                               JUDGMENT


J.K. Maheshwari, J.
1.     This appeal arises out of the judgment and order passed by

the Division Bench of the High Court of Tripura dated

25.08.20201, affirming the decision of the learned Single Judge

dated      05.08.20192,      whereby       cancellation   of   the   ongoing

recruitment process for the post of Inspector of Boilers (Group-A

Gazetted) in Factories and Boilers Organization under the Labour

Department, Government of Tripura, (hereinafter referred to as

“Inspector of Boilers”) was set aside.
1 W.A. No. 196 of 2019
2 W.P. (C) No. 186 of 2019
1
2.    In the instant appeal, the dispute revolves around the

appointment and subsequent cancellation of recruitment process

for the post of Inspector of Boilers. The recruitment to this post is

governed by the
Boilers Act, 1923
(hereinafter referred to as

“
Boilers Act
”), wherein
Section 2(c)
defines a Chief Inspector,

Deputy Chief Inspector and Inspector as a person appointed to be

as Chief Inspector, a Deputy Chief Inspector, and an Inspector

under the Act. Section 28 confers power on the Central Boilers

Board to make regulations consistent with the provisions of the
Boilers   Act
.    Section   28A       confers   powers   on   the   Central

Government to make rules to carry out the purpose of the
Boilers

Act
, which includes power to make rules with respect to the

qualifications and experience of persons to be appointed as

Inspector of Boilers.
Section 29
confers power on the State

Government to make the rules consistent with the provisions of

the
Boilers Act
and regulations thereunder for the purpose as

specified in the section.
3.    In furtherance to the powers under Section 28A, the Central

Government promulgated Chief Inspector, Deputy Chief Inspector

and   Inspector     (Qualification      and     Experience)   Rules,    2012

(hereinafter     referred   to   as    “Central     Rules”)   wherein    the
2
minimum qualifications for appointment to the post of Inspector

of Boilers have been laid down. Similarly, in exercise of power

under
Section 29
of the Boilers Act read with proviso to
Article

309
of Constitution of India, State Government in consultation

with Tripura State Public Service Commission (hereinafter

referred to as “TPSC”) enacted the Rules called the ‘Recruitment

Rules, 2013’ (hereinafter referred to as “State Rules”) for the

post of Inspector of Boilers under Labour Department (Factories

and Boilers Organization) (hereinafter referred to as “Labour

Department”). The State Rules classify the Inspector of Boilers

as Group – ‘A’ Gazetted post and regulate its method of

recruitment. Rule 4 deals with ‘method of recruitment, age limit,

qualification and other matters’ which shall as be as specified in

columns 5 to 13 of the Schedule appended to the State Rules.

The Schedule specifies that the post of Inspector of Boilers shall

be filled by direct recruitment by the State Government through

TPSC unless exemption is granted.
FACTS RELEVANT FOR THE MATTER:
4.   The present case has its inception on 29.12.2016 when the

Labour Department sent a requisition to TPSC for selection of
3
candidates on 2 posts of Inspector of Boilers. Consequently,

Advertisement No. 01/2017 was notified by the TPSC on

05.01.2017 (hereinafter referred to as “Advertisement”). As per

TPSC, out of 126 applications, 36 candidates were called for

written screening test on 21.08.2017, out of which only 30

candidates    appeared.   Finally,       7   candidates   were   declared

successful including respondent no.1, and were called for

personality   test/interview   on        07.12.2017.   Accordingly,   the

interview took place, however, results were not declared.
5.   While the recruitment process was ongoing, State of Tripura

was busy with State Assembly elections, wherein a new

government was elected on 03.03.2018, changing the political

landscape of the State. Thereafter, on 14.03.2018, the State

Government issued a memorandum no. F.20(1)-GA(P&T)/18

(hereinafter referred to as “Abeyance Memorandum”) stating

that a decision has been taken by State Government to review the

recruitment process of the Government, in furtherance of which,

all the ongoing recruitment by all the departments/autonomous

bodies under Government were to be kept in abeyance until

further orders. Subsequent to this, 3 days later, on 17.03.2018,

TPSC wrote to Labour Department seeking its views as to
4
whether the results of personality test/interview conducted in

recruitment process for the post of Inspector of Boiler ought to be

declared   by   TPSC    or   deferred    in   light   of   the   Abeyance

Memorandum. The Labour Department on 29.03.2018 reverted

with the opinion to keep the results pending.
6.   While the results were kept in abeyance, on 05.06.2018, the

State Government vide notification no. F-20(1)-GA(P&T)/18,

issued a new recruitment policy (hereinafter referred to as

“NRP”)     applicable   to   all   the   establishments      under     the

administrative control of the State Government. For ready

reference, the same is reproduced hereunder:
“1.4. The Group A, Group-B and C posts which are at present
      covered by TPSC will continue to be filled as per the existing
      practice. However, weightage for the interview should not
      exceed 10% of total marks. In exceptional case weightage of
      interview may be increased beyond 10% with the approval of
      cabinet, if sufficient justification exists.”
7.   Consequently,      on   20.08.2018,      the     Government       vide

memorandum no. F.20(1)-GA(P&T)/18 (hereinafter referred to as

“Cancellation Memorandum”) directed that in the wake of the

NRP, the State Government has decided to cancel all ongoing

recruitment processes initiated by the respective departments
5
and TPSC, and all new appointments shall be made as per the

NRP.
8.     Subsequently, on 22.11.2018, TPSC issued a notification

cancelling the subject recruitment process for the post of

Inspector of Boilers. The respondent no.1, by filing W.P. (C) No.

186 of 2019, challenged the Cancellation Memorandum and the

TPSC notification dated 22.11.2018. He further sought a

declaration that NRP is not applicable in any manner whatsoever

on the present ongoing recruitment process and sought a

direction for completing the recruitment process by fixing a

defined time limit.
FINDINGS OF THE LEARNED SINGLE JUDGE:
9.     Learned Single Judge, vide judgment dated 05.08.2019

allowed   the   writ   petition   and   quashed    the   Cancellation

Memorandum, as well as TPSC notification dated 22.11.2018 to

the extent of their applicability to the post of Inspector of Boilers.
The Court observed that the factual matrix and legal issues

involved herein were squarely covered by its earlier Single Bench

judgment dated 14.05.2019 in Samudra Debbarma v. State of

Tripura, W.P. (C) No. 831 of 2018 (upheld with modification by
6
Division Bench on 03.12.2019 in W.A. No. 142 of 2019, which is

also challenged in connected Civil Appeal Nos.
4467-4468 of

2023 titled as
State of Tripura and Anr. vs. Samudra

Debbarma and Ors.
). It was observed that recruitment rules

cannot be changed midway once the recruitment process has

begun.      Further,    where   a   recruitment   is   governed   by   a

subordinate legislation enacted under the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution of India, then no executive instructions can

override it, unless an amendment is made in that legislation. The

Court further observed that once a candidate applies for

recruitment pursuant to an advertisement under the then

existing rules, he acquires a right to be considered for selection

under those rules, unless any amendment is brought to the rules

that is retrospective in nature. As the NRP is consciously given

prospective effect, hence it is not applicable on the subject

recruitment process. The Court directed the State to complete the

selection     process    and    publish   the     results   and   make

recommendations within a period of two months from the date of

the judgment. This judgment of the learned Single Judge was

assailed before Division Bench in writ appeal, which has been

dismissed by the impugned order.
7
FINDINGS IN THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT:
10. The Division Bench vide judgment dated 25.08.2020 upheld

the judgment of the Single Bench on the ground that the issues

in the present case are similar to those in Samudra Debbarma’s

case (supra), and these have been dealt with accordingly and

rightly so. Hence, there is no reason to allow the appeal of the

State.
CONTENTIONS OF THE APPELLANTS AND RESPONDENT:
11. Learned senior counsel for appellants has assiduously

urged that the NRP dated 05.06.2018 was introduced to promote

transparency and fairness in public appointments in larger

public   interest.   This   policy   decision,   rooted   in   executive

discretion, aimed to address concerns of subjectivity in the

selection process and was uniformly applied across all the

departments. Such decisions are not open to judicial interference,

unless shown to be arbitrary or violative of
Article 14
of the

Constitution of India. In the present case, the process of selection

was ongoing as the interview was conducted and no results were

declared. It was also contended that here the entire recruitment
8
process was cancelled in pursuance of the NRP, hence, no rules

of game have been changed after the game has begun.
12. The appellants submitted that in the present case, out of

total 200 marks, interview was conducted carrying 100 marks,

which constituted 50% weightage, which was excessive and

susceptible to subjectivity and manipulation. The NRP was

introduced precisely to remedy this issue and bring uniformity in

the selection process. Thus, such cancellation cannot be said to

be arbitrary.
13. It was further contended that respondent no. 1 does not

have any indefeasible right to be appointed as it is open to State

Government to not select such candidate even if he makes it in

the final merit list. Here, there was no select list in the first place.
Furthermore,     the   doctrine    of   legitimate   expectation   and

promissory estoppel will not be applicable.
14. Per contra, learned senior counsel for the respondent no. 1

contented that pursuant to the advertisement, the respondent no.

1 applied for the post and participated in the recruitment

process. He went through a screening test, a written test and

then an interview. All of this was done in accordance with the
9
statutory rules framed under the
Boilers Act
and proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution of India, which has not been

disputed by the State. Thus, cancellation of such recruitment

process by Cancellation Memorandum on pretext of the NRP and

further cancellation by TPSC without making any amendment to

the statutory rules is invalid, arbitrary and illegal. It was

contended that once a recruitment process has begun, its rules

cannot be changed midway through executive instructions, i.e.,

the NRP and Cancellation Memorandum.
15. It was also contended that prior to bringing any change by

the State Government, particularly in respect of the post of

Inspector of Boilers, TPSC is required to be consulted, which was

not done in the present case. Therefore, the NRP is inapplicable

in the subject recruitment process.
16. It was also contended that as per clause (2) of the NRP, it is

applicable prospectively. Therefore, it cannot be applied to an

ongoing recruitment process. There is no express provision in the

NRP which indicates its retrospective application on the ongoing

recruitment processes. Therefore, the Division Bench has rightly

dismissed the appeal filed by appellants.
10
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS:
17. After hearing learned counsel for the parties and on perusal

of the impugned judgment, it is clear that the writ appeal filed by

the State had been dismissed relying upon the Division Bench

judgment dated 03.12.2019 passed in the case of Samudra

Debbarma in W.A. No. 142 of 2019, which is also under challenge

in connected Civil Appeal Nos. 4467-4468 of 2023. The said Civil

Appeals have been dismissed by a judgment pronounced by us

today. In summary, in
the said judgment
, we have held as follows:
i.   Once the field is occupied by subordinate legislation,

          executive instructions cannot override the same. They

          may only supplement, but not supplant the extant

          rules.
ii.   The NRP could not have been applied to the ongoing

          recruitment process since it would amount to change

          of rules of the game after the game has begun.
iii.   State could not discharge its burden to prove that the

          application of NRP to the ongoing recruitment process

          was in larger public interest.
11
iv.       While candidates do not have any indefeasible right to

             be    appointed       merely     by    participating     in    the

             recruitment      process,      they   do   have    a   legitimate
expectation of completion of recruitment process in a

             fair and non-arbitrary manner.
v.       As per Clause (2) of the NRP, it is applicable

             prospectively and would not apply to the ongoing

             recruitment processes.
18. As the legal issues involved in the present case are squarely

covered by Samudra Debbarma’s case (Supra), the reasoning
in

that case
will apply to all the issues involved herein in this case

also.
The operative part of Samudra Debbarma (Supra) is

reproduced herein below:
“In view of the discussions made hereinabove, we dismiss Civil
         Appeal Nos. 4467-68 and 4469 of 2023 and the Civil Appeal
         No. 4471 of 2023 is disposed of in terms of this order. The
         direction of the Single Judge as confirmed by the Division Bench
         of the High Court in the impugned judgements in Civil Appeal
         Nos. 4467-68 of 2023 and 4469 of 2023 are maintained. It is
         further directed that the recruitment for TCS and TPS Grade II
         shall now be finalized and completed by the State after
         declaring the results of the main examination and conducting
         personality test following the provisions of the TCS/TPS Rules
         and Regulations within a period of four months.”
19. As such, we are not inclined to deal with all the similar

issues separately in the present case. The candidates participated
12
in the recruitment process carried out under the
Boilers Act
read

with the Central Rules and State Rules. After issuance of

advertisement, a written screening test was conducted on

21.08.2017, pursuant to which selected candidates, including

respondent no. 1 were called for interview on 07.12.2017. Thus,

only the result of the interview was left to be declared. As such

the recruitment process for the post of ‘Inspector of Boilers’ was

at a significantly advanced stage when the recruitment process

was kept in abeyance, later cancelled by the Cancellation

Memorandum and TPSC notification dated 22.11.2018. The

application of the NRP to the ongoing recruitment process was

arbitrary and unjust and candidates do have a legitimate

expectation of completion of the recruitment process in a fair and

non-arbitrary manner. It is pointed out by the appellant – State

that in the facts of this case, in the
Boilers Act
, Central Rules or

the State Rules or even in the Advertisement, there is no

prescription of marks to be obtained in the written test or the

interview, but the fact remains that the written test was already

conducted out of 100 marks and the interview was also

conducted out of 100 marks. As such, the subsequent decision to

apply NRP to the said recruitment process cannot be sustained.
13
The recruitment should be completed as per the
Boilers Act
,

Central Rules and State Rules, and the candidates may be

appointed, if found to be meritorious, subject to fulfilling all other

criteria.
20. In view of the discussions made hereinabove, the present

Civil Appeal is dismissed, and the direction of the Single Judge as

confirmed by the Division Bench of the High Court in the

impugned judgment is maintained. It is further directed that the

recruitment for ‘Inspector of Boilers’ shall now be finalized and

completed by the State within a period of two months.
21. Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
…….…………….…………J.
                                              (J.K. MAHESHWARI)




                                          …….…………….…………J.
                                                 (RAJESH BINDAL)


NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 28th 2025.
14