[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Time City Infrastructure And Housing ... vs The State Of U.P on 11 August, 2025
1


2025 INSC 966                                                                   REPORTABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                         EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 21747 OF 2025


     TIME CITY INFRASTRUCTURE AND HOUSING LIMITED LUCKNOW                  Petitioner(s)

                                                VERSUS

     THE STATE OF U.P. & ORS.                                              Respondent(s)


                                        O   R    D   E   R


     1.    This petition arises from the order passed by the High Court
     of Judicature at Allahabad (Bench Lucknow) dated 24-7-2025 in Writ-
     C No.6701/2025 by which the petition filed by the respondents –
     herein (original defendants) came to be allowed thereby set asiding
     the order passed by the Civil Judge (Senior Division) granting
     ex parte injunction as prayed for by the petitioner – herein in
     Civil Suit No.447/2025. The Trial Court passed the following order
     dated 9-5-2025 while granting ex parte injunction in favour of the
     petitioner – herein (original plaintiff):-


           “Heard on the arguments of the Ld.Counsel for the plaintiff on
           the Application C-6 with affidavit C-7 of the plaintiff on ad
           interim Injunction.

           The plaintiff has filed the Extract of Khatoni of Year 1425-
           1430 C-11/1 Ta 10 at serial no.C-10, Certified copy of
           Agreement to Sell Dated.21.03.2015 at serial no. C-12/1 Ta 11,
           Certified Copy of the Sale Deed Dated 30.04.2025 at serial no.
           C-13/1 Ta 11 in support of their prayer in the suit.

                         It is the stated by the Counsel for the plaintiff that on
                         21.06.2015, after the full and final payment Rs.3,60,12,782/-
                         (Rupees Three Crores Sixty Lakhs Twelve Thousand Seven Hundred
   Signature Not Verified

   Digitally signed by
   VISHAL ANAND
   Date: 2025.08.12
                         and   Eighty-Two  Only)   to  the   defendant  No.1   as  Sale
   17:26:29 IST
   Reason:               Consideration, the defendant No.1 had handed over the peaceful
                         physical possession of the land to the plaintiff. After the
                         physical possession of the Suit Land, the plaintiff had merged
                         the said plot of land in its adjoining plotting sites and
                         invested huge funds in terms of lacs and lacs of rupees to
                                     2

develop that suit land into plotting for sale. The plaintiff
company had also developed the suit land with good roads and
also constructed 02(two) offices on the same. The plaintiff
company had been in with continuous physical possession of the
said suit property till date.

The plaintiff has prayed for specific relief against the
defendants on the suit property/land bearing Gata/Land No.452/1
Rakba 0.057 Hectre, Gata/Land No.607 Rakba 0.300 Hectre,
Gata/Land No.615 Rakba 0.162 Hectre, Gata/Land No.616 Rakba
0.162 Hectre Gata/Land No.634 Rakba 0.304 Hectre with a Total
Area of 5 Kita Rakba 0.985 Hectre, which is situated at
Village-Kurouli, Pargana & Tehsil-Nawabganj, Dist- Barbanki.
Thus, prima facie the case is made out by the plaintiff. In the
light of the facts and circumstances and for the protection of
the suit property/land and in order to prevent further
litigation, Parties should maintain the status quo in the
interest of justice.

                                ORDER
Parties are directed to maintain status quo on the title and
possession of the suit property/ land bearing Gata/Land
No.452/1 Rakba 0.057 Hectre, Gata/Land No.607 Rakba 0.300
Hectre, Gata/Land No.615 Rakba 0.162 Hectre, Gata/Land No.616
Rakba 0.162 Hectre Gata/Land No.634 Rakba 0.304 Hectre with a
Total Area of 5 Kita Rakba 0.985 Hectre, which is situated at
Village-Kurouli, Pargana Tehsil-Nawabganj, Dist- Barbanki. till
the next date of hearing and parties are also directed not to
sell the suit property/land till the next date of hearing.
Put up for further proceedings on 29.05.2025 for the disposal
of Application No. C-6, Accordingly notice be issued to the
defendants for the next date of hearing. This order will be
binding on the parties those who are made parties in the
present suit. This order is not binding on any Third Party
who has interest in the Suit Property/Land.
The plaintiff to pursue the matter and                  to   abide   by   the
direction under
Order 39 Rule 3 of C.P.C
.
The Amin is appointed as Local Commissioner and directed to
visit the spot for inspection with an advance notice to the
Counsels of the Parties to be present on the spot. He is also
directed to inspect the following points and file the report.
1. The Clear cut boundary of the Suit Property/Land is to be
mentioned in the Report.
2. The clear cut/ accurate details of measurements of the Suit
Property/Land are to be mentioned in the Report.
3. The reference map/naxa has to be prepared and to be attached
for reference in the Report.
4.   The   Reference   map   /naxa   should   contain    and   mention    the
3
particulars about the Construction/s, Trees and any other items
     found on the suit property.
5. The Reference Map/Naxa of the Suit property is to be
     prepared on the material which is allowed to prepare the
     Map/Naxa and not on the ordinary paper.
6. The Area Amin is directed to submit the said report with
     Map/Naxa in the scaly filed book format and also to produce the
     self-attested identity proof of both the parties for the record
     of their presence in the proceeding held by the Local
     Commissioner/Area Amin.
The Local Commissioner/Area Amin is directed to file the said
     inspection report before this Court within 15 days. The
     plaintiff is directed to contact the Amin with immediate
     effect. The Alhmad/Office is directed to dispatch the order
     with immediate effect.
Put up for further proceedings on date fixed.”
2.   The   respondents     (herein)       (original   defendants)   being
dissatisfied with the order passed by the Trial Court, referred to
above, invoked the supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 227
of the Constitution and challenged the same. The High
Court in exercise of its supervisory jurisdiction under
Article 227
of the Constitution thought fit to interfere with the order passed
by the Trial Court and set aside the same. The findings recorded by
the High Court in its impugned order read thus:-
“27. From the plaint and the agreement to sell which has been
     placed, it is evident that the entire suit is nothing but a
     legal jugglery. A registered agreement to sell was executed in
     favour of the respondents in the year 2015. The time of
     performance in the agreement was one year with a provision that
     in case the sale deed is not executed within a period of one
     year, the same can be executed through Court. No suit for
     specific   performance  has  admittedly   been  filed   by  the
     respondents for execution of sale deed in their favour. The
     agreement to sell does not even record that the respondents are
     being put in possession in pursuance to the agreement to sell
     so as to enable the respondents to claim the benefit flowing
     from
Section 53A
of Transfer of Property Act. The suit in
     question was filed after the limitation for filing the suit for
     specific performance had come to an end. The prayer in the suit
     besides mandatory injunction, is to declare the sale deed dated
     30.04.2025 as null and void. The entire suit does not disclose
     as to how the respondents claim to be the owner of the property
     which has been sold by virtue of the sale deed dated
     30.04.2025.
4
29. Thus, the entire suit was based upon no claim with regard
     to ownership of the property or claiming any benefit of
Section
     53A
of Transfer of Property Act. There is no relief for
     specific performance even in the suit filed in the year 2025.
The trial Court has passed the order in a cursory manner, the
     trial Court has not considered the suit in its entirety. It has
     not even recorded any existence of a prima-facie case, the
     balance of convenience or irreparable hardship - the three sine
     qua non for grant of mandatory injunction. No reasoning as has
     been mandated in terms of proviso of
Order 39 Rule 3 CPC
has
     been recorded. The manner in which the injunction has been
     granted cannot be ignored by this Court while exercising its
     power under
Art. 227
of the Constitution.
32. District Judge, Barabanki is directed to transfer Suit
     No.447 of 2025 to any other Court of competent jurisdiction
     except Civil Judge (Senior Division), Court No.20, Barabanki.
33.   The Court to which the proceedings will be transferred
     shall decide the injunction application afresh within a period
     of 15 days as the objections have already been filed.
34. In view of the manner in which the order is passed, the
     same cannot be appreciated. Thus, Senior Registrar of this
     Court is directed to place a copy of the order passed by the
     Civil judge (Senior Division), Court No.20, Barabanki alongwith
     a copy of the suit, a copy of the injunction granted and a copy
     of   this   order    before   the   Administrative   Judge   of
     District Barabanki who may, if deems appropriate, take action
     on the administrative side.”
3.   Heard Mr. Nachiketa Joshi, the learned counsel appearing for
the petitioner (original plaintiff).
4.
Order   39   Rule   3   of   the   Code   of   Civil   Procedure
reads   as
under:-
“Rule 3. Before granting injunction, Court to direct notice to
     opposite party.— The Court shall in all cases, except where it
     appears that the object of granting the injunction would be
     defeated by the delay, before granting an injunction, direct
     notice of the application for the same to be given to the
     opposite party:
Provided that, where it is proposed to grant an injunction
     without giving notice of the application to the opposite party,
     the Court shall record the reasons for its opinion that the
     object of granting the injunction would be defeated by delay,
     and require the applicant—
(a) to deliver to the opposite party, or to send to
          him by registered post, immediately after the order
          granting the injunction has been made, a copy of the
5
application for injunction together with —
(i) a copy of the affidavit filed in support of the
             application;
(ii) a copy of the plaint; and
(iii) copies of documents on which the applicant
             relies, and
(b) to file, on the day on which such injunction is
             granted or on the day immediately following that day,
             an affidavit stating that the copies aforesaid have
             been so delivered or sent.”
5.     Looking    to   the    scheme        of
Order     39,    CPC
it    is   clear   that
ordinarily an order of injunction may not be granted ex parte. The
opposite     party     must       be   issued         a   notice   and     heard    before     an
injunction may be granted. Rule 3 carves out an exception in favour
of granting an injunction without notice to the opposite party
where it appears that the object of granting injunction would be
defeated by the delay. Conferment of this privilege on the party
seeking an injunction is accompanied by an obligation cast on the
court to record reasons for its opinion and an obligation cast on
the applicant to comply with the requirements of Clauses (a) and
(b)    of   the   proviso.         Both     the       provisions     are      mandatory.      The
applicant gets an injunction without notice but subject to the
condition of complying with Clauses (a) and (b) above said.
6.     We   may   refer      to    several       observations        made      by   this    Court
in
Shiv Kumar Chadha v. MCD
, reported in 1993 SCC (3) 161. Although
the observations have been made primarily on the obligation of the
Court to record the reasons, yet in our opinion they equally apply
to    the   obligation       cast      on   the       applicant     by   the    proviso.     The
provisions are mandatory. This Court observed thus:-
“The imperative nature of the proviso has to be judged in the
       context of Rule 3 of Order 39 of the Code. Before the proviso
       aforesaid was introduced, Rule 3 said "the court shall in all
       cases, except where it appears that the object of granting the
       injunction would be defeated by the delay, before granting an
       injunction, direct notice of the application for the same to be
       given to the opposite party". The proviso was introduced to
       provide a condition, where court proposes to grant an injunc-
       tion without giving notice of the application to the opposite
       party being of the opinion that the subject of granting injunc-
       tion itself shall be defeated by delay. The condition so intro-
6
duced is that the court "shall record the reasons" why an ex
      parte order of injunction was being passed in the facts and
      circumstances of a particular case. In this background, the re-
      quirement for recording the reasons for grant of ex parte in-
      junction cannot be held to be a mere formality. This require-
      ment is consistent with the principle, that a party to a suit,
      who is being restrained from exercising a right which such
      party claims to exercise either under a statute or under the
      common law, must be informed why instead of following the re-
      quirement of Rule 3 the procedure prescribed under the proviso
      has been followed. The party which invokes the jurisdiction of
      the court for grant of an order of restraint against a party,
      without affording an opportunity to him of being heard, must
      satisfy the court about the gravity of the situation and court
      has to consider briefly these factors in the ex parte order. We
      are quite conscious of the fact that there are other statutes
      which contain similar provisions requiring the court or the au-
      thorities concerned to record reasons before exercising power
      vested in them. In respect of some of such non-compliance
      therewith will not vitiate the order so passed. But same cannot
      be said in respect of the proviso to Rule 3 of Order 39. The
      Parliament has prescribed a particular procedure for passing of
      an order of injunction without notice to the other side under
      exceptional circumstances. Such ex parte orders have far-reach-
      ing effect, as such a condition has been imposed that court
      must record reasons before passing such order. If it is held
      that the compliance with the proviso aforesaid is optional and
      not obligatory, then the proviso by the Parliament shall be a
      futile exercise and that part of Rule 3 will be a surplusage
      for all practical purposes. Proviso to Rule 3 of Order 39 of
      the Code, attracts the principle that if a statute requires a
      thing to be done in a particular manner it should be done in
      that manner or not all.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
7.    We are of the opinion that if the court is satisfied of non-
compliance by the applicant with the provisions contained in the
proviso then on being so satisfied the court which was persuaded to
grant an ex parte ad interim injunction confiding in the applicant
that having been shown indulgence by the court he would comply with
the   requirements   of   the   proviso,   it   would   simply   vacate   the
ex parte order of injunction without expressing any opinion of the
merits of the case leaving it open to the parties to have a hearing
on the grant or otherwise on the order of injunction but bipartite
only. The applicant would be told that by his conduct he has de-
prived the opponent of an opportunity of having an early or urgent
hearing on merits and, therefore, the ex parte order of injunction
cannot be allowed to operate any more.
7
8.    However, having regard to the fact that now the hearing is to
take place on 12-8-2025 i.e. tomorrow before the Trial Court and
the Trial Court is to hear both the parties in so far as the prayer
of the plaintiff for grant of appropriate injunction is concerned,
we need not interfere with the impugned order. The Trial Court
shall hear the plaintiff and defendants and decide the injunction
application filed by the plaintiff on its own merits in accordance
with law, without being influenced in any manner by any of the
observations made by the High Court in its impugned order.
9.    With the aforesaid, the Special Leave Petition stands disposed
of.
10.   Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
…………………………………………J
                                             (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                             …………………………………………J
                                             (R. MAHADEVAN)
NEW DELHI;
11th AUGUST, 2025.