[Cites
46
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Khem Singh (Dead Through Lrs) vs State Of Uttaranchal (Now State Of ... on 22 August, 2025
2025 INSC 1024
                                                                       REPORTABLE


                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.1330-1332 OF 2017

                            KHEM SINGH (D) THROUGH LRs              ...APPELLANT(S)

                                            VERSUS

                            STATE OF UTTARANCHAL
                            (NOW STATE OF UTTARAKHAND)
                            & ANOTHER ETC.                         …RESPONDENTS




                                              JUDGMENT
NAGARATHNA, J.
Being aggrieved by the common judgment dated 12.09.2012

                   passed in Criminal Appeal Nos.254 of 2004, 258 of 2004, 259 of

                   2004 by the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital, the original

                   appellant Khem Singh S/o Tarachand preferred these Special

                   Leave Petitions before this Court. By order dated 06.07.2017, leave

                   was granted by this Court and consequently, the Special Leave
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
BORRA LM VALLI
Date: 2025.08.22
17:17:06 IST
Petitions have been converted to these Criminal Appeals.
Reason:
Page 1 of 58
Facts in Brief:
2.   For ease of reference, the private respondents herein, namely,
i) Anil @ Neelu; ii) Pramod; and iii) Ashok, who were accused Nos.
4, 3 and 2 respectively in S.T. No.133/1993 in the Court of Addl.

District & Sessions Judge, Haridwar (henceforth “Sessions Court”),

are henceforth referred to as ‘respondents-accused’. The other

accused in S.T. No.133/1993, who were acquitted by the Sessions

Court, are referred to as ‘other accused’.
2.1 Briefly stated, the facts of the case according to the

prosecution are that there was a long-standing previous enmity

between the respondents-accused and other accused and the

original informant and others. On 08.12.1992, there was some

heated exchange between them. The next day, i.e. on 09.12.1992,

at about 08.00 A.M., informant Tara Chand (P.W.1), his brother

Virendra Singh, and P.W.1’s son Khem Singh (P.W.3) were attacked

by the respondents-accused and the other accused using guns,

sharp weapons, and bricks. As a result, Virendra Singh passed

away, and P.W.1 and P.W.3 sustained injuries. On the arrival of

villagers, all the accused managed to escape.
Page 2 of 58
2.2   The specific roles attributed to the respondents-accused are

that: i) Accused No.2, Ashok, fired on Virendra Singh using a gun;
ii) Accused No.3, Pramod, fired on P.W.3 using a gun; and iii)

Accused No.4, Anil @ Neelu, fired on Smt. Mithilesh, wife of P.W.3.

On a complaint given by P.W.1 Tara Chand, Case Crime No.547/92

dated 09.12.1992 was registered at P.S. Jwalapur, District

Haridwar against all the accused persons. The respondents-

accused were charged under
Sections 148
,
452
,
302
,
307
,
149
,
326
, and
149
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter, “
IPC
”).


2.3   After examining all the material witnesses and after hearing

both the parties, the Sessions Court, vide judgment and order

dated 02.08.2004/04.08.2004 acquitted the other accused on the

ground that the role assigned to them was not fully proved.

However, the Sessions Court found that the case against the

respondents-accused was fully proved beyond all reasonable

doubt. The sentence passed against the respondents-accused is as

follows:
Page 3 of 58
Name of the
IPC
Section   Punishment    granted [R.I.       –   Punishment      in
Accused        found guilty   Rigorous Imprisonment; S.I.       –   default of fine
               of             Simple Imprisonment]
S.302
R.I. for life + Rs.1000 fine
                                                                    One month S.I. for
Ashok (A2)     Ss.307/34      Five years R.I. + Rs. 1000 fine
                                                                    each offence
S.452
One month R.I. + Rs.1000 fine
               Ss.302/34      R.I. for life + Rs.1000 fine
Pramod (A3)                                                         One month S.I. for
& Anil @
S.307
Five years R.I. + Rs. 1000 fine
                                                                    each offence
Neelu (A4)
S.452
One month R.I. + Rs.1000 fine




2.4      Being aggrieved by the judgment and order of the Sessions

Court,       the   respondents-accused            preferred     Criminal      Appeal

Nos.254, 258 and 259 of 2004 before the High Court of

Uttarakhand at Nainital. The High Court, vide common impugned

judgment and order dated 12.09.2012, allowed the criminal

appeals filed by the respondents-accused.


2.5      The second respondent in Criminal Appeal No.1330 of 2017

was appellant/Accused No.4-Anil @ Neelu in Criminal Appeal

No.254 of 2004 before the High Court. The second respondent in

Criminal Appeal No.1331 of 2017 was appellant/accused No.3-
Pramod in Criminal Appeal No.258 of 2004 before the High Court.

The second respondent in Criminal Appeal No.1332 of 2017 was

appellant/accused No.2-Kali Ram in Criminal No.259 of 2004

before the High Court. For ease of reference, henceforth the second
Page 4 of 58
respondent in these appeals, who are accused Nos.4, 3 and 2

respectively, are referred to as accused in these appeals. The

State’s Appeal No.47 of 2008 was also disposed of by the High

Court along with the aforesaid appeals.
INTERLOCUTORY       APPLICATION NOS.11322/2025,
11329/2025 & 131604 OF 2025 IN CRIMINAL APPEAL
NOS.1330-1332 OF 2017:
2.6   During the pendency of these appeals, son of original

appellant-Khem Singh (since deceased) - Raj Kumar filed an

application seeking setting aside of the abatement and for

substitution. Consequently, IA No.11322/2025 (application for

seeking setting aside of the abatement), IA No.11329/2025

(application seeking condonation of delay in filing application for

setting aside of abatement), and IA No.131604/2024 (application

for substitution) have been preferred.
Submissions:
3.    Learned counsel for the applicant contended that having

regard to the proviso to
Section 372
of the Code of Criminal

Procedure, 1973 (for short, “
CrPC
”), the substitution applications

may be allowed by condoning the delay in filing the said
Page 5 of 58
application. He further contended that the original appellant was

aggrieved by the acquittal of accused Nos.4, 3 and 2 respectively

by the High Court when, in fact, they had been convicted and

sentenced to life imprisonment and fine by the Sessions Court and

hence, the original appellant herein preferred these appeals.


3.1 It was also brought to our notice that these appeals assume

significance due to the fact that the State has not preferred any

appeal as against the judgment and order of acquittal passed by

the High Court by way of the impugned judgment and order.
In the

circumstances, in view of the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC as well

as the definition of ‘Victim’ laid down under
Section 2(wa)
of CrPC

as well as the principles adumbrated by the Constitution Bench of

this Court in
PSR Sadhanantham vs. Arunachalam
(1980) 3

SCC 141 (“PSR Sadhanantham”), the substitution applications

may be allowed; the abatement may be set aside; the delay in filing

the applications for seeking setting aside of the abatement may be

condoned and the applicant may be substituted in place of the

original appellant and the appeals may be heard on merits.
Page 6 of 58
3.2   In this regard, learned counsel for the applicant also

submitted that the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC which has the

expression ‘the right to prefer an appeal’ would also include ‘the

right to prosecute an appeal’. In the circumstances, the right to

prosecute an appeal given to a legal heir of the victim must also be

construed to extend to a case where the legal heir of the original

appellant, who was also an injured victim in the instant case must

be brought on record. Moreover, the applicant is also an injured

victim. It was contended that the delay in filing the applications for

setting aside of the abatement and in filing the application for

substitution was owing to the long pendency of these appeals

before this Court as well as due to bona fide reasons. In this regard,

learned counsel for the applicant submitted that the reason as to

why the applications have to be allowed in these cases is also owing

to the fact that the High Court, by the impugned judgment, which

is a cryptic one as is evident by the manner in which the same has

been written, has allowed the appeals filed by the accused and

consequently    acquitted   them.    In   the   circumstances,         the

applications may be allowed and in the place of the original

appellant, who is since deceased, the applicant, his son, who is
Page 7 of 58
also an injured victim may be substituted so as to prosecute these

appeals.
3.3   Per contra, learned senior counsel and learned counsel for

the respondent(s) vehemently objected to the applications being

allowed. In this regard, they drew our attention to
Section 394
CrPC and contended that although the said provision refers to an

appeal filed against a conviction, sub-section (1) of
Section 394
CrPC deals with abatement of an appeal on the death of an accused

when the appeal was filed under
Sections 377
or 378
CrPC
. The

expression, “every other appeal under this Chapter” in sub-section

(2) of
Section 394
CrPC is significant inasmuch as the said sub-

section lays down that apart from an appeal filed under
Section

377
or
Section 378
CrPC, every other appeal under the Chapter

shall finally abate on the death of the appellant; that the
CrPC
has

not defined the expression “appellant”, and it could be either a

victim or a complainant, who is the appellant, or it could also be

the convict or the accused who is an appellant; that the proviso

expressly deals with a case where the accused or the convict is the

appellant and if he dies during the pendency of the appeal, the legal

heirs of such an accused can be brought on record to continue the
Page 8 of 58
appeal and they can seek an acquittal if the appeal had been filed

under
Section 377
or
Section 378
CrPC or on any other ground.

However, the said proviso does not extend to a case where an

appeal is filed by a victim or a legal heir of a victim under the

proviso to
Section 372
CrPC. It was further submitted that the

expression ‘near relative’ in the proviso to sub-section (2) of
Section

394
CrPC is of a wider connotation to include a parent, spouse,

lineal descendant, brother or sister, but such an expression cannot

be applied in the case of substitution of an original victim who had

preferred an appeal on his demise during the pendency of his

appeal.
3.4   In the above circumstances, they contended that the

applications may be dismissed. Consequently, the appeal may also

be dismissed as having abated since the original appellant has died

during the pendency of the appeals before this Court.


Points for Consideration:
4.    Having heard learned counsel for the parties, the following

points arise for our consideration:
Page 9 of 58
(a)   Whether the applicant is entitled to be substituted

            in place of the original appellant so as to continue to

            prosecute these appeals?
(b)   What order?
5.     We have considered the arguments advanced at the bar in

light of the provisions of the
CrPC
. It is noted that while
Sections

377
and
378
CrPC were on the statute book even at the time of the

enforcement of the
CrPC
, on the basis of the reports of the Law

Commission, an amendment was made to
Section 372
CrPC by

insertion of the proviso thereto with effect from 31.12.2009.

Consequently, the definition of ‘victim’ was also inserted to
Section

2(wa)
of CrPC which reads as under:
“2(wa)-"victim" means a person who has suffered any loss
      or injury caused by reason of the act or omission for which
      the accused person has been charged and the expression
      "victim" includes his or her guardian or legal heir;”


5.1     Simultaneously, proviso to
Section 372
CrPC was inserted

which reads as under:
“372. No appeal to lie unless otherwise provided.- No
      appeal shall lie from any judgment or order of a Criminal
      Court except as provided for by this Code or by any other
      law for the time being in force.
Page 10 of 58
Provided that the victim shall have a right to prefer an
      appeal against any order passed by the Court acquitting
      the accused or convicting for a lesser offence or imposing
      inadequate compensation, and such appeal shall lie to the
      Court to which an appeal ordinarily lies against the order
      of conviction of such Court.”


5.2    A conjoint reading of the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC in light

of the definition in
Section 2(wa)
of CrPC, would lead to the

conclusion that the expression ‘victim’ is not restricted to any

person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by reason of the

act or omission for which the accused person has been charged. It

also includes a person who is a guardian or legal heir of a victim

as defined above.
5.3    In the instant cases, the legal heir of the injured victim and

himself being an injured victim had preferred these appeals as he

had every right to do so particularly having regard to amendment

made to the
CrPC
with effect from 31.12.2009 by insertion of the

proviso to
Section 372
CrPC. However, the contentious issue in

these cases is, whether a legal heir of a legal heir, who had

preferred these appeals, could also continue to prosecute these

appeals as during the pendency of these appeals the original
Page 11 of 58
appellant has died. We are considering this issue irrespective of the

fact that the applicant who seeks substitution as an appellant in

these appeals is himself an injured victim in the incident and in

his own right could have filed appeals against the acquittal of the

accused. However, he has filed the applications for substitution in

place of his father as a legal heir of an injured victim, the original

appellant in these appeals.
5.4   We have considered the arguments advanced at the bar in

light of the amendment made to
Section 372
CrPC and also the

insertion of the expression ‘Victim’ by way of a definition clause to

Section 2 of the Act extracted above and generally in light of
Article

14
of the Constitution including the right to equal opportunity

before law and right to access to justice.
6.    In Mallikarjun Kodagali (dead) represented through

Legal representatives vs. State of Karnataka, (2019) 2 SCC

752 (“Mallikarjun Kodagali”), there is a reference to four reports

that have dealt with the rights of victims of crime and the remedies

available to them. The same may be briefly discussed as under:
Page 12 of 58
i.    The first report is the 154th Report of the Law Commission of

      India of August, 1996. The said Report touched upon, inter

      alia, compensation to be paid to the victim of crime, their

      rehabilitation, etc.

ii.   In March 2003, Justice Malimath Committee submitted its

      report on ‘Reforms of Criminal Justice System’. Paragraph 2.21

      in the Chapter on Adversarial Rights under the sub-heading of

      ‘Victims Right to Appeal’, states as under:
"2.21. The victim or his representative who is a party
          to the trial should have a right to prefer an appeal
          against any adverse order passed by the trial court. In
          such an appeal he could challenge the acquittal, or
          conviction for a lesser offence or inadequacy of
          sentence, or in regard to compensation payable to the
          victim. The appellate court should have the same
          powers as the trial court in regard to assessment of
          evidence and awarding of sentence."
There is also discussion on other rights of victims under

      the Chapter titled, ‘Justice to Victims’. In paragraph 6.(14)(v),

      Justice    Malimath     Committee      made     the     following

      recommendations:
"6. (14)(v) The victim shall have a right to prefer an
          appeal against any adverse order passed by the court
          acquitting the accused, convicting for a lesser offence,
Page 13 of 58
imposing inadequate sentence, or granting inadequate
            compensation. Such appeal shall lie to the court to
            which an appeal ordinarily lies against the order of
            conviction of such court."
iii.   In July 2007, a Report of the Committee on the Draft National

       Policy on Criminal Justice was submitted which is also known

       as    ‘Professor   Madhava     Menon      Committee       Report’.

       Observations with regard to providing victim-oriented criminal

       justice and a balance between the constitutional rights of an

       accused and victim of crime have been discussed. One of the

       suggestions made is that the victim must be impleaded in the

       trial proceedings so that such a party would have a right to file

       an appeal against an adverse order, particularly an order of

       acquittal.
iv.    In the 221st Report of the Law Commission of India submitted

       in April, 2009, it has been noted that as the law then stood, an

       aggrieved person could not file an appeal against an order of

       acquittal. However, a revision petition could be filed. Noting

       that the powers of a revisional court are limited and the

       process involved is cumbersome, a recommendation was made

       by the Law Commission that as against an order of acquittal

       passed by a Magistrate, a victim should be entitled to file an
Page 14 of 58
appeal before the revisional court. Similarly, in complaint

       cases, the appeal should be provided to the Sessions Court

       instead of the High Court. However, it was suggested that the

       aggrieved person or complainant should have the right to

       prefer an appeal with the leave of the appellate court.

v.     It was further recommended that
Section 378
CrPC requires

       an amendment with a view to enable filing of appeals in

       complaint cases also in the Sessions Court, of course, subject

       to the grant of special leave by it. Limited scope of powers of a

       revisional court under
Section 401
CrPC was taken note of and

       it was suggested that there is a need to amend the
CrPC
.

 6.1     Taking note of the aforesaid reports, an amendment was

 brought to
Section 372
CrPC with effect from 31.12.2009 by adding

 a proviso thereto.
6.2      The decisions of the Full Benches of the High Courts in the

 matter of interpretation of the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC are

 highlighted by this Court in the case of Mallikarjun Kodagali.

 There are also Division Bench decisions of the High Courts taking

 different views.
Page 15 of 58
Mallikarjun Kodagali:
6.3      This Court in Mallikarjun Kodagali, speaking through

Lokur, J. for himself and Nazeer, J. referred to the Declaration of

the Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and Abuse of

Power adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations in

the 96th Plenary Session on 29.11.1985. It was observed in

paragraphs 74, 75 & 76 as under:
“74. Putting the Declaration to practice, it is quite obvious
      that the victim of an offence is entitled to a variety of rights.
      Access to mechanisms of justice and redress through
      formal procedures as provided for in national legislation,
      must include the right to file an appeal against an order of
      acquittal in a case such as the one that we are presently
      concerned with. Considered in this light, there is no doubt
      that the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC must be given life, to
      benefit the victim of an offence.
75. Under the circumstances, on the basis of the plain
      language of the law and also as interpreted by several High
      Courts and in addition the resolution of the General
      Assembly of the United Nations, it is quite clear to us that
      a victim as defined in
Section 2(wa)
CrPC would be entitled
      to file an appeal before the Court to which an appeal
      ordinarily lies against the order of conviction. …
76. … The language of the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC is
      quite clear, particularly when it is contrasted with the
      language of
Section 378(4)
CrPC. The text of this provision
      is quite clear and it is confined to an order of acquittal
      passed in a case instituted upon a complaint. The word
      “complaint” has been defined in
Section 2(d)
CrPC and
      refers to any allegation made orally or in writing to a
      Magistrate. This has nothing to do with the lodging or the
      registration of an FIR, and therefore it is not at all
Page 16 of 58
necessary to consider the effect of a victim being the
      complainant as far as the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC is
      concerned.”

6.4     Consequently, the appeals in the said case were allowed and

the judgment and order of the High Court was set aside and the

matter was remanded to the High Court to hear and decide the

appeal against the judgment and order of acquittal once again.
Analysis of the Relevant Provisions of
CrPC
:
7.
Section 2
CrPC is the definition clause under which relevant

definitions are extracted as under:
“2. Definitions.—In this Code, unless the context
      otherwise requires,—
                                 xxx
(d) “complaint” means any allegation made orally or in
      writing to a Magistrate, with a view to his taking action
      under this Code, that some person, whether known or
      unknown, has committed an offence, but does not include
      a police report.
Explanation.—A report made by a police officer in a case
      which discloses, after investigation, the commission of a
      non-cognizable offence shall be deemed to be a complaint;
      and the police officer by whom such report is made shall
      be deemed to be the complainant;
xxx
(n) “offence” means any act or omission made punishable
      by any law for the time being in force and includes any act
      in respect of which a complaint may be made under
section 20
of the Cattle Trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871);
Page 17 of 58
xxx
24. Public Prosecutors.-
xxx
(8) The Central Government or the State Government may
appoint, for the purposes of any case or class of cases, a
person who has been in practice as an advocate for not
less than ten years as a Special Public Prosecutor:
Provided that the Court may permit the victim to engage
an advocate of his choice to assist the prosecution under
this sub-section.
CHAPTER XXIX
                       APPEALS
372. No appeal to lie unless otherwise provided.—No
appeal shall lie from any judgment or order of a Criminal
Court except as provided for by this Code by any other law
for the time being in force:
Provided that the victim shall have a right to prefer an
appeal against any order passed by the Court acquitting
the accused or convicting for a lesser offence or imposing
inadequate compensation, and such appeal shall lie to the
Court to which an appeal ordinarily lies against the order
of conviction of such Court.
xxx
377. Appeal by the State Government against
sentence.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section
(2), the State Government may, in any case of conviction
on a trial held by any Court other than a High Court, direct
the Public Prosecutor to present an appeal against the
sentence on the ground of its inadequacy—
(a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by
    the Magistrate; and
(b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any
    other Court.
Page 18 of 58
(2) If such conviction is in a case in which the offence has
been investigated by the Delhi Special Police
Establishment, constituted under the
Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act, 1946
(25 of 1946), or by any other
agency empowered to make investigation into an offence
under any Central Act other than this Code, the Central
Government may also direct the Public Prosecutor to
present an appeal against the sentence on the ground of
its inadequacy—
(a) to the Court of Session, if the sentence is passed by
    the Magistrate; and
(b) to the High Court, if the sentence is passed by any
    other Court.
(3) When an appeal has been filed against the sentence on
the ground of its inadequacy, the Court of Session or, as
the case may be, the High Court shall not enhance the
sentence except after giving to the accused a reasonable
opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement
and while showing cause, the accused may plead for his
acquittal or for the reduction of the sentence.
(4) When an appeal has been filed against a sentence
passed under section 376, section 376A, section 376AB,
section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA,
section 376DB or
section 376E
of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), the appeal shall be disposed of within a period
of six months from the date of filing of such appeal.
378. Appeal in case of acquittal.—(1) Save as otherwise
provided in sub-section (2), and subject to the provisions
of sub-sections (3) and (5),—
(a) the District Magistrate may, in any case, direct the
    Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the Court of
    Session from an order of acquittal passed by a
    Magistrate in respect of a cognizable and non-bailable
    offence;
(b) the State Government may, in any case, direct the
    Public Prosecutor to present an appeal to the High
Page 19 of 58
Court from an original or appellate order of acquittal
    passed by any Court other than a High Court not being
    an order under clause (a) or an order of acquittal
    passed by the Court of Session in revision.
(2) If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case in
which the offence has been investigated by the Delhi
Special Police Establishment constituted under the
Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946
(25 of 1946), or by
any other agency empowered to make investigation into an
offence under any Central Act other than this Code, the
Central Government may, subject to the provisions of sub-
section (3), also direct the Public Prosecutor to present an
appeal—
(a) to the Court of Session, from an order of acquittal
    passed by a Magistrate in respect of a cognizable and
    non-bailable offence;
(b) to the High Court from an original or appellate order
    of an acquittal passed by any Court other than a High
    Court not being an order under clause (a) or an order
    of acquittal passed by the Court of Session in revision.
(3) No appeal to the High Court under sub-section (1) or
sub-section (2) shall be entertained except with the leave
of the High Court.
(4) If such an order of acquittal is passed in any case
instituted upon complaint and the High Court, on an
application made to it by the complainant in this behalf,
grants special leave to appeal from the order of acquittal,
the complainant may present such an appeal to the High
Court.
(5) No application under sub-section (4) for the grant of
special leave to appeal from an order of acquittal shall be
entertained by the High Court after the expiry of six
months, where the complainant is a public servant, and
sixty days in every other case, computed from the date of
that order of acquittal.
Page 20 of 58
(6) If, in any case, the application under sub-section (4) for
the grant of special leave to appeal from an order of
acquittal is refused, no appeal from that order of acquittal
shall lie under sub-section (1) or under sub-section (2).
xxx
386. Powers of the Appellate Court.—After perusing
such record and hearing the appellant or his pleader, if he
appears, and the Public Prosecutor if he appears, and in
case of an appeal under section 377 or section 378, the
accused, if he appears, the Appellate Court may, if it
considers that there is no sufficient ground for interfering,
dismiss the appeal, or may—
(a) in an appeal from an order or acquittal, reverse such
    order and direct that further inquiry be made, or that
    the accused be re-tried or committed for trial, as the
    case may be, or find him guilty and pass sentence on
    him according to law;
(b) in an appeal from a conviction—
(i)     reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or
            discharge the accused, or order him to be re-
tried by a Court of competent jurisdiction
            subordinate to such Appellate Court or
            committed for trial, or
(ii)    alter the finding, maintaining the sentence, or
(iii)   with or without altering the finding, alter the
            nature or the extent, or the nature and extent,
            of the sentence, but not so as to enhance the
            same—
(c) in an appeal for enhancement of sentence—
(i)     reverse the finding and sentence and acquit or
            discharge the accused or order him to be re-
tried by a Court competent to try the offence, or
(ii)    alter the finding maintaining the sentence, or
Page 21 of 58
(iii)   with or without altering the finding, alter the
            nature or the extent, or, the nature and extent,
            of the sentence, so as to enhance or reduce the
            same;
(d) in an appeal from any other order, alter or reverse
    such order;
(e) make any amendment or any consequential or
    incidental order that may be just or proper:
Provided that the sentence shall not be enhanced
    unless the accused has had an opportunity of showing
    cause against such enhancement:
Provided further that the Appellate Court shall not
    inflict greater punishment for the offence which in its
    opinion the accused has committed, than might have
    been inflicted for that offence by the Court passing the
    order or sentence under appeal.
394. Abatement of appeals. (1) Every appeal under
Section 377 or Section 378 shall finally abate on the death
of the accused.
(2) Every other appeal under this Chapter (except an
appeal from a sentence of fine) shall finally abate on the
death of the appellant:
Provided that where the appeal is against a conviction
and sentence of death or of imprisonment, and the
appellant dies during the pendency of the appeal, any of
his near relatives may, within thirty days of the death of
the appellant, apply to the Appellate Court for leave to
continue the appeal; and if leave is granted, the appeal
shall not abate.
Explanation.- In this section, "near relative" means a
parent, spouse, lineal descendant, brother or sister.”
Page 22 of 58
7.1   Chapter XXIX of the
CrPC
deals with appeals. The said

Chapter delineates the statutory framework governing appeals.
Section 372
CrPC unequivocally declares that no appeal shall lie

from any judgment or order of a criminal court except as provided

for by the
CrPC
itself or by any other law for the time being in force.

In fact,
Section 372
CrPC speaks of an embargo on the filing of an

appeal from any judgment or order of a criminal court except as

provided for by the
CrPC
or by any other law for the time being in

force.
Section 372
CrPC is couched in a negative language and it

states that no appeal shall lie from any judgment or order of a

criminal court except as provided for by the
CrPC
or by any other

law for the time being in force.
Section 372
CrPC is a preface to the

chapter on appeals which in substance states that an appeal can

be filed only in accordance with what has been stated in the

provisions to follow
Section 372
CrPC. The proviso to Section 372

was introduced by the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)

Act, 2008 (Act 5 of 2009), which came into effect from 31.12.2009.

By virtue of this amendment, a limited right of appeal has been

conferred upon the victim of an offence. On a reading of the proviso

to
Section 372
CrPC, it is apparent that a victim shall have a right
Page 23 of 58
to prefer an appeal against: (i) any order passed by the court

acquitting the accused; or (ii) convicting for a lesser offence; or (iii)

imposing inadequate compensation. Such appeal shall lie to the

court to which an appeal ordinarily lies against the order of

conviction of such court. In fact, with effect from 31.12.2009 when

clause (wa) to
Section 2
CrPC was inserted to the definition of

victim, proviso to Section 24 was also added which provides that

the Court may permit the victim to engage an advocate of his choice

to assist the prosecution under the said sub-section.

7.1.1      Further, with effect from 31.12.2009, Section 357A and

Section 357B were inserted to the
CrPC
in the form of victim

compensation scheme for providing compensation to the victim or

his dependants who have suffered loss or injury as a result of the

crime and who require rehabilitation. The compensation payable

by the State Government under Section 357A is in addition to the

payment of fine to the victim of offences under Section 326A,

Section 376AB, Section 376D, Section 376DA and
Section 376DB
of the Indian Penal Code. Also, Section 357C states that all

hospitals, public or private, whether run by the Central

Government, the State Government, local bodies or any other
Page 24 of 58
person, shall immediately provide first-aid or medical treatment,

free of cost, to the victims of any offence covered under the

aforesaid Sections.
7.2   While
Section 374
CrPC deals with appeals from convictions

with which we are not concerned in this case, what is of relevance

is
Section 378
CrPC which, inter alia, deals with an appeal in case

of acquittal. The remedy of an appeal against an acquittal is

couched in certain conditions which are evident on a reading of

sub-sections (4) and (5) of
Section 378
CrPC vis-à-vis an appeal

that could be filed by a complainant. However, the Parliament in

its wisdom amended
Section 372
CrPC by adding a proviso thereto

by virtue of the
Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act
2008

(5 of 2009), (with effect from 31.12.2009). It is hence necessary to

unravel the definition of victim in clause (wa) of
Section 2
of the

CrPC which was also introduced along with proviso to
Section 372
CrPC. A victim is defined to mean a person who has suffered any

loss or injury caused by reason of the act or omission for which the

accused person has been charged and the expression ‘victim’

includes his or her guardian or legal heir.
Page 25 of 58
7.3 The expression ‘injury’, as defined in
Section 44
of the IPC

includes:
“Any harm whatever illegally caused to any person, in
      body, mind, reputation or property.”


7.3.1     Similarly, Black’s Law Dictionary defines injury to include

property damage, bodily harm, or violation of a legal right.


7.3.2     Additionally, the United Nations General Assembly’s

Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice for Victims of Crime and

Abuse of Power (1985) provides a broad and inclusive definition of

victim. According to
Article 1
of the Declaration:
“Victim means persons who, individually or collectively,
      have suffered harm through acts or omissions which
      involve physical or mental injury, emotional distress,
      economic loss or substantial impairment of their
      fundamental rights.”


7.3.3     Further,
Article 2
extends the definition of victim to include

immediate family members, dependents, or those who have

intervened to assist a victim in crisis.
7.4     On a reading of the definition of ‘victim’, it is clear that the

said expression is initially exhaustive and thereafter inclusive. The

expression ‘victim’ means a person who has suffered any loss or
Page 26 of 58
injury. The loss or injury could be either physical, mental, a

financial loss or injury. The expression ‘injury’ could also be

construed as a legal injury in a wider sense and not just a physical

or a mental injury. The loss or injury must be caused by reason of

an act or omission for which the accused person has been charged.
Thus, it can be both by a positive act or negatively by an omission

which is at the instance of the accused and for which such accused

has been charged. Further, the expression ‘victim’ also includes

his/her guardian or legal heir in the case of demise of the victim.

7.5   Thus, the expression ‘victim’ has been couched in a broad

manner so as to include a person who has suffered any loss or

injury. The expressions ‘loss’ or ‘injury’ themselves are of a very

broad import which expressions also enlarge the scope of the

expression ‘victim’. Further, the expression ‘victim’ includes not

only the person who has suffered any loss or injury caused by

reason of any act or omission for which the accused person has

been charged but also includes his or her guardian or legal heir

which means that the definition of victim is inclusive in nature.


7.6   Having regard to the insertion of the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC, we find that in the case of a victim who seeks to file an
Page 27 of 58
appeal, he or she could proceed under the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC in the circumstances mentioned therein and need not prefer

an appeal by invoking
Section 378(4)
CrPC which is in respect of

appeals to be filed by a complainant. It may be that the

complainant is a victim in certain cases and therefore, the victim

has the right to file an appeal under the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC and need not proceed under
Section 378(4)
CrPC. However,

if the complainant is not a victim and intends to file an appeal, in

such a case a complainant would have to proceed under
Section

378
CrPC which circumscribes the right to file an appeal by virtue

of the conditions which are stipulated under the said Section.


7.6.1 The word ‘victim’ is derived from the latin word “victima”

and originally contained the concept of sacrifice. In more

contemporary times, the term ‘victim’ has been expanded to imply

a victim of war, an accident, a scam, etc. As a scientific concept,

according to Criminologist B. Mendelsohn (1976), a victim may be

viewed as containing four fundamental criteria which are as

follows:
Page 28 of 58
•   The nature of the determinant that causes the suffering. The

    suffering may be physical, psychological, or both, depending

    on the type of injurious act.
•   The social character of the suffering. This suffering originates

    in the victim’s and others’ reaction to the event.

•   The nature of the social factor. The social implications of the

    injurious act can have a greater impact, sometimes, than the

    physical or psychological impact.
•   The origin of the inferiority complex. This term, suggested by

    Mendelsohn, manifests itself as a feeling of submission that

    may be followed by a feeling of revolt. The victim generally

    attributes his injury to the culpability of another person.

     Victimology thus is a social-structural way of viewing crime,

the law, the criminal and the victim. Insofar as the injury is

concerned, apart from there being short time and long time

physical injuries, there could also be economic or financial loss

which are also injuries within the meaning and definition of victim

under clause (wa) of
Section 2
CrPC. We could also place reliance

on
Dr. Vimla vs. State (NCT of Delhi
), AIR 1963 SC 1572,

wherein the expression “injury” has been explained to mean
Page 29 of 58
something other than economic loss i.e., deprivation of property,

whether movable or immovable, or of money, and to include any

harm whatever caused to any person in body, mind, reputation or

such others. In short, it is a non-economic or non-pecuniary loss.

7.7     Further, while analysing the expression ‘victim’, it is noted

that it is with reference to an accused person who has been

charged. Under the
CrPC
, the expression ‘charge’ is defined under

clause (b) of
Section 2
which reads as under:
“2. Definitions.—In this Code, unless the context
      otherwise requires,—
                                 xxx
(b) “charge” includes any head of charge when the charge
      contains more heads than one;
7.7.1       Besides the omnibus meaning, the
CrPC
does not define

what a charge is. However, judicial pronouncements tell us that a

charge is actually a precise formulation of the specific accusation

made against a person who is entitled to know its nature at the

earliest stage. The charge is against a person in respect of an act

committed or omitted in violation of penal law forbidding or

commanding it. In other words, a charge is an accusation made

against a person in respect of offence alleged to have been
Page 30 of 58
committed by him, vide
Esher Singh vs. State A.P.
, (2004) 11

SCC 585.
In
Birichh Bhuian vs. State of Bihar
, AIR 1963 SC

1120, this Court observed that a charge is not a mere abstraction

but a concrete accusation against a person in respect of an offence

and     that    joinder   of   charges   is   permitted   under    certain

circumstances, whether joinder is against one person or different

persons.
7.7.2          In Advanced Law Lexicon by P Ramanatha Aiyar, 6th

Edition, Volume I, a charge is defined to mean an expression as

applied to a crime, sometimes used in a limited sense, intending

the accusation of a crime which precedes a formal trial; to mean a

person charged with an accusation of a crime. In a fuller and more

accurate sense, the expression charge includes the responsibility

for the crime. As a formal complaint, a charge signifies an

accusation, made in a legal manner of legal conduct, either of

omission or commission by the person charged. A person charged

with a crime means something more than being suspected or

accused of a crime by popular opinion or rumour and implies that

the offence has been alleged against the accused parties according

to the forms of law. The purpose of a charge is to tell an accused
Page 31 of 58
person as precisely and consciously as possible of the matter with

which he is charged with. Thus, the expression charge includes the

element of offence and also reference to the person who is alleged

to have committed the offence.
8.
Section 378
CrPC is a specific provision dealing with appeals.

Sub-section (4) of
Section 378
CrPC is pertinent. It states that if an

order of acquittal is passed in any case instituted upon a complaint

and the High Court, on an application made to it by the

complainant in that behalf, grants special leave to appeal from the

order of acquittal, the complainant may present such an appeal to

the High Court. The limitation period for seeking special leave to

appeal is six months where the complainant is a public servant and

sixty days in every other case, computed from the date of the order

of acquittal. Sub-Section (6) states that if, in any case, the

application under sub-section (4) for grant of special leave to appeal

from an order of acquittal is refused, no appeal from that order of

acquittal shall lie under sub-section (1) or under sub-section (2) of
Section 378
CrPC.
8.1   A reading of
section 378
CrPC would clearly indicate that in

case the complainant intends to file an appeal against the order of
Page 32 of 58
acquittal, his right is circumscribed by certain conditions

precedent. When an appeal is to be preferred by a complainant,

the first question is, whether the complainant is also the victim or

only an informant. If the complainant is not a victim and the case

is instituted upon a complaint, then sub-section (4) requires that

the complainant must seek special leave to appeal from an order of

acquittal from the High Court. As noted under sub-section (6), if

the application under sub-section (4) for grant of special leave to

appeal from the order of acquittal is refused, no appeal from that

order of acquittal would lie, inter alia, under sub-section (1) of
Section 378
CrPC. However, if the complainant is also a victim, he

could proceed under the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC, in which

case the rigour of sub-section (4) of
Section 378
CrPC, which

mandates obtaining special leave to appeal, would not arise at all,

as he can prefer an appeal as a victim as a matter of right. Thus, if

a victim who is a complainant proceeds under
Section 378
CrPC,

the necessity of seeking special leave to appeal would arise but if a

victim, whether he is a complainant or not, files an appeal in terms

of proviso to
Section 372
CrPC, then the mandate of seeking special

leave to appeal would not arise.
Page 33 of 58
8.2    The reasons for the above distinction are not far to see and

can be elaborated as follows:
Firstly, the victim of a crime must have a right to prefer an

appeal which cannot be circumscribed by any condition precedent

except as provided under the provision of the
CrPC
.
Secondly, the right of a victim of a crime must be placed on

par with the right of an accused who has suffered a conviction,

who, as a matter of right can prefer an appeal under
Section 374
CrPC. A person convicted of a crime has the right to prefer an

appeal under
Section 374
CrPC as a matter of right and not being

subjected to any conditions. Similarly, a victim of a crime, whatever

be the nature of the crime, must have a right to prefer an appeal

as per the
CrPC
.
Thirdly, it is for this reason that the Parliament thought it fit

to insert the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC without mandating any

condition precedent to be fulfilled by the victim of an offence, which

expression also includes the legal representatives of a deceased

victim who can prefer an appeal.
Page 34 of 58
On the contrary, as against an order of acquittal, the State,

through the Public Prosecutor, can prefer an appeal even if the

complainant does not prefer such an appeal, though of course such

an appeal is with the leave of the court. However, it is not always

that the State or a complainant would prefer an appeal. But when

it comes to a victim’s right to prefer an appeal, the insistence on

seeking special leave to appeal from the High Court under
Section

378(4)
CrPC would be contrary to what has been intended by the

Parliament by insertion of the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC.
Fourthly, the Parliament has not amended
Section 378
CrPC

which deals with appeals against acquittal to circumscribe the

victim’s right to prefer an appeal just as it has with regard to a

complainant or the State filing an appeal. On the other hand, the

Parliament has inserted the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC so as to

envisage a superior right for the victim of an offence to prefer an

appeal on the grounds mentioned therein as compared to a

complainant.
9. The right to prefer an appeal is no doubt a statutory right and

such a right in an accused against a conviction is not merely a

statutory right but can also be construed to be a fundamental right
Page 35 of 58
under
Articles 14
and
21
of the Constitution. If that is so, then the

right of a victim of an offence to prefer an appeal cannot be equated

with the right of the State or the complainant to prefer an appeal

unless the victim is also the complainant. Hence, the statutory

rigours for filing of an appeal by the State or by a complainant

against an order of acquittal cannot be read into the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC so as to restrict the right of a victim to file an

appeal on the grounds mentioned therein, when none exists.

9.1   As already noted, the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC was

inserted in the statute book only with effect from 31.12.2009. The

object and reason for such insertion must be realised and must be

given its full effect to by a court. In view of the aforesaid discussion,

we hold that the victim of an offence has the right to prefer an

appeal under the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC, irrespective of

whether he is a complainant or not. Even if the victim of an offence

is a complainant, he can still proceed under the proviso to
Section

372
CrPC and need not advert to sub-section (4) of
Section 378
CrPC.
9.2   We find that on the recommendation made by the Law

Commission, the Parliament inserted the proviso in order to give
Page 36 of 58
an independent right to a victim to prefer an appeal under the

circumstances mentioned under the proviso. This is de hors an

appeal that could be filed by the complainant under
Section 378(4)
CrPC. The object and purpose of giving an independent right to a

victim to prefer an appeal is particularly in a case where a

complainant may not file an appeal and the State also would decide

not to prefer an appeal as against the acquittal or award of a lesser

sentence to an accused. If we bear in mind the object with which

the amendment has been made by the Parliament, we find that the

victim has every right to prefer an appeal as against a conviction

for a lesser offence or for imposing inadequate compensation or

even in the case of an acquittal of an accused as stated in the

proviso to
Section 372
CrPC. There is no doubt that in the instant

cases they are cases of acquittal of the accused by the High Court.


9.3 The expression ‘right to prefer an appeal’ in the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC cannot be limited to mean ‘only the filing of an

appeal’. Mere filing of an appeal in the absence of prosecution of

an appeal is of no avail. It does not fulfill the object with which the

proviso has been added to
Section 372
CrPC. Therefore, we

interpret the expression ‘the right to prefer an appeal’ to also
Page 37 of 58
include the ‘right to prosecute an appeal’. Then, if during the

pendency of an appeal, the original appellant dies, can it be said

that his legal heir cannot be substituted so as to prosecute the

appeal further? Any curtailing of the legal right to prosecute an

appeal on the death of an original appellant by his legal heir would

make the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC wholly redundant and in fact

may result in a situation which is contrary to the entire object with

which the Parliament had inserted the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC.

In this context, it is also relevant to note that the Parliament has

been conscious to expand the definition of the word ‘victim’ to not

only include the victim himself who had suffered the loss or injury

but also to include his legal heir. When a legal heir, who is not a

complainant or an injured victim, can prefer an appeal then why

not his legal heir on the death of the legal heir who had preferred

the appeal be permitted to prosecute the appeal? We see no reason

to curtail the right of a legal heir, who had preferred the original

appeal, to be denied the right to prosecute the appeal. In the

instant cases, the applicant, who is seeking substitution, is the

legal heir of the victim who had preferred the appeal before this

Court and is also an injured victim.
Page 38 of 58
Relevant Judicial Dicta:
10. A Constitution Bench of this Court in PSR Sadhanantham,

speaking through Krishna Iyer, J., observed that in a murder case,

when an appeal against acquittal was not filed by the State but by

a brother of the deceased, a private citizen, who is neither a

complainant nor the first informant, could invoke the special power

under
Article 136
of the Constitution for leave to appeal against an

acquittal, the same would not violate
Article 21
of the Constitution.

The facts of the said case were that the petitioner therein

was acquitted of a murder charge by the High Court but the

brother of the deceased — not the State nor even the first informant

— moved this Court under
Article 136
, got leave and had his appeal

heard which resulted in the petitioner (accused) being convicted

and sentenced to life term under
Section 302
IPC. A writ petition

was filed by the accused challenging the locus standi of the brother

of the deceased in moving this Court under
Article 136
of the

Constitution.
10.1 It was observed that
Article 136
of the Constitution is of

composite structure wherein power-cum-procedure is in-built

which vests power in this Court to entertain a petition and
Page 39 of 58
prescribes a mode of hearing so characteristic of the Court process.

When a motion is made for leave to appeal against an acquittal,

this Court has to appreciate the gravity of the peril to personal

liberty involved in that proceeding. The Court will also pay

attention to the person who seeks such leave from the Court, his

motive and his locus standi and the weighty factors which

persuade the Court to grant special leave. The Court may not, save

in special situations, grant leave to one who is not eo nomine a

party on the record.
10.1.1    This Court observed that the strictest vigilance over

abuse of the process of the Court is necessary, as ordinarily

meddlesome bystanders should not be granted a “visa”, but access

to justice to every bona fide seeker is a democratic dimension of

remedial jurisprudence. It was further observed that while the

criminal law should not be used as a weapon in personal vendettas

between private individuals, in the absence of an independent

prosecution authority easily accessible to every citizen, a wider

connotation of the expression “standing” is necessary for
Article

136
to further its mission.
Page 40 of 58
10.1.2     Pathak, J. (as he then was) writing a separate judgment

for himself and Koshal, J. considered the question whether a

brother of a deceased person, who had been murdered, possessed

the right to petition under
Article 136
of the Constitution for special

leave to appeal against an acquittal of the accused. It was observed

that this question touched directly on the nature of the crime and

of a criminal proceeding. When entertaining a petition for special

leave to appeal by a private party against an order of acquittal,

certain factors to be borne in mind were also enumerated. It was

opined that the judicial process under
Article 136
ought not to be

invoked for the satisfaction of private revenge or persona vendetta.

Nor can it be permitted as an instrument of coercion where a civil

action would lie. In every case, this Court is bound to consider what

is the interest which brings the petitioner to this Court and

whether the interest of the public community will benefit by the

grant of special leave. This Court should closely scrutinise the

motives and urges of those who seek to employ its process against

the life or liberty of another.
The Court should entertain a special

leave petition filed by a private party, other than the complainant,

in those cases only where it is convinced that the public interest
Page 41 of 58
justifies an appeal against the acquittal and that the State has

refrained from petition for special leave for reasons which do not

bear on the public interest but are prompted by private influence,

want of bona fide and other extraneous considerations. Therefore,

locus standi of the petitioner must be recognised in law. It was

observed that the petitioner therein had failed to establish that

there was a case for interfering with the judgment of this Court

allowing the appeal and hence, the writ petition was dismissed.


10.2 In
Chand Devi Daga vs. Manju K. Humatani
, (2018) 1

SCC 71, the original complainant had died during the pendency of

the criminal miscellaneous petition before the High Court which

was filed against the order of the Sessions Court rejecting the

criminal revision against the order of the Magistrate dismissing the

complaint. The High Court allowed the interlocutory application

filed by the legal representatives of the petitioner in the criminal

miscellaneous petition. The respondent before the High Court,

being aggrieved by the said order, had filed an appeal before this

Court. Referring to
Section 256
CrPC, this Court observed

that even in case of trial of summons case, it is not necessary or

mandatory that after the death of the complainant, the complaint
Page 42 of 58
has to be rejected. Under the proviso to the said Section, the

Magistrate can proceed with the complaint. That a similar

provision with regard to trial of warrant cases by the Magistrate is

not provided for under the
CrPC
but the Magistrate has the power

to discharge a case where the complainant is absent under Section

249 which is, however, hedged with a condition that “the offence

may be lawfully compounded or is not a cognizable offence”.

Therefore, there is no indication that on the death of the

complainant, the complaint has to be rejected in a warrant case.

Referring to certain other judicial dicta, this Court observed that

the High Court did not commit any error in allowing the legal heirs

of the complainant to prosecute the criminal miscellaneous

petition before the High Court and consequently, dismissed the

appeal.
10.3   In
M.R. Ajayan vs. State of Kerala
, 2024 SCC OnLine SC

3373, this Court considered the locus of a private individual

seeking exercise of jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 136
of

the Constitution.
Placing reliance on National Commission for
Women vs. State of Delhi
, (2010) 12 SCC 599;
Amanullah vs.

State of Bihar
, (2016) 6 SCC 699 (“Amanullah”) and PSR
Page 43 of 58
Sadhanantham, it was observed that the appellant therein had

locus standi to prosecute the special leave petition before this

Court. Referring to the observations of this Court in Amanullah,

it was stated that it may not be possible to strictly enumerate as to

who all will have locus to maintain an appeal before this Court

invoking
Article 136
of the Constitution of India as that would

depend upon the factual matrix of each case, as each case has its

unique set of facts. In other words, any person having a bona fide

connection with the matter, to maintain the appeal with a view to

advance substantial justice, must be permitted to do so.


10.4   We take note of the aforesaid judgments of this Court which

are judgments rendered in the context of
Article 136
of the

Constitution of India as they would squarely apply to the present

case as apart from the original appellant herein the applicant

(injured victim) could have also preferred a Special Leave Petition

under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India in his own right but

instead he is now seeking to prosecute these Criminal Appeals as

an heir of the original appellant who was a victim. Although PSR

Sadhanantham is a case which arose in a petition filed under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India, nevertheless the question
Page 44 of 58
which arose therein is similar to the question in the present case

and therefore, the observations therein squarely apply.
11.   We are conscious of the fact that the applicant who is seeking

substitution in the instant case is not only the son and heir of the

original appellant who preferred these appeals but is also an

injured victim in the incident which occurred on 09.12.1992 in

respect of which these appeals have been filed. Therefore, the

applicant could have filed these appeals assailing the judgment of

acquittal passed by the High Court in his individual capacity as an

injured victim. However, the applications for substitution have

been filled in order to continue the prosecution of these appeals as

the heir of the original appellant who was also an injured victim.

Hence, the detailed discussion that we have made is in acceptance

of the argument of learned counsel for the applicant that as heir of

the original appellant, who was an injured victim, he can prosecute

these appeals. Therefore, the applicant is being permitted to be

substituted in place of the original appellant as heir of the original

appellant (who was a victim in the incident). In other words, we

observe that even if the applicant was not an injured victim in the

said incident but has sought to prosecute these appeals as heir of
Page 45 of 58
the injured victim (original appellant), he is permitted to do so. We

therefore say, coincidentally, the applicant is also an injured victim

in the incident. In view of the above discussion, we do not accept

the contention of learned senior counsel for the respondent-

accused that the applicant herein would have to separately file

appeals before this Court as an injured victim and in that capacity

only and not as heir of the original appellant.


11.1   Secondly, another contention of learned senior counsel for

the respondent-accused is that under
Section 394(2)
CrPC, the

expression “every other appeal” other than an appeal filed under
Section 377
CrPC or
Section 378
CrPC shall finally abate applies

to an appeal filed by a victim. We do not think the same can be

simply applied to an appeal filed by a victim or an heir of the victim.

Although, sub-section (2) of
Section 394
CrPC states that “every

other appeal under this Chapter shall finally abate on the death of

the appellant”, it cannot be related to an appeal filed by a victim or

on the death of the victim/appellant. This is because
Sections 377
and
378
CrPC respectively deal with an appeal filed by the State

Government against sentence and an appeal in case of acquittal.

Such appeals are filed against the accused and therefore, when the
Page 46 of 58
accused dies, such appeals would abate. The expression “every

other appeal” must therefore, relate to an appeal which is not filed

under Section 377 or
Section 378
CrPC. Such an appeal is an

appeal against a conviction such as under
Section 374
CrPC and

on the death of the appellant who is the accused, such appeal

would abate. The proviso to sub-section (2) of
Section 394
CrPC

however, states, that even if the accused-appellant dies during the

pendency of the appeal, any of his near relatives may continue the

appeal and the appeal may not abate. In other words, the heirs of

the deceased accused-appellant have been permitted to continue

the appeals so as to seek an acquittal and realise the fruits of such

an acquittal which could be even in monetary terms despite the

death of the accused-appellant.
11.2   If the same logic is to apply to the proviso to
Section 372
CrPC, it would imply that the heirs of a victim can also pursue an

appeal filed under that provision as the definition of victim under
Section 2(wa)
includes the heir of a victim.
11.3 The expression “prefer an appeal” in proviso to
Section 372
CrPC has to be given an expanded meaning to include prosecution
Page 47 of 58
of an appeal or effectively pursue an appeal. According to Black’s

Law Dictionary, the word “prefer” means “to bring before; to

prosecute; to try; to proceed with. Thus, preferring an indictment

signifies prosecuting or trying an indictment; -
Manik Lal

Majumdar vs. Gouranga Chandra Dey
, (2004) 12 SCC 448.
11.4 We may usefully refer to Constitution Bench Judgment of

this Court in
Garikapati Veeraya vs. N. Subbiah Choudhry
, AIR

1957 SC 540 wherein it was observed thus:
“23. From the decisions         cited   above    the   following
    principles clearly emerge:
(i) That the legal pursuit of a remedy, suit, appeal and
    second appeal are really but steps in a series of
    proceedings all connected by an intrinsic unity and are to
    be regarded as one legal proceeding.
(ii) The right of appeal is not a mere matter of procedure
    but is a substantive right.
(iii) The institution of the suit carries with it the implication
    that all rights of appeal then in force are preserved to the
    parties thereto till the rest of the career of the suit.
(iv) The right of appeal is a vested right and such a right to
    enter the superior court accrues to the litigant and exists
    as on and from the date the lis commences and although
    it may be actually exercised when the adverse judgment is
    pronounced such right is to be governed by the law
    prevailing at the date of the institution of the suit or
    proceeding and not by the law that prevails at the date of
    its decision or at the date of the filing of the appeal.
Page 48 of 58
(v) This vested right of appeal can be taken away only by a
    subsequent enactment, if it so provides expressly or by
    necessary intendment and not otherwise.”


11.5   More importantly,
Article 136
of the Constitution deals with

Special leave to appeal by the Supreme Court. Sub-clause (1) of
Article 136
begins with a non-obstante clause and confers

discretion on the Supreme Court to grant special leave to appeal

from any judgment, decree, determination, sentence or order in

any cause or matter passed or made by any court or tribunal in the

territory of India. When this power under
Article 136
is exercised

by the Supreme Court by granting leave, the special leave petition

would get converted into a criminal appeal. If during the pendency

of the special leave petition or the criminal appeal, the appellant

dies, the heir of the appellant must be given an opportunity to

prosecute the appeal irrespective of whether the heir is a victim of

the criminal offence. More significantly, the appeal heard pursuant

to
Article 136
of the Constitution is not an appeal under Chapter

XXIX
CrPC
.
11.6 In the circumstances, we find that in the instant case, the

applicant, being heir of the victim, has the right to continue these
Page 49 of 58
appeals irrespective of the fact that he is an injured victim. In that

view of the matter also, we find that the application for substitution

has to be allowed.
11.7 However, if in a situation, the complainant who has preferred

an appeal under
Section 378
CrPC dies, what would be the fate of

the appeal is not a question which arises in this case and therefore,

we keep the said question open to be adjudicated in any other

appropriate case.
12. In the circumstances, the delay in filing the application for

seeking setting aside of the abatement is condoned. The abatement

is set aside. The application for substitution of applicant is allowed.

Consequently, the applicant is permitted to be brought on record

as the legal representative of the original appellant, apart from he

being an injured victim also. Appellant’s counsel to file amended

memo of parties.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.1330-1332 OF 2017:
The appellant herein, who is the legal heir of the original

appellant (and a victim of the incident that occurred on

09.12.1992) has been substituted to prosecute these appeals
Page 50 of 58
which have been filed being aggrieved by the judgment of acquittal

of the accused vide order dated 12.09.2012 passed in Criminal

Appeal Nos.254 of 2004, 258 of 2004, 259 of 2004 by the High

Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital.
2.   Learned   counsel   for   the   appellant   made     a   two-fold

submission: firstly, he contended that even without going into the

merits of the case, the manner and tenor of the judgment may be

considered; that this is a judgment of a High Court which was

considering a first appeal against a judgment and order of

conviction which appeals were filed by respondents - accused; that

in a cryptic manner, the judgment has been delivered by the High

Court acquitting the respondents – accused. That this Court in a

catena of cases has observed that even if a judgment confirming

the judgment of a Sessions Court is to be rendered by the High

court and thereby dismissing the first appeal which has been

preferred under
Section 374
CrPC, the appeal would have to be

considered based on the evidence on record and thereafter possibly

the High Court could dismiss such an appeal. But here is a case

where the High Court has reversed the judgment of the Sessions

Court   inasmuch    as   the   judgment    and   sentence       of      life
Page 51 of 58
imprisonment has been set aside and a complete acquittal given to

the respondents - accused without there being any reasons and

marshalling of the facts and the evidence on record. In this regard,

he drew our attention to paragraph 7 of the impugned judgment

and submitted that the findings in paragraph 7 of the impugned

judgment are de hors any basis in the absence of there being a

discussion   of   the   facts   and   evidence   on   record.   In       the

circumstances, he submitted that this Court if it is so inclined may

consider remanding of the matter without going into the merits of

the case.
3.   The second submission of learned counsel for the appellant

is, in the event this Court is not inclined to accept the first

submission, then the appeal can be taken up on merits. Learned

counsel submitted that even on merits, the High Court could not

have given a judgment of acquittal by reversing the judgment of the

Sessions Court. He therefore submitted that the impugned

judgment may be set aside and the judgment of the Sessions Court

may be restored.
Page 52 of 58
4.   Per contra, learned senior counsel and learned counsel

appearing for the respondents-accused who have been acquitted,

vehemently contended that there is no merit in the submissions

made by appellant’s counsel. They drew our attention to the fact

that the High Court may have given the judgment pithily but it is

not without substance. Merely because the impugned judgment is

short and not lengthy cannot make it an erroneous judgment so

long as the reasoning is evident and there is a basis for the findings

arrived at. In the circumstances, this Court may not accept the first

contention of the appellant and hence, they contended that they

are ready to argue the matter on merits so that this Court could

confirm the judgment of acquittal passed by the High Court.
5.   Learned counsel for the respondent-State submitted that, no

doubt the State has not preferred an appeal against the judgment

of acquittal as against the respondents - accused before this Court.
However, the State had preferred an appeal against the acquittal of

six other accused and that appeal was dismissed but in these

appeals filed by the appellant herein, the State is supporting the

appellant. Learned counsel for the respondent – State submitted

that having regard to the submissions advanced by the respective
Page 53 of 58
counsel and learned counsel for the parties, this Court may

consider remanding the matter to the High Court so that all parties

would get an opportunity to put forth their respective cases and

the High Court could consider the appeal afresh and in accordance

with law and come to its conclusion.
6.   While hearing the appeals under
Section 374(2)
of the CrPC,

the High Court is exercising its appellate jurisdiction. There shall

be independent application of mind in deciding the criminal appeal

against conviction. It is the duty of an appellate court to

independently evaluate the evidence presented and determine

whether such evidence is credible. Even if the evidence is deemed

reliable, the High Court must further assess whether the

prosecution has established its case beyond reasonable doubt. The

High Court though being an appellate Court is akin to a Trial

Court, must be convinced beyond all reasonable doubt that the

prosecution's case is substantially true and that the guilt of the

accused has been conclusively proven while considering an appeal

against a conviction.
Page 54 of 58
As the first appellate court, the High Court is expected to

evaluate the evidence including the medical evidence, statement of

the victim, statements of the witnesses and the defence version

with due care.
7.   While the judgment need not be excessively lengthy, it must

reflect a proper application of mind to crucial evidence. Albeit the

High Court does not have the advantage to examine the witnesses

directly, the High Court should, as an appellate Court, re-assess

the facts, evidence on record and findings to arrive at a just

conclusion in deciding whether the Trial Court was justified in

convicting the accused or not. We are also cognizant of the large

pendency of cases bombarding our courts. However, the same

cannot come in the way of the Court’s solemn duty, particularly,

when a person's liberty is at stake.
8.   This Court in
State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Ambarish
, (2021)

16 SCC 371 held that while deciding a criminal appeal on merits,

the High Court is required to apply its mind to the entirety of the

case including the evidence on the record before arriving at its

conclusion.
In this regard, we may also refer to the orders passed

by this Court in
Shakuntala Shukla vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
,
Page 55 of 58
(
2021) 20 SCC 818 and State Bank of India vs. Ajay Kumar

Sood
, (2023) 7 SCC 282.
9.   We find that the High Court ought to have considered the

evidence on record in light of the arguments advanced at the bar

and thereafter ascertained whether the Sessions Court was

justified in passing the judgment of conviction and imposing the

sentence. The same being absent in the impugned judgment, for

that sole reason, we set aside the same.
10. We therefore find that the first contention advanced by the

learned counsel for the appellant and the submission made by

learned counsel for the respondent-State has to be accepted for the

reason that the respondents-accused in these appeals respectively

would also have another opportunity in the appeals that they had

filed before the High Court. In the circumstances, while holding

that the impugned judgment of the High Court is cryptic and de

hors any reasoning in coming to the findings in paragraph 7 of
the

said judgment
, we set aside
the said judgment
without expressing

anything on the merits of the case.
Page 56 of 58
11. We allow the appeals filed on the aforesaid limited ground.
12. The matters are remanded to the High Court of Uttarakhand

at Nainital.
13. The High Court is requested to rehear the appeals filed by the

respondents/accused respectively in these appeals by also giving

an opportunity to the appellant herein to make his submission in

the said appeals as well as the State to make its submission in the

matter.
14.   We once again clarify that we have not made any

observations on the merits of the matter.
15.   All contentions on both sides are left open to be advanced

before the High Court.
16.   Since the incident is of the year 1992 and the impugned order

is dated 12.09.2012 and we are remanding the matter to the High

Court, we request the High Court to dispose of the appeal as

expeditiously as possible.
Page 57 of 58
17.    Since we have set aside the judgment dated 12.09.2012

passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital in Criminal

Appeal Nos.254 of 2004, 258 of 2004, 259 of 2004, the accused

Nos.4, 3 and 2 respectively shall remain on bail. However, accused

Nos.4, 3 and 2 shall appear before the concerned Principal District

and Sessions Judge, Haridwar and execute fresh bonds for a sum

of Rs.15,000/- each with two like sureties each and subject to

other conditions imposed by the concerned Principal District and

Sessions Judge, Haridwar.
These appeals are allowed and disposed of in the aforesaid

terms.
...................................J.
                                         (B. V. NAGARATHNA)




                                        ...................................J.
                                        (K.V. VISWANATHAN)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 31, 2025.
Page 58 of 58