[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shyam Kali Dubey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 8 August, 2025
2025 INSC 947


                                                                              Non-Reportable
                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                                  Criminal Appeal No.305 of 2011
                                     Shyam Kali Dubey
                                                                                  …Appellant
                                                               Versus
                                     State of Madhya Pradesh
                                                                                …Respondent
                                                             JUDGMENT
K. VINOD CHANDRAN, J.
The appellant along with her husband was

                                     convicted for an offence under
Section 302
of the Indian

                                     Penal Code, 18601 and sentenced to life imprisonment. The

                                     allegation was that the couple beat the deceased with

                                     sticks/lathi/danda in the premises of a temple and the

                                     victim succumbed to the injuries sustained. The motive was

                                     said to be an altercation that occurred in the afternoon

                                     when the appellant attempted to graze her cattle in the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
field of the deceased. The objection of the deceased
   NARENDRA PRASAD
   Date: 2025.08.08
   18:52:02 IST
   Reason:
1
the ‘
IPC
’
Page 1 of 9
Criminal Appeal No.305 of 2011
     regarding the land having not been harvested was

     ignored, upon which the deceased pushed the appellant

     ,who fell down and then took a stick from her son and beat

     the deceased, twice on his leg. The appellant’s son and

     mother-in-law took her away from the scene of occurrence

     upon which the appellant warned the deceased that she

     will come back with her husband. The threat levelled was

     then executed, which led to the death of the victim.
2.        The case of the prosecution that the death was

     homicidal has been clearly established by way of evidence

     of PW-6, the Doctor. PW-6 spoke of 13 injuries on the body

     of the deceased and opined that the death was due to acute

     circulatory failure and asphyxia, due to regurgitation of

     blood in bronchus and trachea. Death was also opined to

     be due to the head injury caused by a hard and blunt

     object.
3.        In cross-examination, PW-6 stated that the autopsy

     was conducted at 4 in the evening of 24.03.1999 and the

     death could have been caused between 10 to 12 in the

     night i.e. the night of 23.03.1999. We specifically noticed
Page 2 of 9
Criminal Appeal No.305 of 2011
     this since the incident, as the prosecution alleges in front

     of a number of eyewitnesses, was stated to be at 7 O’clock

     in the night.
4.        PW-1, PW-2 and PW-4, neighbours and PW-7, the

     father of the deceased were eyewitness to whom the victim

     had also spoken of the attack on him by the couple. The

     statement of the deceased about the perpetrators, has the

     force of a dying declaration. However, this was not

     reckoned either by the trial court or by the High Court;

     presumably due to the improbability of such a statement

     having been made. We have to notice that the father of the

     deceased PW-7, whose house is nearby, deposed that he

     not only witnessed the attack by the accused, but he also

     heard the victim shouting that he was being beaten to

     death by the accused. The other eye-witnesses who also

     came to the scene of crime, hearing shouts, do not speak

     of any persons having been named. It is the specific case

     of PW-7, who is said to have reached the scene of

     occurrence and witnessed the attack that he along with his
Page 3 of 9
Criminal Appeal No.305 of 2011
     daughter witnessed the incident and the victim in an

     unconscious state was taken to the house, by PW-1, PW-2

     and another person and after 10 minutes, the victim

     stopped breathing. Later, at 9:00 pm, a report was lodged

     in the police post Semaria which is marked as Exhibit P-4.

     The medical evidence is categoric in so far as the death

     having occurred sometime between 10 to 12 O’clock in the

     night while the deposition of PW-7 would indicate the time

     of the death to be before 9 at night.
5.        Be that as it may, PW-1 and PW-2, neighbours of the

     deceased and also related to the deceased spoke of their

     coming to the scene of occurrence on hearing cries when

     they saw the accused running away from the scene,

     carrying sticks and the victim lying on the ground,

     bleeding. Both spoke about the dying declaration as did

     PW-4, another neighbour who come to the scene of

     occurrence after the incident.
6.        Pertinent is the fact that the victim who was bleeding

     was taken from the scene of occurrence to his house, where
Page 4 of 9
Criminal Appeal No.305 of 2011
     his body was found by the police after registration of the

     FIR. PW-10, the Investigating Officer speaks of two

     recoveries, one from the husband of the appellant; a danda

     and a blood stained shirt and the other from the appellant;

     a blood stained danda. PW-9 the witness to recovery

     declined to prove the prosecution story of a recovery from

     the husband of the appellant but affirmed the recovery of a

     danda from the appellant. Though, the danda recovered on

     the confession statement of the appellant was spoken of as

     blood stained, it was not sent for any chemical

     examination. The danda was also not confronted to PW-6,

     the Doctor to get his opinion whether the injury which led

     to the death could have been caused by the said weapon.
7.        As we noticed, the body of the deceased was found

     by the police in the courtyard of his own house, while the

     incident is said to have occurred near the temple. When

     the incident occurred at 7 O’clock, there is no explanation

     as to why the injured victim was taken to the house and not

     to the hospital. At the cost of repetition, we have to reiterate

     the Doctor’s opinion that the death took place between 10
Page 5 of 9
Criminal Appeal No.305 of 2011
     to 12 O’clock while the incident is said to have occurred at

     7 O’clock and the victim having died 10 minutes after

     being brought to the house.
8.        One of the very disturbing circumstance is the

     injury found on the body of the father and mother of the

     deceased. PW-6, the Doctor who conducted autopsy and

     spoke of the death being homicidal, also examined the

     father and mother of the deceased on the same day.

     Incised wounds were found on both their bodies which

     were opined to have been caused by a sharp-edged

     weapon like an axe or a knife. The Doctor also opined that

     the aforementioned injuries sustained by PW-7 and his

     wife could have been self-inflicted. The defence had in

     fact, spoken of a rift between the family of the deceased

     and the deceased. PW-7 in his cross-examination admitted

     that his son, the deceased had been abusing and

     threatening him, and his other children were sent to

     Rampur due to such threats. Though, PW-7 asserted that he

     had no enmity with his son, he admitted that there was a

     quarrel with regard to partition. This has to be looked at, in
Page 6 of 9
Criminal Appeal No.305 of 2011
     juxtaposition with the unexplained injuries on the body of

     the father and mother of the deceased; which the

     prosecution ought to have explained.
9.        The trial court and the High Court had relied upon a

     number of decisions which declared that merely because

     the witnesses were related, that would not make them

     interested witness. We fully agree with the proposition for

     general application.        However, in the present case, a

     defence is setup of an enmity between the victim and his

     family which has been spoken of by the father of the victim.

     Admittedly, there were unexplained injuries on the

     parents of the victim which were also caused by a cutting

     weapon. Coupled with this is the fact that the body of the

     deceased, was found in the courtyard of his own house;

     when the scene of occurrence, as per the prosecution, was

     elsewhere. There is also no clarity as to the time when the

     death was occasioned, so as to garner support from the

     medical evidence.
10.       The very same eyewitnesses had spoken of a scuffle

     between the appellant and the deceased in the evening. It
Page 7 of 9
Criminal Appeal No.305 of 2011
     was also alleged that the said witnesses had heard the

     appellant threatening to bring her husband to settle

     scores. Admittedly all these witnesses are related and are

     residing in the same neighbourhood and their presence

     cannot at all be doubted. However, the fact that the body

     was found in a different place from the scene of

     occurrence; at the house of the deceased, the unexplained

     injuries on the body of the father and mother of the

     deceased, the admitted dispute on partition in the family of

     the deceased and the lack of clarity on the exact time of

     death creates a reasonable doubt. The eye-witness

     testimony of a frontal assault is only of PW-7, who did not

     have a very good relationship with the deceased, his son.

     The other eyewitnesses converged on the scene of

     occurrence, hearing cries and spoke of having seen the

     accused fleeing from the site with sticks in their hands.

     None other than PW-7, witnessed the alleged attack on the

     deceased victim. The dying declaration was not even

     noticed by the trial court or by the High Court and we also

     find it to be improbable.
Page 8 of 9
Criminal Appeal No.305 of 2011
11.       In the conspectus of the above findings, we are of

     the opinion that the appellant should be given the benefit

     of doubt. The order of conviction entered into by the trial

     court and confirmed by the High Court stands set aside.

     The appellant, hence, stands acquitted and she shall be

     released forthwith, if she is not wanted in any other case,

     and if she is on bail, the bail bonds shall stand cancelled.
12.       The Appeal is allowed.
13.       Pending application, if any, shall stand disposed of.
………….……………………. J.
(K. VINOD CHANDRAN)



                                     ………….……………………. J.
(N. V. ANJARIA)
     NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 08, 2025.
Page 9 of 9
Criminal Appeal No.305 of 2011