[Cites
53
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
D.P.C.C vs Lodhi Property Co. Ltd.Etc on 4 August, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 923                                                                                        REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 757-760 OF 2013
             DELHI POLLUTION CONTROL COMMITTEE                                                    ...APPELLANT(S)
                                                              VERSUS

             LODHI PROPERTY CO. LTD. ETC.                                                     …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                                 WITH
                              CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 1977-2011 OF 2013

                                                      JUDGMENT
Contents
1. Introduction ............................................................................................ 2
2. Facts....................................................................................................... 3
3. Single Judge’s Judgement and Orders ..................................................... 4
4. Impugned Order of the Division Bench .................................................... 6
5. Submissions ........................................................................................... 8
6. Issue ..................................................................................................... 11
7. Existing Legal Regime for Pollution Control in India .............................. 12
8. Insertion of Sections 33A & 31A in Water and Air Acts .......................... 14
9. Interpretation of and for Environmental Institutions.............................. 18
10. Duty to Restitute v. Power to Punish and Penalise ............................... 20
11. Principles ............................................................................................ 26

                  A. Board’s Responsibility to Choose Appropriate Course of Action ............. 32
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
KAPIL TANDON
Date: 2025.08.04
19:14:07 IST
Reason:        B. Powers Must Be Guided by Transparency and Non-Arbitrariness ......... 33
1
1. Introduction.
1.     The Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC)1 is in appeal

against the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court

holding that it is not empowered to levy compensatory damages in

exercise of powers under
Section 33A
of the Water (Prevention and

Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Section 31A of the Air

(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 19812 on the ground that

such an action amounts to imposition of penalty provided for in

Chapters VII and VI of the respective Acts, and as such, procedure

contemplated thereunder will be the only method for imposing and

collecting compensatory damage.
2.     Having       considered         the    principles        that     govern      Indian

environmental laws, we have held that the environmental

regulators, the Pollution Control Boards exercising powers under

the Water and Air Acts, can impose and collect restitutionary or

compensatory damages in the form of fixed sum of monies or

require furnishing of bank guarantees as an ex-ante measure to

prevent potential environmental damage. These powers are


1 DPCC is a regulatory body in the National Capital Territory of Delhi, established as a ‘State

Board’. These Boards are constituted under
section 4
of the Water Act and under
section 4
or
section 5
of the Air Act, and exercise powers granted under
section 33A
of the Water Act
and
section 31A
of the Air Act. Our interpretation of
section 33A
and 31A herein will apply to
any such body established under said Acts.
2 Hereinafter referred to as the
Water Act and Air Act
respectively.
2
incidental and ancillary to the empowerment under Sections 33A

and 31A of the Water and Air Acts. At the same time, we have

directed that the powers must be exercised as per procedure laid

down    by   subordinate    legislation   incorporating   necessary

principles of natural justice, transparency and certainty.
2. Facts.
3.   It is the case of the Delhi Pollution Control Committee that

pursuant to the directions of the Ministry of Environment, Forest

and Climate Change (MoEFCC) to take appropriate action against

certain entities operating in violation of the environmental norms,

show cause notices were issued for violation of
Section 25
of the

Water Act and
Sections 21
and
22
of the Air Act. These entities

were either residential complexes, commercial complexes or

shopping malls. The show cause notices were issued on the ground

that they proceeded with construction and in fact, were operating

without obtaining the mandatory “consent to establish” and

“consent to operate” under
Section 25
of the Water Act and
Section

21
of the Air Act. The show cause notices were challenged by way

of 38 writ petitions before the Delhi High Court. The challenge

culminated in the judgement of a single judge dated 30.09.2010 in
3
the case of Splendor Landbase Ltd. v. DPCC 3. The learned single

judge considered the question as to whether a State Board can levy

environmental damages in the form of fixed sums of money or

require an entity to furnish a bank guarantee as a condition for

grant of consent under
Section 33A
of Water Act and/or
Section

31A
of Air Act. Similar writ petitions were considered and decided

by another single judge bench in Bharti Realty Ltd. v. DPCC and

Anush Finlease and Construction v. DPCC on 20.07.2011 and

15.09.2011 and were disposed of in terms of the decision in

Splendor Landbase Ltd. v. DPCC. The reasoning adopted in the

judgement and orders passed by the Single Judges are as follows.
3. Single Judge’s Judgement and Orders.
4.     In Splendor Landbase Ltd. v. DPCC 4, the ld. single judge by

his judgement dated 30.09.2010 dealt with two major issues –

firstly, whether proprietors of properties over 20,000 square

meters are required to obtain consent to establish and consent to

operate under
Water Act and Air Act
independently, despite

obtaining EIA Clearance from the Ministry; and secondly, whether

Boards can levy penalties, fines, environmental damages in form



3 2012 (195) DLT 177.
4 Hereinafter referred to as Splendor.
4
of fixed sums of monies or call for bank guaranties as a condition

to grant consent under Water and Air Acts? While the first question

was answered in the affirmative, the second was answered in the

negative.
4.1   It was held that the power to levy penalty is in the nature of

a penal power and as such a penalty cannot be imposed without

there being an enabling statutory power. For this reason, the single

judge held that Board has no power to levy penalty or damage,

even on the basis of the general powers under Sections 31A or 33A

of the Acts. The learned Judge criticized the monetary demand as

a pre-condition for grant of consent under the Acts on the ground

that it has no statutory backing.
4.2   In the other batch of cases i.e. in Bharti Realty Ltd. v. DPCC

and Anush Finlease and Construction Ltd. v. DPCC, decided on

12.07.2011 and 15.09.2011, the learned Single Judge was

constrained to enquire into the matter in detail as writ appeals

against the judgement in Splendor were already pending before a

Division Bench. Therefore, the Single Judge allowed the writ

petitions following the decision in Splendor and holding that the

Board has no power to impose and collect compensatory damages.

In these cases, the learned Judge also directed refund of the
5
amounts collected. However, no interest was granted to the

respondents as they chose to comply with the demand instead of

challenging the same at the relevant point in time.
4. Impugned Order of the Division Bench.
5.   The decisions of the single judges were challenged by the

appellant before the Division Bench of the High Court. By the

judgement impugned before us, the Division Bench upheld the

findings of the Single Judge in Splendor that the power to issue

directions under
Sections 33A
and 31A under the two Acts does

not confer the power to levy ‘penalty’. The High Court further

observed that under Chapter VII and Chapter VI of the Water and

Air Acts penalties can be levied only by courts and that too after

taking cognizance of offences specified under the two Acts.

Provided that the procedure so prescribed under the statute has

to be followed mandatorily, the Division Bench held that the

appellant would not be entitled to impose compensation or direct

deposit of bank guarantees. The relevant portion of the Division

Bench of the High Court is as follows –

        “37. We concur with the reasoning of the learned Single Judge
        in paras 58 to 64 of the impugned decision and thus do not
        elaborate any further, but would additionally highlight that,
        the power to issue directions under
Section 33A
of the Water
        Act and the power to issue directions under Section 31A of the
6
Air Act
, on their plain language, does not confer the power to
levy any penalty. We would further highlight that under
Chapter VII of the Water Act
and under
Chapter VI of the Air
Act
penalties and procedure to levy the same have been set
out. A perusal of the provisions under the
Water Act
would
reveal that penalties can be levied as per procedure prescribed
and only Courts can take cognizance of offences under the Act
and levy penalties, whether by way of imprisonment or fine.
Similar is the position under the
Air Act
. The legislature having
enacted specific provisions for levy of penalties and
procedures to be followed has specifically made the offences
cognizable by Courts and the power to levy penalties under
both Acts has been vested in the Courts. The role of the
Pollution Control Boards is to initiate proceedings before the
Court of Competent jurisdiction and no more.
40. The language of Sub-
Section 5
of
Section 25
of the Water
Act makes it plain clear that the only solution to a situation of
a building being constructed to establish an industry,
operation or process without obtaining prior consent of the
State Pollution Control Board is the power of the Board to serve
upon the person concerned a notice imposing such conditions
as might have been imposed on an application, seeking prior
consent and we find that the learned Single Judge has
correctly so opined and has rightly issued the direction that
the only way out, pertaining to the
Water Act
is to permit DPCC
to inspect the shopping malls and the shopping commercial
complexes and if it is found that pertaining to discharge of
sewage from these buildings any steps are required to prevent
water pollution DPCC would be authorized to issue notices
requiring the owner of the building to take steps in terms of the
notice issued. Pertaining to the Air Act notwithstanding there
being no similar provision, but the concept of a post decisional
hearing may be made applicable with the modification that no
hearing would be required inasmuch as there is no decision,
but DPCC should be empowered to inspect the shopping malls
and the shopping, commercial complexes and pertaining to air
pollution, if the owners of the buildings do not take corrective
action, DPCC would always have the power to file criminal
complaints before the Courts of Competent Jurisdiction, which
Courts would alone have the power to impose fine and
additionally impose sentence of imprisonment upon the
offending persons.
42. In a few cases, we find that since DPCC was not permitting
the buildings to be occupied, under protest, the owners paid
the penalty to DPCC and have immediately approached the
Court seeking refund and the same has been ordered for the
reason neither under the
Water Act
nor under the
Air Act
there
exists any power in DPCC to levy penalty or impose conditions
7
of furnishing bank guarantee. The decision of the learned
           Single Judge is correct in directing the bank guarantees to be
           discharged and penalties levied to be refunded for the reason
           the said act of DPCC is ultra-vires its power under the two
           statutes and the levy of penalty is without any authority of
           law.
In the decision reported as 1997 [5]
SCC 535 Mafatlal
           Industries Ltd. & Ors. Vs UOI & Ors.
, under writ jurisdiction
           refund can be directed where the levy is without jurisdiction
           and the same would include a penalty levied without any
           jurisdiction. In the instant case the penalty levied is
           unconstitutional being not sanctioned by any power vested in
           DPCC either under the
Water Act
or the
Air Act
. The impugned
           decisions where penalty levied has been directed to be
           refunded are upheld.”
5. Submissions.
6.   Mr. Pradeep Mishra appearing on behalf of the appellant

DPCC submitted that the High Court erred in holding that the

State Boards are not empowered to impose environmental

damages under Sections 33A and 31A of Water and Air Acts. He

has argued that the application of the principle of Polluter Pays is

distinct from the requirement of authority of law to impose tax or

penalty.
7.   On behalf of the respondents, Mr. Ninad Laud has submitted

that as per broad scheme of the Acts and also the statement of

objects and reasons, State Boards are empowered to act on their

own while enforcing
Sections 25
and
26
and also while issuing

directions under
Sections 33A
and 31A. However, when faced with

non-compliances, recourse to judicial process is contemplated
8
under Sections 49 and 43 of Water and Air Acts respectively.

Further, neither Rule 34 of Water (Prevention & Control of

Pollution) Rules 1975 nor Rule 20A of Air (Prevention & Control of

Pollution) Rules 1983, while providing a mechanism to administer
Section 33A
and Section 31A, contemplate monetary penalties.

Countering the submission of Mr. Pradeep Misra on the principle

of Polluter Pays to encourage reading the power to impose and

collect environmental damages under
Sections 33A
and 31A of the

respective      Acts,    he       would   submit   such   an   approach   is

impermissible as the said power is specifically and separately

provided under Chapters VII and VI therein. Relying on the

decision of this Court in MC Mehta v. Kamal Nath5, he would

submit, after considering the scheme of penal provisions under

Water Act, Air Act and Environment (Protection) Act 1986, the

Supreme Court held that penalties under the Acts befall a person

only after finding of guilt upon trial by a court of law. Referring to

the legitimacy of State Board’s action demanding bank guarantees

to secure compliance with conditions, he would submit that no

penalty, other than that contemplated in the statute or statutory




5 (2000) 6 SCC 213, para 13-17.
9
scheme can be imposed. 6 We have also heard Mr. Pinaki Misra,

Senior Advocate and other learned counsel and they have strongly

supported the decision of the Division Bench.
7.1    Counsel for M/s Laxmi Buildtech Pvt Ltd 7 has submitted that

they have neither violated nor acted in breach of any provision of

environmental laws and therefore they cannot be subjected to any

penalty or criminal prosecution. Counsel for other respondents

further submitted that they have deemed consent as well as EIA

clearance from the Ministry. They have also submitted that

imposition and collection of damages by the State Boards is

outside the powers vested in them under the Water and Air Acts.

7.2    Counsel for M/s Bharti Realty Ltd has submitted that it is a

settled principle of law that if a statute provides for a thing to be

done in a particular manner, then it has to be done in that manner

and no other. 8 This principle, according to the learned counsel,

squarely applies to the present case as Chapter VII and Chapter VI

of the Water and Air Acts have a prescribed procedure to be

followed before imposing penalties. It is further argued that the



6
State of MP v. Centre
for Environment Protection Research & Development, (2020) 9 SCC
781.
7 Civil Appeal No. 2001 of 2013.
8
Chandra Kishore Jha v. Mahavir Prasad & Ors
, (1999) 8 SCC 266.
10
role of any State Board is in the nature of a complainant and not

that of an adjudicatory authority. In this vein, it is submitted that

any other interpretation would render the chapter on ‘Penalties

and Procedures’ nugatory and otiose. It is also submitted that the

power to give directions under Sections 33A and 31A of the Water

and Air Acts is “subject to provisions of this Act”. Written

submissions also refer to the recent amendments to the Water and

Air Acts, empowering an Adjudicating Officer, not below the rank

of Joint Secretary of Government of India or Secretary to State

Government, for imposing penalties for contravention of provisions

of the Acts.
6. Issue.
8.   The core question in these appeals is - whether the regulatory

boards can, in exercise of powers under
Section 33A
of the Water

Act and
Section 31A
of the Air Act, impose and collect as

restitutionary and compensatory damages fixed sums of monies or

require furnishing bank guarantees as an ex-ante measure

towards potential environmental damage?
11
7. Existing Legal Regime for Pollution Control in India.
9.
Under the Water Act and the Air Act
, the State Boards have

a broad statutory mandate to prevent, control and abate water

pollution and air pollution. Under
Section 17
of the Water Act, the

State Boards are to shoulder enormous responsibilities and their

functions are reproduced herein for ready reference -
“
Section 17
. Functions of State Board – (1) Subject to the
        provisions of this Act, the functions of a State Board shall be—
(a) to plan a comprehensive programme for the prevention,
        control or abatement of pollution of streams and wells in the
        State and to secure the execution thereof;
(b) to advise the State Government on any matter concerning
        the prevention, control or abatement of water pollution;
(c) to collect and disseminate information relating to water
        pollution and the prevention, control or abatement thereof;
(d) to encourage, conduct and participate in investigations and
        research relating to problems of water pollution and
        prevention, control or abatement of water pollution;
(e) to collaborate with the Central Board in organising the
        training of persons engaged or to be engaged in programmes
        relating to prevention, control or abatement of water pollution
        and to organise mass education programmes relating thereto;
(f) to inspect sewage or trade effluents, works and plants for
        the treatment of sewage and trade effluents and to review
        plans, specifications or other data relating to plants set up for
        the treatment of water, works for the purification thereof and
        the system for the disposal of sewage or trade effluents or in
        connection with the grant of any consent as required by this
        Act;
(g) to lay down, modify or annul effluent standards for the
        sewage and trade effluents and for the quality of receiving
        waters (not being water in an inter-State stream) resulting
        from the discharge of effluents and to classify waters of the
        State;
(h) to evolve economical and reliable methods of treatment of
        sewage and trade effluents, having regard to the peculiar
        conditions of soils, climate and water resources of different
        regions and more especially the prevailing flow characteristics
        of water in streams and wells which render it impossible to
        attain even the minimum degree of dilution;
12
(i) to evolve methods of utilisation of sewage and suitable trade
            effluents in agriculture;
(j) to evolve efficient methods of disposal of sewage and trade
            effluents on land, as are necessary on account of the
            predominant conditions of scant stream flows that do not
            provide for major part of the year the minimum degree of
            dilution;
(k) to lay down standards of treatment of sewage and trade
            effluents to be discharged into any particular stream taking
            into account the minimum fair weather dilution available in
            that stream and the tolerance limits of pollution permissible in
            the water of the stream, after the discharge of such effluents;
(l) to make, vary or revoke any order—
(i) for the prevention, control or abatement of discharges of
            waste into streams or wells;
(ii) requiring any person concerned to construct new systems
            for the disposal of sewage and trade effluents or to modify,
            alter or extend any such existing system or adopt such
            remedial measures as are necessary to prevent, control or
            abate water pollution;
(m) to lay down effluent standards to be complied with by
            persons while causing discharge of sewage or sullage or both
            and to lay down, modify or annul effluent standards for the
            sewage and trade effluents;
(n) to advise the State Government with respect to the location
            of any industry the carrying on of which is likely to pollute a
            stream or well;
(o) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed or as
            may, from time to time, be entrusted to it by the Central Board
            or the State Government.
(2) The Board may establish or recognize a laboratory or
            laboratories to enable the Board to perform its functions under
            this section efficiently, including the analysis of samples of
            water from any stream or well or of samples of any sewage or
            trade effluents.”
10.
Section 17
of the Air Act9, substantially similar to its

equivalent under the
Water Act
, also indicates the crucial


9
Section 17
of Air Act states –
17. Functions of State Boards.— (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and without
prejudice to the performance of its functions, if any, under the
Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Act, 1974
, the functions of a State Board shall be—
(a) to plan a comprehensive programme for the prevention, control or abatement of air
        pollution and to secure the execution thereof;
(b) to advise the State Government on any matter concerning the prevention, control or
        abatement relating to air pollution;
13
responsibilities of the State Boards in discharge of their mandate.

Chapter V of the Water Act and Chapter IV of the Air Act include

provisions that prescribe the regulatory powers of the State

Boards. These powers include the power to issue, modify or

withdraw consent10, power to obtain information11, power of entry

and inspection 12 and power to take samples 13.
8. Insertion of
Sections 33A
& 31A in Water and Air Acts.
11. In 1988, both Acts were amended. Notably, through

amendments the State Boards were further empowered to give
(c) to collect and disseminate information relating to air pollution;
(d) to collaborate with the Central Board in organising the training of persons engaged
        or to be engaged in programmes relating to prevention, control or abatement of air
        pollution and to organise a mass-education programme relating thereto;
(e) to inspect, at all reasonable times, any control equipment, industrial plant or
        manufacturing process and to give, by order, such directions to such persons as it may
        consider necessary to take steps for the prevention, control or abatement of air pollution;
(f) to inspect air pollution control areas at such intervals as it may think necessary,
        assess the quality of air therein and take steps for the prevention, control or abatement
        of air pollution in such areas;
(g) to lay down, in consultation with the Central Board and having regard to the
        standards for the quality of air
laid down by
the Central Board, standards for emission
        of air pollutants into the atmosphere from industrial plants and automobiles or for the
        discharge of any air pollutant into the atmosphere from any other source whatsoever
        not being a ship or an aircraft: Provided that different standards for emission may be
        laid down under this clause for different industrial plants having regard to the quantity
        and composition of emission of air pollutants into the atmosphere from such industrial
        plants;
(h) to advise the State Government with respect to the suitability of any premises or
        location for carrying on any industry which is likely to cause air pollution;
(i) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed or as may, from time to time,
        be entrusted to it by the Central Board or the State Government;
(j) to do such other things and to perform such other acts as it may think necessary for
        the proper discharge of its functions and generally for the purpose of carrying into effect
        the purposes of this Act.
(2) A State Board may establish or recognise a laboratory or laboratories to enable the State
Board to perform its functions under this section efficiently.
10
Sections 25
,
27
of Water Act and
Section 21
of Air Act
11
Section 20
of Water Act and
Section 25
of Air Act
12
Section 23
of Water Act and
Section 24
of Air Act
13
Section 21
of Water Act and
Section 26
of Air Act
14
directions under
Section 33A
of the Water Act and
Section 31A
14
of the Air Act. These two provisions are identically worded.
Section

33A
of the Water Act is as under;
“
Section 33A
. Power to give directions.—Notwithstanding
            anything contained in any other law, but subject to the
            provisions of this Act, and to any directions that the Central
            Government may give in this behalf, a Board may, in the
            exercise of its powers and performance of its functions under
            this Act, issue any directions in writing to any person, officer
            or authority, and such person, officer or authority shall be
            bound to comply with such directions.
Explanation.—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby
            declared that the power to issue directions under this section
            includes the power to direct—
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry,
            operation or process; or
(b) the stoppage or regulation of supply of electricity, water or
            any other service.”
12. The directions contemplated under Sections 33A and 31A of

the Water and Air Acts must be in furtherance of the powers and

functions of the Boards and they must be in writing. These

provisions, declares that the power to issue directions will include

the power to direct closure, prohibition or regulation of any



14
Section 31A
of the Air Act states –

31A. Power to give directions.—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, but
subject to the provisions of this Act, and to any directions that the Central Government may
give in this behalf, a Board may, in the exercise of its powers and performance of its functions
under this Act, issue any directions in writing to any person, officer or authority, and such
person, officer or authority shall be bound to comply with such directions.
Explanation.—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to issue
directions under this section includes the power to direct—
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, operation or process; or
(b) the stoppage or regulation of supply of electricity, water or any other service.
15
industry, operation or process. Further, this power extends to

directing the stoppage or regulation of supply of electricity, water

or any other service. The power to give directions has been worded

broadly, and it allows the Boards significant flexibility in deciding

the nature of directions. The legislative intention of granting these

powers through the 1988 amendment can be inferred from the

Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Water Act, which reads

as follows –

        “2.
The Water Act
is implemented by the Central and State
        Governments and the Central and State Pollution Control
        Boards. Over the past few years, the implementing agencies
        have experienced some more administrative and practical
        difficulties in effectively implementing the provisions of the Act.
        The ways and means to remove these difficulties have been
        thoroughly examined in consultation with the implementing
        agencies. Taking into account the views expressed, it is
        proposed to amend certain provisions of the Act in order to
        remove such difficulties….
3. The Bill, inter alia, seeks to make the following amendments
        in the Act, namely:—
        ….
(iv) in order to effectively prevent water pollution, the penal
        provisions of the Act are proposed to be made stricter and
        bring them at par with the punishments prescribed in the
Air
        (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981
as amended by
        Act 47 of 1987;
….
(vi) it is proposed to empower the Boards to give directions to
        any person, officer or authority including the power to direct
        closure or regulation of offending industry, operation or
        process or stoppage or regulation of supply of services such as
        water and electricity;”
16
13. Similar objective is expressed for the amendment introduced

in the
Air Act
. 15
14. An appeal against directions issued under
Section 33A
of the

Water Act by the State Board can be filed before the National Green

Tribunal under
Section 33B
, introduced in 201016. Unlike the

Water Act there is no specific Appeal provision against directions

issued under
Section 31A
of the Air Act. This asymmetry must be

addressed legislatively.
15. Offences and penalties under the two Acts, and the related

procedures, are covered in Chapter VII of the Water Act and

Chapter VI of the Air Act. These chapters have undergone

significant        and       substantial             amendments.           Prior       to     the

amendments, the two Acts stipulated penalties in the form of


15 Statement of Objects and Reasons for
Air Act
states, “2.
The Air Act
is implemented by the

Central and State Governments and the Central and State Boards. Over the past few years,
the implementing agencies have experienced some administrative and practical difficulties in
effectively implementing the provisions of this Act and have brought these to the notice of
Government. The ways and means to remove these difficulties have been thoroughly
examined in consultation with the concerned Central Government departments, the State
Governments and the Central and State Boards. Taking into account the views expressed, the
Government have decided to make certain amendments to the Act in order to remove such
difficulties. 3. The Bill, inter alia, seeks to make the following amendments in the Act,
namely—
….
iv) In order to prevent effectively air pollution, the punishments provided in the Act are proposed
to be made stricter.
….
(vii) It is proposed to empower the Boards to give directions to any person, officer or authority
including the power to direct closure or regulation of offending establishments or stoppage or
regulation of supply of services such as, water and electricity. (viii) It is proposed to empower
the Boards to approach courts to obtain orders restraining any person from causing air
pollution.”
16 Act 19 of 2010.
17
imprisonment, monetary fine or both for offences under the

statute. Courts could only take cognizance of an offence if a

complaint was filed by a Board or any officer authorized by it, or

by any person who had given notice of the alleged offence and of

his intention to make a complaint. No court inferior to that of a

Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial magistrate of the first class

can try an offence punishable under the two Acts. Be that as it

may, for the present purpose we have to examine and interpret

Sections 33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts.
9. Interpretation of and for Environmental Institutions.
16. Our constitutionalism bears the hallmark of an expansive

interpretation of fundamental rights. But such creative expansion

is only a job half done if the depth of the remedies, consequent

upon infringement, remain shallow. In other words, remedial

jurisprudence must keep pace with expanding rights and

regulatory challenges. It is not sufficient that courts adopt

injunctory, mandatory and compensatory remedies, but our

regulators also must be empowered in that regard. However, the

legislative grammar must be elastic for us to infuse the regulators

with power to fashion different remedies. This infusion must also

be tampered with the necessary guidelines and parameters of
18
exercise of remedial powers, failing which such infusion would aid

arbitrary use. Our firm view is that remedial powers or

restitutionary directives are a necessary concomitant of both the

fundamental rights of citizens who suffer environmental wrongs

and an equal concomitant of the duties of a statutory regulator,

which are informed by Part IV A of the constitution. To that extent,

the functions and powers of a regulator must be inspired by the

obligation in Part IV A and
Article 48
A. The State’s ‘endeavour to

protect and improve the environment’ will be partial, if it does not

encompass a duty to restitute.
17. Of all the duties imposed under
Article 51A
, the obligation to

conserve and protect water and air, is perhaps the most

significant, amidst our climate change crisis.
The Water Act and

the Air Act
institutionalised all efforts and actions that need to be

taken to protect air that we breathe and water that we consume by

creating the Pollution Control Boards. These Boards functioning

as our environment regulators are expected to act with institutional

foresight by evolving necessary policy perspectives and action

plans. Working with perpetual seal and succession, they are to

develop and retain institutional memory so that they can act on the

basis of the experience, data and information that they would have
19
gathered and processed. Institutional expertise is critical, and these

bodies are to employ human resource which have domain expertise

and talent. These bodies are intended to maintain institutional

integrity by taking independent and objective decisions without

governmental or industrial control. These values flow naturally if

there is institutional transparency and accountability. It is in this

perspective that we need to interpret
Section 33A
of the Water Act

and 31
A of the Air Act
.
10. Duty to Restitute v. Power to Punish and Penalise.
18. There is a distinction between an action for environmental

damages for restitution or remediation and imposition of penalties

or fines levied at the culmination of a punitive action. This Court

in M.C. Mehta (supra), while referring to the provisions of the Water

Act, Air Act and the Environment Protection Act observed –

        “17. All the three Acts, referred to above, also contemplate the
        taking of the cognizance of the offences by the court. Thus, a
        person guilty of contravention of provisions of any of the three
        Acts which constitutes an offence has to be prosecuted for
        such offence and in case the offence is found proved then
        alone can he be punished with imprisonment and fine or both.
        The sine qua non for punishment of imprisonment and fine is
        a fair trial in a competent court. The punishment of
        imprisonment or fine can be imposed only after the person is
        found guilty.”


        “24. Pollution is a civil wrong. By its very nature, it is a tort
        committed against the community as a whole. A person,
        therefore, who is guilty of causing pollution has to pay
20
damages (compensation) for restoration of the environment
           and ecology. He has also to pay damages to those who have
           suffered loss on account of the act of the offender.…”
19. Therefore, Indian law distinguishes between the imposition of

a monetary penalty or fine, which constitutes punitive action

following a determination of guilt after adherence to the statutorily

prescribed procedure, and the payment of damages for restitution

or remediation as compensatory relief.
20. In this context, it is important to turn to one of the key

principles of Indian environmental law – the Polluter Pays

principle. This principle has been a part of Indian jurisprudence

since 1996.
In Indian Council for
Enviro-Legal Action v. Union of

India
17, this Court held that according to the Polluter Pays

principle the responsibility for repairing the damage is that of the

offending industry. The
Court further held
that the powers of the

Central Government to issue directions under
Section 5
read with
Section 3
of the Environment Protection Act include the power to

impose costs for remedial measures -
“60. …
Section 3
of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986
           expressly empowers the Central Government (or its delegate,
           as the case may be) to “take all such measures as it deems
           necessary or expedient for the purpose of protecting and
           improving the quality of environment…”.
Section 5
clothes the
           Central Government (or its delegate) with the power to issue

17 (1996) 3 SCC 212
21
directions for achieving the objects of the Act. Read with the
           wide definition of ‘environment’ in
Section 2(a)
,
Sections 3
and
5
clothe the Central Government with all such powers as are
           “necessary or expedient for the purpose of protecting and
           improving the quality of the environment”. The Central
           Government is empowered to take all measures and issue all
           such directions as are called for for the above purpose. In the
           present case, the said powers will include giving directions for
           the removal of sludge, for undertaking remedial measures and
           also the power to impose the cost of remedial measures on the
           offending industry and utilise the amount so recovered for
           carrying out remedial measures. This Court can certainly give
           directions to the Central Government/its delegate to take all
           such measures, if in a given case this Court finds that such
           directions are warranted. …
67. The question of liability of the respondents to defray the
           costs of remedial measures can also be looked into from
           another angle, which has now come to be accepted universally
           as a sound principle, viz., the “Polluter Pays” principle. …Thus,
           according to this principle, the responsibility for repairing the
           damage is that of the offending industry.
Sections 3
and
5
empower the Central Government to give directions and take
           measures for giving effect to this principle. In all the
           circumstances of the case, we think it appropriate that the task
           of determining the amount required for carrying out the
           remedial measures, its recovery/realisation and the task of
           undertaking the remedial measures is placed upon the Central
           Government in the light of the provisions of the
Environment
           (Protection) Act, 1986
. It is, of course, open to the Central
           Government to take the help and assistance of State
           Government, RPCB or such other agency or authority, as they
           think fit.”
                                                        (emphasis added)
21. Subsequently, the Court in
Vellore Citizens’ Welfare Forum v.

Union of India18
, has held that the liability for environmental

damage includes both a compensatory aspect and a restorative or

remedial aspect-
“12. … The “Polluter Pays Principle” as interpreted by this
           Court means that the absolute liability for harm to the

18 (1996) 5 SCC 647
22
environment extends not only to compensate the victims of
           pollution but also the cost of restoring the environmental
           degradation. Remediation of the damaged environment is part
           of the process of “Sustainable Development” and as such the
           polluter is liable to pay the cost to the individual sufferers as
           well as the cost of reversing the damaged ecology.”
                                                         (emphasis added)
22. Application of the Polluter Pays principle not only includes

payment for restoring the damaged environment, taking remedial

action to deal with the damage and compensating for the direct

harm caused, but also for avoiding pollution.
In Research

Foundation for
Science (18) v. Union of India19
, this Court held -
“29. The polluter-pays principle basically means that the
           producer of goods or other items should be responsible for the
           cost of preventing or dealing with any pollution that the
           process causes. This includes environmental cost as well as
           direct cost to the people or property, it also covers cost incurred
           in avoiding pollution and not just those related to remedying
           any damage. It will include full environmental cost and not just
           those which are immediately tangible. The principle also does
           not mean that the polluter can pollute and pay for it. The
           nature and extent of cost and the circumstances in which the
           principle will apply may differ from case to case.”
                                                          (emphasis added)
23. The
Court further held
that the observations of the Court in

in
Deepak Nitrite Ltd. v. State of Gujarat20
that “mere violation of

the law in not observing the norms would result in degradation of

environment would not be correct” were confined to the facts of that



19 (2005) 13 SCC 186.
20 (2004) 6 SCC 402
23
case. The Court clarified that the actual degradation of the

environment is not a necessary condition for the application of

polluter pays principle, as long as the offending activities have the

potential of degrading the environment -
“30…The decision also cannot be said to have laid down a
          proposition that in the absence of actual degradation of
          environment by the offending activities, the payment for repair
          on application of the polluter-pays principle cannot be ordered.
          The said case is not relevant for considering cases like the
          present one where offending activities have the potential of
          degrading the environment. In any case, in the present case,
          the point simply is about the payments to be made for the
          expenditure to be incurred for the destruction of imported
          hazardous waste and amount spent for conducting tests for
          determining whether it is such a waste or not…”
                                                        (emphasis added)
24. The distinction between a punitive action and a direction to

pay environmental damages was made by the National Green

Tribunal in State Pollution Control Board, Odisha v M/s Swastik

Ispat Pvt Ltd and Others21. The Tribunal in this case was

considering the legality of forfeiture of bank guarantees in case a

defaulting industry did not comply with the regulatory conditions

within    the    stipulated     timeframe.      The     Tribunal     expressly

considered the opinion of the High Court in the impugned

judgment before us today and held -
“45. It is evident from the above facts and the reasoning that
          there was actual levy of penalty or damages by the DPCC and

21 2014 SCC OnLine NGT 13.
24
it was in consequence of such imposition of penalty/damages
        that the Units were called upon to furnish bank guarantees for
        granting of consent. In other words, bank guarantee was
        required to be furnished in furtherance to the imposition of a
        penalty or damages
in that case
. It was not an act de hors the
        imposition of penalty and had the element of punitive action.
        In the present case, it is not a consequence of a punitive or
        penal action but is in exercise of the powers vested in the
        Board in relation to recalling the conditions of consent and
        ensuring    their   implementation      while   also   making
        compensatory provision for remedying the apprehended
        wrong to the environment. In the cases in hand, the Board has
        not imposed any penalty upon the units but has granted
        consent to them on certain conditions, none of which is
        punitive. They squarely fall within the power of the Board to
        prevent and control pollution in consonance with the scheme
        of the Acts concerned. Thus, on facts, the judgments of the
        High Court in Splendor (supra) do not have any application to
        the present case. In any case, we are of the considered view
        that asking for a bank guarantee as an interim measure for
        due performance of the conditions of the consent order being
        compensatory in nature, is not punitive.
46. We have already noticed above that there is a clear
        distinction between a penal and a compensatory provision. In
        such matters, the paramount question that would normally fall
        for determination before a court or tribunal would be whether
        the action contemplated is penal or compensatory. This issue
        shall have to be decided with reference to the facts of the case,
        the provisions of the law applicable and the intent of the
        authority concerned. Once it falls in the ‘compensatory’ field,
        then it will necessarily be beyond the purview of penalty….”
                                                     (emphasis added)
25. In Swastik Ispat, the Green Tribunal correctly interpreted

Sections 33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts. The judgment of

the High Court in Splendor had not yet been taken up or

considered by this Court at that time, the Tribunal had to

distinguish the facts of Splendor to arrive at its own conclusion. In

view of our reasoning and interpretation of Sections 33A and 31A
25
of the Water and Air Acts, we have no hesitation to hold that the

Green Tribunal is correct in its approach.
26. More recently, in T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad, In
Re v.

Union of India22
, this Court while considering the issue of illegal

construction in the Corbett Tiger Reserve drew the distinction

between action against persons violating the law and measures for

restoration of the environmental damage. The Court held -
“173. … However, the principle of restoration of damaged
           ecosystem would require the States to promote the recovery of
           threatened species. We are of the considered view that the
           States would be required to take steps for the identification
           and effective implementation of active restoration measures
           that are localised to the particular ecosystem that was
           damaged. The focus has to be on restoration of the ecosystem
           as close and similar as possible to the specific one that was
           damaged.
175. We find that, bringing the culprits to face the proceedings
           is a different matter and restoration of the damage already
           done is a different matter. We are of the considered view that
           the State cannot run away from its responsibilities to restore
           the damage done to the forest. The State, apart from
           preventing such acts in the future, should take immediate
           steps for restoration of the damage already done; undertake
           an exercise for determining the valuation of the damage done
           and recover it from the persons found responsible for causing
           such a damage.”
                                                          (emphasis added)
11. Principles.
27. Based on a review of precedents on this issue, the following

legal position emerges –


22 (2025) 2 SCC 641
26
I. There is a distinction between a direction for payment of

       restitutionary and compensatory damages as a remedial

       measure for environmental damage or as an ex-ante measure

       towards potential environmental damage on the one hand;

       and a punitive action of fine or imprisonment for violations

       under Chapters VII of the Water Act and VI of the Air Act on

       the other hand.
II. If    directions         in     furtherance          of     restitutionary          and

       compensatory measures are issued, these are not to be

       considered as punitive in nature. Punitive action can only be

       taken through the procedure prescribed in the statute for

       example under chapters VII and VI of the Water and Air Acts

       respectively.
III. Indian environmental law has assimilated 23 the principle of

         Polluter Pays and there is also a statutory incorporation of

         this principle in our laws. 24 The invocation of this principle

         is triggered in the situations25; i) when an established

         threshold        or    prescribed          requirement        is       exceeded    or



23 Indian Council for
Enviro-Legal Action
(supra n.12);
Vellore
(supra n 13).
24
Section 20
. Tribunal to apply certain principles- The Tribunal shall, while passing any

order or decision or award, apply the principles of sustainable development, the precautionary
principle and the polluter pays principle.
25 Loveleen Bhullar, ‘The Polluter Pays Principle: Scope and Limits or Judicial Decisions’; in

Shibani Ghosh (ed.), Indian Environmental Law (Orient BlackSwan 2019).
27
breached, and it does result in environmental damage, ii)

   when an established threshold or prescribed requirement is

   not exceeded or breached, nevertheless the act in question

   results in environmental damage and also iii) when a

   potential risk or a likely adverse impact to the environment

   is anticipated, irrespective of whether or not prescribed

   thresholds or requirements are exceeded or breached.

IV. Environmental regulators have a compelling duty to adopt

   and apply preventive measures irrespective of actual

   environmental damage. Ex-ante action shall be taken by

   these regulators and for this purpose a certain measure in

   exercise of powers under Sections 33A and 31A of the Water

   and Air Acts is necessary.
V. The powers of the Boards under Sections 33A and 31A of the

  Water and Air Acts are identical to that of
Section 5
of the

  Environment Protection Act. Under
Section 5
, the Central

  Government or its delegate has the power to issue directions

  to the polluting industry to pay certain amounts and utilise

  the said fund for carrying out remedial measures. The Boards

  are empowered to take similar actions under
Sections 33A
and
31A
of the Acts.
28
28.   Having   considered   the        principles   that   govern   our

environmental laws and on interpretation of Sections 33A and 31A

of the Water and Air Acts, we are of the opinion that that the

Division Bench of the High Court was not correct in restrictively

reading powers of the Boards. We are of the opinion that these

regulators in exercise of these powers can impose and collect, as

restitutionary or compensatory damages fixed sum of monies or

require furnishing bank guarantees as an ex-ante measure

towards potential or actual environmental damage.
29. There is no doubt that
Section 33A
of the Water Act and
Section 31A
of the Air Act give the State Boards powers to issue

necessary directions for environmental restoration, remediation

and compensation and for the payment of costs for the same. The

National Green Tribunal’s judgment in Swastik Ispat correctly

identified the Boards powers to issue directions for payment of

environmental damages under
Section 33A
of the Water Act and

the
Section 31A
of the Air Act. A restrictive interpretation which

fails to differentiate between environmental damages and punitive

action significantly encumbers the Boards ability to discharge its

duties.
29
30. The Board’s powers under
Section 33A
of the Water Act and
Section 31A
of the Air Act have to be read in light of the legal

position on the application of Polluter Pays principle as formulated

and explained. This means that State Board cannot impose

environmental damages in case of every contravention or offence

under the
Water Act and Air Act
. It is only when the State Board

has made a determination that some form of environmental

damage or harm has been caused by the erring entity, or the same

is so imminent, that the State Board must initiate action under
Section 33A
of the Water Act and
Section 31A
of the Air Act.
31. At this stage, we must also take note of the recent 2024

amendments26 to the Water and Air Acts. Two major changes

relevant for our consideration are that of decriminalisation27 and

introduction of the office of “Adjudicatory Officer”28. Even after the


26 The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment Act, 2024, Jan Vishwas

(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023.
27
Section 41
in the erstwhile
Water Act
has been substituted by
sections 41
and 41A, whereby
contravention of directions issued under
section 20
(for obtaining information), 32 (for
imposing emergency measures in case of pollution), 33 (for restraining apprehended
pollution) or 33A would now be punishable by penalty alone; thereby replacing the earlier
penal framework comprising of imprisonment and fine. Similar amendments done for
section
42
(penalty for certain acts),
section 43
for contravention of directions under
section 24
(prohibiting use of stream or well),
section 44
(prohibiting alteration of meter, etc.), and
section 45A (residuary)
. Correspondingly, under the
Air Act
criminal liability under
section
37
for contravention of directions under
section 22
(restricting emission beyond standards)
or section 31A has been restricted to fine alone. Similar amendments have been brought in
section 38
and
39 (residuary)
. Punishment for imprisonment has been retained only for
violation of
section 21
and failure to pay penalty or additional penalty under section 39D.
28
In the Water Act
, section 45B puts in place a new office by the title of ‘Adjudicating Officer’,
who would be an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Centre or Secretary to
the State, appointed by the Central Government. Adjudicating Officer is empowered to inquire
30
amendments, in our opinion, there is no conflict between the

powers of the State Boards to direct payment of environmental

damages under Sections 33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts

and the powers of the Adjudicating Officer to impose penalties

under Chapter VII of the Water Act and Chapter VI of the Air Act.

The decriminalization of offences under these Chapters has not

removed the punitive nature of actions that can be taken under

them. There remains a clear distinction between the nature of

directions that the State Boards can issue under Sections 33A and

31A of the Water and Air Acts for payment of environmental

damage and the determination by Adjudicating Officers. The

former is compensatory in nature and will be resorted to when

remedial measures are being undertaken to restore the degraded

environment or pollution caused. The latter is a penalty for an

offence under the law and is imposed with the objective of

punishing the offender. This penalty collected here will not be

specifically directed towards the restoration of the degraded

environment (for instance, to decontaminate a pond that has been



and impose penalties under
sections 41
, 41A,
42
,
43
,
44
,
45A
and
48
. Appeal against such
imposition lies before the National Green Tribunal as per section 45C. The Adjudicating
Officer is further empowered to file a complaint for cognizance under
section 49
.
Corresponding additions have been made under the
Air Act
as well under sections 39A
(Adjudicating Officer), 39B (Appeal to NGT) and 43 (Cognizance of offences).
31
polluted due to discharge of untreated sewage). It will be deposited

in the Environmental Protection Fund that is to be set up under
Section 16
of the Environment (Protection) Act. According to
Section 16(3)
of the EP Act, the Fund shall be used for, (a) the

promotion of awareness, education and research for the protection

of environment; (b) the expenses for achieving the objects and for

purposes of the
Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,

1981
(14 of 1981) and under this Act; and (c) such other purposes,

as may be prescribed.
A. Board’s Responsibility to Choose Appropriate Course of
Action.
32. Given their broad statutory mandate and the significant duty

towards public health and environmental protection the Boards

must have the power and distinction to decide the appropriate

action against a polluting entity. It is essential that the Boards

function effectively and efficiently by adopting such measures as

is necessary in a given situation. The Boards can decide whether

a polluting entity needs to be punished by imposition of penalty or

if   the   situation   demands   immediate    restoration   of   the

environmental damage by the polluter or both.
32
B. Powers Must Be Guided by Transparency and Non-
Arbitrariness.
33. While we hold that the Boards have the power to direct the

payment of environmental damages, we make it clear that this

power must always be guided by two overarching principles. First,

that the power cannot be exercised in an arbitrary manner; and

second, the process of exercising this power must be infused with

transparency.
34. This Court has underscored the importance of strong

institutional frameworks in environmental governance that are

effective, accountable and transparent.
In
Bengaluru Development

Authority v. Sudhakar Hegde29
, this Court held -
“95. The protection of the environment is premised not only on
           the active role of courts, but also on robust institutional
           frameworks within which every stakeholder complies with its
           duty to ensure sustainable development. A framework of
           environmental governance committed to the rule of law
           requires a regime which has effective, accountable and
           transparent institutions. Equally important is responsive,
           inclusive, participatory and representative decision-making.
           Environmental governance is founded on the rule of law and
           emerges from the values of our Constitution. Where the health
           of the environment is key to preserving the right to life as a
           constitutionally recognised value under
Article 21
of the
           Constitution, proper structures for environmental decision-
           making find expression in the guarantee against arbitrary
           action and the affirmative duty of fair treatment under
Article
           14
of the Constitution. Sustainable development is premised
           not merely on the redressal of the failure of democratic
           institutions in the protection of the environment, but ensuring
           that such failures do not take place.”
                                                         (emphasis added)

29 (2020) 15 SCC 63
33
35. To ensure that the Boards impose restitutionary and the

compensatory environmental damages in a fair transparent, non-

arbitrary      manner,         with     procedural         certainty,        necessary

subordinate legislation in the form of rules and regulations must

be notified. This shall include methods by which environmental

damage is determined, and the consequent quantum of damages

are assessed. They may also incorporate certain basic principles of

natural justice for fairness in action. At present environmental

damages are being levied by the Boards on the basis of certain

guidelines issued by the Central Pollution Control Board in its

document “General framework for imposing environmental damage

compensation” issue in December, 2022. These guidelines seem to

have been issued pursuant to the directions of the NGT.30 It is

important that these guidelines are reviewed thoroughly and

issued in the form of Rules and Regulations. This will enable

declaration of a law that applies and ensures its recognition and

easy implementation.
36. These Rules must also create enabling framework for citizens

to    file   complaints         about      environmental          damage.       Public

participation in environmental protection has assumed great


30 Pursuant to the NGT in its order in O.A. No. 606/2018 dated 24.04.2019.
34
importance with climate change threatening to drastically disrupt

our way of living. Boards, being the first line of defence against

polluting activities, must provide easy accessibility and encourage

public participation in their function and decision making.
37.   While we have reversed the decision of the High Court on the

principle of law and hold that the environmental regulators, the

Pollution Control Boards, can impose and collect as restitutionary

and compensatory damages fixed sums of monies or require

furnishing bank guarantees as an ex-ante measure towards

potential environmental damage in exercise of powers under

Sections 33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts, we issue the

following consequential directions.
38. In view of the fact that the show cause notices in these cases

relate to the year 2006 and those show cause notices were set-

aside by the Single as well as by the Division Benches of the High

Court, we are of the opinion that no purpose will be served in

reviving the said show cause notices at this point of time. In the

facts and circumstances of the case while we allow the appeal on

the principle of law there shall not be any consequential direction

for reviving the show cause notices which have been set-aside

concurrently by the Single as well as by the Division Bench of the
35
High Court. If certain amounts have been collected on the basis of

the said show cause notices they shall be returned by DPCC within

a period of six weeks from the date of this order, and if amounts

are not deposited or collected the appellant, DPCC shall not take

any further action.
39. For the reasons stated above:
(a) we allow these appeals and set aside the judgement and order

dated 23.01.2012, passed by the Division Bench of the High Court

of Delhi to the extent of declaration of law but direct that the show

cause notices that have been set aside by the High Court shall not

be revived.
(b) we direct that the Pollution Control Boards can impose and

collect as restitutionary and compensatory damages fixed sums of

monies or require furnishing bank guarantees as an ex-ante

measure towards potential environmental damage in exercise of

powers under Sections 33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts.
(c) it is further directed that the power to impose or collect

restitutionary or compensatory damages or the requirement to

furnish bank guarantees as an ex-ante measure under Sections

33A and 31A of the Water and Air Acts shall be enforced only after
36
detailing   the   principle   and   procedure   incorporating   basic

principles of natural justice in the subordinate legislation.
………………………………....J.
                              [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]


                                         ………………………………....J.
                                                   [MANOJ MISRA]


NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 04, 2025
37