[Cites
28
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Tarabai Nagar Co Op. Hog. ... vs The State Of Maharashtra on 22 August, 2025
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Surya Kant
2025 INSC 1015                                                                        REPORTABLE
                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          Civil Appeal No. __________ / 2025
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 19774 / 2018)

             Tarabai Nagar Co-Op. Hog. Society (Proposed)                            ….Appellant(s)

                                                          versus

             The State of Maharashtra and others                                   ….Respondent(s)

                                                           with

                                          Civil Appeal No. __________ / 2025
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 25494 / 2018)

             The State of Maharashtra and another                                    ….Appellant(s)

                                                          versus

             Indian Cork Mills Private Limited and others                          ….Respondent(s)

                                                           with

                                          Civil Appeal No. __________ / 2025
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 27497 / 2018)

             The Slum Rehabilitation Authority                                       ….Appellant(s)

                                                          versus

             The State of Maharashtra and others                                   ….Respondent(s)


                                                       JUDGEMENT
SURYA KANT, J.
Leave granted.
2.
Signature Not Verified
The dispute which falls for consideration in these Civil Appeals pertains
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2025.08.22
12:23:03 IST
Reason:                  to the validity of the acquisition of land bearing CTS Nos. 119 I and

                            119 I/1-83 in Village Tungwa, Taluka Kurla, Mumbai, admeasuring
Page 1 of 55
9,054 sq. m. (Subject Land), under the
Maharashtra Slum Areas

     (Improvement, Clearance and Redevelopment) Act, 1971
(Slums Act
).

     The High Court of Judicature at Bombay (High Court), vide the

     Impugned Judgements dated 13.06.2018 and 09.07.2018, has: (i)

     allowed the writ petition filed by the landowner; (ii) held the acquisition

     to be void; and (iii) directed the State of Maharashtra and the Slum

     Rehabilitation Authority (SRA) to invite the landowner and consider its

     proposal for redevelopment. The instant appeals have, thus, been

     preferred by the proposed housing society of slum dwellers, the State of

     Maharashtra, and the SRA.
A.   LEGISLATIVE SCHEME
3.   Before delving into the facts of this case, it may be prudent to first

     consider the legislative scheme of the
Slums Act
.
4.
The   Maharashtra     Slum     Areas   (Improvement,     Clearance     and

     Redevelopment) Act, 1971
was originally enacted by the Maharashtra

     State Legislature as “[an] Act to make better provision for the

     improvement and clearance of slum areas in the State and their

     redevelopment.”


A.1 Original Framework for Slum Redevelopment (1971)
5.   In its original form, the
Slums Act
provided a procedure for appointment

     of a Competent Authority (
Section 3
); declaration by the Competent

     Authority of certain slums as ‘Slum Areas’ (Chapter II); improvements to

     be conducted in such Slum Areas by the landowner or the Competent
Page 2 of 55
Authority (Chapter III); clearing and redevelopment of the Slum Areas

     (Chapter IV); and the acquisition of land for such redevelopment

     (Chapter V).
6.   Given the background of the instant appeals, it seems to us that, besides

     the definitions contained in
Section 2
of the Slums Act, Chapters IV and

     V thereof also merit a more detailed consideration.
7.
Section 2
contains the definitions of various terms and phrases used in

     the
Slums Act
:
“2. Definitions.– In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ––
                                              [xxxx]
(d) “land” includes building and also benefits to arise out of land,
              things attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything
              attached to the earth;
(e) “occupier” includes,—
(i) any person who for the time being is paying or is liable to
                     pay to the owner the rent or any portion of the rent of the
                     land or building in respect of which such rent is paid or is
                     payable;
(ii) an owner in occupation of, or otherwise using, his land
                     or building;
(iii) a rent-free tenant of any land or building;
(iv) a licensee in occupation of any land or building; and
(v) any person who is liable to pay to the owner damages
                     for the use and occupation of any land or building;
(f) “owner”, when used with reference to any building or land,
              means the person who receives or is entitled to receive the rent of
              the building or land, if the building or land were let, and
              includes,—
(i) an agent or trustee who receives such rent on account of
                     the owner;
(ii) an agent or trustee who receives the rent of, or is
                     entrusted with, or concerned for, any building or land
                     devoted to religious or charitable purpose;
(iii) a receiver, sequestrator or manager appointed by a court
                     of competent jurisdiction to have the charge of or to exercise
                     the rights of owner of the said building or land; and
(iv) a mortgagee-in-possession;
but does not include, a slumlord;
[xxxx]
(h) “slum clearance” means the clearance of any slum area by the
              demolition and removal of buildings therefrom;
[xxxx] ”
Page 3 of 55
8.   It may be noted that although the term ‘landholder’ is not expressly

     defined within the legislation, it is taken to mean all the persons who

     hold any interest in the land in question. This would, of course, include

     the owner(s) of the land, but it also covers other interest holders, such

     as mortgagees or assignees.
9.   Chapter IV lays down the process whereby the Competent Authority can

     decide to clear a declared Slum Area, execute such a decision, and

     initiate the redevelopment of the area.
10.
Section 11(1)
allows the Competent Authority to declare a Slum Area as

     a Clearance Area, if it is satisfied “that the most satisfactory method

     of dealing with the conditions in the area is the demolition of all

     the buildings in the area.”
11. Following the declaration,
Section 12
stipulates how the buildings and

     structures on the land would be cleared. A Clearance Order is to be

     issued by the Competent Authority, whereafter the occupants are given

     a specified time to vacate the buildings. An appeal against the Clearance

     Order lies before a Tribunal. Once the Clearance Order becomes

     operative, the landowner must demolish the buildings on its land within

     six weeks, at its own cost.
12. Within this scheme, sub-section (10) of
Section 12
further allows the

     owner to redevelop the land after the execution of the Clearance Order,

     subject to any laws governing town planning, erection of buildings, and

     approval of plans as well as any restrictions placed by the Competent
Page 4 of 55
Authority. For reference, we shall quote the following portion of
Section 12
:
“12. Clearance Order.–
                                            [xxxx]
        (10) Subject to the provisions of this Act, and of any other law for the
        time being in force in relation to town-planning and to the regulation of
        the erection of buildings, where a clearance order has become
        operative, the owner of the land to which the clearance order
        applies, may redevelop the land in accordance with the plans
        approved by the Competent Authority, and subject to such restrictions
        and conditions (including a condition with regard to the time within
        which the redevelopment shall be completed), if any as that Authority
        may think fit to impose:
Provided that, an owner who is aggrieved by a restriction or condition
        so imposed on the user of his land, or by a subsequent refusal of the
        Competent Authority to cancel or modify any such restriction or
        condition may, within such time as may be prescribed, appeal to the
        Tribunal and its decision shall be final.
(11) No person shall commence or cause to be commenced any
        work in contravention of a plan approved or a restriction or
        condition imposed under sub-section (10).”
                                                           [Emphasis supplied]
13. Finally, the Competent Authority is also permitted to redevelop the

    Clearance Area at its own cost under
Section 13(1)
. The only

    requirements to exercise this power are that the owner must not have

    commenced redevelopment work and the Competent Authority ought to

    be satisfied that such an action would be necessary in public interest.
Section 13
is reproduced hereinbelow:
“13. Power of Competent Authority to redevelop clearance area.–
        (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of
section 12
,
        the Competent Authority may, at any time after the land has been
        cleared of buildings in accordance with a clearance order, but before
        the work of redevelopment of that land has been commenced by the
        owner, by order, determine to redevelop the land at its own cost, if that
        Authority is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest to do so.
        (2) Where land has been cleared of the buildings in accordance with a
        clearance order, the Competent Authority, if it is satisfied that the land
        has been, or is being, redeveloped by the owner thereof in
        contravention of plans duly approved, or any restrictions or conditions
        imposed under sub-section (10) of
section 12
, or has not been
Page 5 of 55
redeveloped within the time, if any, specified under such conditions,
          may, by order, determine to redevelop the land at its own cost:
Provided that, before passing such order, the owner shall be given a
          reasonable opportunity of showing cause why the order should not be
          passed.”
14. To complement the above-mentioned ability of the Competent Authority

    to redevelop the Clearance Area, Chapter V introduces a procedure for

    the acquisition of land under the
Slums Act
. While
Section 14
gives power

    to the State Government to acquire land, subsequent Sections provide

    for concomitant processes to take over possession of the land as well as

    for   computation,      apportionment,      and     payment     or   deposit     of

    compensation for the acquisition.
15. For reference,
Section 14
is reproduced below:
“14. Power of State Government to acquire land.– (1) Where on
          any representation from the Competent Authority it appears to the
          State Government that, in order to enable the Authority to execute any
          work of improvement or to redevelop any slum area or any structure in
          such area, it is necessary that such area, or any land within adjoining
          or surrounded by any such area should be acquired, the State
          Government may acquire the land by publishing in the Official Gazette,
          a notice to the effect that the State Government has decided to acquire
          the land in pursuance of this section:
Provided that, before publishing such notice, the State Government, or
          as the case may be, the Competent Authority may call upon by notice
          the owner of, or any other person who, in its or his opinion may be
          interested in, such land to show cause in writing why the land should
          not be acquired with reasons therefor, to the Competent Authority
          within the period specified in the notice; and the Competent Authority
          shall, with all reasonable despatch, forward any objections so
          submitted together with his report in respect thereof to the State
          Government and on considering the report and the objections, if any,
          the State Government may pass such order as it deems fit.
          (1A) The acquisition of land for any purpose mentioned in sub-section
          (1) shall be deemed to be a public purpose.
(2) When a notice as aforesaid is published in the Official Gazette, the
          land shall, on and from the date on which the notice is so published,
          vest absolutely in the State Government free from all encumbrances.”
Page 6 of 55
16. This above system, holistically, constitutes the original framework for

    initiating the redevelopment of slums under the
Slums Act
, beginning

    with declaration of a Slum Area and concluding with either the owner

    developing it or the SRA taking over the redevelopment.


A.2 New Framework for Slum Rehabilitation (Between 1995 and 2018)
17. In 1995, the Maharashtra State Legislature amended the
Slums Act
to

    introduce   a   new   framework     for   Slum   Rehabilitation     through

    Chapter I-A. According to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the

    Amendment, the intention was to establish an authority responsible for

    overseeing each aspect of the slum rehabilitation process, including

    situations where slum dwellers were not participating. The phrase ‘Slum

    Rehabilitation Work’ has since been defined within
Section 2
(h-e) of the
Slums Act
as “the work relating to demolition of any structure or

    any part thereof in slum area or Slum Rehabilitation Area, and

    construction of a new building thereon.” This amendment, however,

    did not tinker with the original legislative policy existing prior to 1995.

    Instead, Chapter I-A was incorporated to act as a separate procedure,

    applicable to certain areas.
18. Section 3A provides for the appointment of the Slum Rehabilitation

    Authority for certain areas to facilitate and regulate the redevelopment

    process. For this purpose, each SRA has a Chief Executive Officer (CEO).

    In the context of the area concerned in the instant case, the SRA for

    Greater Mumbai has been in place since 1995.
Page 7 of 55
19. Section 3B stipulates the power and duty of the SRA to prepare the

    General Slum Rehabilitation Scheme (General SR Scheme) for the area

    covered by the SRA. Sub-section (4), which lists the matters which the

    General SR Scheme would provide for, is reproduced for reference:
“3B. Slum Rehabilitation Schemes.–
                                           [xxxx]
         (4) The Slum Rehabilitation Scheme so notified under sub-section (3)
         shall, generally lay down the parameters for declaration of any land
         as the Slum Rehabilitation Area and indicate the manner in which
         rehabilitation of the area declared as Slum Rehabilitation Area shall
         be carried out. In particular, it shall provide for all or any of the
         following matters, that is to say,-
(a) the parameters or guidelines for declaration of an area as the
                   slum rehabilitation area;
(b) basic and essential parameters of development of slum
                   rehabilitation area under the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme;
(c) provision      for   obligatory    participation     of   the
                   landholders and occupants of the area declared as the
                   slum rehabilitation area under the Slum Rehabilitation
                   Scheme in the implementation of the Scheme;
(d) provision relating to transit accommodation pending
                   development of the slum rehabilitation area and allotment of
                   tenements on development to the occupants of such
                   area, free of cost.
(e) scheme for development of the Slum Rehabilitation
                   Areas under the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme by the
                   landholders and occupants by themselves or through a
                   developer and the terms and conditions of such
                   development; and the option available to the Slum
                   Rehabilitation      Authority     for   taking     up    such
                   development in the event of non-participation of the
                   landholders or occupants;
(f) provision regarding sanction of Floor Space Index and transfer
                   of development rights, if any, to be made available to the
                   developer for development of the slum rehabilitation area
                   under the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme;
(g) provision regarding non-transferable nature of tenements for
                   a certain period, etc.
                                          [xxxx] ”
                                                         [Emphasis supplied]
20. Section 3C, reproduced hereinafter, provides for the declaration of an

    area as a Slum Rehabilitation Area (SR Area). After the publication of the

    General SR Scheme, the CEO can declare any area as an SR Area, if it
Page 8 of 55
meets the criteria specified in the said Scheme. Such a declaration

    (Section 3C(1) Declaration) would be published in the Official Gazette,

    and an appeal against it lies before the Special Tribunal.
“3C. Declaration of a slum rehabilitation area.– (1) As soon
            as may be, after the publication of the Slum Rehabilitation
            Scheme, the Chief Executive Officer on being satisfied
            circumstances in respect of any area, justifying its declaration as
            slum rehabilitation area under the said scheme, may by an order
            published in the Official Gazette, declare such area to be a “slum
            rehabilitation area”. The order declaring slum rehabilitation area
            (hereinafter referred to as “the slum rehabilitation order”) shall
            also be given wide publicity in such manner as may be specified
            by the Slum Rehabilitation Authority.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the slum rehabilitation order may,
            within four weeks of the publication of such order prefer an
            appeal to the Special Tribunal; and the decision of the Special
            Tribunal shall be final.
(3) On the completion of the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme, the Slum
            Rehabilitation Area shall cease to be such area.”
21. Section 3D contains the provisions for the application of other Chapters

    of the Slums Act to an area declared as an SR Area. Section 3D(a)

    stipulates that Chapters II (regarding declaration of Slum Areas) and III

    (regarding improvements in Slum Areas) would not apply to an SR Area.
22. Section 3D(b) clarifies that Chapter IV (regarding clearance and

    redevelopment) applies to SR Areas. As per sub-clause (i),
Section 11
(regarding declaration as Clearance Area) is not applicable to an SR Area.

    As such, once an area is declared to be an SR Area, it cannot then be

    declared as a Clearance Area.
23. Section 3D(b)(ii) provides that
Section 12
of the Slums Act is applicable

    with certain modifications. Effectively, the CEO is empowered to issue a

    Clearance Order under
Section 12
in respect of SR Areas. It is pertinent
Page 9 of 55
that the modification virtually retains sub-section (10), wherein, as

     already elucidated, the private owner of the SR Area has the right to

     redevelop it after the Clearance Order comes into force.1
24. Section 3D(b)(iii), then, effectively substitutes
Section 13
and introduces

     a new framework which replaces the original scheme. Under this new

     provision, the SRA can decide to undertake rehabilitation of the slum

     itself after the area is declared an SR Area.
25. Section 3D(c) deals with the applicability of Chapter V (regarding the

     acquisition of land). Generally, the acquisition powers under Chapter V

     are made applicable to SR Areas with certain modifications. These

     modifications place the CEO as a substitute for the Competent Authority.

     Specifically, a modification is also made to the first part of
Section 14
to

     clarify when the acquisition can be undertaken.
26. The remaining provisions in Section 3D address other aspects of

     implementing the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme (SR Scheme) and

     ensuring the rehabilitation of slum dwellers.
27. At this juncture, it is essential to reproduce the relevant portions of

     Section 3D:
“3D. Application of other Chapters of this Act to slum
          Rehabilitation Area with modification.– On publication of the slum
          Rehabilitation Scheme under sub-section (1) of Section 3B, the
          provisions of other Chapters of this Act shall apply to any area
          declared as the slum rehabilitation area, subject to the following
          modifications, namely:-
[xxxx]


1 Reproduced in Paragraph 12.
Page 10 of 55
(b) in Chapter IV,-
[xxxx]
(ii) in
Section 12
,-
[xxxx]
               (H) in sub-section (10),-
(a) for the words “Competent Authority”, the
                     words “Slum Rehabilitation Authority” shall be
                     substituted;
(b) in the proviso,-
(i) for the words “Competent Authority”, the
                            words “Chief Executive Officer” shall be
                            substituted;
(ii) for the words “Tribunal”, the words
                            “Special Tribunal” shall be substituted;
(iii) for
Section 13
, the following Section shall be substituted,
       namely:-
“13. Power of Slum Rehabilitation Authority to
       develop Slum Rehabilitation Area.– (1) Notwithstanding
       anything contained in sub-section (10) of
section 12
, the
       Slum Rehabilitation authority may, after any area is
       declared as the Slum Rehabilitation Area, if the landholders
       or occupants of such area do not come forward within a
       reasonable time, with a scheme for redevelopment of such
       land, by order, determine to redevelop such land by
       entrusting it to any agency for the purpose.
       (2) Where on declaration of any area as a Slum
       Rehabilitation Area the Slum Rehabilitation Authority , is
       satisfied that the land in the Slum Rehabilitation Area has
       been or is being developed by the owner in contravention of
       the plan duly approved, or any restrictions of conditions
       imposed under sub-section (10) of
section 12
, or has not
       been developed within the time, if any, specified under such
       conditions it may, by order, determine to develop the land
       by entrusting it to any agency for the purpose:
Provided that, before passing such the owner shall be given
       a reasonable opportunity of cause why such order should
       not be passed.”;
(c) in Chapter V,-
(i) in
Section 14
, in sub-section (1),-
(A) for the portion beginning with the words “Where on
               any representation” and ending with the words
               “clearance area” the following portion shall be
               substituted, namely:-
“Where on any representation from the Chief Executive
               Officer it appears to the State Government that, in
               order to enable the Slum Rehabilitation Authority to
               carry out development under the Slum Rehabilitation
               Scheme in any Slum Rehabilitation Area”
               (B) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be
               added, namely:-
“Provided further that, the State Government may
               delegate its powers under this sub-section to any
               officer not below the rank of Commissioner.”
                                      [xxxx] ”
Page 11 of 55
28. The text of
Section 14
, as contained in Chapter V in the original

    legislative scheme, has already been reproduced in Paragraph 15 above.

    However, as previously noticed, for the purpose of giving effect to the new

    scheme envisaged in Chapter I-A, the said
Section 14
, especially sub-

    section (1) thereof, has been partially amended through Section 3D and

    reads as follows:
“14. Power of State Government to acquire land.– (1) Where on
         any representation from the Chief Executive Officer it appears
         to the State Government that, in order to enable the Slum
         Rehabilitation Authority to carry out development under the
         Slum Rehabilitation Scheme in any Slum Rehabilitation Area it
         is necessary that such area, or any land within adjoining or
         surrounded by any such area should be acquired, the State
         Government may acquire the land by publishing in the Official Gazette,
         a notice to the effect that the State Government has decided to acquire
         the land in pursuance of this section:
Provided that, before publishing such notice, the State Government, or
         as the case may be, the Competent Authority may call upon by notice
         the owner of, or any other person who, in its or his opinion may be
         interested in, such land to show cause in writing why the land should
         not be acquired with reasons therefor, to the Competent Authority
         within the period specified in the notice; and the Competent Authority
         shall, with all reasonable despatch, forward any objections so
         submitted together with his report in respect thereof to the State
         Government and on considering the report and the objections, if any,
         the State Government may pass such order as it deems fit.
         Provided further that, the State Government may delegate its powers
         under this sub-section to any officer not below the rank of
         Commissioner.
[xxxx] ”
                                                        [Emphasis supplied]
29. The subsequent provisions of Chapter I-A lay down the administrative

    aspects of the SRA’s functioning.
30. Since the instant case pertains to an SR Area under Chapter I-A, it is

    clarified that wherever the provisions of Chapters IV and V are referred

    to, the reference remains to the modified provisions as they are now

    encapsulated in Section 3D. However, wherever need be, the original
Page 12 of 55
provisions of Chapters IV and V will be referred to with the phrase

    ‘original framework’.
A.3 The 2018 Amendment
31.
The Slums Act
was further amended in 2018, with substantial changes

    made to the expressions and language of certain provisions, reflecting

    the revised legislative policy.
32. However, considering that the actions impugned before the High Court

    took place before the amended Act came into force on 26.04.2018, there

    is no gainsaying that the instant case would have to be adjudicated in

    accordance with the law as it stood when the acquisition was initiated.
33. We are pained to observe that the
Slums Act
, especially the framework

    for Slum Rehabilitation, is poorly structured. There appears to be no

    cogent reason as to why, instead of enacting a self-contained code within

    Section I-A, the drafters of this legislation chose to incorporate an

    entirely distinct slum rehabilitation mechanism by amending the existing

    legislation through Section 3D. This approach to drafting inevitably blurs

    the boundaries between the two frameworks, creating confusion in the

    mind of a reader. In this backdrop, dealing with the 2018 Amendment at

    this stage would only exacerbate the perplexity. We thus do not deem it

    necessary to refer to or reproduce the 2018 Amendment.


A.4 Subordinate Legislation and other Circulars
34. It is also imperative to note that the
Slums Act
is supplemented by

    critical   subordinate    legislation/circulars   to   enable   its   proper
Page 13 of 55
implementation. Keeping in view the discussion above, consideration

    would be limited to the subordinate legislation/circulars applicable at

    the time of initiation of the acquisition. The same are noticed herein

    below.
A.4.1 Development Control Regulations for Greater Mumbai, 1991
35. The development of urban areas in Maharashtra is governed by the
Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966
. Under this Act, the

    State Government notified the Development Control Regulations for

    Greater Mumbai, 1991 (DCR 1991). It creates a regulatory framework

    for any development work to be carried out within Greater Mumbai.
Regulation 33(10)
was introduced to cover plans to redevelop slums. This

    Regulation predates the new framework under
Chapter I-A of the Slums

    Act
and is thus applicable in cases of development of Slum Areas as well

    as SR Areas. It provides a comprehensive scheme of requirements and

    approvals, along with development incentives, such as additional

    transferable Floor Space Index (FSI). Although the DCR 1991 has been

    replaced in 2020 by the Development Control and Promotion Regulations

    for Greater Mumbai, 2034 (DCPR 2034),
Regulation 33(10)
retains its

    position and remains substantially unchanged.
A.4.2 Guidelines for the Implementation of Slum Rehabilitation Policy

in Greater Mumbai, 1997
36. The SRA issued the Guidelines for the Implementation of Slum

    Rehabilitation Policy in Greater Mumbai, 1997 (1997 Guidelines), to

    clarify the procedure for slum rehabilitation. Clause IV of the 1997
Page 14 of 55
Guidelines outlines the procedure for submitting, processing, and

    approving SR Schemes. In Paragraph 8 thereof, it is provided that

    redevelopment plans are to be prepared in accordance with
Regulation

    33(10)
of the DCR 1991. Furthermore, it lays out the various Annexures

    which are to be duly filled and submitted along with the proposal. They

    require details such as the ownership of the land, the existing structures

    on the land, a list of dwellers, and their approval for the proposed

    redevelopment scheme, as well as the financial details showing the

    promoter’s capacity to undertake and complete the redevelopment. The

    1997 Guidelines subsequently outline the further steps to be taken by

    the SRA to process any proposal submitted in the specified format.


A.4.3 General Slum Rehabilitation Scheme for Greater Mumbai, 1998
37. The SRA has also notified the General Slum Rehabilitation Scheme for

    Greater Mumbai, 1998 (1998 General Scheme) under
Section 3B
of the

    Slums Act. It covers the parameters based on which the rehabilitation of

    the slum would be undertaken by the SRA.
A.4.4 SRA Circular Nos. 144 and 144-A
38. The SRA has issued various circulars to clarify and lay down the

    procedures of its functioning. Specifically, Circular No. 144, issued on

    31.08.2013, provides the procedure for submission, scrutiny, and

    consideration of an SR Scheme. Inter alia, it requires that the proposal

    be submitted as per
Regulation 33(10)
of DCR 1991, and all the relevant

    Annexures be included with the proposal. It also makes various

    clarifications and suggestions to streamline the scrutiny process.
Page 15 of 55
Importantly, it lays down that the SR Schemes must be strictly in

      conformity with the laid down format. The SRA has also issued Circular

      No. 144-A on 09.11.2015, whereunder, it recognises that landowners

      have the first right to file SR Schemes and has relaxed the requirement

      of obtaining the consent of 70% of slum dwellers if the landowner(s)

      themselves file the SR Scheme.
B.   FACTS
39. Having illustratively captured the statutory scheme, we now advert to the

      facts of this case, which are delineated below in detail.


39.1. Indian Cork Mills Private Limited (ICM) has been the owner of the Subject

      Land since 1970. The said land seems to have been encroached upon by

      hutment dwellers, and thereupon, a portion of it admeasuring 3,045.03

      sq. m. was declared as a ‘Slum Area’ under
Section 4
of the Slums Act

      on 18.09.1979.
39.2. Over time, the slum expanded, and its dwellers formed the Tarabai Nagar

      Co-operative   Housing    Society   (Proposed)   (Tarabai   Society)    on

      28.02.2002.
39.3. Tarabai Society moved letters and applications in 2006-2008 before the

      Competent Authority under the
Slums Act
, seeking a survey of the slum,

      declaration of the remainder of the Subject Land as a Slum Area, and its

      acquisition for redevelopment. Accordingly, surveys were conducted, and

      vide notification dated 11.03.2011, the SRA declared the entire Subject

      Land as an SR Area through a Section 3C(1) Declaration.
Page 16 of 55
39.4. As a consequence, Tarabai Society reiterated its request to the Additional

      Collector (Encroachment/Clearance), Eastern Suburban, Mumbai, for

      acquiring the Subject Land under
Section 14
,
2
through letters dated

      28.02.2012, 15.03.2012, and 05.05.2012, coupled with a proposal to

      redevelop the same.
39.5. In pursuance of the above proposal, the State of Maharashtra, through

      the Additional Collector, issued a public notice dated 17.05.2012 under

      the first proviso to
Section 14(1)
,
3
calling upon ICM, as landowner, and

      other interested parties to show cause as to why Tarabai Society’s

      proposal should not be forwarded for approval. As per ICM, this notice

      was not served upon it.
39.6. As things stood thus, proceedings in this regard were originally initiated

      before the Additional Collector in the absence of ICM. Although some

      third parties had raised objections, the Additional Collector rejected them

      as these were in respect of adjoining parcels of land, not the Subject

      Land. As such, the Additional Collector recommended that the Subject

      Land be acquired and forwarded a report dated 04.08.2012 to the

      Housing Department, Government of Maharashtra.


39.7. Upon consideration of the report, the Ward Officer, Housing Department,

      sought the remarks of the CEO on the land acquisition proposal. The

      CEO, vide letter dated 29.11.2012, informed the State that no SR

      Scheme had been received in respect of the subject property, and there


 2 Reproduced in Paragraph 28.
3 Reproduced in Paragraph 28.
Page 17 of 55
was no objection to the acquisition. However, the State was not satisfied

      with the response and sought clarification from the CEO as to whether

      the landowners had been heard or any opportunity had been given to

      them.
39.8. Accordingly, a fresh notice was issued to ICM on 08.08.2013 regarding

      the land acquisition proposal. It responded to the notice on 23.08.2013,

      stating, inter alia, that, as the owner, it would like to develop the property

      itself, under an SR Scheme, without any third-party involvement. ICM

      further reiterated this objection during the hearings dated 26.08.2013

      and 16.09.2013, whereafter the CEO reserved its order on the matter.


 39.9. Meanwhile, ICM relayed a communication dated 12.09.2013 to the

      Deputy Collector, SRA, highlighting its intention to redevelop the Subject

      Land without any interference from third-party builders and developers.


39.10. ICM also addressed a letter dated 08.10.2013 to Tarabai Society,

      confirming its willingness to redevelop the Subject Land by implementing

      an SR Scheme. However, the Tarabai Society does not appear to have

      responded to the said letter. On the other hand, a different society,

      namely, the Tara Nagar Welfare Society, approached ICM regarding

      rehabilitation, but no substantive communication proceeded with this

      society.
39.11. Finally, the CEO submitted its report dated 21.12.2013 to the State

      Government,     proposing    to   acquire   the   Subject    Land.   It   was
Page 18 of 55
recommended that the acquisition be undertaken under
Section 14
,
4
and

       that while ICM had relayed its willingness to redevelop the Subject Land,

       it had not filed any SR Scheme. The CEO also conveyed a formal request

       for acquisition, vide letter dated 09.01.2014.
39.12. Subsequently, the SRA, acting on the directions of the State Government,

       conducted inspections and surveys on the Subject Land to determine its

       feasibility for implementing an SR Scheme. It was reported that

       rehabilitation is feasible, and if the land were to be acquired, the SRA

       would be able to approve an SR Scheme. The Housing Department,

       thereafter on 09.01.2015, directed that the matter be placed for

       consideration     before   the   Minister   for   Housing,   Government    of

       Maharashtra, for appropriate orders.
39.13. In this backdrop, ICM sent a letter dated 25.02.2015 to the Minister for

       Housing, reiterating its intention to develop the Subject Land and not to

       grant rights in this regard to any third party. This letter was then

       forwarded to the CEO, requesting that it reply to ICM and mark a copy

       to the Government.
39.14. ICM communicated another letter, dated 06.05.2015, to the CEO,

       reiterating its willingness to develop the Subject Land in accordance with

       the stipulations prescribed under
Regulation 33(10)
of the DCR 1991.

       For this purpose, ICM sought directions from the SRA to enable it to




  4 Reproduced in Paragraph 28.
Page 19 of 55
carry out a survey and demarcation so as to submit a proposal for

       redevelopment.
39.15. Considering the above correspondence, the CEO, on 15.05.2015,

       recommended to the State that, in conformity with the notion that the

       landlord ought to be afforded the first right to develop the land, an

       opportunity ought to be given to ICM to submit an SR Scheme. Still

       further, the State, in its response dated 12.10.2015, recorded that the

       entire matter ought to be reconsidered, either at the level of the SRA or,

       if necessary, at the level of the High-Powered Committee constituted by

       the High Court.5


39.16. The CEO, however, in what can be construed as a volte face, forwarded

       a report dated 12.09.2016 to the State Government, reaffirming its

       previous reasoning that ICM has not submitted any SR Scheme and that

       it would thus not be proper to provide another opportunity to ICM. As

       such, it was recommended that the acquisition of the Subject Land be

       initiated by the State Government.
39.17. In this vein, the State Government issued a notification dated 22.12.2016

       under
Section 14(1)
6
for the acquisition of the Subject Land.


39.18. Additionally, the SRA sent a communication dated 07.01.2017 to ICM,

       seeking details of the Subject Land required for the acquisition. This



  5 High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Writ Petition No. 1326 of 2007, judgement dated
  01.11.2007; High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Notice of Motion No. 126 of 2008 in Writ
  Petition No. 1326 of 2007, judgement dated 18.12.2008.
  6 Reproduced in Paragraph 28
Page 20 of 55
included the number of hutments, the approximate rent of each hut, and

       the total rent recovered over the last 5 years. ICM was also informed to

       be present before the Deputy Collector, SRA, for a hearing scheduled on

       19.01.2017.
39.19. Aggrieved, ICM filed Writ Petition No. 658 of 2017 before the High Court,

       challenging the notification dated 22.12.2016 and the notice dated

       07.01.2017.
39.20. The High Court, vide an interim order dated 27.01.2017, directed that

       status quo be maintained in respect of the acquisition of the property.


39.21. The High Court on 13.06.2018 passed the Impugned Judgement,

       allowing the Writ Petition. As already iterated, the High Court held that
(i) a landowner has a preferential right to develop the Subject Land,

       which is enshrined in
Sections 3B(4)
and
13(1)
of the Slums Act;7 (ii) the

       SRA was under a duty to issue a notice to invite the owner to submit an

       SR Scheme once private land is declared to be an SR Area; and (iii) the

       power of the State to acquire land under
Section 14
read with

       Section 3D(c)(i)
8
was subject to the owner’s preferential right. The Court,

       therefore, concluded that if an owner had not been invited to submit an

       SR Scheme, such acquisition would be without foundation and

       consequently fail. Keeping these postulates in mind, the High Court

       observed that the State and the SRA had conducted the acquisition in

       the absence of any proper opportunity afforded to ICM to submit its SR


  7 Reproduced in Paragraphs 19 and 27.
8 Reproduced in Paragraphs 27 and 28.
Page 21 of 55
Scheme. Thus, the High Court set aside the acquisition and directed the

       SRA to consider ICM’s proposal expeditiously.
39.22. Vide a clarificatory order dated 09.07.2018, the High Court corrected a

       typographical error in the judgement dated 13.06.2018.


39.23. Aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, Tarabai Society, the State of

       Maharashtra, and the SRA have filed independent appeals against the

       Impugned Judgements dated 13.06.2018 and 09.07.2018.


  C.   CONTENTIONS
40. Mr. Shyam Divan, learned Senior Counsel, appearing on behalf of

       Tarabai Society, vehemently contended that neither the legislative

       scheme of the
Slums Act
nor the facts and circumstances of this case

       warrant that ICM be allowed to interfere in the redevelopment of the

       Subject Land. In this regard, he adduced the following submissions:
(a)   The High Court has incorrectly interpreted a preferential right in

             favour of the landowner as being implied in
Section 13
of the Slums

             Act.9 The text of the provision does not indicate that the owner has

             the right to redevelop land over other stakeholders. The law also

             does not provide for any specific notice to be issued to the

             landowner.
(b)   A landholder, which includes the owner of the land, does not fulfil

             the requirement of Section 1310 by merely announcing its intent to


  9 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
10 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
Page 22 of 55
redevelop the land. Instead, it must demonstrate that actual steps

           have been taken to initiate an SR Scheme.
(c)   The SR Scheme must be submitted within the format prescribed by

           the 1997 Guidelines and
Regulation 33(10)
of the DCR 1991.
In this

           regard, reliance has been placed on two judgements of the Bombay

           High Court,
Atesham Ahmed Khan v. Lakadawala Developers

           Pvt. Ltd.11
and
Awdesh Vasistha Tiwari v. Chief Executive

           Officer, Slum Rehabilitation Authority,12
as well as SRA Circular

           No. 144 dated 31.08.2013, to buttress the contention that the

           proposal to redevelop must be strictly as per the format.
(d)   The power to acquire land under
Section 14
of the Slums Act13 is

           independent of
Section 13
,
14
which only deals with the decision of

           the authority to develop the land on its own. Such a distinction was

           also upheld by this Court in an unreported judgement titled
Murlidhar      Teckchand       Gandhi      and     others    v.    State      of

           Maharashtra
and others,15 wherein it was held that acquisition

           would only be subject to the requirements explicated in
Section 14
.
(e)   The High Court has wrongly distinguished
Murlidhar Teckchand

           Gandhi
(supra) on account of the difference between a ‘Slum Area’

           and an ‘SR Area’. Despite the variation between the cited case and



11 2011 SCC OnLine Bom 239.
12 2006 SCC OnLine Bom 481.
13 Reproduced in Paragraph 28.
14 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
15 Supreme Court of India, Civil Appeal No. 11077 of 2017, judgement dated 29.08.2017.
Page 23 of 55
the present appeals, the scope and interrelationship of
Sections 13
and
14
, as
,
laid down in
the former,16 are squarely applicable to the

           latter.17
(f)   In the instant case, ICM has been negligent towards the slum

           dwellers. In spite of a part of the Subject Land having been declared

           a Slum Area in 1979, no efforts were undertaken by ICM for over

           four decades towards any development or improvement. Even after

           the Subject Land was declared as an SR Area in 2011, ICM has not

           redeveloped it.
(g)   ICM was aware of the Section 3C(1) Declaration dated 11.03.2011,

           more so when it stood published in the Official Gazette on

           16.03.2011. There is a presumptive notice to the public at large from

           the date of publication of the Official Gazette. As such, ICM ought

           to have come forward within a reasonable time with an SR Scheme

           for the redevelopment of the Subject Land. Failing this, ICM has

           fallen short of its obligation under Section 1318 and cannot now

           claim any purported preferential right.
(h)   ICM has no intention to redevelop the Subject Land. Originally, in

           2012, it did not attend the hearing on the acquisition proposal

           under the garb of not being informed. This was despite notices being

           published in one English and one vernacular (Marathi) newspaper.



16 Reproduced in Paragraphs 13 and 15.
17 Reproduced in Paragraphs 27 and 28.
18 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
Page 24 of 55
Even in 2013, when the hearings were conducted anew, ICM’s

           representatives only conveyed that they intended to redevelop the

           Subject Land. No SR Scheme was submitted as per
Regulation

           33(10)
of DCR 1991. Instead, mere letters were sent between 2013

           and 2016, reiterating ICM’s purported intention to redevelop the

           Subject Land independently.
(i)   ICM’s inaction has resulted in huge delays in the rehabilitation

           process. The slum dwellers, who are the constituents of Tarabai

           Society, are its primary victims. In light of this delay, there was,

           thus, no option but to move for the acquisition of the Subject Land.

           Keeping in mind ICM’s conduct, the High Court erred in setting

           aside the acquisition and granting it another opportunity.
41. Mr. Shyam Mehta, learned Senior Counsel representing the State of

     Maharashtra, and Mr. Sudhanshu S. Choudhari, learned Senior Counsel

     appearing on behalf of the SRA, clarified that the State and the SRA were

     not intending to take any position on the facts of the case. Instead, the

     respective appeals were filed because they were aggrieved by the High

     Court’s legislative interpretation. The following submissions were made

     on their behalf:
(a)   Section 1319 creates equal interest and rights in favour of the

           ‘landholders’ and ‘occupants’. There is no preference for owners (as

           part of ‘landholders’) vis-à-vis the slum dwellers (occupants). Even



19 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
Page 25 of 55
other provisions of the
Slums Act
, such as Section 3B(4)(c) and (e),20

           envision the rights of the owner to be on par with those of other

           stakeholders.
(b)   The High Court has incorrectly interpreted a requirement for

           specific notice in
Section 13
.21 Even if the owner has a preferential

           right to redevelop an SR Area, there is no basis for a demand to be

           specifically invited to redevelop.
Section 13
does not contemplate

           the issuance of any specific notice to a party. Rather, when the

           Section 3C(1) Declaration is published in the Official Gazette, it

           ought to constitute adequate notice to the owner, as also all other

           stakeholders.
(c)   The intention behind the system developed in
Chapter I-A of the

           Slums Act
is aimed at efficient and effective rehabilitation of slums.

           The process must be simplified and expedited to ensure efficiency.

           Adding requirements for specific notice in favour of the owners and

           allowing them to interfere in development efforts belatedly would

           only delay the process.
42. On the contrary, Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Mr. Amar Dave,

     learned Senior Counsels appearing on behalf of ICM, asserted that the

     High Court’s interpretation of the
Slums Act
was well-founded. They also

     highlighted the substantive and procedural lapses on the part of the




20 Reproduced in Paragraph 19.
21 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
Page 26 of 55
Appellants in the instant case. In this respect, they sought to put forth

     the following averments:
(a)
The Slums Act
creates a preferential right in favour of the owner to

           develop it. Section 3B(4)(c) and (e),22 as well as
Section 13
,
23
showcase this inalienable right in the cases of SR Schemes. The

           primacy of the landowner is also discernible in the SRA’s Circular

           No. 144-A dated 09.11.2015, wherein it is stated that the ‘first

           right to file the Slum Rehabilitation scheme is of the owner of

           the land’. Such a preferential right has also been accepted by the

           State and the SRA in their internal communications.
(b)   The requirement of a specific notice to the owner to submit an SR

           Scheme is essential to protect its preferential right. If the owner does

           not act within a reasonable time under
Section 13
,
24
the SRA or

           another entity can move to undertake redevelopment, prejudicing

           the owner’s rights. The SRA must, thus, ensure that the owner is

           notified of the Section 3C(1) Declaration and invited to submit an

           SR Scheme. This enables the owner to exercise its rights. The SRA

           has also issued such notices in previous cases, inviting the

           landowners therein to submit redevelopment proposals.
22 Reproduced in Paragraph 19.
23 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
24 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
Page 27 of 55
(c)   There is no legislative mandate encapsulated within Section 13 of

           the Slums Act,25 which necessitated the submission of a scheme in

           the format prescribed by the DCR 1991.
(d)   A complete SR Scheme, in line with
Regulation 33(10)
of DCR 1991,

           can only be submitted once mapping, surveys, and studies are

           completed. This requires the consent and support of the SRA. In the

           absence of such support, no owner would be able to submit an SR

           Scheme. No such material information was ever offered by the SRA

           to ICM.
(e)   If the consequent proposal submitted by the owner is considered

           deficient, the SRA must notify the owner of the deficiencies and

           provide a reasonable opportunity to rectify the same.
(f)
Sections 13
and
14
read with
Section 3D
of the Slums Act26 are not

           independent     provisions.   The   purpose   of   acquisition   under
Section 14
is to enable the SRA to carry out development under an

           SR Scheme. Since the decision of the SRA to redevelop the SR Area

           on its own is governed by
Section 13
, it is intertwined with the

           purpose of acquisition under
Section 14
. If the SRA does not first

           allow the owner to redevelop, it cannot decide to develop the land

           itself, and the purpose of acquiring the land cannot arise. Thus,




25 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
26 Reproduced in Paragraphs 27 and 28.
Page 28 of 55
acquisition under
Section 14
cannot pre-empt the statutory

      compliance of the mandate contained under
Section 13
.
(g)   The decision of this Court in
Murlidhar Teckchand Gandhi
(supra) is inapplicable to the instant case and has been rightly

      distinguished by the High Court in the Impugned Judgement.
(h)   ICM has, unequivocally, been ready to redevelop the land on its own.
Through various means, including letters to the SRA and the State,

      the owner has reiterated this intention. It had even reached out to

      the Tarabai Society to initiate the process of redevelopment in 2013,

      but no response was received from them.
(i)   Though the State and the SRA have recognised ICM’s preferential

      right to redevelop the Subject Land in their communications and

      internal noting, no opportunity was granted to it to submit a

      proposal for redevelopment.
(j)   Tarabai Society is operating with a mala fide intention, aiming to

      grab the Subject Land at a low price to benefit a private builder, with

      whom they are colluding. The land, after redevelopment, could

      generate approximately INR 900 crores in revenue from the sale of

      residential and commercial units. In comparison, the land

      acquisition compensation, which would be paid to the owner, is a

      paltry sum of INR 25 lakhs. The Society and its builder have also

      previously acted deceitfully, when the representative of the said
Page 29 of 55
builder had filed a false affidavit before the SRA that it was ICM’s

             Constituted Attorney.
(k)   Following the pronouncement of the Impugned Judgement, ICM

             promptly submitted its SR Scheme, and the process for its approval

             was underway when the instant appeals were filed. By seeking and

             obtaining an order of status quo from this Court, Tarabai Society

             has further delayed the process of rehabilitation.
D.     ISSUES
43. Having given our thoughtful consideration to the rival submissions and

       having scrutinised the material on record, we find that the following

       issues arise for consideration by this Court:
I.    Whether the owner of the land in an SR Area has any preferential

             right to redevelop it under
Chapter I-A of the Slums Act
?
II.    Whether such preferential right, if any, entails that the owner be

             specially notified and invited to redevelop the SR Area before the

             SRA takes a decision under
Section 13
read with
Section 3D(b)(iii)
of the Slums Act?27


     III.    Whether the power of the State Government to acquire land under
Section 14
read with
Section 3D(c)(i)
of the Slums Act28 is subject to

             the preferential right, if any, of the owner?
27 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
28 Reproduced in Paragraphs 27 and 28.
Page 30 of 55
IV.   Whether, in the facts of the instant case, the acquisition of the

           Subject Land by the State Government has rightly been set aside by

           the High Court?
E.    ANALYSIS

E.1 Issue I: Existence of a Preferential Right to Develop the Land
44. The High Court vide the Impugned Judgement has held that the scheme

      of
Chapter I-A of the Slums Act
creates a preferential right in favour of

      the owner of an SR Area to redevelop it. For this, besides interpreting the

      relevant provisions, the High Court has relied upon the communications

      between the SRA and the State as well as SRA Circulars to identify a

      preferential right encapsulated in the legislative scheme. On the other

      hand, the Appellants have sought to make out that the text of the
Slums

      Act
does not exhibit any such primacy in favour of the owner.


E.1.1 The Owner’s Right to Develop the Land
45. Let us first consider the right of the owner to develop the SR Area.
46. The Statute contemplates that once the land is declared as an SR Area,

      it must ordinarily be redeveloped under an SR Scheme. However, before

      an SR Scheme is envisaged or implemented, if a Clearance Order is

      passed in respect of such land, then the owner may develop it in terms

      of the right conferred under
Section 12(10)
.29 Here, the owner is given

      clear, unparalleled rights to develop the SR Area, as long as the plan is

      approved by the SRA.
29 Reproduced in Paragraphs 12 and 27.
Page 31 of 55
47. The landowner is also included within the framework of SR Schemes. The

     mandate for involvement of the owner in rehabilitation goes beyond mere

     obligatory participation (see Clause (c) of Section 3B(4)).30 Clause (e) of

     Section 3B(4), rather expressly conceptualises that there can be an SR

     Scheme propounded by the ‘landholders’ and occupants themselves or

     through a developer, with an option to the SRA for taking up such

     development in the event of non-participation of the ‘landholders’ or

     occupants. This statutory mandate has been explicitly insulated in the

     1998 General Scheme, Clause 6 whereof, permits the ‘landlord’ to

     undertake an SR Scheme.
48. In fact, the legislative intent imbibed in Section 3B(4)(e)
31
has been

     reiterated throughout
Section 13(1)
,
32
which, inter alia, provides that

     notwithstanding anything contained in
Section 12(10)
, the SRA can

     launch a scheme for redevelopment of such land which has been

     declared as SR Areas and where the landholders or occupants of such

     areas do not come forward within a reasonable time with a scheme for

     redevelopment.
E.1.2 The Primacy of the Owner’s Right over the SRA’s Power
49. Since the owner of an SR Area has been granted an unambiguous right

     to redevelop, we now proceed to analyse whether such owner holds any

     precedence over the SRA’s power to develop the SR Area.




30 Reproduced in Paragraph 19.
31 Reproduced in Paragraph 19.
32 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
Page 32 of 55
50. The question posed in the previous paragraph need not detain us for

     long, as, in our considered opinion, the Legislature has answered it in so

     many words through Section 3B(4)(e),
33
referred to above
. We say so for

     the reason that the SRA has been assigned the responsibility to redevelop

     an SR Area only when the landholder or occupants do not come forward

     with a proposal for redevelopment. To put it differently, where

     landholders or occupants have submitted a proposal for redevelopment,

     it places a caveat against any claim by the SRA for its statutory right or

     preference to redevelop the SR Area on its own.
51. It may, however, be clarified that Section 1334 has its own measure to

     balance the rights of slum dwellers, by imposing the restriction of

     ‘reasonable time’ on the owner’s right to redevelop. The resultant effect

     is that the SRA cannot undertake development of the SR Area unless the

     owner fails to come forward with a scheme within a reasonable time.
52. A similar approach to the development of an SR Area is also visible in
Section 12(10)
35
, where the owner is given a clear first right to develop

     the land in accordance with a plan approved by the SRA. The Appellants

     have sought to argue that the primacy established in
Section 12(10)
is

     irrelevant to the power of the SRA under
Section 13
,
36
given the

     non-obstante clause at the beginning of the latter Section. Be that as it

     may, the said provision reflects the common legislative thread running



33 Reproduced in Paragraph 19.
34 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
35 Reproduced in Paragraph 12.
36 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
Page 33 of 55
throughout      the   Chapter       I-A   framework,   which   is    that    the

     landholders/owners possess primacy over the SRA’s ability to redevelop

     the SR Area.
53. As such, a logical reading of Sections 3B(4)(e) and
13(1)
37
makes it clear

     that the SRA’s power to undertake redevelopment can only be invoked if

     the owner extinguishes its right to redevelop. The owner’s right to develop

     an SR Area, thus, holds preference over that of the SRA within
Chapter I-A of the Slums Act
.
E.1.3 The Primacy of the Owner’s Right over Other Stakeholders
54. The Appellants, especially the State of Maharashtra and the SRA, have

     further argued that while the SRA’s power to redevelop may be subject

     to the rights of the ‘landholder’ and the ‘occupants’, there is nothing in

     these provisions to create a preference for owners/landlords over the

     rights of the ‘occupants’ or other ‘landholders’. Mr Mehta, in his

     arguments, emphatically took us through Sections 3B(4)(e) and
13(1)
38
to point out that no explicit distinction is created between ‘landholders’

     and ‘occupants’, even if there is primacy over the powers of the SRA.
55. We are, however, unable to accept this contention. We say so because a

     landowner of an SR Area is not only entitled to the rights granted by the
Slums Act
but also enjoys some inherent rights attached to an

     immovable property. Ordinarily, a landowner is entitled to all the

     incidental benefits derived from the ownership of such immovable


37 Reproduced in Paragraphs 19 and 27.
38 Reproduced in Paragraphs 19 and 27.
Page 34 of 55
property. Ownership rights are also constitutionally protected and can

    only be interfered with as a result of the operation of law. Even the

    principles of equity come to the rescue of an owner, barring when the

    landowner is denuded of such protection in accordance with law. These

    rights even go beyond those of the other landholders.
56. Be that as it may, there also exist slum dwellers, belonging to the poor

    strata of society, who, on account of their economic backwardness and

    lack of governmental or social support, take shelter in extremely

    unhygienic conditions within slum areas. India being a welfare state, the

    Government has an unquestionable duty to confer these sections of our

    society with actionable rights for shelter and enable them to lead a

    dignified life. It is in performance of this duty and for the rehabilitation

    of these slum dwellers that the
Slums Act
has been enacted in

    Maharashtra. In doing so, while the Legislature has created rights in

    favour of the slum dwellers, the
Slums Act
also attempts to resolve the

    resultant dichotomy of interests between the landowners and slum

    dwellers. The legislation provides an opportunity for the landowner to

    develop the land, as well as for the occupants to bring their own scheme.

    It also creates incentives for a developer to undertake the development,

    such as an additional FSI and free-sale units.
57. Nevertheless, the dichotomy emerges in its complete form when we

    consider a case where the owner submits a valid SR Scheme, fulfilling all

    requirements for the slum dwellers, and the slum dwellers (through a

    proposed society) also bring forward another valid SR Scheme,
Page 35 of 55
nominating a different developer to undertake the rehabilitation. If the

    argument of the Appellants is accepted, both of these proposals would

    have equal priority.
58. In such a situation, if the SRA is allowed to exercise any discretion in

    giving priority to a particular proposal, it may lead to discriminatory and

    arbitrary results motivated by extraneous considerations. It also creates

    scope for an unholy nexus between the SRA and private developers. Such

    a regime would leave slum dwellers, who are already at a grave

    disadvantage against developers and landowners, vulnerable to greater

    exploitation, and could even result in unaccountable losses to the State

    exchequer. Ultimately, the real victims would be the slum dwellers

    themselves, left in inhumane living conditions and pushed to the very

    end of the line when receiving the benefits envisaged under the
Slums

    Act
. To counteract such occurrences, the Legislature, in its wisdom, has

    thought it appropriate to confer preferential rights on the landowner,

    though conditional for the redevelopment of the SR Area.
59. The peremptory right of redevelopment vested in the landowner does not

    militate against the rights of the slum dwellers. As explained earlier, if

    the landowner does not come up with a redevelopment proposal within a

    reasonable time, the occupants of the SR Area are entitled to submit their

    own proposal for redevelopment, empowering this marginalised section

    of our urban society. It enables them to forward an SR Scheme through

    a willing developer when the owner is not ready to support their

    endeavour to rehabilitate themselves.
Page 36 of 55
60. Therefore, there is no tenable reason, in law or in equity, to allow the

    occupants to exercise primacy over and steamroll the landowner’s

    proposal, especially when the latter is willing to implement the SR

    Scheme by itself, within the confines of the
Slums Act
. If the

    interpretation suggested by the Appellants is accepted, we would

    inevitably incentivise third-party developers and anti-social elements to

    prop up the poor slum dwellers so as to grab the land from the true

    owners. It would ultimately encourage mala-fide proposals to be filed,

    manipulating the inhabitants of these slums and stripping the owners of

    the fruits of their land.
61. We are also not inclined to accept the proposed equivalence of the rights,

    given the fact that the SRA has recognised the legislative preference

    granted to the owner or landlord in Circular No. 144-A dated 09.11.2015,

    which stipulates that “the first right to file the Slum Rehabilitation

    scheme is of the owner of the land.” By relaxing the requirement of

    consent of seventy percent of the slum occupants, it depicts a clear

    intention on behalf of the SRA that the occupants cannot override the

    owner’s proposal for an SR Scheme.
62. The learned Senior Counsel for ICM have also placed on record various

    notices issued by the SRA to owners of different SR Areas, expressly

    inviting   them   to   exercise   their   “first   preferential   right    for

    implementation of the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme.” They have

    further relied upon internal communications between the SRA and the
Page 37 of 55
State, where both sides have seemingly acknowledged that the owner has

     the first right to develop the land.
63. In light of the overwhelming material on record, which is in conformity

     with legislative intent, there can be no other conclusion but to deduce

     that a landowner has the first right among stakeholders to undertake

     redevelopment under an SR Scheme.
E.2 Issue II: Specific Notice/Invitation to the Owner
64. Having held that the landowner has a preferential right to develop the

     land, the High Court then read into the provisions of the Statute a

     requirement for a specific notice to be issued to the owner, inviting it to

     participate in the redevelopment of the land. The High Court has, in this

     regard, interpreted the phrase ‘reasonable time’ in Section 1339 to mean

     that the clock would start ticking only after the landowner is invited to

     submit an SR Scheme. Per contra, the Appellants have contended that

     no specific notice is required, and the owner is deemed to be notified once

     the Section 3C(1) Declaration, converting the land to an SR Area, is

     issued.
65. As discussed earlier, there are at least three provisions in the
Slums Act
,

     where the preferential right of a landowner to redevelop an SR Area is

     traceable. However, such a right is subject to the condition encompassed

     under
Section 13
,
40
viz., the SR Scheme must be submitted within a

     reasonable time after the Section 3C(1) Declaration. The owner failing to


39 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
40 Reproduced in Paragraph 28.
Page 38 of 55
do so would likely result in the SRA exercising its power under
Section 13
and taking over the development of the SR Area. In that

     eventuality, the owner would stand deprived of its preferential right to

     redevelop the SR Area.
66. We may hasten to add that beyond this adverse consequence, the

     situation would likely escalate to acquisition of the land under
Section 14
,41 backed by payment of a meagre compensation, which is far

     less than the fair and just market value of the property. In this

     eventuality, the owner loses not only its right to redevelop but,

     potentially, also the entirety of its rights over such land. This situation

     amplifies the already resounding need for the owner to first be notified

     and invited to exercise its rights.
67. It cannot be overlooked that in the absence of a prior notice, the owner

     may not even become aware that the Subject Land has been declared an

     SR Area. Unaware that it is required to submit an SR Scheme to exercise

     its preferential right, the owner could lose a substantial part of its rights

     over the land. This is despite being willing to submit an SR Scheme and

     undertake redevelopment. In contrast to the high likelihood of prejudice

     caused to the landowner, the procedural necessity of a prior notice does

     not cause inequity either to the first beneficiaries of the scheme, namely

     the slum dwellers, or to the SRA or the State. We fail to understand the

     SRA’s admonishable conduct in assuming that an owner, whose rights,




41 Reproduced in Paragraph 28.
Page 39 of 55
in no uncertain terms, would be adversely impacted, does not deserve to

     be heard before it is deprived of its preferential right for redeveloping the

     SR Area.
68. The Appellants have also averred that the publication of the Section 3C(1)

     Declaration constitutes adequate notice to a landowner. They have relied

     upon the text of Section 3C(1),42 which prescribes that the order

     declaring the land to be an SR Area shall be published in the Official

     Gazette and given wide publicity in the manner specified by the SRA,

     amounting to a deemed notice on the owner. At its core, the argument

     raised     is   that   the   owner   ought   to   be   vigilant,    and     the

     publication/publicity would be an adequate measure undertaken

     towards informing it.
69. True it is that the Gazette notification or a public notice in newspapers

     shall be deemed to have informed an owner regarding the Section 3C(1)

     Declaration. It will, however, be far-fetched and preposterous to further

     assume that such owner is also obligated to submit a redevelopment

     scheme when the said notification does not invite the owner to submit

     any proposal. Mere declaration of an area as an SR Area does not amount

     to inviting the landowner to redevelop the land, and the publication of

     the former cannot attract the consequences attributable to the latter.
70. Learned Senior Counsel for ICM rightly contended that without an

     invitation to conduct surveys, etc., on the SR Area and other support by



42 Reproduced in Paragraph 19.
Page 40 of 55
the SRA, the owner would be unable to prepare any SR Scheme, given

    the   technical   and   otherwise   inaccessible   requirements    for   its

    preparation. As has already been discussed, SRA’s Circular No. 144

    mandates that an SR Scheme must be complete in all respects, including

    the required Annexures. Generally, this would entail that the promoter

    of an SR Scheme undertakes a complete survey and feasibility study for

    the project. The 1997 Guidelines also stipulate specific requirements for

    the SR Scheme, including the details of the plot area (required to be

    mapped by government officials), existing hutments and their type,

    tenement density, extent and type of reservations, amenities, and

    available FSI, as well as number, details, identification, and consent of

    the slum dwellers.
71. There is no doubt in our minds that an owner would be unable to obtain

    this information without the involvement of the SRA in conducting

    surveys and demarcation. This is especially important if the slum

    dwellers are not in favour of the owner’s proposal. The owner cannot be

    left high and dry by the SRA when it comes to providing necessary

    support for the preparation of the SR Scheme. As such, the SRA cannot

    be allowed to shy away from its duty to invite the owner to conduct

    surveys, map the area, and conduct the necessary tests before finalising

    the SR Scheme and submitting it to the SRA.
72. We are also unable to accept the contention of Mr. Mehta that the

    requirement of a specific notice would reduce efficiency and lead to delay.

    The issuance of the specific notice would undoubtedly involve some
Page 41 of 55
expenditure of time and effort. However, the requirement to wait for the

    owner to come forward within a reasonable time already exists. By

    ensuring that the owner is able to come forward sooner, the SRA would

    reduce delays in obtaining proposals for SR Schemes. All that the SRA

    would need to incorporate into its process is the issuance of a

    notice-cum-invite to the landowner.
73. In fact, the record reveals that the SRA has employed this method in the

    past. ICM has sought to showcase two such instances, where the SRA

    has issued a specific notice-cum-invitation to the owner. It may be

    relevant to reproduce certain portions of the said communication:
“ [xxxx]
         And whereas, your name appears in record of rights made available
         from Revenue department, the list whereof is enclosed herewith. These
         lands are partly and/or fully encroached by Slum Dwellers, who are
         residing there without having basic civil amenities and in unhygienic
         conditions.
And whereas you must be aware that the Government of Maharashtra
         has published general Slum Rehabilitation Scheme as contemplated
         U/sec. 3(B) of the Maharashtra Slum Areas (IC&R) Act, 1971 in respect
         of Mumbai city and its suburban districts and even to that effect the
         Official Gazette Notification has been published on 9.4.1998.
         Accordingly in keeping with the aims and objects of the Government of
         Maharashtra to remove the slums from the Mumbai city and its
         suburban districts and to make the city slum free and in view of the
         provisions of
Section-12 (10)
and
3(1)
of the Maharashtra Slum Areas
         (IC&R) Act, 1971 and considering the provisions of Appendix-IV of
         amended DCR-33(10) you are called upon to indicate whether you
         claim to have first preferential right for implantation of the
         Slum Rehabilitation Scheme on the subject property under
         amended DCR 33(10) as per
Section 13(1)
of Slum Act, and in
         case of claim to such a right, you are further called upon to
         submit documents to substantiate such claim and to submit the
         Slum Rehabilitation Scheme in respect of said lands under the
         amended
Regulation 33(10)
of Development Control Regulations
         of Greater Mumbai 1991 within 3 months from the date of
         receipt of this notice. The Slum Rehabilitation Authority
         assures you of full co-operation on its part.
         Please take note that if you fail to intimate the claim under
Section 13(1)
of Slum Act and/or to establish your ownership
         claim as contemplated U/Sect. 13(1) of
Slum Act
and/or to the
Page 42 of 55
submit the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme within 3 months, Slum
          Rehabilitation Authority will be compelled to initiate action
          under Maharashtra Slum Areas (IC&R) Act 1971 for acquisition
          of the said lands for implementation of Slum Rehabilitation
          Scheme in the larger interest.
Note:- Attached list of survey numbers
          Yours faithfully,
          Sd/-
Chief Executive Officer
          Slum Rehabilitation Authority”
                                                  [Sic] [Emphasis supplied]
74. The above notice clearly reveals the intention of the SRA to bring the

     owner’s attention to its preferential right and its duty to implement an

     SR Scheme in exercise of such right. It calls upon the owner to prepare

     and submit the SR Scheme within 3 months of receipt of the notice so as

     to exercise its preferential right. In fact, it also assures the owner of full

     cooperation from the SRA for preparing the SR Scheme.
75. Considering the dire consequences potentially suffered by the owner

     upon inadvertent failure to exercise its preferential right and the SRA’s

     previous notices, we find that the requirement for a specific notice

     inviting the owner to submit an SR Scheme, as prescribed in the

     Impugned Judgement, must be read as mandatory.
E.3 Issue III:
Section 14
vis-à-vis
Section 13
76. Mr. Divan contended on behalf of Tarabai Society that even if there is a

     preferential right in favour of the owner, it does not militate against the

     power of the State to acquire the land under
Section 14
.43 In support of

     this contention, he heavily relied upon this Court’s decision in
Murlidhar Teckchand Gandhi
(supra). Contrarily, ICM submitted that


43 Reproduced in Paragraph 28.
Page 43 of 55
the power of the State to acquire land under
Section 14
is not

     independent but flows from
Section 13
.44


E.3.1 The State’s Power to Acquire
77. In this context, we deem it appropriate to clarify at this stage that

     Section 1445 empowers the State Government to acquire land if necessary

     to enable the SRA to carry out development under the SR Scheme. It is

     writ large on the text of
Section 14
that the State can invoke its power to

     acquire the land, if it is necessitated, as per the SRA, for the

     implementation of a Scheme.
78. To explicate, the SRA, in line with the scheme envisaged by the
Slums

     Act
, is not only authorised but also responsible for ensuring that

     development is undertaken in SR Areas. In furtherance of this objective,

     it invites developers to submit SR Schemes. In the event no developer

     comes forward, the SRA can take over the development itself. To achieve

     this, it would undoubtedly need to utilise the land in the SR Area for

     various purposes, such as preparing temporary or permanent transit

     residences, construction work, setback area, and access roads.
79. However, when tasked with such an endeavour, the SRA may face

     instances where the owner is unwilling to accede to the redevelopment

     of the land. In such situations, as per the 1997 Guidelines and
Regulation 33(10)
, a consent or no-objection certificate from the owner

     is mandatory for any proposal to be considered. By withholding such


44 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
45 Reproduced in Paragraph 28.
Page 44 of 55
consent, the landowner has the ability to perpetually stall the entire

    redevelopment.
80. This instance illustrates how it may become necessary for the State to

    acquire land using its eminent domain for the purpose of facilitating

    slum rehabilitation.
E.3.2 Interplay with the Owner’s Rights
81. Given the above backdrop, what becomes important for us to ascertain

    is whether such necessity can arise before the landowner’s preferential

    right to redevelop is extinguished.
82. As already held, the owner has a preferential right over other

    stakeholders to develop an SR Area. If the owner then chooses to exercise

    this right by submitting and implementing a valid SR Scheme, issues

    involving rights over the property would not arise. It is, thus, not

    fathomable that when the landowner is implementing an SR Scheme on

    its own, a necessity to acquire the land could arise.
83. Rather, any process to acquire the land shall have to be kept in abeyance

    till such time as the owner’s preferential right to develop it stands

    extinguished. Since it is open to the owner to file its own SR Scheme

    within a reasonable time and the proposal of the owner, if valid and

    complete, would take primacy, it cannot be said that there is any legal

    necessity to acquire the land. If acquisition is allowed to take place at

    this stage, it will jeopardise the preferential right of the landowner. It is

    only when the owner declines to undertake development or to support
Page 45 of 55
any third-party development, thereby foregoing its preferential right, that

     such a necessity would actually arise. There can thus be no doubt that,

     as long as the owner is willing to undertake development in exercise of

     its preferential right, the acquisition cannot proceed.
84. This can also be harmoniously read in conjunction with the requirement

     for a notice-cum-invitation to the owner, as set out in
Section 13
.46 Until

     the SRA has invited the owner to submit an SR Scheme, the owner’s right

     to develop the land cannot be said to have closed. In such a case, the

     subsisting preferential right cannot be frustrated or undermined by

     initiating the acquisition process.
85. This Court in
Murlidhar Teckchand Gandhi
(supra) held that
Sections

     13
and
14
,47 as they were couched in the original framework, are

     independent provisions, which can be invoked separately. Mr. Divan, on

     this premise, urged that a similar independent power to acquire the land

     was traceable under Chapter I-A also. However, such a contention would

     merit acceptance only if the object and scope of acquisition under
Section

     14
, as contained in Chapter V of the original framework, are similar, if

     not identical, to the scope and power of acquisition conferred under the

     same provision when proceeding under the Chapter I-A framework. In

     this context, it becomes crucial to analyse the differences herein.
86. Firstly, the original framework and the cited judgement do not confer or

     provide any preferential right in favour of the owner to develop the land,


46 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
47 Reproduced in Paragraphs 27 and 28.
Page 46 of 55
whereas there exists a definite primacy of the owner’s right to develop

     the SR Area under Chapter I-A. Secondly and more importantly, the

     scope of acquisition under
Section 14
(within Chapter V) in the original

     framework48 is much broader than that in Chapter I-A.49 In the former,

     the power of acquisition is wide enough to include improvement works

     and specific structures, whereas in the latter, it is restricted only to the

     implementation of an SR Scheme. Thirdly, in
Murlidhar Tekchand

     Gandhi
(supra), this Court had no occasion to evaluate the scope of

     Chapter I-A, to which we are concerned in the present matter. The

     perceived power to proceed under
Section 14
without responding to the

     rights and powers created under
Section 13
,50 cannot, thus, be applied

     mutatis mutandis in a case of an SR Scheme to be given effect under

     Chapter I-A. Given these stark differences, comparing the interpretation

     of the original framework and the Chapter I-A framework is akin to

     matching apples with oranges. The High Court has thus rightly

     distinguished this decision in the Impugned Judgement.
87. When an SR Area has been notified under Section 3C(1) of Chapter I-A51

     and its development through an SR Scheme is conceptualised,

     whereunder there is an inbuilt preferential right of an owner to carry out

     redevelopment, the power of acquisition under Section 1452 would not

     operate in an independent silo; rather, it must derive meaning and effect



48 Reproduced in Paragraph 15.
49 Reproduced in Paragraph 28.
50 Reproduced in Paragraph 13.
51 Reproduced in Paragraph 20.
52 Reproduced in Paragraph 27.
Page 47 of 55
from the principles prevailing throughout the legislative scheme of

    Chapter I-A.


E.4 Issue IV: Validity of the Acquisition in the Instant Case
88. Having held that the owner possesses a preferential right to redevelop

    the SR Area; that the SRA is duty-bound to invite the owner to submit

    an SR Scheme; and that acquisition is not warranted until such right

    stands extinguished, it is now apropos to apply these principles to the

    facts of the case in hand.
E.4.1 Absence of Necessity to Acquire
89. A bare reading of the records in this case indicates that the SRA never

    issued a notice to ICM, thereby inviting it to submit an SR Scheme, and

    does not appear to have explored the opportunity for the owner to develop

    the Subject Land. As such, ICM’s preferential right to develop the land

    was not extinguished.
90. Mr. Divan nevertheless contended that ICM was fully aware of the

    proposal to acquire the Subject Land, having appeared before the SRA

    on 26.08.2013 and 16.09.2013 for hearings, yet it failed to submit any

    SR Scheme from 2013 until 2016, when the acquisition notice was

    ultimately issued. He further pointed out that, despite being aware of the

    Section 3C(1) Declaration, ICM did not submit any SR Scheme within a

    reasonable time. According to him, such prolonged inaction must be

    treated as, and indeed amounts to, a closure of its preferential right.
Page 48 of 55
91. The records, however, indicate otherwise. ICM consistently demonstrated

    its willingness to redevelop the land and submit an SR Scheme in

    accordance    with
Regulation   33(10)
.   It   addressed   letters   dated

    23.08.2013 and 12.09.2013 to the SRA while the acquisition proposal

    was still under consideration, expressing its readiness to undertake

    redevelopment. It also approached the Tarabai Society by letter dated

    08.10.2013, to which no response was received. Further, on 25.02.2015,

    ICM wrote directly to the State, reiterating its intent to redevelop the

    Subject Land under an SR Scheme, and on 06.05.2015, it applied to the

    SRA seeking directions to carry out a survey and demarcation of the land

    to enable such a scheme. The SRA, however, for reasons best known to

    it, failed to act on the owner’s express willingness to proceed with the

    redevelopment even despite further correspondence dated 15.07.2015

    and 16.07.2015 sent by the owner.
92. In light of the foregoing facts, it cannot be concluded that ICM failed to

    submit its scheme within the stipulated time. The record reflects that

    ICM was, at all times, willing to prepare and submit an SR Scheme, but

    neither the Tarabai Society nor the SRA extended the necessary

    cooperation. Where the circumstances and the conduct of the SRA and

    the Society themselves impeded the owner from submitting the SR

    Scheme, it cannot be said that the owner failed to do so within a

    reasonable period.
93. It naturally follows from the above that the SRA and the State exceeded

    their power, apparently to pre-empt the owner from undertaking
Page 49 of 55
redevelopment. The acquisition of land, in such circumstances, being a

    colourable exercise of power, cannot be sustained.


E.4.2 Doubtful Conduct of the SRA and Tarabai Society
94. That being so, a closer examination of the record discloses a matter of

    even greater concern, casting serious doubt on the conduct and bona

    fides of both the SRA and the Tarabai Society.
95. To begin with, it is evident that the SRA’s entire initiative to undertake

    Slum Rehabilitation on the Subject Land was driven at the behest of the

    Tarabai Society. Since 2006, the Society had been submitting various

    proposals—first for the declaration of the expanded slum as a Slum Area

    under the then-prevailing framework, and subsequently for the

    acquisition of the slum land. This process ultimately culminated in a

    fresh survey by the SRA and, on 11.03.2011, the declaration of the

    Subject Land in its entirety as an SR Area. Even thereafter, the push for

    acquisition was persistently advanced by the Tarabai Society through its

    letters   dated   28.02.2012,   15.03.2012,    and   05.05.2012.    These

    circumstances beg the question—why was it so?
96. The answer perhaps lies in the fact that the Tarabai Society had

    appointed a developer, M/s Concrete Lifestyle and Infrastructures Pvt.

    Ltd., even before any proposals were forwarded to the SRA. This fact

    alone is sufficient to draw an almost irrefutable inference that the poor

    slum dwellers were allured by a powerful private developer, who had a

    vulture’s eye on the Subject Land and was seemingly affluent enough
Page 50 of 55
that it could effectively influence the decision-making process within the

    SRA as well. The conduct of the Society, too, adds to this understanding.
97. To instantiate, the Society never approached ICM after the publication of

    the Section 3C(1) Declaration to explore the development of the Subject

    Land. On the contrary, even when ICM itself reached out to the Society,

    no response was forthcoming. The management of the Society also seems

    to largely be under the influence of the private developer, who prevented

    it from pursuing legitimate remedies and rights available to the Society

    under an SR Scheme. Instead, it actively pursued every available avenue

    to have the State and the SRA acquire the Subject Land, thereby enabling

    the ill-intentioned developer to undertake an SR Scheme and reap the

    benefits of
Regulation 33(10)
.
98. That there was an invisible power acting behind the Society and the SRA

    is further evident from the fact that in some of its initial filings for the

    acquisition proposal, one Mr. Anuj Desai, Director of the developer

    company, submitted affidavits claiming to be the Constituted Attorney of

    ICM. However, no such Power of Attorney had been granted by ICM in

    favour of Mr. Desai. The High Court has also recognised such fraudulent

    acts of the developer in the Impugned Judgement, painting a stark

    picture as to how the constituents of Tarabai Society were rendered mute

    spectators as their rights were being used by the private developer to

    meet its greed.
Page 51 of 55
99. The conduct of the SRA is equally, if not more, troubling and warrants a

    closer scrutiny. Its actions reflect a pattern of shifting positions and an

    approach that is arbitrary and unreasonable and lacks bona fides. To

    begin with, the SRA made no attempt to invite or facilitate the submission

    of an SR Scheme from ICM. Even when ICM, on its own initiative,

    expressed readiness to undertake surveys and demarcation and sought

    the   SRA’s   assistance    in   that   process,   the   authority     remained

    unresponsive, turning a deaf ear to the owner’s requests.
100. Further, internal correspondences reveal that both, the SRA and the

    State, accepted that the owner has a preferential right to develop the SR

    Area. The CEO also recommended to the State on 15.05.2015 that ICM

    ought to be given an opportunity to submit an SR Scheme. It is relevant

    to reproduce an extract of this communication:
“ [xxxx]
          On the property to be acquired, M/s Indian Cork Mills Pvt. Ltd. has
          been reflected as the landlords… the argument was done on behalf of
          the Landlords that we can submit the scheme as landlords. As per the
          provisions under
Section 3(b)(4)(e)
of the Maharashtra Slum Area
          (Improvement, Clearance & Redevelopment) Act, 1971, the
          Landlord has a first right to develop the Slum Rehabilitation
          Area/Zone. Considering the provisions under the Act, it is
          deemed proper to give one opportunity to the landlords to
          submit the rehabilitation scheme before taking any final
          decision in the matter of land acquisition. Hence, request is made
          to take decision at the Government Level.”
                                                 [Sic] [Emphasis supplied]
101. In this vein, the Deputy Secretary, Ministry of Housing, Government of

    Maharashtra, in its letter dated 12.10.2015, also endorsed the

    above-reproduced proposal.
Page 52 of 55
102. The subsequent internal noting made by the District Collector (SRA) on

    the SRA’s file in respect of the acquisition have reaffirmed the preferential

    right of the landowner, as may be seen from the following contents of the

    noting dated 05.04.2016:
“ [xxxx]
         Considering the provisions under
Section 3(b)(4)(e)
of the Maharashtra
         Slum Area (Improvement, Clearance & Redevelopment) Act, 1971, the
         landlord has a first right to develop the slum rehabilitation
         area/zone. Considering the provisions of the said Act, it has been
         decided to grant one opportunity to the landlords in respect for
         submitting slum rehabilitation scheme, before taking final
         decision on acquisition of land. As such, it would be proper to give an
         opportunity to the landlords at the authority level. Furthermore, if the
         abovementioned proposed action is acceptable, then to submit the said
         matter to the High Power Committee does not arise.”
                                                    [Sic] [Emphasis supplied]
103. However, the very same document surprisingly reveals that the CEO took

    a contradictory view and stated that since one opportunity had already

    been granted to ICM, there was no necessity to give it one more chance

    to bring a development scheme. The record, thus, not only evidences an

    abrupt reversal of the CEO’s earlier position but also discloses a complete

    disregard for the directive of the Deputy Secretary. Such conduct raises

    serious reservations as to the considerations underlying the CEO’s

    decisions.
104. This part of the CEO’s opinion, even more curiously, found favour with

    the State, notwithstanding the previous letter dated 12.10.2015. The

    State’s readiness to accept the CEO’s report raises suspicions about the

    sanctity and integrity of the administrative process involved in this case.
Page 53 of 55
105. Moreover, having observed the above-quoted communications, the bona

     fides of the SRA as well as the Government are called into question when

     they seek to challenge, through these appeals, an interpretation that they

     had themselves previously accepted.
106. Such an anomalous situation does not speak well of the conduct of the

     private and the official actors. To permit the acquisition to stand, despite

     the dubious motives of Tarabai Society and its developer and the deeply

     suspect conduct of the SRA, would catalyse a travesty of justice.


F.   CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS
107. For the reasons set out above, the instant appeals are dismissed. The

     following conclusions and directions are, accordingly, issued:
i.    The Impugned Judgement of the High Court stands upheld;
ii.   The   status   quo   directed   vide   order   dated   27.01.2017    is,

           consequently, vacated;
iii. Keeping in mind the amendment in the applicable regulations

           during the pendency of these Civil Appeals, liberty is granted to ICM

           to submit, within a period of 120 days, a fresh SR Scheme for

           redevelopment of the Subject Land, strictly in accordance with laws

           and regulations in force; and


     iv.   The SRA and the State shall process ICM’s proposal as expeditiously

           as possible under the prescribed procedure, within a period of not

           more than 60 days from the date of ICM’s submission.
Page 54 of 55
108. All the matters and pending interlocutory applications, if any, stand

    disposed of in the aforementioned terms.
109. Ordered accordingly.
.........................................…….........J.
                                                                       (SURYA KANT)




                                  .........................................…….........J.
                                   (NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH)

NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 22, 2025
Page 55 of 55