[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Brij Bihari Gupta vs Manmet on 8 August, 2025
2025 INSC 948


                                                                                Non-Reportable
                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                               Civil Appeal Nos. 6338-6339 of 2024

                                Brij Bihari Gupta
                                                                                    …Appellant
                                                                  Versus
                                Manmet & Ors.
                                                                                …Respondents
                                                                    with

                                                    Civil Appeal No. 6341 of 2024

                                                    Civil Appeal No.6340 of 2024
                                                                    and
                                                    Civil Appeal No.6342 of 2024

                                                               J U D G M E NT

                                K. VINOD CHANDRAN, J.
The appeals arise from the orders of the High Court of

                                Chhattisgarh at Bilaspur, wherein the order of the Motor

                                Accidents Claims Tribunal granting compensation with

                                respect to the death/injuries suffered in a motor vehicle
Signature Not Verified       accident was challenged by both the insurance company
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2025.08.08
18:52:02 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 12
C. A. No. 6338-39 of 2024 & Ors.
and the claimants. There were a total of 11 claim petitions

    before the Tribunal out of which the insurance company

    choose to challenge the award in only three such claim

    petitions. The challenge was on the ground of there being

    no liability to indemnify, since the injured were gratuitous

    passengers in the goods vehicle and the driver was in

    possession and ownership of the vehicle on the strength of

    an agreement with the registered owner, while the policy

    was in the name of the registered owner. Before the

    Tribunal,        though        these   contentions   were      taken,

    compensation was awarded and the registered owner, the

    driver alleged to be the ostensible owner and the insurance

    company were made jointly and severally liable.
2. The claimants and the insurance company filed appeals

    before the High Court in which the company’s appeals were

    allowed finding the insurer absolved of its liability. In the

    claimant’s appeals, in two cases, the compensation was

    enhanced, and the other appeal was dismissed, affirming

    the Tribunal’s award insofar as the compensation is
Page 2 of 12
Civil Appeal Nos. 6338-39 of 2024 & Ors.
concerned. The present appeals are filed by the ostensible

    owner who also was the driver of the vehicle, who had also

    unsuccessfully sought a review insofar as the liability cast

    on him personally, to satisfy the award; which order in

    review also is challenged in two appeals captioned above.
3.      That the vehicle had a valid insurance policy in the

    name of the registered owner and that the driver had a valid

    driving license are admitted. Insurer claimed no liability to

    indemnify the registered owner because at the time of the

    accident, even according to the registered owner, by an

    agreement the possession and ownership of the vehicle was

    handed over to the appellant who was also driving the

    vehicle. The appellant did not transfer the registration, nor

    did he take out a policy in his name. It is also argued before

    the High Court that the injured claimants and the deceased

    were gratuitous passengers.
4.     Sh. Kaustubh Shukla learned counsel for the appellants

    would first point out that the issue as to the passengers

    being gratuitous has to be considered in the context of the
Page 3 of 12
Civil Appeal Nos. 6338-39 of 2024 & Ors.
village setting where the goods vehicle was plying. The

    injured /deceased were petty hawkers who had been

    transporting their goods in the goods vehicle and their

    presence in the vehicle was in their capacity of the owner

    of the goods. It is also argued that at the time of accident,

    the ownership had not been transferred in the name of the

    appellant. The appellant assails the order of the High Court

    mulcting the entire liability for the satisfaction of the awards

    on him. It is also argued that there were eleven claim

    petitions in which awards were passed, and the insurer

    employed a pick and choose method to challenge only

    three awards. The learned counsel also relied on a decision

    of this Court in
Naveen Kumar vs. Vijay Kumar & Ors.1to
further his claim for indemnification by the insurer,

    determining the liability on the registered owner.
5.      Sh. Subhranshu Padhi, learned Amicus Curiae for the

    claimants supported the appellant and also provided a



1 (2018) 3 SCC 1
Page 4 of 12
Civil Appeal Nos. 6338-39 of 2024 & Ors.
chart dealing with the facts of the case, award of

    compensation as also the enhancement made by the High

    Court. The learned counsel for the insurance company Sh.

    Rajesh Kumar Gupta resisted the claim pointing out that on

    both the grounds urged, the insurer has no liability. Insofar

    as the eleven claim petitions filed, the learned counsel

    sought time to appraise this Court about the fate of the other

    eight claim petitions and verify whether there were appeals

    filed.
6.       We are not concerned with the compensation as

    awarded by the Tribunal and enhanced in two cases by the

    High Court in these appeals, which seek determination of

    liability and its indemnification. It has to be first noticed, as

    submitted by learned Amicus Curiae, that in Civil Appeal

    Nos.6341 and 6342 there has been a settlement arrived at

    in the Lok Adalat. The documents relating to the Lok Adalat

    have been filed along with I.A. No.190313/2022, produced

    as Annexure R7. The entire claim has been settled by the

    appellant in a Lok Adalat by payment of part amount and
Page 5 of 12
Civil Appeal Nos. 6338-39 of 2024 & Ors.
issuance of a cheque for the balance amount and nothing

    survives in the said appeals, which stand dismissed.
7.     Insofar as the contention regarding the passengers in

    the goods vehicle being gratuitous, we have to notice the

    evidence as produced by the second respondent along with

    I.A. No.190303/2022 in C.A. Nos. 6338-6339/2024. The

    deposition of the claimant injured in the said appeal clearly

    indicates that he was a fish monger and the basket with fish

    for sale, was being carried in the goods vehicle, in which

    the claimant was also accompanying the goods. Likewise in

    C.A. No.6340/2024, the deceased passenger was a

    vegetable hawker, who too accompanied the goods carried

    in the vehicle. We see from the cross-examination by the

    learned counsel for the insurer that the said fact was

    challenged by way of a suggestion. In the examination-in-

    chief of the witness for the insurer produced as Annexure-

    R/13, the         Administrative       Officer   asserted   that   the

    passengers were gratuitous. But, in cross-examination he

    categorically stated that he did not have any knowledge
Page 6 of 12
Civil Appeal Nos. 6338-39 of 2024 & Ors.
regarding the status of the deceased / injured in the

    accident and he does not have any information as to

    whether they were accompanying the goods in the vehicle

    or not. The suggestion made to the claimant hence has to be

    ignored. It is pertinent that in the reply to the claim filed,

    produced as Annexure-R/11, the insurer had raised a

    contention that if there were goods in the vehicle then the

    seizure of such goods would have been recorded in the

    mahazar prepared in the criminal case. However, the

    insurance company did not take any effort to produce any

    such mahazar. The claimant while being cross-examined

    was also not confronted with the records of the criminal

    case which were produced and marked by the claimants in

    their evidence.
8.    We also find that the Tribunal had specifically found so

    with respect to the issue of gratuitous passengers:
“बीमा कंपनी का केवल एक ही बचाव है कक, आवेकिका
          िु र्घटनाग्रस्त वाहन, जो कक माल वाहक यान है , में अनुग्रह यात्री

          थी और उसे तृ तीय पक्ष नहीं माना जा सकता है परं तु प्रकरण
Page 7 of 12
Civil Appeal Nos. 6338-39 of 2024 & Ors.
में उपलब्ध तथ्ों एवं साक्ष्यो से स्पष्ट होता है कक आवेकिका
          िु र्घटनाग्रस्त वाहन में अपने सामान की सुरक्षा के कलए बैठी हुई

          थी और मोटर यान अकिकनयम के प्राविानों के अनुसार माल

          वाहक यान में अपनी सामान की सुरक्षा के कलए बै ठे व्यक्ति को
          अनुग्रह याकत्र नही माना जा सकता।“


    The High Court has interfered with the said finding of fact

    without any material and in a perfunctory manner. We

    hence find that the contention raised by the insurer that the

    deceased/injured             in    the   accident       were      gratuitous

    passengers in the vehicle remains in the realm of mere

    assertion without substantiation. Section 147 which has the

    nominal heading “Requirements of policies and limits of

    liability” by sub-section (1)(b)(i) enables indemnification

    by the insurer, any liability with respect to the death or

    bodily injury to third parties and any person including

    owner of the goods or his authorized representative carried

    in the motor vehicle.
9.      The next contention is with respect to the transfer of

    ownership to the appellant herein which even the
Page 8 of 12
Civil Appeal Nos. 6338-39 of 2024 & Ors.
registered owner asserts. To substantiate, the agreement is

    produced as Annexure-R/1 again in IA No.190313/2022 in

    the appeals we have dismissed herein above for having

    settled the matter in the Lok Adalat. The agreement only

    indicates that the sale consideration was fixed at

    Rs.90,000/- and on payment of Rs.80,000/- there was a

    transfer of possession. The recital in the agreement clearly

    indicates that the balance of Rs.10,000/- shall be paid within

    two months and only after the balance is paid the

    registration of the vehicle would be transferred. The recitals

    clearly indicate that there has been no transfer of

    ownership of the vehicle and the appellant merely had

    possession of the same.
10.      There is considerable reliance placed by the insurer

    on the fact that the appellant had received the vehicle from

    the Magistrate’s Court, asserting his ownership. The order

    directing handing over the vehicle to the appellant is

    produced as Annexure-R/4, in IA No.190313/2022, where it

    is indicated that even at that point the registered owner’s
Page 9 of 12
Civil Appeal Nos. 6338-39 of 2024 & Ors.
name was not changed. The registered owner was present

      before the Magistrate as we see from the order and while

      ordering        handing          over   of   the   vehicle,     the

      applicant/appellant was directed to change the ownership

      within 30 days. Hence obviously the balance consideration

      of Rs.10,000/- had not been paid till that date. The transfer

      of the registration as per Section 50 of the Motor Vehicle Act,

      19882 requires the transferee to report the fact of transfer in

      the prescribed form to the Registering Authority within

      whose jurisdiction the transfer is affected within 14 days of

      the transfer. There is no contention raised by the registered

      owner that he made such a report as required under Section

      50(1)(a)(i) of the Act. Hence the ownership was with the

      registered owner even at the time of the accident and it is

      his liability to compensate the victims in the accident, which

      also has to be indemnified by the insurer. We also notice

      that in Naveen Kumar1, the definition of owner in the Act of
2
“the Act”
Page 10 of 12
Civil Appeal Nos. 6338-39 of 2024 & Ors.
1988 was interpreted to facilitate fulfilment of the object of

    the law, which was not to burden the claimant to follow the

    trail of successive transfers. The liability to pay falls

    squarely on the registered owner, even if there has been

    successive transfers which has to be indemnified by the

    insurer.
11. We also notice that the contention raised of eight claim

    petitions having not been challenged has not been repelled

    by the insurer. We were not inclined to grant any time to the

    learned counsel for the insurer to verify as to what occurred

    in the eight other claim petitions, since the judgment of the

    High Court clearly records the contention of the claimants,

    that there was a pick and choose employed. The High Court

    has failed to consider the same and it was for the insurer to

    have refuted the same with documentary proof in the

    present appeals. In any event, the said issue does not

    assume relevance since we have negatived the grounds

    raised by the insurer to absolve itself of the liability. We

    hence        allow       C.A.          No.6338-6339/2024   and     C.A.
Page 11 of 12
Civil Appeal Nos. 6338-39 of 2024 & Ors.
No.6340/2024. For completeness we notice that the Tribunal

    had granted 12% interest from the date of the claim petition

    and for the enhanced amount, the High Court has granted

    6% interest, again from the date of filing of the claim

    petition. Awards impugned in the appeals, other than that

    dismissed shall be satisfied by the insurer. Ordered

    accordingly.
12.      Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
………….……………………. J.
(K. VINOD CHANDRAN)




                                           ………….……………………. J.
(N. V. ANJARIA)



    NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 08, 2025
Page 12 of 12
Civil Appeal Nos. 6338-39 of 2024 & Ors.