[Cites
78
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kallu Nat Alias Mayank Kumar Nagar vs State Of U P on 5 August, 2025
2025 INSC 930                                                         REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                         EXTRAORDINAIRY CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 10010 OF 2025



             KALLU NAT ALIAS MAYANK KUMAR NAGAR                     ...PETITIONER(S)



                                                  VERSUS



             STATE OF U.P. AND ANR.                                ...RESPONDENT(S)




                                              JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Date: 2025.08.05
17:55:25 IST
Reason:
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.,

For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided in the following parts: -
INDEX
A. FACTUAL MATRIX ................................................................................... 3

B. IMPUGNED ORDER ................................................................................. 10

C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER ........................ 12

D. ISSUE FOR DETERMINATION ............................................................. 15

E. ANALYSIS .................................................................................................. 15

   i.   What is the import and purport of ‘Cognizance’ under the scheme of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973? ............................................................... 15

        a. Meaning of the expression ‘Cognizance’ and ‘Taking Cognizance’ under
              Chapter XIV of the Code. ............................................................................ 15

        b. Cognizance of offences by Magistrates and the Three Distinct Points of
              Origin of the Criminal Machinery under the Code. .................................... 20

              I.      On the basis of a Complaint. .............................................................. 21

   ii. Who takes Cognizance of Offence exclusively triable by Court of Sessions
        under the Code? ................................................................................................ 36

        a. Role of the Magistrate where the Offence is exclusively triable by a Court
              of Session. .................................................................................................... 37

              I.      Chapter XVI - Section(s) 207, 208 and 209 of the Code and
                      Committal of Case by a Magistrate to the Court of Sessions. ............ 38

        b. Role of the Court of Session after the case is committed to it by the
              Magistrate under
Section 209
of the Code. ................................................. 48

        c. Object and Purpose underlying
Section 193
of the Code. ........................... 60

        d. How the decision of this Court in Dharam Pal should be understood. ...... 69

F. CONCLUSION ........................................................................................... 83
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                                                               Page 2 of 85
1. This petition arises from the order passed by the High Court of judicature at

     Allahabad dated 03.04.2025 in Criminal Revision No. 6732 of 2024 (for short,

     the “Impugned Order”) by which the High Court rejected the revision

     application filed by the petitioner-herein and thereby affirmed the order passed

     by the Additional District and Sessions Judge-Fast Track Court (Crime against

     women) Kanpur Dehat below disposal proposal paper no. 92 of 2019 arising

     from the First Information Report bearing case crime no. 402 of 2018 lodged

     with the police station Shivali, District Kanpur Dehat for the offence

     punishable under Section(s) 302 and 376 of the
Indian Penal Code
, 1860 (for

     short, the “
IPC
”).
A.      FACTUAL MATRIX
2. The respondent No. 2 herein (original first informant) is the husband of the

     victim (deceased). The victim all of a sudden went missing on 21.11.2018. On

     24.11.2018 the dead body of the victim was recovered somewhere from the

     bushes lying on the outskirts of the village. In such circumstances the first

     informant i.e. the husband lodged a First Information Report at the concerned

     police station. In the FIR the first informant named one Ajay as the suspect.
The first informant alleged that Ajay had an extra-marital affair with his wife

     (victim) and was last seen with the victim and accordingly he alleged that Ajay

     might have been involved in the murder of his wife. In the course of the
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                          Page 3 of 85
investigation, the name of the petitioner-herein surfaced. Some of the

   witnesses in their police statements recorded under
Section 161
of the CrPC

   stated that the petitioner herein had made an extra judicial confession about

   his involvement in the alleged crime. Later the investigation came to be

   transferred to the Crime Branch. The transfer of investigation took place

   sometime in 2019. The Crime Branch gave a clean chit to the petitioner-

   herein. On 21.02.2019 chargesheet came to be filed only against Ajay. The

   name of the present petitioner was dropped from the chargesheet.
3. On 11.03.2019 the case came to be committed under
Section 209
of the Code

   of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, the “
CrPC
”) being exclusively triable

   by the Court of Session. Ajay Kumar (accused) against whom chargesheet was

   filed was brought before the trial court on 02.04.2019 for the purpose of

   framing of charge. However, on the same day i.e. 02.04.2019 the respondent

   No. 2 (husband of the victim) filed an application under
Section 193
of the

   CrPC seeking to summon the petitioner-herein as an accused. It took almost

   five years for the trial court to decide the application preferred by the

   respondent No. 2 under
Section 193
of the CrPC seeking to summon the

   petitioner-herein as an accused.
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                     Page 4 of 85
4. The trial court in exercise of powers under
Section 193
of the CrPC ordered

   that the petitioner-herein shall be summoned as an accused in connection with

   the crime referred to above and be put to trial along with Ajay.
5. The order passed by the trial court reads thus: -
“Heard and properly examined the file.
It is clear from the perusal of the file that in the present case,
         complainant Vijaylal has registered an FIR on 24.11.2018 at
         Police Station- Shivli, Kanpur Dehat, regarding the murder of his
         wife/deceased Shivwati between 21.11.2018 and 24.11.2018. The
         First Information Report was registered against accused Ajay
         Kumar under
Section-302
IPC.
On behalf of the complainant, Proforma Paper No. 5B has been
         presented and it has been stated that till the time of filing the
         report, the applicant/ complainant was not aware of the name of
         the proposed opponent. But during the investigation, the name of
         the accused has come to light and sufficient evidence is also
         available in the case diary, on the basis of which a request has
         been made to summon the opponent Mayank Kumar Nagar alias
         Kallu Nat.
The statement in the case diary number-2 states that his wife
         Shivwati had illicit relations with the cousin" of this witness. On
         '21,11.2018 at around 7 pm his wife went out on the pretext of
         defecation and has not returned home since then. On 21.11.2018
         at around 8 pm Pushpa Devi, Deepu and Vinod of the village told
         that they saw his wife Shivwati going towards the forest with his
         cousin Ajay Kumar. On 24.11.2018, at around 5 pm, when they
         reached the wasteland while searching, they found the dead body
         of his wife lying in the bushes. A noose of sal was tied around her
         neck. His wife was killed by his cousin Ajay Kumar by putting a
         noose of sal around her neck due to Illicit relations.
In the statement of Renu, who is the sister-in-law of the
         victim/deceased Shivwati, it is mentioned in the case diary
         number-l0 that her sister-in-law's conduct was not good, she had
         a love affair with her aunt's son Ajay and Kallu Nat, who had come
         with Ajay, also had a relationship with her sister-in-law Shivwati.
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 5 of 85
On 21.11.2018, Kallu Nat had dropped her sister-in-law home on
         a motorcycle in the evening. The next day on 22.11.2018, he came
         home early in the morning on the pretext of buying a buffalo.
         Whereas Kallu Nat is fully aware that there is no buffalo for sale
         in this house. His sister-in law stayed with him the whole day on
         21/11/2018 from here to the hospital and from the hospital to here.
         The justification of coming on the morning of 22/11/2018 is
         doubtful.
In the case diary slip number - 10 itself, the statement of witness
         Framed Kumar is recorded that his father Sundar was ill, who was
         admitted in Kiran Hospital, his sister-in-law Mrs. Shivwati came
         to see his father in Kiran Hospital Kanpur city on 21.11.2018, who
         was brought by a person on a motorcycle, when she asked, he said
         that he was her brother-in-law from the village. At that time, this
         witness's brother-in-law and brother-in-law's son in-law were in
         the hospital, who knew that person.
Neeraj's statement is mentioned in case diary paper number 10
         that his brother-in-law Pramod's father Sundar was admitted in
         Kiran Hospital Kanpur Nagar. His younger sister Shivwati came
         on a motorcycle with Kallu Nat of Baghpur on 21/11/2018, whom
         he already knew, Kallu Nat used to visit his sister Shivwati's house
         earlier also, that's why he knew her. On the same day at around
         4:00 pm, Kallu Nat took his sister from the hospital to Ludhaura.
         Deepak's statement is mentioned in case diary paper number 10
         that Shivwati was his wife's aunt, who was his paternal aunt-in-
         law. On 21/11/2018, he went to Kiran Hospital Kalyanpur to see
         the father of his paternal atmt Framod, resident of Kapuipur.
         Where her aimt-in-law Mrs. Shivwati came to the hospital sitting
         on Kallu Nat's motorcycle and in the evening Kallu went back to
         Varshas along the river. This witness has stated in his statements
         that he recognized Kallu Nat, resident of Bagpur, at Shivwati's
         house in Luchaura.
The investigating officer has recorded in paper number 11 that
         CDR of mobile number 7678819303 of deceased Smt. Shivwati has
         been received, on examination of which it was found that on
         21/11/2018 a very long conversation took place from the above
         mentioned mobile number of the deceased to mobile number
         6386602633 at different times from 15-19-18 to 22-55-47 and on
         22/11/2018 in the night from 00-30-15 to 03-31-26 seven times at
         different times, details of which are recorded in the CD and it is
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 6 of 85
also mentioned on examination of the CDR received from
         1/11/2018 to 22/11/2018 that from mobile number 7678819303 of
         deceased Shivwati to mobile number 17 calls were made to
         6386602633 from 21/11/2018 to 22/11/2018 in which the
         deceased had a long conversation and it was done at inopportune
         time. On checking the software, the mobile number 6386602633
         holder is shown as Shri Mayank Kumar Nagar son of Jeetpal
         Nagar resident of 194 Bagpur, Maitha Kanpur Dehat.
In case diary paper number- 11, Surjan Singh's statement is
         recorded that a few days ago at around 4:00 pm, I was sitting on
         the high platform in front of Bagpur Inter College near
         Ramptakash Aatishbaaz of Ludhaura village. Kallu Nat of Bagpur
         came. He told Ramprakash that uncle I want to talk to you and
         came on the platform and told in front of this witness that on
         21/11/2018, he had taken Shivwati on his motorcycle to Kiran
         Hospital Kalyanpur to see her relative and give him food. He told
         that Ajay and he had illicit relations with Shivwati and also told
         that both of them were friends. He told that he had made a plan to
         elope on the same day. As per the plan, Ajay had taken Shivwati
         from her home to Raipur in the evening and when Kallu Nat did
         not reach Raipur as promised, they would talk to each other
         throughout the night. In the morning when Kallu Nat reached
         Raipur, Shivwati would get upset and want to go back home and
         she would insist on elope. And when she did not agree after being
         explained, he would come to Ludhaura village on the night of
         22/28-11-18 to get money and clothes to elope. He also told that
         he had raped Shivwati one by one in the cover near Ludhaura in
         the barren land and both of them would kill Shivwati by putting a
         noose around her neck with a shawl and he was also apologizing.
         In the case diary's paper number 12A, the doctor who conducted
         the post mortem of the deceased, Mr. Puneet Kumar Pandey, has
         stated that it has been confirmed that the deceased was raped and
         strangled to death and it is also mentioned that the entire
         investigation revealed that the deceased Shivwati was in a love
         relationship with Ajay Kumar and Kallu Nat alias Mayank Kumar
         Nagar. Due to the love affair, the accused Ajay Kumar took
         Shivwati to Raipur on the instructions of Kallu Nat with the
         intention of elopement on the evening of 21/11/2018 and Kallu Nat
         failed in his plan and tried to convince her the next day and made
         a plan with Ajay to remove the deceased from the way on her
         insistence and under this plan, Shivwati was lured and taken to the
         barren land in village Ludhaura and both of them raped her one
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                       Page 7 of 85
by one in the barren land and as per the plan, both of them together
         killed the deceased by strangulating her by putting a noose around
         her neck with a sal. On the basis of the above, the name of Mayank
         Kumar Nagar alias Kallu Nat came to light and
Section 376
IPC
         was added.
It is mentioned in the case diary paper number-13 that I, the in-
         charge inspector, along with my accompanying staff, vehicle' and
         driver left from police station to village Bagpur and raided the
         possible locations of the accused Mayank Kumar Nagar alias
         Kallu Nat who has come into light recently, but he was not found.
         He is absconding as usual.
According to the case diary paper number-17, Deep Kumar
         appeared before the Additional Director General of Police,
         Kanpur Zone- Kanpur on 13.01.2019 and gave a written
         application and stated that his younger brother Kallu has no
         involvement in the murder of Shivwati and the Investigating officer
         is demanding one lakh rupees through his broker. On the basis of
         which application, the investigation of the case has been
         transferred from Chandrashekhar Dubey, Incharge Inspector,
         Shivli, Kanpur Dehat to Inspector Shri Naveen Kumar, Crime
         Branch, Kanpur Dehat.
It is clear from all the above evidence/discussion that according
         to complainant Vijaylal, his wife went to the toilet on 21.11.2018
         at around 7 pm. whose dead body was found lying in the bushes
         on 24.11.2018 at around 5 pm, with a noose of sal around her
         neck. According to the complainant, Ajay Kumar killed the
         deceased. It is worth mentioning that the complainant is not an
         eyewitness to the incident. According to the other witness of the
         case, Renu, the deceased also had illicit relations with Kallu Nat,
         who had gone to Kanpur to see her relative on 21.11.2018 with
         Kallu Nat and on 22.11.2018 also Kallu Nat came home.
         According to another witness Pramod Kumar, the deceased had
         come to Kiran Hospital to see her relatives on 21.11.2018 sitting
         on a person's motorcycle. On being asked, the deceased had said
         that the person was her brother-in-law from the village, whom the
         witness' brother-in-law and son-in-law knew. According to
         witness Neeraj, his younger sister/deceased Shivwati had come to
         the hospital on 21.11.2018 sitting on Kallu Nat's motorcycle and
         on the same day at around 4 pm. Kallu Nat had taken his sister
         from the hospital to Ludhaura. According to witness Deepak, on
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 8 of 85
21.11.2018, the deceased had come to Kiran Hospital to see her
         relatives sitting on a motorcycle with Kallu Nat and had returned
         with Kallu Nat. According to witness Surjan, Kallu Nat had told
         Ramprakash in front of this witness that Kallu Nat and Ajay
         Kumar had illicit relations with the deceased Shivwati and had
         raped Shivwati In turns in the bushes near Ludhaura in the barren
         land and had killed her by putting a noose around her neck with a
         shawl.
The doctor who conducted the post-mortem of the deceased. Dr.
         Puneet Kumar Pandey, has stated in the summary that the
         deceased was raped and strangulated to death.
The case diary of the case shows that the deceased had a long
         conversation 17 times from her mobile to another number from
         21.11.2018 to 22.11.2018, which other number 6386602633
         belongs to Mayank Kumar Nagar son of Jeetpal and the deceased
         had called the above number several times in the past as well. The
         case diary also shows that during investigation, it was found that
         the deceased Shivwati had illicit relations with Ajay Kumar and
         Kallu Nat alias Mayank Kumar and with the intention of
         eliminating the deceased, Ajay Kumar and Kallu Nat alias Mayank
         Kumar, as per the plan, took the deceased Shivwati to the barren
         village Ludhaura and raped her one by one and killed her by
         putting a noose around her neck.
On the basis of the application of Deep Kumar, brother of the
         opponent Kallu Nat alias Mayank Kumar Nagar, the investigation
         was given to another investigator and a chargesheet has been sent
         to the court against only accused Ajay Kumar under
Section 302
,
376
IPC.
All the above evidence, facts, circumstances and investigation
         show that the opponent Kallu Nat alias Mayank Kumar Nagar had
         illegal relations with the deceased/victim Shivwati. Who is also a
         friend of the accused Ajay Kumar in the said opponent case. With
         the aim of removing the deceased from their path, accused Ajay
         Kumar and opponent Kallu Nat alias Mayank Kumar-Nagar, as
         per-the-plan, called-the victim deceased-Shivwati to the-
         wasteland in Ludhaura village and forcibly raped the victim
         Shivwati one by one (gang rape) and by tightening the noose of
         shawl around the neck of the victim Shivwati, killed the victim
         deceased Shivwati.
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                      Page 9 of 85
Therefore, on the basis of the above facts and circumstances and
          evidence available on the file, it is justified to summon the opposite
          accused Kallu Nat alias Mayank Kumar Nagar for trial under
Section 376
,
302
IPC.
Order
          The application presented by complainant case / applicant Vijay
          Lai under paper number - SB under
Section 193
CrPC dated
          26.04.2019 is allowed. Accused Kallu Nat alias Mayank Kumar
          Nagar son of Jeetpal Nagar, resident of 194 Baghpur (Maitha),
          Police Station- Shivli- District - Kanpur Dehat is taken cognizance
          under
Section 376
,
302
IPG. Accordingly, summons should be
          issued to accused Kallu Nat alias Mayank Kumar Nagar. The case
          be presented on 07/06/2024 for further action / charge on accused
          Kallu Nat alias Mayank Kumar Nagar.”
6. Thus, it appears from the aforesaid that the application filed by the

     complainant under
Section 193
of the CrPC to summon the petitioner-herein

     as an accused came to be allowed. Having regard to the materials on record

     the trial court reached the conclusion that there was prima facie material

     indicating involvement of the petitioner-herein in the alleged crime and he

     should be asked to face the trial along with the co-accused against whom

     chargesheet was filed by the Investigating Agency for the offence of rape and

     murder.
B.      IMPUGNED ORDER
7. The order referred to above came to be challenged before the High Court by

     way of criminal revision application. The High Court rejected the criminal

     revision application holding as under: -
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                           Page 10 of 85
“5. At the very outset, the learned A.G.A. for State-opposite party-
1 has raised a preliminary objection regarding maintainability of
         present Criminal revision. Learned A-G.A. submits that since
         applicant has already approached this Court by means of
         aforementioned application under
Section 482
Cr.P.C., therefore,
         present criminal revision for the same relief is not maintainable.
According to the learned A.G.A., no liberty was granted by this
         Court to the applicant to file a criminal revision nor the
         aforementioned application was dismissed on the ground of
         alternative remedy. He therefore submits that in view of law laid
         down by Apex Court in the case of
Sarguja Transport Service Vs.
         State Transport Appellate
tribunal, M.P. Gwalior and others
         (1987) 1 SCC 5, the present criminal revision shall not be
         maintainable.
Learned A.G.A. has then referred to the judgement
         of Supreme Court in
Prabhu Chawla Vs. State of Rajasthan and
         another
, (2016) 16 SCC 30 wherein the Apex Court has held that
         an application under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. is not liable to be
         dismissed on the ground of alternative remedy, of filing a revision.
6. On the edifice of aforesaid submissions, the learned A.G.A.
         submits that the true import of the order dated 07.08.2024 is that
         the revisionist has been granted liberty to approach the competent
         court and not to file criminal revision before this Court. As such,
         present criminal revision is not maintainable and therefore liable
         to be dismissed.
7. Learned A.G.A. has then submitted that the Court of Sessions in
         exercise of jurisdiction under
Section 193
Cr.P.C. has summoned
         the present applicant/revisionist. Referring to the five Judges
         Bench Judgement of Supreme Court in
Dharmpal and others Vs.
         State of Haryana and another
, (2014) 3 SCC 306, the learned
         A.G.A. submits that the order impugned in present criminal
         revision cannot be said to be illegal for want of jurisdiction. As
         such, the order impugned cannot be challenged on the ground of
         jurisdictional error. On the cumulative strength of above
         submission, the learned A.G.A. submits that present criminal
         revision is not maintainable and therefore liable to be dismissed.
8. When confronted with above, the learned counsel for revisionist
         could not overcome the same.
9. Having heard the learned counsel for revisionist, the learned
         AG.A. for State-opposite party-1 and upon perusal of record that
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 11 of 85
court finds that the preliminary objection raised by the learned
          A.G.A in opposition to this criminal revision is clearly borne out
          from the record and furthermore, the same could not be dislodged
          by the learned counsel for revisionist with reference to the record
          at this stage. As such, no good ground now exits to entertain the
          present criminal revision.
10. In view of above, this criminal revision fails and is liable to be
          dismissed.
11. It is accordingly dismissed.”
8. Thus, the High Court rejected the revision application filed by the petitioner

     herein and thereby affirmed the order passed by the trial court summoning the

     petitioner as an accused to face the trial along with the accused named in the

     charge sheet. The High Court rejected the revision application relying on the

     Constitution Bench decision of this Court in
Dharam Pal & Ors. vs. State of

     Haryana & Anr.
reported in (2014) 3 SCC 306.
9. In such circumstances
referred to above
the petitioner is here before this Court

     with the present petition.
C.      SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
10.Mr. Vikas Upadhyay, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner

     vehemently submitted that the trial court as well as the High Court committed

     a serious error in summoning the petitioner as an accused to face the trial along

     with the charge sheeted accused, namely, Ajay Kumar. He would submit that
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                           Page 12 of 85
the petitioner could have been summoned as an accused to face the trial only

   after the trial court would have started recording oral evidence of the

   witnesses. In other words, according to the learned counsel it is only if the

   involvement of the petitioner would have surfaced from the oral evidence of

   any of the witnesses, then the trial court would have been justified to summon

   the petitioner to face the trial in exercise of the powers under
Section 319
of

   the CrPC.
11.The learned counsel vehemently submitted that there was no scope for the trial

   court to summon the petitioner in exercise of the powers under
Section 193
of

   the CrPC as the Magistrate while committing the case to the Court of Session

   had already taken cognizance of the offence and in such circumstances the

   trial court by invoking
Section 193
of the CrPC could not have taken

   cognizance for the second time. He would submit that the power under
Section

   193
CrPC is a stage specific power and in the exact words of the learned

   counsel; once that stage has crossed it gets exhausted unlike the power under
Section 319
of the CrPC which could be exercised multiple times during a

   particular period when the trial is on and is not bound by any specific stage of

   trial.
12.Relying on the decision of this Court in
Balveer Singh & Anr. vs. State of

   Rajasthan
reported in (2016) 6 SCC 680 he would submit that there is nothing
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 13 of 85
like second cognizance. According to him if a Magistrate has taken

   cognizance in a case before committing the case, then despite there being

   power under
Section 193
of the CrPC the Sessions court cannot again take

   cognizance.
The learned counsel relying on the Constitution Bench decision

   in the case of
Dharam Pal
(supra) would submit that cognizance of offence

   can be taken only once i.e. either by the Magistrate or by the Sessions court.

   According to the learned counsel there is nothing like ‘part-cognizance’.
13.In other words, the argument of the learned counsel appearing for the

   petitioner is that the Constitution Bench decision of this Court in
Dharam Pal
(supra) says in so many words that cognizance of a sessions triable offence

   cannot be taken by a Magistrate but the same has to be taken by a Sessions

   Judge after committal. According to the learned counsel, cognizance of a

   police report/chargesheet filed by the police is always taken by the Magistrate

   irrespective of whether the offences alleged therein are triable by a Court of

   Sessions or not.
He would submit that the ratio of
Dharam Pal
(supra) should

   be understood as conveying that
Section 193
does not permit the Sessions

   Judge to take cognizance of the same offences of which cognizance stood

   taken by the Magistrate under
section 190
of the Code which the Magistrate

   takes in order to reach the stage of committal under
Section 209
of the Code.

   And if once cognizance is taken by the Magistrate, the same cannot be done

   by the Sessions Judge.
According to the learned counsel
Dharam Pal
(supra)
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                       Page 14 of 85
says that cognizance of sessions trial offences can only be taken by the

     Sessions Judge.
14.In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned counsel prayed that there

     being merit in his petition, the same may be considered accordingly.
D.      ISSUE FOR DETERMINATION
15.The seminal issue that falls for our consideration is whether the Court of

     Session, without itself recording evidence, can summon a person to stand trial

     in exercise of its powers under
Section 193
of the Code of Criminal Procedure

     (for short, the
CrPC
) as an accused (along with others committed to it by a

     Magistrate) on the basis of materials in the form of statements and other

     documents as contained in the final report of the investigating officer under
Section 173
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 independently of the

     provisions of
Section 319
of the said Code?
E.      ANALYSIS


i.      What is the import and purport of ‘Cognizance’ under the scheme of
        the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973?

a.      Meaning of the expression ‘Cognizance’ and ‘Taking Cognizance’
        under Chapter XIV of the Code.
16.Mr. Vikas Upadhyay, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner herein

     has vehemently canvassed that cognizance of an offence, in law, can be taken
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 15 of 85
only once. He submitted that in cases involving offences triable exclusively

   by the Court of Sessions, cognizance of such offence may be taken either by

   a Magistrate prior to the committal of the case, or, in the absence of such

   cognizance at the instance of the Magistrate, by the Court of Session alone, to

   which the case is committed. However, he would submit that, once cognizance

   of the offence has been taken by either the Magistrate or the Court of Sessions,

   as the case may be, a second cognizance by the other is impermissible in law.

   He urged that there cannot be a second cognizance nor can there be any part

   cognizance or bifurcation of such cognizance by a Magistrate and a Court of

   Sessions.
In support of his contention, reliance was placed on the decisions of
Dharam Pal
(supra) and
Balveer Singh
(supra).
17.In Dharam Pal
(supra) this Court held that “cognizance of an offence can only

   be taken once. In the event, the Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and

   then commits the case to the Court of Sessions, the question of taking fresh

   cognizance of the offence, and thereafter, proceed to issue summons, is not in

   accordance with law.
If cognizance is to be taken of the offence, it could be

   taken either by the Magistrate or by the Court of Session.” and that there can

   be no “question of part cognizance being taken by the Magistrate and part

   cognizance being taken by the learned Session Judge.” Similarly, in
Balveer

   Singh
(supra) it was reiterated that “cognizance of an offence can only be

   taken once. In the event, a Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and then
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 16 of 85
commits the case to the Court of Session, the question of taking fresh

   cognizance of the offence and, thereafter, proceeding to issue summons, is not

   in accordance with law. If cognizance is to be taken of the offence, it could be

   taken either by the Magistrate or by the Court of Session”.
18.Before we advert to the submission canvassed by the petitioner herein, and try

   to understand what has been conveyed in so many words by this Court in the

   aforesaid decisions of
Dharam Pal
(supra) and
Balveer Singh
(supra), it

   would be apposite to first understand what is meant by ‘cognizance’ under the

   Code and the legal import and significance of the term “taking cognizance”.
19.The term “cognizance” has nowhere been defined under the Code, but the

   word itself is of indefinite import. The word itself is derived from the Latin

   word ‘cognoscere’, and the French Word “conoisance” which means “to

   know”, “to become acquainted with”, or “to recognize”. The Black’s Law

   Dictionary defines the term “cognizance” as “Judicial notice, knowledge or

   acknowledgement” or “the judicial hearing of a cause”.
20.In criminal law, the term “cognizance” has no esoteric or mystic significance,

   and the same is reflected by the omission of any formulaic definition of the

   term under the Code. However, over time, the term “cognizance” has come to

   acquire a special and distinct connotation, through a catena of decisions and
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 17 of 85
authoritative exegesis rendered by this Court. The expression “cognizance”

   means to ‘become aware of’ or ‘to take notice of judicially’. The special

   connotation that has been ascribed to the term denotes or indicates the stage

   at which a judicial authority such as a Court of Sessions or a Magistrate is said

   to have taken judicial notice of the commission of an offence, with a view to

   initiate proceedings against the person or persons alleged to have committed

   such offence. [See:
Chief Enforcement Officer v. Videocon International

   Ltd.
, (2008) 2 SCC 492].
21.Cognizance is, at its heart, always an act of the court. It entails not merely the

   receipt of information or the mechanical act of acknowledgement of a

   particular offence by a judicial authority, but a conscious application of mind

   by it, to the information disclosed or received, as the case may be, and the

   subjective element of its satisfaction that i) an offence has indeed occurred and
ii) the circumstances necessitate setting into motion criminal proceedings in

   respect of the said offence, or at the very least take steps for ascertaining if

   there is any basis for initiating such proceedings. Cognizance is attended by

   the assumption of jurisdiction for proceeding further.
22.Having understood the legal import of the term “cognizance”, we may now

   profitably turn towards understanding how cognizance may be taken. Chapter

   XIV of the Code deals with “Conditions requisite for initiation of
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                          Page 18 of 85
proceedings”, and Section(s) 190 to 199 contained thereunder, delineates the

   methods and the limitations subject to which cognizance of offence may be

   taken by the various criminal court empowered thereunder.
23.Remarkably, none of the provisions in the aforesaid Chapter prescribe how

   ‘cognizance’ is to be taken, and rather only describe the conditions and

   limitations for the initiation of proceedings under the Code. This is because,

   taking cognizance, as already stated, is an act of court, and the prosecuting

   agency or complainant have no control over the same. It is predicated upon

   application of judicial mind and is not dictated by the complaint or police

   report, which cannot be construed by any formulaic approach. ‘Taking

   cognizance’ does not involve any formal action of any kind. It occurs as soon

   as a judicial authority applies its mind to the suspected commission of an

   offence. [See:
R.R. Chari v. State of U.P.
, AIR 1951 SC 207;
Sarah Mathew

   v. Institute of Cardio Vascular Diseases
, (2014) 2 SCC 62]
24.The process of “taking cognizance” is one of variable and inderminate import;

   it neither carries a uniform or fixed procedural contour nor has it been used in

   the same sense throughout the scheme of the Code. This is because “taking of

   cognizance” signifies the setting into motion, the criminal justice machinery,

   which may be done, under the Code, in different ways, which is why it derives

   its understanding from the various procedures by which proceedings are

   initiated under the Code, and as such its import differs, depending upon the
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 19 of 85
context of the procedure in which it has been used. Hence, there exists no rigid

     taxonomy or formulaic framework for “taking cognizance”, and the act of

     “taking cognizance” has to be understood from the procedure itself, more

     particularly, at which stage, it could be said that there has been an application

     of judicial mind for the purpose of initiating proceedings under the Code or in

     simple words, cognizance has been taken. [See:
Darshan Singh Ram Kishan

     v. State of Maharashtra
, (1971) 2 SCC 654]



b.     Cognizance of offences by Magistrates and the Three Distinct Points of
       Origin of the Criminal Machinery under the Code.
25.
Section 190
of the Code empowers a Magistrate to take cognizance of any

     offence in three distinct manners. As per the said provision, a Magistrate may

     take cognizance upon (a) receiving a complaint of facts which constitute such

     offence; (b) a police report of such facts; or (c) information received from any

     person other than a police officer, or upon his own knowledge, that such

     offence has been committed. The said provision reads as under: -
“190. Cognizance of offences by Magistrates. –
          (1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of the
          first class, and any Magistrate of the second class specially
          empowered in this behalf under sub-section (2), may take
          cognizance of any offence —
(a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute such
          offence;
(b) upon a police report of such facts;
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                           Page 20 of 85
(c) upon information received from any person other than a police
          officer, or upon his own knowledge, that such offence has been
          committed.
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any Magistrate of
          the second class to take cognizance under sub-section (1) of such
          offences as are within his competence to inquire into or try.”
26.A bare perusal of the aforesaid, indicates that there are three distinct ways in

     which the criminal machinery may be set into motion i.e., cognizance of an

     offence may be taken by the Magistrate. It may take place on the basis of a

     complaint moved before a Magistrate by any complainant complaining of any

     offence, or by the police itself on the basis of a police report in terms of

     Section(s) 2(r) and 173(2) of the Code, or on the basis of the Magistrate’s own

     knowledge about any offence.
I.      On the basis of a Complaint.
27.As per
Section 190
sub-section (1)(a) the first manner in which a Magistrate

     may take cognizance of an offence is on the basis of a complaint received by

     him.
Section 2(d)
of the Code defines “complaint” to mean any allegation,

     whether made orally or in writing, by any persons against some other person

     or persons, whether known or unknown, who is alleged to have committed an

     offence, that has been made to a Magistrate, with a view that he initiates any

     action under the Code.
Section 2(d)
of the Code reads as under: -
“2. Definitions. –
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                           Page 21 of 85
(d) “complaint” means any allegation made orally or in writing
         to a Magistrate, with a view to his taking action under this Code,
         that some person, whether known or unknown, has committed an
         offence, but does not include a police report.”
28.This Court in
Mohd. Yousuf v. Afaq Jahan
, reported in (2006) 1 SCC 627,

   explained thus: -
“15. A faint plea was made by learned counsel for Respondent 1
         that the petition filed by the appellant was not a complaint in the
         strict sense of the term. The plea is clearly untenable. The
         nomenclature of a petition is inconsequential. [...]
16. There is no particular format of a complaint. A petition
         addressed to the Magistrate containing an allegation that an
         offence has been committed, and ending with a prayer that the
         culprits be suitably dealt with, as in the instant case, is a
         complaint.”
                                           (Emphasis supplied)
29.For the purpose of enabling the Magistrate to take cognizance of an offence

   on the basis of a complaint as defined above, in terms of
Section 190
sub-
section 1(a)
, such complaint must contain facts constituting the offence. Once

   such a complaint is received by a Magistrate, he will apply his mind to the

   complaint and the facts disclosed therein, and ordinarily proceed further under

   Chapter XV of the Code, which relates to “Complaints to Magistrates”.
Section 200
thereof provides for examination of the complainant and the

   witnesses on oath.
Section 201
provides for the procedure which a Magistrate

   who is not competent to take cognizance has to follow.
Section 202
provides

   for postponement of issue of process.
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                       Page 22 of 85
30.Although, at this stage, the Magistrate is not obliged to proceed further in

   terms of Section(s) 200 to 203 in Chapter XV of the Code, and he may instead,

   order the police to investigate or inquire into the offence alleged in the

   complaint in terms of
Section 156
sub-section (3) of the Code.
31.
Section 200
of the Code empowers the Magistrate taking cognizance of an

   offence on a complaint to examine upon oath the complainant and the

   witnesses present, if any. The section further requires the such examination to

   be reduced to writing with the signatures of the complainant, witnesses and

   the Magistrate. The object of examination under
Section 200
is to ascertain

   whether there is a prima facie case against the accused in the complaint, and

   to prevent the issue of process on a complaint which is false or vexatious.
In
S.R. Sukumar v. S. Sunaad Raghuram
, reported in (2015) 9 SCC 609, this

   Court summarized the object of
Section 200
of the Code: -
“8.
Section 200
CrPC provides for the procedure for the
         Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence on complaint. The
         Magistrate is not bound to take cognizance of an offence merely
         because a complaint has been filed before him when in fact the
         complaint does not disclose a cause of action. The language in
Section 200
CrPC

                “A Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence on
                complaint shall examine upon oath the complainant
                and the witnesses present, if any…”
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                       Page 23 of 85
clearly suggests that for taking cognizance of an offence on
         complaint, the court shall examine the complainant upon oath. The
         object of examination of the complainant is to find out whether the
         complaint is justifiable or is vexatious. Merely because the
         complainant was examined that does not mean that the Magistrate
         has taken cognizance of the offence. Taking cognizance of an
         offence means the Magistrate must have judicially applied the
         mind to the contents of the complaint and indicates that the
         Magistrate takes judicial notice of an offence.
xxx
11.
Section 200
CrPC contemplates a Magistrate taking
         cognizance of an offence on complaint to examine the complaint
         and examine upon oath the complainant and the witnesses present,
         if any. Then normally three courses are available to the
         Magistrate. The Magistrate can either issue summons to the
         accused or order an inquiry under
Section 202
CrPC or dismiss
         the complaint under
Section 203
CrPC. Upon consideration of the
         statement of the complainant and the material adduced at that
         stage if the Magistrate is satisfied that there are sufficient grounds
         to proceed, he can proceed to issue process under
Section 204
CrPC.
Section 202
CrPC contemplates “postponement of issue of
         process”. It provides that the Magistrate on receipt of a complaint
         of an offence, of which he is authorised to take cognizance may, if
         he thinks fit, postpone the issue of process for compelling the
         attendance of the person complained against, and either inquire
         into the case himself, or have an inquiry made by any Magistrate
         subordinate to him, or an investigation made by a police officer,
         or by some other person for the purpose of deciding whether or
         not there is sufficient ground for proceeding. If the Magistrate
         finds no sufficient ground for proceeding, he can dismiss the
         complaint by recording briefly the reasons for doing so as
         contemplated under
Section 203
CrPC. A Magistrate takes
         cognizance of an offence when he decides to proceed against the
         person accused of having committed that offence and not at the
         time when the Magistrate is just informed either by the
         complainant by filing the complaint or by the police report about
         the commission of an offence.
12. “Cognizance” therefore has a reference to the application of
         judicial mind by the Magistrate in connection with the commission
         of an offence and not merely to a Magistrate learning that some
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                          Page 24 of 85
offence had been committed. Only upon examination of the
         complainant, the Magistrate will proceed to apply the judicial
         mind whether to take cognizance of the offence or not. Under
Section 200
CrPC, when the complainant is examined, the
         Magistrate cannot be said to have ipso facto taken the cognizance,
         when the Magistrate was merely gathering the material on the
         basis of which he will decide whether a prima facie case is made
         out for taking cognizance of the offence or not. “Cognizance of
         offence” means taking notice of the accusations and applying the
         judicial mind to the contents of the complaint and the material
         filed therewith. It is neither practicable nor desirable to define as
         to what is meant by taking cognizance. Whether the Magistrate
         has taken cognizance of the offence or not will depend upon the
         facts and circumstances of the particular case.”

                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
32.In Mona Panwar v. High
Court of Judicature of Allahabad, reported in

   (2011) 3 SCC 496, this Court noted that two options would be open to a

   Magistrate, when presented with a complaint: one, to pass an order as per
Section 156(3)
of the Code, or two, to direct examination as per
Section 200
.

   Prior to taking cognizance under
Section 190
, the Magistrate may order police

   investigation under
Section 156(3)
. That is to say, the requirements of
Section

   200
do not put a bar on the powers of the Magistrate under
Section 156(3)
of

   the Code.
We have produced the relevant paragraphs of
Mona Panwar
(supra)

   below:
“18. When the complaint was presented before the appellant, the
         appellant had mainly two options available to her. One was to pass
         an order as contemplated by
Section 156(3)
of the Code and the
         second one was to direct examination of the complainant upon
         oath and the witnesses present, if any, as mentioned in
Section 200
and proceed further with the matter as provided by
Section 202
of
         the Code. An order made under sub-section (3) of
Section 156
of
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 25 of 85
the Code is in the nature of a peremptory reminder or intimation
         to the police to exercise its plenary power of investigation under
Section 156(1)
. Such an investigation embraces the entire
         continuous process which begins with the collection of evidence
         under
Section 156
and ends with the final report either under
Section 169
or submission of charge-sheet under
Section 173
of
         the Code. A Magistrate can under
Section 190
of the Code before
         taking cognizance ask for investigation by the police under
Section
         156(3)
of the Code. The Magistrate can also issue warrant for
         production, before taking cognizance. If after cognizance has been
         taken and the Magistrate wants any investigation, it will be under
Section 202
of the Code.
xxx
23. Normally, an order under
Section 200
of the Code for
         examination of the complainant and his witnesses would not be
         passed because it consumes the valuable time of the Magistrate
         being vested in inquiring into the matter which primarily is the
         duty of the police to investigate. However, the practice which has
         developed over the years is that examination of the complainant
         and his witnesses under
Section 200
of the Code would be directed
         by the Magistrate only when a case is found to be a serious one
         and not as a matter of routine course. If on a reading of a
         complaint the Magistrate finds that the allegations therein
         disclose a cognizable offence and forwarding of the complaint to
         the police for investigation under
Section 156(3)
of the Code will
         not be conducive to justice, he will be justified in adopting the
         course suggested in
Section 200
of the Code.”
33.It is also true that where the Magistrate exercises his jurisdiction under
Section 200
, he is required to apply his mind. Exercise of such jurisdiction

       cannot be in a routine manner. A careful scrutiny of evidence placed on

       record must be made in order to arrive at the conclusion if any offence is

       prima facie committed by the accused. Such strict requirements to exercise

       the jurisdiction under
Section 200
are founded as cornerstones of criminal

       jurisprudence that a criminal proceedings must not be initiated lightly and
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 26 of 85
there must be sufficient grounds to believe that an offence has taken place

       before the initiation of such proceedings.
In
Maksud Saiyed v. State of

       Gujarat
, reported in (2008) 5 SCC 668, this Court explained the following

       in context of the jurisdiction under
Sections 156(3)
and
Section 200
of the

       Code:
“13. Where a jurisdiction is exercised on a complaint petition filed
         in terms of
Section 156(3)
or
Section 200
of the Code of Criminal
         Procedure, the Magistrate is required to apply his mind. The Penal
         Code does not contain any provision for attaching vicarious
         liability on the part of the Managing Director or the Directors of
         the Company when the accused is the Company. The learned
         Magistrate failed to pose unto himself the correct question viz. as
         to whether the complaint petition, even if given face value and
         taken to be correct in its entirety, would lead to the conclusion that
         the respondents herein were personally liable for any offence. The
         Bank is a body corporate. Vicarious liability of the Managing
         Director and Director would arise provided any provision exists
         in that behalf in the statute. Statutes indisputably must contain
         provision fixing such vicarious liabilities. Even for the said
         purpose, it is obligatory on the part of the complainant to make
         requisite allegations which would attract the provisions
         constituting vicarious liability.
15. This Court in
Pepsi Foods Ltd. v. Special Judicial Magistrate
[(1998) 5 SCC 749 : 1998 SCC (Cri) 1400] held as under: (SCC
         p. 760, para 28)

               “28. Summoning of an accused in a criminal case is a
               serious matter. Criminal law cannot be set into motion
               as a matter of course. It is not that the complainant has
               to bring only two witnesses to support his allegations
               in the complaint to have the criminal law set into
               motion. The order of the Magistrate summoning the
               accused must reflect that he has applied his mind to the
               facts of the case and the law applicable thereto. He has
               to examine the nature of allegations made in the
               complaint and the evidence both oral and documentary
               in support thereof and would that be sufficient for the
               complainant to succeed in bringing charge home to the
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                          Page 27 of 85
accused. It is not that the Magistrate is a silent
               spectator at the time of recording of preliminary
               evidence before summoning of the accused. The
               Magistrate has to carefully scrutinise the evidence
               brought on record and may even himself put questions
               to the complainant and his witnesses to elicit answers
               to find out the truthfulness of the allegations or
               otherwise and then examine if any offence is prima
               facie committed by all or any of the accused.”

         The learned Magistrate, in our opinion, shall have kept the said
         principle in mind.”
34.In R.R. Chari
(supra), this Court had held that “when a Magistrate applies his

   mind for the purpose of proceeding under
Section 200
and subsequent sections

   of Chapter XV of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, he must be held to have

   taken cognizance of the offence.” On the other hand, in
Tula Ram v. Kishore

   Singh
reported in (1977) 4 SCC 459, it was held that when the Magistrate

   applies his mind not for the purpose of proceeding as abovementioned in
R.R.

   Chari
(supra), but for taking action of some other kind, for instance ordering

   investigation or issuing a search warrant he cannot be said to have taken

   cognizance of the offence.
35.For the purpose of taking cognizance of an offence on the basis of a complaint

   received under
Section 190
sub-section (1)(a), a Magistrate is required to

   examine upon oath, the complainant and any witnesses, and reduce in writing

   the substance of their examination. This inquiry which is conducted by the

   Magistrate pursuant to
Section 200
of the Code, cannot always mean, that
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                      Page 28 of 85
cognizance of the offence alleged in the complaint has been taken by it, as the

   Magistrate is still empowered to take recourse to the other provision of

   Section(s) 201 to 203, whereby he may simply bring the inquiry before it to

   an end, without an intention of proceeding further in terms of the Code.
36.In the same breath,
Section 202
of the Code empowers a Magistrate, who has

   received a complaint of an offence, to postpone the issue of process against

   the accused in terms of
Section 204
, and either (i) inquire into the case himself

   or direct an investigation by the police or any other person, in the case, for the

   purpose of deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding.
The said provision reads as under: -
202. Postponement of issue of process.—
         (1) Any Magistrate, on receipt of a complaint of an offence of
         which he is authorised to take cognizance or which has been made
         over to him under
section 192
, may, if he thinks fit, and shall, in a
         case where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in
         which he exercises his jurisdiction, postpone the issue of process
         against the accused, and either inquire into the case himself or
         direct an investigation to be made by a police officer or by such
         other person as he thinks fit, for the purpose of deciding whether
         or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding:
Provided that no such direction for investigation shall be
         made,—
(a) where it appears to the Magistrate that the offence complained
         of is triable exclusively by the Court of Session; or
(b) where the complaint has not been made by a Court, unless the
         complainant and the witnesses present (if any) have been
         examined on oath under
section 200
.
(2) In an inquiry under sub-section (1), the Magistrate may, if he
         thinks fit, take evidence of witnesses on oath:
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 29 of 85
Provided that if it appears to the Magistrate that the offence
           complained of is triable exclusively by the Court of Session, he
           shall call upon the complainant to produce all his witnesses and
           examine them on oath.
(3) If an investigation under sub-section (1) is made by a
           person not being a police officer, he shall have for that
           investigation all the powers conferred by this Code on an officer
           in charge of a police station except the power to arrest without
           warrant.
37.The provision empowers the Magistrate to find reasons to doubt the

   truthfulness of the complaint and defer issuing process against the accused. In

   such a case, the Magistrate may either direct an investigation by the police, or

   conduct an inquiry to determine whether there is sufficient basis to proceed

   with the complaint. It is pertinent to underscore that the investigation

   envisaged in
Section 202
is different from the investigation contemplated in
Section 156(3)
, as it is only for assisting the Magistrate to decide whether or

   not there is sufficient ground for him to proceed further. This Court in
Kewal

   Krishan v. Suraj Bhan
, reported in 1981 SCC (Cri) 438, lucidly explained

   that;
“10. In the instant case, there was prima facie evidence against
           Suraj Bhan accused which required to be weighed and
           appreciated by the Court of Session. At the stage of
Sections 203
and
204
of the Criminal Procedure Code in a case exclusively
           triable by the Court of Session, all that the Magistrate has to do is
           to see whether on a cursory perusal of the complaint and the
           evidence recorded during the preliminary inquiry under
Sections
           200
and
202
of the Criminal Procedure Code, there is prima facie
           evidence in support of the charge levelled against the accused. All
           that he has to see is whether or not there is “sufficient ground for
           proceeding” against the accused. At this stage, the Magistrate is
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                           Page 30 of 85
not to weigh the evidence meticulously as if he were the trial court.
The standard to be adopted by the Magistrate in scrutinising the
           evidence is not the same as the one which is to be kept in view at
           the stage of framing charges. This Court has held in
Ramesh Singh
case [(1977) 4 SCC 39 : 1977 SCC (Cri) 533 : AIR 1977 SC 2018]
           that even at the stage of framing charges the truth, veracity and
           effect of the evidence which the complainant produces or proposes
           to adduce at the trial, is not to be meticulously judged. The
           standard of proof and judgment, which is to be applied finally
           before finding the accused guilty or otherwise, is not exactly to be
           applied at the stage of framing charges. A fortiori, at the stage of
Sections 202
/
204
, if there is prima facie evidence in support of the
           allegations in the complaint relating to a case exclusively triable
           by the Court of Session, that will be a sufficient ground for issuing
           process to the accused and committing them for trial to the Court
           of Session.”
38.This Court in
Rameshbhai Pandurao Hedau v. State of Gujarat
, reported in

   (2010) 4 SCC 185, held that a direction for investigation under
Section 156(3)
is to ascertain whether the Magistrate shall take cognizance. Whereas, an

   investigation under
Section 202
is for ascertaining whether there are sufficient

   grounds for the Magistrate to proceed further. The relevant observations read

   thus;
“22. It is now well settled that in ordering an investigation under
Section 156(3)
of the Code, the Magistrate is not empowered to
           take cognizance of the offence and such cognizance is taken only
           on the basis of the complaint of the facts received by him which
           includes a police report of such facts or information received from
           any person, other than a police officer, under
Section 190
of the
           Code.
Section 200
which falls in Chapter XV, indicates the manner
           in which the cognizance has to be taken and that the Magistrate
           may also inquire into the case himself or direct an investigation to
           be made by a police officer before issuing process.
23. Reference was also made to the decision of this Court in
Mohd.
           Yousuf v. Afaq Jahan
[(2006) 1 SCC 627 : (2006) 1 SCC (Cri)
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                           Page 31 of 85
460] where it has been held that when a Magistrate orders
         investigation under Chapter XII of the Code, he does so before he
         takes cognizance of the offence. Once he takes cognizance of the
         offence, he has to follow the procedure envisaged in Chapter XV
         of the Code. The inquiry contemplated under
Section 202(1)
or
         investigation by a police officer or by any other person is only to
         help the Magistrate to decide whether or not there is sufficient
         ground for him to proceed further on account of the fact that
         cognizance had already been taken by him of the offence disclosed
         in the complaint but issuance of process had been postponed.
xxx
25. The power to direct an investigation to the police authorities
         is available to the Magistrate both under
Section 156(3)
CrPC and
         under
Section 202
CrPC. The only difference is the stage at which
         the said powers may be invoked. As indicated hereinbefore, the
         power under
Section 156(3)
CrPC to direct an investigation by the
         police authorities is at the pre-cognizance stage while the power
         to direct a similar investigation under
Section 202
is at the post-
         cognizance stage.”
39.In Ramdev Food Products Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Gujarat
, reported in (2015) 6

   SCC 439, three-Judge Bench of this Court underscored the difference in

   meaning of the term “investigation” under
Section 156(3)
as compared to
Section 202
of the Code. The relevant observations read thus:
“21. On the other hand, power under
Section 202
is of different
         nature. Report sought under the said provision has limited
         purpose of deciding “whether or not there is sufficient ground for
         proceeding”. If this be the object, the procedure under
Section 157
or
Section 173
is not intended to be followed.
Section 157
requires
         sending of report by the police that the police officer suspected
         commission of offence from information received by the police and
         thereafter the police is required to proceed to the spot, investigate
         the facts and take measures for discovery and arrest. Thereafter,
         the police has to record statements and report on which the
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 32 of 85
Magistrate may proceed under
Section 190
. This procedure is
         applicable when the police receives information of a cognizable
         offence, registers a case and forms the requisite opinion and not
         every case registered by the police.
xxx

         22.1. The direction under
Section 156(3)
is to be issued, only after
         application of mind by the Magistrate. When the Magistrate does
         not take cognizance and does not find it necessary to postpone the
         issuance of process and finds a case made out to proceed
         forthwith, direction under the said provision is issued. In other
         words, where on account of credibility of information available,
         or weighing the interest of justice it is considered appropriate to
         straightaway direct investigation, such a direction is issued.
xxx
37.
In
Nagawwa v. Veeranna Shivalingappa Konjalgi
[(1976) 3
         SCC 736 : 1976 SCC (Cri) 507] , referring to earlier judgments
         on the scope of
Section 202
, it was observed : (SCC p. 740, para
3)
3.
“In Chandra Deo Singh v. Prokash Chandra Bose
[AIR 1963 SC 1430 : (1963) 2 Cri LJ 397 : (1964) 1
                SCR 639] this Court had after fully considering the
                matter observed as follows : (AIR p. 1433, para 8)

                      ‘8. … The courts have also pointed out
                      in these cases that what the Magistrate
                      has to see is whether there is evidence in
                      support of the allegations of the
                      complainant and not whether the
                      evidence is sufficient to warrant a
                      conviction. The learned Judges in some
                      of these cases have been at pains to
                      observe that an enquiry under
Section
                      202
is not to be likened to a trial which
                      can only take place after process is
                      issued, and that there can be only one
                      trial.
No doubt, as stated in sub-section
                      (1) of
Section 202
itself, the object of the
                      enquiry is to ascertain the truth or
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 33 of 85
falsehood of the complaint, but the
                      Magistrate making the enquiry has to do
                      this only with reference to the intrinsic
                      quality of the statements made before
                      him at the enquiry which would naturally
                      mean the complaint itself, the statement
                      on oath made by the complainant and the
                      statements made before him by persons
                      examined at the instance of the
                      complainant.’

         Indicating the scope, ambit of
Section 202
of the Code of Criminal
         Procedure this Court in
Vadilal Panchal v. Dattatraya Dulaji
         Ghadigaonkar
[AIR 1960 SC 1113 : 1960 Cri LJ 1499] observed
         as follows : (AIR p. 1116, para 9)

                ‘9. …
Section 202
says that the Magistrate may, if
                he thinks fit, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
                postpone the issue of process for compelling the
                attendance of the person complained against and
                direct an inquiry for the purpose of ascertaining the
                truth or falsehood of the complaint; in other words,
                the scope of an inquiry under the section is limited
                to finding out the truth or falsehood of the complaint
                in order to determine the question of the issue of
                process. The inquiry is for the purpose of
                ascertaining the truth or falsehood of the complaint;
                that is, for ascertaining whether there is evidence in
                support of the complaint so as to justify the issue of
                process and commencement of proceedings against
                the person concerned.
The section does not say that
                a regular trial for adjudging the guilt or otherwise
                of the person complained against should take place
                at that stage; for the person complained against can
                be legally called upon to answer the accusation
                made against him only when a process has issued
                and he is put on trial.’”

         Same view has been taken in
Mohinder Singh v. Gulwant Singh
[(1992) 2 SCC 213 : 1992
SCC (Cri) 361] , Manharibhai
         Muljibhai Kakadia v. Shaileshbhai Mohanbhai Patel
[(2012) 10
         SCC 517 : (
2013) 1 SCC (Cri) 218] , Raghu Raj Singh Rousha v.
         Shivam Sundaram Promoters (P) Ltd.
[(2009) 2 SCC 363 : (2009)
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                           Page 34 of 85
1 SCC (Cri) 801] and Chandra Deo Singh v. Prokash Chandra
         Bose [AIR 1963 SC 1430 : (1963) 2 Cri LJ 397 : (1964) 1 SCR
         639] .”
40.Undoubtedly, the inquiry under
Section 202
of the Code is to ascertain the fact

   whether the complaint has any valid foundation calling for issuance of process

   to the person complained against under
Section 204
, or whether the complaint

   should be dismissed by resorting to
Section 203
. As a natural corollary, at the

   stage of issuing process the Magistrate is only concerned with the allegations

   in the complaint and the statements of the complainant and the witnesses. The

   Magistrate is required only to be prima facie satisfied that sufficient grounds

   exist to proceed against the accused.
41.Therefore, the scope of inquiry under
Section 202
is limited to the

   ascertainment of the truth or falsehood of the allegation made in the complaint

   – (i) on the materials placed by the complainant before the court; and (ii) for

   limited purpose of finding out whether a prima facie case for issue of process

   has been made out. There is no gainsaying that discretion vested in the

   Magistrate has to be judicially exercised.
42.The proviso to sub-section (2) stipulates that if it appears to the Magistrate

   that the offence complained of is triable by the Court of Sessions, he must call

   upon the complainant to produce all his witnesses and examine them on oath.
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 35 of 85
The intent behind the provision lies in the fact that in a police case,

      investigation reveals the nature of the crime and its truthfulness as opposed to

      a case born out of a complaint. Hence, to protect the prospective accused from

      harassment from false complaints, the duty of the Magistrate to examine the

      complainant and his witnesses becomes onerous. We must remind that it is

      imperative on the part of the Magistrate to examine the complainant and his

      witnesses in a complaint case triable exclusively by Court of Sessions.
43.Although, in practice, there may at times be an overlap or convergence in the

      procedures envisaged under these three routes, such as where on the basis of

      a complaint, police investigation is ordered under
Section 156
sub-section (3),

      or where upon receiving a police report under
Section 173
sub-section (2), a

      protest petition filed in lieu thereof is treated as a complaint in terms of
Section

      200
of the Code, yet the procedural trajectory in which a Magistrate is

      expected to adopt for the purpose of proceeding in respect of an offence, still

      retains a certain degree of distinctiveness, based on how the criminal

      machinery came into motion.
ii.      Who takes Cognizance of Offence exclusively triable by Court of
         Sessions under the Code?
44.To answer the question, whether the summoning of the petitioner herein by

      the Court of Session amounts to ‘second cognizance’, we have to try and
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                              Page 36 of 85
understand the decision of this Court in
Dharam Pal
(supra), more

     particularly, its observations that when it comes to offences exclusively triable

     by the Court of Session, “if cognizance is to be taken of the offence, it could

     be taken either by the Magistrate or by the Court of Session”. In other words,

     the question that falls for our consideration is that, for offences triable

     exclusively by the Court of Session, whether cognizance is taken by the

     Magistrate or by the Court of Session, or either of them as the case may be?

     To answer the aforesaid, we may, put aside
Section 193
of the Code for the

     time being and first try to understand what role is expected to be played by the

     Magistrate as-well as the Court of Session under the Code for offences

     exclusively triable by the Court of Session.
a.      Role of the Magistrate where the Offence is exclusively triable by a
        Court of Session.
45.In the foregoing paragraphs of this judgment, we have already delineated the

     manner in which a Magistrate, ordinarily takes cognizance of an offence. To

     sum it up, where a complaint is received disclosing facts which constitute an

     offence, cognizance is taken after the Magistrate has applied his mind to the

     complaint and has proceeded under
Section 200
and the subsequent provisions

     of Chapter XV, whereupon such complaint is neither returned in terms of
Section 201
nor dismissed under
Section 203
, and instead there is issuance of

     process by the Magistrate in terms of
Section 204
and other provisions of
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                           Page 37 of 85
Chapter XVI, at which stage it is understood without a shred of doubt, that

     cognizance of such offence has been taken and proceedings under the Code

     stand initiated. On the other hand, where a police report is received,

     proceedings are said to be initiated i.e., cognizance is affirmatively said to be

     taken after the Magistrate has applied its mind to the contents of the police

     report, and thereafter he has either issued process to the accused under
Section

     204
of the Code, on the basis of such report, or where the accused is present

     before it, either on his own or on being produced by the police, the Magistrate

     has complied with the requirement envisaged under
Section 207
of the Code.

     In short, while a Magistrate who proceeds under Chapter XV of the Code, may

     or not be said to have taken cognizance, however, whenever, a Magistrate has

     proceeded under the provisions of Chapter XVI which deals with

     “Commencement of Proceedings”, cognizance of offence, without an iota of

     doubt is understood to have been taken.
I.      Chapter XVI - Section(s) 207, 208 and 209 of the Code and Committal
        of Case by a Magistrate to the Court of Sessions.
46.We may now turn to see, how the Magistrate is required under the Code to

     proceed where the offence is exclusively triable by the Court of Sessions.

     Where a case is instituted before a Magistrate, in terms of
Section 190
of the

     Code, i.e., either upon a complaint, or a police report, or on the basis of the

     Magistrate’s own knowledge, and it appears to the Magistrate, that the case
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                           Page 38 of 85
pertains to an offence triable exclusively by the Court of Session, then the

   Magistrate has to commit the said case to the Court of Session.
Section 209
of

   the Code reads as under: -
“209. Commitment of case to Court of Session when offence is
         triable exclusively by it.—
         When in a case instituted on a police report or otherwise, the
         accused appears or is brought before the Magistrate and it
         appears to the Magistrate that the offence is triable exclusively by
         the Court of Session, he shall—
(a) commit, after complying with the provisions of
section
                 207
or
section 208
, as the case may be, the case to the
                 Court of Session, and subject to the provisions of this
                 Code relating to bail, remand the accused to custody
                 until such commitment has been made;
(b) subject to the provisions of this Code relating to bail,
                  remand the accused to custody during, and until the
                  conclusion of, the trial;
(c) send to that Court the record of the case and the
                  documents and articles, if any, which are to be
                  produced in evidence;
(d) notify the Public Prosecutor of the commitment of the
                  case to the Court of Session.”
47. A plain and careful reading of the aforesaid provision reveals that, where a

   case is instituted on a police report or otherwise, that is to say, on the basis of

   a complaint received or on the basis of information by a Magistrate’s own

   knowledge, and such case involves an offence which is triable exclusively by

   the Court of Sessions, the Magistrate is placed under a statutory obligation to

   commit such case to the Court of Sessions in the manner
laid down in
clauses
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                          Page 39 of 85
(a) to (d) of the said provision.
Section 209
of the Code, enjoins a duty upon

   the Magistrate to comply with four procedural requirements enumerated in

   clauses (a) to (d), thereto, i.e., the commitment of the case by the Magistrate

   to the Court of Session, has to take place, strictly in accordance with the four

   procedural steps provided in the provision, being as under: -
(i)     As per clause (a), the Magistrate is required to commit such case to the

           Court of Session, and further remand the accused to custody, subject to

           the provisions of bail, until such committal is complete. However, such

           commitment has to be done after the Magistrate as complied with the

           provisions of
Section 207
or 208 of the Code, as the case may be;
(ii)    In terms of clause (b), the Magistrate must also remand the accused to

           custody for the duration of trial, subject to the provisions relating to bail

           under the Code;
(iii)   Clause (c) enjoins a further duty upon the Magistrate, to forward to the

           Court of Session, more particularly the Court to which the case is

           committed, the entire record of the case, along with any documents and

           articles thereof, that are to be produced or relied upon as evidence;
(iv)    Under clause (d), the Magistrate is further required to notify the Public

           Prosecutor regarding the commitment of the case to the Court of

           Session.
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                            Page 40 of 85
48.Chapter XVI of the Code which deals with “Commencement of Proceedings

   before Magistrates” encompasses the aforementioned provision of
Section

   209
as-well as Section(s) 207 and 208. Both these provisions pertain to the

   obligation of furnishing to the accused, copies of documents in respect of any

   case where proceedings have been instituted under the Code, with the former

   dealing with proceedings instituted upon a police report and the latter

   pertaining to proceedings instituted otherwise, such as on a complaint or on

   the basis of information by a Magistrate’s own knowledge.
49.
Section 207
of the Code stipulates that in every case where proceedings have

   been instituted on the basis of a police report, the Magistrate, shall supply to

   the accused, without delay and free of cost, inter-alia, a copy of the police

   report as contemplated under
Section 173
, a copy of the first information

   report, recorded under
Section 154
, if any, the copies of all statements made

   under
Section 161
sub-section (3) by persons, whom the prosecution intends

   to examine as witness, subject to the first proviso, the copies of any confession

   or statement recorded under
Section 164
, as-well as a copy of any other

   document or relevant extract thereof that was forwarded to the Magistrate by

   the police.
Section 207
of the Code reads as under: -
207. Supply to the accused of copy of police report and other
         documents.—
         In any case where the proceeding has been instituted on a police
         report, the Magistrate shall without delay furnish to the accused,
         free of cost, a copy of each of the following:—
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 41 of 85
(i)     the police report;
(ii)    the first information report recorded under
section
                     154
;
(iii)   the statements recorded under sub-section (3) of
section 161
of all persons whom the prosecution
                     proposes to examine as its witnesses, excluding
                     therefrom any part in regard to which a request for
                     such exclusion has been made by the police officer
                     under sub-section (6) of
section 173
;
(iv)    the confessions and statements, if any, recorded
                     under
section 164
;
(v)     any other document or relevant extract thereof
                     forwarded to the Magistrate with the police report
                     under sub-section (5) of
section 173
:
Provided that the Magistrate may, after perusing any such
         part of a statement as is referred to in clause (iii) and considering
         the reasons given by the police officer for the request, direct that
         a copy of that part of the statement or of such portion thereof as
         the Magistrate thinks proper, shall be furnished to the accused:
Provided further that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any
         document referred to in clause (v) is voluminous, he shall, instead
         of furnishing the accused with a copy thereof, direct that he will
         only be allowed to inspect it either personally or through pleader
         in Court.
50.In the same breadth,
Section 208
of the Code, stipulates that in every case

   where proceedings have been instituted otherwise than on a police report,

   which when understood in the context of
Section 190
, means on the basis of a

   complaint received by a Magistrate or on the basis of information by a

   Magistrate’s own knowledge, and the offence is triable exclusively by the

   Court of Session, the Magistrate, shall supply to the accused, without delay

   and free of cost, inter-alia, a copy of the statements recorded under Section(s)

   200 or 202, of all persons examined by the magistrate, the copies of any
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 42 of 85
statement or confession recorded under Section(s) 161 or 164, as-well as a

   copy of any other document produced before the Magistrate, on which the

   prosecution proposes to rely.
Section 208
of the Code reads as under: -
208. Supply of copies of statements and documents to accused in
         other cases triable by Court of Session.—
         Where, in a case instituted otherwise than on a police report, it
         appears to the Magistrate issuing process under
section 204
that
         the offence is triable exclusively by the Court of Session, the
         Magistrate shall without delay furnish to the accused, free of cost,
         a copy of each of the following:—
(i)   the statements recorded under
section 200
or
section
                   202
, of all persons examined by the Magistrate;
(ii) the statements and confessions, if any, recorded
                   under
section 161
or
section 164
;
(iii) any documents produced before the Magistrate on
                   which the prosecution proposes to rely:
Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any such
         document is voluminous, he shall, instead of furnishing the
         accused with a copy thereof, direct that he will only be allowed to
         inspect it either personally or through pleader in Court.
51.The stage at which the provisions of Section(s) 207 and 208 of the Code,

   respectively spring into action, de hors
Section 209
, can be gleaned from the

   heading of Chapter XVI wherein these provisions are contained;
“Commencement of Proceedings before Magistrates”. The said Chapter, deals

   with the stage, where the accused person is before the Magistrate, either by

   way of issue of process under
Section 204
of the Code, or if such person

   appears on his own, or is brought before the Magistrate by the police, which

   as already discussed in the foregoing paragraphs, signifies that the Magistrate

   has taken cognizance of the offence, and has now proceeded further under the
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 43 of 85
Code, by initiating proceedings against persons accused of committing such

   offences. That apart, the documents, copies of which, have to be supplied to

   the accused, under each of these provisions, are all documents that have

   become part of the record before the Magistrate, by virtue of him, having

   already proceeded under the provisions of
Section 200
and subsequent

   sections of Chapter XV in case of complaint case, which again reinforces that

   at this stage the Magistrate has taken cognizance.
52.It could be argued, that in a case instituted upon a police report, the Magistrate

   not having proceeded in terms of Chapter XV, as he is no required to in such

   cases, may not necessarily have taken cognizance of the offence. There may

   be situations where although police report may have been submitted to a

   Magistrate under
Section 173
, but the stage of taking cognizance of an offence

   on the basis of such report in terms of
Section 190
of the Code, may not have

   reached by the Magistrate. It is particularly in this context, that our discussion

   in the foregoing paragraphs assumes importance. We have already discussed,

   how the act of taking cognizance of an offence does not involve any formal

   action of any kind, and cannot be construed by any rigid formula. Whether

   cognizance of an offence has been taken, or not taken or yet to be taken,

   depends in the peculiar context of the case and the stage of proceedings

   therein, and lodestar for answering the same has to be discerned from the

   procedure adopted by the Magistrate. Nevertheless, when a Magistrate, upon
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                          Page 44 of 85
receiving a police report, proceeds further, by complying with the procedural

   requirements
laid down in
Section 207
of the Code, he is deemed to have taken

   cognizance of the offence. For there can be no need or question of supplying

   the documents envisaged under
Section 207
to the accused, if cognizance of

   the offence is not taken, and more importantly, there can be no situation where

   the accused is compelled to appear before the Magistrate, or made a part of

   the proceedings in connection with any case instituted, if cognizance of the

   offence, involved therein is not yet taken. This is because prior to taking

   cognizance of an offence, the person alleged to be the accused, has no locus

   in the proceedings.
53.It also flows from the cardinal principal of criminal jurisprudence, that unless

   the court is satisfied, upon application of its mind about the occurrence of an

   offence, in other words, unless cognizance of an offence is taken, a person

   even though alleged or suspected to be involved in the commission of such

   offence, cannot be called upon or compelled to partake in the criminal

   proceedings, on a mere suspicion, lest it violate the right of dignity of such

   person as-well as the right of such person against self-incrimination enshrined

   in Article(s) 20 and
21
of the Constitution and undermine the sanctity of

   criminal proceedings, the bedrock of which is fairness. The imperative

   requirement of first taking cognizance of an offence, before any person is

   arrayed in the proceedings as an accused, is not a mere procedural formality,
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 45 of 85
it is there to ensure that no person is subjected to the rigours of criminal

   proceedings on a conjectural suspicions and unverified allegations. To do so,

   would gravely prejudice and stigmatize the dignity and reputation of such

   person, or put simply, the right to life of such persons, and more importantly,

   to ensure that a person suspected of committing an offence, is not compelled

   to give any information or evidence, in other words, incriminate himself, for

   the very purpose of then establishing and making out an offence against him

   or in simple words taking cognizance of an offence against such person.
54.The expression “the accused appears or is brought before the Magistrate”

   used in
Section 209
of the Code, which, at the cost of repetition, deals with

   committal of cases to the Court of Session when offence is triable exclusively

   by it, have to be understood in the context of the aforesaid paragraphs.
Section

   209
of the Code, leaves no room for ambiguity. The words used in it are clear

   as a noon day. There can be no committal of a case by a Magistrate to the

   Court of Session, unless the accused is before it. It is not difficult to

   comprehend why;
Section 209
insists upon the requirement for the person

   accused to be before the Magistrate before the committal of the case takes

   place. The reason is quite simple. There can be no compliance of the

   requirements envisaged under Section(s) 207 or 208 of the Code, as the case

   may be, if a person is not yet arrayed as an accused to the case instituted before

   the Magistrate. As both these provisions mandate the requirement to furnish
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 46 of 85
the copies of the documents enumerated therein, to the accused, thereby

   indicating that when the Magistrate proceeds under the provisions of

   Section(s) 207 or 208 and then 209 of Chapter of XVI of the Code, cognizance

   of the offence is already taken, and further that the Magistrate has also applied

   its mind to find out who the offenders really are. [See:
Raghubans Dubey v.

   State of Bihar
, 1967 Cri LJ 1081 (SC)].
55.This is further reinforced from clause(s) (b) and (d) of
Section 209
of the Code,

   which talk about the duty of the Magistrate to remand the accused to custody

   and to notify the Public Prosecutor about the committal of the case to the Court

   of Session.
Section 209(b)
stipulates that for the purpose of committal of the

   case to the Court of Session, the Magistrate, has to remand the accused to

   custody, subject to the provisions of bail, “during, and until the conclusion of,

   the trial”. This itself indicates that, when the accused is being remanded by

   the Magistrate, it is being done, for the purpose of undergoing trial, which

   presupposes that, the Magistrate is satisfied that there is enough material for

   the purpose of sending such accused to trial. On the other hand, the duty to,

   notify the Public Prosecutor under
Section 209(d)
, as regards the committal of

   the case, is for the purpose of facilitating the opening of the case by the

   prosecution before the Court of Session in terms of
Section 226
contained in

   Chapter XVIII, which specifically deals with “Trial before a Court of

   Session”.
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 47 of 85
56.It is worthwhile to note that
Section 190
of the Code, which as already stated

     deals with Cognizance of offences by Magistrates, specifically employs the

     words “any offence”. Thus, subject to conditions
laid down in
Chapter XIV, a

     Magistrate by virtue of
Section 190
of the Code has been specifically and

     consciously empowered to take cognizance of “Any Offence”. The use of the

     expression “Any Offence” is particularly significant, because even-though the

     Code, in Chapter(s) XV and XVI has qualified the meaning of the term

     “offences” with the expression “triable exclusively by the Court of Session”,

     wherever necessary, no such expression has been juxtaposed with the term

     “offences” insofar as Chapter XIV is concerned. This reinforces that the

     language couched in
Section 190
of the Code, more particularly the words

     “any offence” is of wide import and that a Magistrate is empowered to take

     cognizance of an offence even if the same is triable exclusively by the Court

     of Session.
b.     Role of the Court of Session after the case is committed to it by the
       Magistrate under
Section 209
of the Code.
57.For a better exposition on the issue of who takes cognizance of offence under

     which is exclusively triable by a Court of Session, under the Code, it would

     be apposite to under the procedure that is to be followed after a case where an

     offence is exclusively triable by a Court of Session, is committed by a
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 48 of 85
Magistrate to the Court of Session. In this regard, the provisions of Section(s)

   226, 227 and 228 of the Code are of significance.
58.Once a case has been committed by the Magistrate to a Court of Session in

   terms of
Section 209
, the procedure that follows suit, is provided in Section(s)

   225 to 237 in Chapter XVIII of the Code. The heading of Chapter XVIII is

   also very clear. It reads, “Trial before a Court of Session”. Thus, once a case

   has been committed, the procedure that now has to be adopted by the Court of

   Sessions is in lieu of commencement of trial.
59.Although, one must be mindful that, mere committal of the case, does not

   mean that trial has now commenced. Trial in respect of any case instituted

   under the Code, commences only after the charges have been framed. All

   stages prior to the framing of charges, are a pre-trial stage, which may also

   happen to be a stage of inquiry. All that we are trying to emphasize, on the

   basis of the heading of Chapter XVIII of the Code is that, the procedure that

   the Court of Session is expected to adopt is towards commencement of trial,

   and not for the purpose of taking cognizance of an offence, which as discussed

   in the foregoing paragraphs of this judgment, already stands taken by the

   Magistrate, who committed the case to the Court of Session. This may be

   better understood by taking a closer look at few provisions of Chapter XVIII,
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 49 of 85
and by discerning what the Court of Session is empowered to do, post the

   committal of the case to it.
60.
Section 225
of the Code, although merely explanatory in nature as to how

   trials are to be conducted before a Court of Session, yet is of some degree of

   aid, inasmuch as it further indicates that the procedure
laid down in
Chapter

   XVIII is for the purpose of facilitating the trial. The provision simplictier

   states that in every trial before a Court of Session, the prosecution shall be

   done by a Public Prosecutor. The said provision reads as under: -
“225. Trial to be conducted by Public Prosecutor.—
         In every trial before a Court of Session, the prosecution shall be
         conducted by a Public Prosecutor.”
61.
Section 226
of the Code, is the immediate next procedural step after the case

   has been committed by a Magistrate to the Court of Session in terms of Section
209. The said provision stipulates that, when the accused appears or is brought

   before the Court of Session “in pursuance of a commitment of the case under
Section 209
” the prosecutor shall first open his case. In doing so, the

   prosecutor is required to describe the charges brought against the accused and

   further stating the evidence, he proposes to prove for establishing the guilt of

   such accused.
Section 226
of the Code reads as under: -
“226. Opening case for prosecution.—
         When the accused appears or is brought before the Court in
         pursuance of a commitment of the case under
section 209
, the
         prosecutor shall open his case by describing the charge brought
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 50 of 85
against the accused and stating by what evidence he proposes to
         prove the guilt of the accused.”
62.A bare perusal of the aforesaid provision, makes it clear that, the first

   procedural step that is ordinarily contemplated to be undertaken by a Court of

   Session, under the Code, after the committal of the case by the Magistrate

   under
Section 209
, is to be apprise itself as-well as the accused about the

   charges that are brought against such accused.
Section 226
does not

   contemplate, any procedural step of first satisfying the Court of Session about

   the occurrence of an offence, such that the Court of Session, in turn, take

   cognizance of the offence. The procedure contemplated in the said provision,

   presupposes the cognizance of the offence. This is because, as already

   discussed by us, in the foregoing parts of the judgment, the Magistrate before

   committal of the case, is already expected as-well as deemed to have taken

   cognizance of the offence, sought to be brought to trial before the Court of

   Session.
63.
Section 227
of the Code deals with discharge. Where the Court of Session,

   upon consideration of the record of the case and documents tendered with it,

   and after hearing the accused and the prosecution in regards to such material

   on record, considers that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against

   the accused, then the Court of Sessions, shall discharge the accused, by

   recording reasons for the same. The said provision reads as under: -
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                       Page 51 of 85
“227. Discharge.—
         If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents
         submitted therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the
         accused and the prosecution in this behalf, the Judge considers
         that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the
         accused, he shall discharge the accused and record his reasons
         for so doing.”
64.At this stage, we may address ourselves on one another aspect, with a view to

   obviate any confusion. It may be argued, that the cognizance of an offence can

   only be taken by that court who is also empowered to discharge the accused

   qua such offence. Since, in a case where the offence is exclusively triable by

   the Court of Session, as is manifest from a reading of Section(s) 209, 226 and

   227 of the Code, only a Court of Sessions is empowered to discharge an

   accused, it must be the one who must take cognizance of the offence, and not

   the Magistrate, whose role is only confined to committing the case to the Court

   of Session. Although, such an argument may be seemingly lucrative and

   appealing, the same is a misunderstanding of the basics of what is meant by

   “taking cognizance”.
65.One another fundamental aspect pertinent to bear in mind is that, cognizance

   of an offence is taken when the judicial authority who has applied its mind,

   comes to the finding that it is necessary to initiate proceedings. The act of

   “taking cognizance” as already discussed, signifies judicial application of

   mind on the allegations purported to be levelled. Equally important to
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                       Page 52 of 85
remember is that cognizance is of an offence and not the offender. Where,

   however, there is no offence, there can be no cognizance, as there can be no

   proceedings initiated. In the course of uncovering, whether there is any

   offence, whose cognizance is to be taken, the court or the Magistrate, as the

   case may be, comes to the finding that there is no offence, all proceedings

   initiated leading upto such conclusion are dropped. In other words, any

   proceedings that may have been initiated under the Code, for determining, if

   there an offence has taken place or not, come to an end and are dropped once

   it is found that no offence had occurred. This is quite distinct from ‘discharge’,

   for the reason that discharge does not necessarily, always lead to dropping of

   proceeding. Discharge is always qua the accused person, as opposed to

   cognizance which is always qua the offence itself. Discharge of an accused

   does not tantamount to the negation or eradication of the necessity to initiate

   proceedings in the first place. Discharge only signifies that; there isn’t

   sufficient ground to charge the person accused of commission of a particular

   offence. It has no bearing on the offence itself whose cognizance was taken,

   as the occurrence of such offence and the correlating necessity for initiation

   of proceedings still remains. Discharge of an accused does not mean that no

   offence had occurred in the first place. Take for instance, the Magistrate had

   taken cognizance of an offence, pursuant to which two persons ‘A’ and ‘B’

   came to be arrayed as accused. Later, the Court of Sessions, finds that there

   isn’t sufficient material to proceed against ‘B’. This does not mean that there
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 53 of 85
is no necessity for initiation of proceedings in respect of the said offence, as

   the same may still continue in respect of ‘A’. Even if ‘A’ also comes to be

   discharge, it does not stand that no offence had taken place, and it would be

   the bounden duty of the Court to find out the actual offenders. Cognizance is

   always qua an offence and always correlates to initiation of proceedings,

   whereas, discharge is only qua an accused and concerned with if there is

   sufficient ground to proceed against such accused.
66.If at all, there was a correlation between the power to “discharge” and the act

   of “taking cognizance”, such that only that court empowered to discharge an

   accused for an offence, could be said to be empowered to also take cognizance

   of such offence in the first place, then there would have been no need for the

   Code to contain the provisions pertaining to discharge by a Court of Session

   and by a Magistrate, in separate distinct Chapters, more particularly Chapter

   XVIII;
Section 227
and Chapter XIX; Section(s) 239 and 245, respectively,

   which specifically deal with trials before the Court of Session and Magistrates,

   respectively. The Code would have simpliciter empowered the Court of

   Session and the Magistrate to discharge an accused under Chapter XIV, which

   deals with cognizance of offences by Magistrates and Courts of Session. This

   reinforces that, the power to discharge an accused, is nothing more than a

   safeguard against any mechanical or capricious framing of charges; a pre-
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 54 of 85
requisite for commencement of trials, and thus, correlates only to trials, and

   has nothing to with the act of “taking cognizance” under the Code.
67.
Section 228
of the Code is particularly of significance for an insight into the

   role that a Court of Sessions plays after a case is committed to it by the

   Magistrate.
Section 228
which deals with framing of charges, stipulates that,

   where after such consideration and hearing as contemplated under Section(s)

   226 and 227 of the Code, the Court of Session is of the opinion that there is

   ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence, then only

   two options are available to it: first, where it finds that the offence is not

   exclusively triable by the Court of Session, then, it may either frame a charge

   against such accused and thereafter, transfer the case back to the Magistrate

   mentioned therein, or simply transfer the case back without framing any

   charge; or second, where it finds that the offence is indeed exclusively triable

   by the Court of Session, then it shall proceed to frame a charge against such

   accused. The said provision reads as under: -
“228. Framing of charge.—
         (1) If, after such consideration and hearing as aforesaid, the Judge
         is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused
         has committed an offence which—
(a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session, he
                  may, frame a charge against the accused and, by order,
                  transfer the case for trial to the Chief Judicial
                  Magistrate, or any other Judicial Magistrate of the
                  first class and direct the accused to appear before the
                  Chief Judicial Magistrate, or, as the case may be, the
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 55 of 85
Judicial Magistrate of the first class, on such date as
                  he deems fit, and thereupon such Magistrate shall try
                  the offence in accordance with the procedure for the
                  trial of warrant-cases instituted on a police report;
(b) is exclusively triable by the Court, he shall frame in
                  writing a charge against the accused.
(2) Where the Judge frames any charge under clause (b) of sub-
section (1), the charge shall be read and explained to the accused
         and the accused shall be asked whether he pleads guilty of the
         offence charged or claims to be tried.
68.It is manifest from a careful reading of the aforesaid provision, that a Court of

   Session, after a case has been committed, is only required to see, if the offence

   in the case, is one exclusively triable by it or not. Where, the offence is not

   exclusively triable by it, the Court of Session will mandatorily transfer the

   case to the Magistrate as specified in
Section 228
sub-section (1) clause (a).

   Where, however the offence is exclusively triable by it, the Court of Session

   will mandatorily proceed to frame charges. The only discretion that has been

   conferred upon the Court of Session, is in the former, where it can decide

   whether to frame the charge himself or not, before mandatorily transferring

   the case back to the Magistrate as specified therein.
69.There is no discretion conferred upon the Court of Session, to whom a case

   has been committed to go into the question, whether any offence has taken

   place, cognizance of which may be taken. Once the Court of Session is in

   seisin of the case in terms of
Section 209
of the Code, it cannot go into the
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 56 of 85
question whether, the case is fit one for it to take cognizance or to drop the

   proceedings, for it is assumed that the case has been committed to it by the

   Magistrate after application of his mind.
Section 228
, more particularly the

   words “there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an

   offence” presupposes the cognizance of offence, or put simply, it means that

   the Court of Session is already alive to the fact that there has been an offence,

   which is why it is only required to form an opinion that there is ground for

   presuming that the accused has committed such offence and thereafter, must

   decide whether, the offence is one exclusively triable by it or not. Even under
Section 228(1)(a)
, the Court of Session is only empowered to transfer the case

   back to the Magistrate, with the discretion of framing the charge first, if the

   offence is not exclusively triable by it. It cannot go into the question, whether

   there is any offence or not, worth initiating proceedings under the Code. This

   is further fortified from the expression “and thereupon such Magistrate shall

   try the offence in accordance with the procedure for the trial of warrant-cases

   instituted on a police report” in
Section 228(1)(a)
which indicates that where

   such case is transferred back to the Magistrate, the Magistrate is mandated to

   thereafter proceed to try such offence i.e., to commence trial in respect of the

   same. The Court of Session is not empowered to send back the case to the

   Magistrate for relooking into whether cognizance should be taken or not.
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 57 of 85
70.A combined reading of Section(s) 226, 227 and 228, clearly outline, that after

   the case is committed to the Court of Session, its role is only limited for the

   purpose of deciding whether the case is a fit one for commencing trial against

   the accused, and whether such offence should be tried by it or by the

   Magistrate. After a case is committed to the Court of Session, the first

   immediate procedural step envisaged by the Code, is under
Section 226
,

   whereby the Court apprises itself and through it the accused about the charges.

   Thereafter, the next course of action available to the Court of Session, is only

   in terms of Section(s) 227 and 228 of the Code. The expressions “considers

   that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused” and “is

   of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed

   an offence” used in Section(s) 227 and 228, respectively, to our minds, appear

   to empower the Court of Session to only decide whether on the basis of the

   material on record and the submissions of the accused and the prosecution,

   there is enough material to either commence a trial or discharge the accused.

   The framework of the provisions of Section(s) 226, 227 and 228 of the Code,

   to our minds, do not appear to envisage any power of the Court of Session, to

   decide whether cognizance of the offence should be taken or not, or the

   question whether the Magistrate should have taken cognizance or not. For

   offences which are exclusively triable by the Court of Session, the role that

   the Court of Session is expected to play in terms of Section(s) 226 to 228, after

   the case has been committed to it, is not only altogether different from the one
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 58 of 85
that a Magistrate is required to play but also one concerned only with the stage

   “post-cognizance of offence” in respect of the case committed to it.
71.We say so, because, unlike
Section 190
of the Code, which empowers the

   Magistrate with the discretion to decide whether cognizance of an offence

   should be taken or not, by application of his mind, there is no provision of the

   same similitude as
Section 190
, which empowers the Court of Session to do

   so, in respect of cases committed to it by the Magistrate. At the same time,

   there is also no provision, which empowers the Court of Session, to decide

   whether the committal of the case was correct or not, to such nature and extent,

   that the Court of Session be said to be empowered to sit in appeal over the

   committal proceedings and decide or rather re-decide if the cognizance of the

   offence should be taken or should have been taken in the first place or not.

   The only limited power that the Court of Session has been armed with over

   the order of committal passed by the Magistrate, is to ascertain and re-decide

   if the offence is one exclusively triable by it or not. Unlike a Magistrate, who

   is empowered in terms of
Section 190
of the Code, to drop proceedings where

   after application of his mind, he comes to the finding that there is no offence

   for taking cognizance to initiate proceedings in respect of, the Court of Session

   is not empowered to drop the proceedings in the case committed to it, it is only

   empowered to either proceed to frame charges against the accused or to

   discharge the accused or if such offence is not exclusively triable by it, transfer
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                          Page 59 of 85
the case back to the Magistrate, again for the purpose of commencement of

     trial by such Magistrate. This when seen in light of the expression “Any

     Offence” used in
Section 190
of the Code, clearly indicates that it is the

     Magistrate who is not only empowered but also indeed does take cognizance

     of an offence even if the same is triable exclusively by the Court of Session.



c.     Object and Purpose underlying
Section 193
of the Code.
72.The proposition of law, that where a case is committed by the Magistrate in

     view of the offence being exclusively triable by the Court of Session, it is only

     the Magistrate who takes cognizance of the offence and not the Court of

     Session has to be understood in the context of
Section 193
of the Code.
73.The marginal note appended to
Section 193
of the Code, reads as “Cognizance

     of offences by Courts of Session”. It stipulates that no Court of Session shall

     be empowered to take cognizance of any offence as a Court of Original

     Jurisdiction, unless the case has been committed to it by the Magistrate, or

     where it has been expressly empowered to do so, either under the Code or any

     other law.
Section 193
reads as under: -
“193. Cognizance of offences by Courts of Session.—
          Except as otherwise expressly provided by this Code or by any
          other law for the time being in force, no Court of Session shall take
          cognizance of any offence as a Court of original jurisdiction unless
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                           Page 60 of 85
the case has been committed to it by a Magistrate under this
         Code.”
74.A reading of the aforesaid provision, makes it manifest, that there is a clear

   embargo cast upon the Court of Session from taking cognizance of any

   offence, as a Court of original jurisdiction i.e., no cognizance of an offence

   can be taken by a Court of Session in its original capacity, as a point of

   initiation of any proceedings under the Code. The expression “as a Court of

   original jurisdiction” warrants a careful interpretation. The said expression

   cannot be construed to mean that merely because the Court of Session is

   precluded from taking cognizance of an offence as forum of inception of

   proceedings under the Code i.e., as an original forum, that it must by necessary

   implication, be presumed to be empowered to take cognizance of an offence

   as a forum of superior jurisdiction or as an intermediate procedural forum at a

   subsequent stage in the proceedings already initiated. To say so, would go

   against the well-established rule, that cognizance of an offence can only be

   taken once, as held in
Dharam Pal
(supra) and
Balveer Singh
(supra). The

   negative language employed in
Section 193
of the Code, more particularly,

   “no Court of Session shall take cognizance of any offence” which has been

   used in conjunction with “unless the case has been committed to it” is not

   suggestive of the fact that, where a case has been committed to the Court of

   Session, it has to then mandatorily take cognizance of the offence. To say

   would, resulting in turning the very tenets of the act of “taking cognizance”
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 61 of 85
over its head. It would lead to an absurd interpretation, where, although the

   Magistrate, by way of
Section 190
of the Code has the discretion to take

   cognizance of an offence, no such discretion exists insofar as the Court of

   Session is concerned.
75.
In
Pradeep S. Wodeyar v. State of Karnataka
, reported in (2021) 19 SCC

   62, this Court has elaborately noted upon the scope of
Section 193
as thus:
“23. …
Section 193
stipulates that unless the case has been
         committed by a Magistrate to the Sessions Court under the Code,
         no Court of Session shall take cognizance of any offence. But there
         are two exceptions to this formulation, namely, where:
(i) the
CrPC
has made an express provision to the
             contrary; and
(ii) an express provision to the contrary is contained in
             “any other law for the time being in force”.
The bar in
Section 193
is to the Sessions Court taking cognizance
         of an offence, as a court of original jurisdiction unless the case
         has been committed to it by the Magistrate under the Code.
Xxx
38. Section 193CrPC states that the Sessions Court shall not take
         cognizance of an offence as a court of original jurisdiction unless
         the Magistrate commits the case to it. The only exception is if it is
         expressly provided otherwise by the Code or the statute. Neither
         the Code nor the
MMDR Act
provide that the Special Court could
         directly take cognizance of the offences. Therefore, the Sessions
         Court did not have the authority to take cognizance. Section
         209CrPC provides the Magistrate the power to commit the case.
In
Dharam Pal v. State of Haryana [Dharam Pal
v. State of
         Haryana, (2014) 3 SCC 306 : (2014) 2 SCC (Cri) 159] , a
         Constitution Bench, while discussing whether the committing
         court was required under Section 209 to take cognizance of the
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 62 of 85
offence before committing the case to the Court of Session, held
         that the Magistrate could either commit the case before or after
         taking cognizance. In this case, the Special Court has directly
         taken cognizance. It now needs to be determined if this irregularity
         in the cognizance order vitiates the entire proceedings for the
         order to be quashed and set aside.
Xxx
50. It is a well-settled principle of law that cognizance as
         envisaged in Section 190CrPC is of the offence and not of the
         offender. The expression “cognizance of any offence” is
         consistently used in the provisions of Sections 190, 191, 192 and
193. [ As a matter of fact, the expression “cognizance of any
         offence” is also used in Sections 195, 196, 197, 198, 198-A, 198-
         B and 199. Chapter XV
CrPC
which governs complaints of
         Magistrates also emphasises the principle that cognizance is of an
         offence. The same principle, as we have seen earlier, is
         emphasised in Chapter XVI in which Section 204(1) adverts to a
         Magistrate “taking cognizance of an offence”.]

                                           Xxx
56. It is evident from the discussion in
Kishun Singh [Kishun Singh
         v. State of Bihar
, (1993) 2 SCC 16 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 470] and
         Dharam Pal [Dharam Pal v. State of Haryana, (2014) 3 SCC 306
         : (2014) 2 SCC (Cri) 159] that in view of the provisions of Section
         193CrPC, cognizance is taken of the offence and not the offender.
         Thus, the Magistrate or the Special Judge does not have the power
         to take cognizance of the accused. The purpose of taking
         cognizance of the offence instead of the accused is because the
         crime is committed against the society at large. Therefore, the
         grievance of the State is against the commission of the offence and
         not the offender. The offender as an actor is targeted in the
         criminal procedure to provide punishments so as to prevent or
         reduce the crime through different methods such as reformation,
         retribution and deterrence. Cognizance is thus taken against the
         offence and not the accused since the legislative intent is to prevent
         crime. The accused is a means to reach the end of preventing and
         addressing the commission of crime.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                          Page 63 of 85
76.Likewise in
Nahar Singh v. State of U.P.
, reported in (2022) 5 SCC 295, this

   Court made the following observations on
Kishun Singh
(supra) to comment

   on the nature of cognizance under Section 197 of the Code:
“23.
In
Kishun Singh
case [
Kishun Singh v. State of Bihar
, (1993)
         2 SCC 16 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 470] , the scope of jurisdiction of the
         Court of Session under Section 193 of the Code was explained,
         relying on an authority dealing with similar provision under the
         1898 Code (
P.C. Gulati v. Lajya Ram [P.C. Gulati
v. Lajya Ram,
         AIR 1966 SC 595 : 1966 Cri LJ 465 : (1966) 1 SCR 560] ).
The
         phrase used to explain the implication of taking cognizance by a
         Court of Session in the judgment of
Kishun Singh [Kishun Singh
         v. State of Bihar
, (1993) 2 SCC 16 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 470] was
         “cognizance in the limited sense”.
24.
In para 8 of the Report (in
Kishun Singh
case [Kishun Singh v.
State of Bihar, (1993) 2 SCC 16 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 470] ), it has
         been held observed : (SCC pp. 24-25)

             “8. Section 193 of the old Code placed an embargo on the
             Court of Session from taking cognizance of any offence as
             a court of original jurisdiction unless the accused was
             committed to it by a Magistrate or there was express
             provision in the Code or any other law to the contrary.
In
             the context of the said provision this Court in
P.C. Gulati
             v. Lajya Ram [P.C. Gulati
v. Lajya Ram, AIR 1966 SC 595
             : 1966 Cri LJ 465 : (1966) 1 SCR 560] , SCR p. 568, AIR
             p. 599, Cri LJ p. 469 observed as under : (AIR p. 599, para
21)
                 ‘21. When a case is committed to the Court of
                 Session, the Court of Session has first to determine
                 whether the commitment of the case is proper. If it
                 be of opinion that the commitment is bad on a point
                 of law, it has to refer the case to the High Court
                 which is competent to quash the proceeding under
                 Section 215 of the Code. It is only when the
                 Sessions Court considers the commitment to be
                 good in law that it proceeds with the trial of the
                 case. It is in this context that the Sessions Court has
                 to take cognizance of the offence as a court of
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                       Page 64 of 85
original jurisdiction and it is such a cognizance
                  which is referred to in Section 193 of the Code.’ ””

                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
77. It is well noted in a legion of authorities that the commitment which is talked

   of under Section 193 of the Code is a commitment of the “case” and not that

   of the “offender”. The purpose of Section 193 is to allow Court of Sessions

   the limited window to deemed to have taken cognizance on its own motion.
78.The question of law formulated by us calls for our examination in the light of

   the earlier Section 193 of the old Code and the change brought therein by the

   Code of 1973. It is, therefore, necessary to juxtapose the two provisions:
Old Code                                 New Code
     “Section 193(1) : Except as otherwise   Section 193 : Except as otherwise
     expressly provided by this Code or by   expressly provided by this Code or by any
     any other law for the time being in     other law for the time being in force, no
     force, no Court of Session shall take   Court of Session shall take cognizance of
     cognizance of any offence as a Court    any offence as a Court of original
     of original jurisdiction unless the     jurisdiction unless the case has been
     accused has been committed to it by     committed to it by a Magistrate under this
     a Magistrate duly empowered in that     Code.
behalf.
79.From the above, the meaningful and significant change brought about in the

   Code of 1973 seems manifest. In the earlier provision, the requirement was

   that the accused must have been committed to the Court of Session by a

   Magistrate. The legislature made a change by deleting the word ‘accused’ and
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                            Page 65 of 85
provided instead that the ‘case’ should have been committed to the Court of

   Session.
80.The Court of Session takes cognizance of the case or the offence as a whole

   and, therefore, is entitled to summon anyone who, on the material before it,

   appears to be guilty of such offence to stand trial before it. To highlight, what

   is committed to the Court of Session by the Magistrate is the case or the

   offence for trial and not the individual offender therefor. To hold otherwise

   would be again relapsing into the fallacy that cognizance is taken against

   individual accused persons and not of the offence as such. This was the evil

   which the amendment sought to remedy in express terms.
81.In the aforesaid context, we must look into the following observations made

   in
Joginder Singh vs. State of Punjab
reported in 1979 Cri LJ 333 (Para 6) :-
“It will be noticed that both under Section 193 and Section 209 the
       commitment is of ‘the case’ and not of ‘the accused’ whereas under the
       equivalent provision of the old Code, viz., Section 193(1) and Section 207-
       A it was ‘the accused’ who was committed and not ‘the case’. It is true that
       there cannot be a committal of the case without there being an accused
       person before the Court, but this only means that before a case in respect
       of an offence is committed there must be some accused suspected to be
       involved in the crime before the Court but once “the case in respect of the
       offence qua those accused who are before the Court is committed then the
       cognizance of the offence can be said to have been taken properly by the
       Sessions Court and the bar of Section 193 would be out of the way and
       summoning of additional persons who appear to be involved in the crime
       from the evidence led during the trial and directing them to stand their
       trial along with those who had already been committed must be regarded
       as incidental to such cognizance and a part of the normal process that
       follows it;”                                      (Emphasis supplied)
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                             Page 66 of 85
82.Therefore, what the law under section 193 seeks to visualise and provide for

   now is that the whole of the incident constituting the offence is to be taken

   cognizance of by the Court of Session on commitment and not that every

   individual offender must be so committed or that in case it is not so done then

   the Court of Session would be powerless to proceed against persons regarding

   whom it may be fully convinced at the very threshold of the trial that they are

   prima facie guilty of the crime as well.
83.In Kishun Singh vs. State of Bihar
reported in (1993) 2 SCC 16, the question

   before the Court was whether the Court of Sessions to which a case has been

   committed to for trial by the Magistrate, can without recording evidence,

   summon a person not named in the police report by exercise of its power under
Section 319
CrPC. The two judge Bench held that when a case is committed

   to the Court of Sessions by the Magistrate under Section 209 on the ground

   that it is exclusively triable by it, the Sessions Court would have the power to

   take cognizance of the offence. It was thus held that since cognizance is taken

   of the offence and not the accused, if any material suggests the complicity of

   other persons in the offence, the Court of Sessions can summon such other

   persons. The court, by drawing a comparison between Section 193 of the Code

   of 1973 and the Code of 1898, and on a reading of
Section 209
CrPC held that

   both the committal and cognizance is of the offence and not the
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                        Page 67 of 85
accused/offender. The Court summarized the position in law in the following

   observations: -
“7. […] Section 190 of the Code sets out the different ways in which a
       Magistrate can take cognizance of an offence, that is to say, take notice
       of an allegation disclosing commission of a crime with a view to setting
       the law in motion to bring the offender to book. Under this provision
       cognizance can be taken in three ways enumerated in clauses (a), (b) and
(c) of the offence alleged to have been committed. The object is to ensure
       the safety of a citizen against the vagaries of the police by giving him the
       right to approach the Magistrate directly if the police does not take action
       or he has reason to believe that no such action will be taken by the police.
Even though the expression take cognizance is not defined, it is well
       settled by a catena of decisions of this Court that when the Magistrate
       takes notice of the accusations and applies his mind to the allegations
       made in the complaint or police report or information and on being
       satisfied that the allegations, if proved, would constitute an offence
       decides to initiate judicial proceedings against the alleged offender he is
       said to have taken cognizance of the offence. It is essential to bear in mind
       the fact that cognizance is in regard to the offence and not the offender.
       […]
       It may Immediately be noticed that under the old provision a Court of
       Session could not take cognizance of an offence as a court of original
       jurisdiction unless the accused was committed to it whereas under the
       recast section as it presently stands the expression the accused has been
       replaced by the words the case. As has been pointed out earlier, under
       Section 190 cognizance has to be taken for the offence and not the
       offender; so also under Section 193 the emphasis now is to the committal
       of the case and no more on the offender. So also Section 209 speaks of
       committing the case to the Court of Session. On a conjoint reading of
       these provisions it becomes clear that while under the old Code in view
       of the language of Section 193 unless an accused was committed to the
       Court of Session the said court could not take cognizance of an offence
       as a court of original jurisdiction; now under Section 193 as it presently
       stands once the case is committed the restriction disappears.”

       “16…Thus, on a plain reading of Section 193, as it presently stands once
       the case is committed to the Court of Session by a Magistrate under the
       Code, the restriction placed on the power of the Court of Session to take
       cognizance of an offence as a court of original jurisdiction gets lifted. On
       the Magistrate committing the case under Section 209 to the Court of
       Session the bar of Section 193 is lifted thereby investing the Court of
       Session complete and unfettered jurisdiction of the court of original
       jurisdiction to take cognizance of the offence which would include the
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                               Page 68 of 85
summoning of the person or persons whose complicity in the commission
        of the crime can prima facie be gathered from the material available on
        record.”
                                                           (Emphasis supplied)
84.In other words, upon the committal by the Magistrate, the Court of Sessions

     is empowered to take cognizance of the whole of the incident constituting the

     offence. The Court of Sessions is thus invested with the complete jurisdiction

     to summon any individual accused of the crime. The above principles were

     reiterated in a two judge Bench decision in
State of W.B. vs. Mohd. Khalid
reported in (1995) 1 SCC 684. Justice S Mohan speaking for the Court

     observed:
“43.[…] Section 190 of the Code talks of cognizance of offences by
        Magistrates. This expression has not been defined in the Code. In its
        broad and literal sense, it means taking notice of an offence. This would
        include the intention of initiating judicial proceedings against the
        offender in respect of that offence or taking steps to see whether there is
        any basis for initiating judicial proceedings or for other purposes. The
        word ‗cognizance‘ indicates the point when a Magistrate or a Judge first
        takes judicial notice of an offence. It is entirely a different thing from
        initiation of proceedings; rather it is the condition precedent to the
        initiation of proceedings by the Magistrate or the Judge. Cognizance is
        taken of cases and not of persons.”

                                                             (Emphasis supplied)



d.      How the decision of this Court in
Dharam Pal
(supra) should be
        understood.
85.In Dharam Pal
(supra) a Constitution Bench was called upon to answer the

     following questions:
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                              Page 69 of 85
“7.1 Does the Committing Magistrate have any other role to play after
       committing the case to the Court of Session on finding from the police
       report that the case was triable by the Court of Session?
7.2 If the Magistrate disagrees with the police report and is convinced
       that a case had also been made out for trial against the persons who had
       been placed in column 2 of the report, does he have the jurisdiction to
       issue summons against them also in order to include their names, along
       with Nafe Singh, to stand trial in connection with the case made out in the
       police report?
7.3 Having decided to issue summons against the appellants, was the
       Magistrate required to follow the procedure of a complaint case and to
       take evidence before committing them to the Court of Session to stand
       trial or whether he was justified in issuing summons against them without
       following such procedure?
7.4 Can the Sessions Judge issue summons under
Section 193
CrPC as a
       court of original jurisdiction?
7.5 Upon the case being committed to the Court of Session, could the
       Sessions Judge issue summons separately under Section 193 of the
       Code or would he have to wait till the stage under Section 319 of the
       Code was reached in order to take recourse thereto?
7.6
Was Ranjit Singh v. State of Punjab
, which set aside the decision in
Kishun Singh v. State of Bihar
, rightly decided or not?”
                                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
86.Answering the reference, the Constitution Bench held that:-
(i)    The Magistrate has ample powers to disagree with the final report

              that may be filed by the police authorities under Section 173(2) of

              the Code and to proceed against the accused persons dehors the

              police report. The Magistrate has a role to play while committing the

              case to the Court of Session upon taking cognizance on the police

              report submitted before him under Section 173(2) of the Code. In the
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                             Page 70 of 85
event the Magistrate disagrees with the police report, he has two

               choices. He may act on the basis of a protest petition that may be

               filed, or he may, while disagreeing with the police report, issue

               process and summon the accused.
(ii)    Thereafter, if on being prima facie satisfied that a case had been

               made out to proceed against the persons named in Column 2 of the

               report, he may proceed to try the said persons or if he is satisfied that

               a case had been made out which was triable by the Court of Session,

               he must commit the case to the Court of Session to proceed further

               in the matter. Further, if the Magistrate decides to proceed against

               the persons accused, he would have to proceed on the basis of the

               police report itself and either inquire into the matter or commit it to

               the Court of Session if the same is found to be triable by the Sessions

               Court.
(iii)   The Sessions Judge is entitled to issue summons under Section 193

               of the Code upon the case being committed to him by the Magistrate.
Section 193 speaks of cognizance of offences by the Court of

               Session. The key words in the section are that ‘no Court of Session

               shall take cognizance of any offence as a court of original

               jurisdiction unless the case has been committed to it by a Magistrate

               under this Code’. The provision of Section 193 entails that a case

               must, first of all, be committed to the Court of Session by the
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                            Page 71 of 85
Magistrate. The second condition is that only after the case had been

              committed to it, could the Court of Session take cognizance of the

              offence exercising original jurisdiction. The submission that the

              cognizance indicated in Section 193 deals not with cognizance of an

              offence but of the commitment order passed by the Magistrate, was

              specifically rejected in view of the clear wordings of Section 193

              that the Court of Session may take cognizance of the offences under

              the said section.
(iv)   Cognizance of an offence can only be taken once. In the event, a

              Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and then commits the

              case to the Court of Session, the question of taking fresh cognizance

              of the offence and, thereafter, proceeding to issue summons, is not

              in accordance with law. If cognizance is to be taken of the offence,

              it could be taken either by the Magistrate or by the Court of Session.

              The language of Section 193 of the Code very clearly indicates that

              once the case is committed to the Court of Session by the Magistrate,

              the Court of Session assumes original jurisdiction and all that goes

              with the assumption of such jurisdiction. The provisions of Section

              209 of the Code will, therefore, have to be understood as the

              Magistrate playing a passive role in committing the case to the Court

              of Session on finding from the police report that the case was triable

              by the Court of Session. Nor can there be any question of part
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 72 of 85
cognizance being taken by the Magistrate and part cognizance being

              taken by the Sessions Judge.
87.In the process of coming to the aforesaid conclusions, this Court accepted the

   view expressed in
Kishun Singh
(supra) that the Sessions Court has

   jurisdiction on committal of a case to it, to take cognizance of the offence

   which would include the summoning of the person not named as offender but

   whose complicity in the case would be evident from the materials available on

   record. It specifically held that upon committal under Section 209 of the Code,

   the Sessions Judge may summon those persons shown in Column 2 of the

   police report to stand trial along with those already named therein.
(See:
Balveer Singh
(supra))
88.At the same time, the Court also held that it would not be correct to hold that

   on receipt of a police report and seeing that the case is triable by a Court of

   Session, the Magistrate has no other function but to commit the case trial to

   the Court of Session and the Sessions Judge has to wait till the stage under

   Section 319 of the Code is reached before proceeding against the persons

   against whom a prima facie case is made out from the material contained in

   the case papers sent by the Magistrate while committing the case to the Court

   of Session. This is reflected in the following passage:
“33. As far as the first question is concerned, we are unable to
       accept the submissions made by Mr. Chahar and Mr Dave that on
       receipt of a police report seeing that the case was triable by Court
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                       Page 73 of 85
of Session, the Magistrate has no other function, but to commit the
       case for trial to the Court of Session, which could only resort to
       Section 319 of the Code to array any other person as accused in the
       trial. In other words, according to Mr Dave, there could be no
       intermediary stage between taking of cognizance under Section
       190(1)(b) and Section 204 of the Code issuing summons to the
       accused. The effect of such an interpretation would lead to a
       situation where neither the Committing Magistrate would have any
       control over the persons named in column 2 of the police report nor
       the Sessions Judge, till the Section 319 stage was reached in the
       trial. Furthermore, in the event the Sessions Judge ultimately found
       material against the persons named in column 2 of the police report,
       the trial would have to be commenced de novo against such persons
       which would not only lead to duplication of the trial, but also
       prolong the same.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
89.In Dharam Pal
(supra), a Constitution Bench was deciding on whether the Court of

   Sessions has the power under
Section 193
CrPC to take cognizance of the offence

   and then summon other persons not mentioned as accused in the police report.
The

   issue was referred to a five-judge Bench in view of the conflicting decisions in
Kishun Singh
(supra) and
Ranjit Singh v. State of Punjab
reported in (1998) 7 SCC
149. As discussed above, while in
Kishun Singh
(supra), it was held that the

   Sessions Court has such a power under
Section 193
CrPC, it was held in
Ranjit

   Singh
(supra) that from the stage of committal till the Sessions Court reaches the

   stage indicated in
Section 230
CrPC, the Court could not arraign any other person

   as the accused.
The Constitution Bench affirmed the view in
Kishun Singh
(supra)

   on the ground that the Magistrate before whom the final report is submitted has

   ample powers to disagree with the report filed by the police under Section 173(2)

   and to proceed against the accused persons de hors the police report.
However, if

   the interpretation in
Ranjit Singh
(supra) were to be followed, it would lead to an
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                          Page 74 of 85
anomaly where the Sessions Court would not have this power till the Section 319

   stage is reached, which the Magistrate would otherwise have. In that context, the

   Constitution Bench observed:
“35. In our view, the Magistrate has a role to play while committing
       the case to the Court of Session upon taking cognizance on the police
       report submitted before him under
Section 173(2)
CrPC. In the event
       the Magistrate disagrees with the police report, he has two choices.
       He may act on the basis of a protest petition that may be filed, or he
       may, while disagreeing with the police report, issue process and
       summon the accused. Thereafter, if on being satisfied that a case had
       been made out to proceed against the persons named in column 2 of
       the report, proceed to try the said persons or if he was satisfied that
       a case had been made out which was triable by the Court of Session,
       he may commit the case to the Court of Session to proceed further
       in the matter.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
90.In view of the aforesaid discussion, the position of law is clear that the Court

   of Session has power under
Section 193
CrPC to summon a person as accused

   to stand trial, even if he has not been charge-sheeted by the police and whose

   complexity in the crime appears in the evidence available on record. To hold

   in such a situation, that if the investigating agency blatantly exonerates an

   accused person and the Magistrate does not consequently commit him, the

   Court of Session itself would be rendered powerless to put such an offender

   in the dock at the very opening stage of the trial, would to our mind only

   hamper the cause of justice rather than advance it. It is to be borne in mind

   that herein we are construing procedural provisions and it is well-settled that

   procedure is the hand-maid of justice and is not to be employed as a roadblock
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 75 of 85
thereto. Therefore on the larger canon of construction there appears to be no

   logic for narrowly construing the statute so as to denude the Court of Session

   of the power to summon a person to stand his trial at the outset even when

   wholly convinced of a prima facie case against him on the basis of materials

   in the final report which is admittedly adequate for framing a charge against

   the committed accused under section 228 or discharging him under section

   227 of the Code.
91.Our judgment would remain incomplete without referring to one very erudite

   judgment of this Court rendered in
Raghubans Dubey vs. State of Bihar
reported in (1967 Cri LJ 1081) (SC). Therein a first information report had

   been lodged against as many as 15 persons including petitioner Raghubans

   Dubey. On investigation, the police submitted final form under Section 173 in

   which Raghubans Dubey was not sent up by the police for trial whilst the

   remaining accused were. The Sub-divisional Magistrate took cognizance

   against the fourteen accused persons and expressly discharged Raghubans

   Dubey and thereafter transferred the case to a Magistrate for commitment. In

   the course of the trial, the transferee Magistrate noticed that Raghubans Dubey

   had been named in the first information report and was also named by 5 more

   witnesses in their statements under Section 161. He, therefore, summoned

   Raghubans Dubey as an accused to stand his trial along with others. This was

   challenged on behalf of the petitioner Raghubans Dubey before the High
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                       Page 76 of 85
Court. But the Division Bench of the High Court while upholding the action

   of the Magistrate in summoning the additional accused person rejected the

   revision petition. Upholding the High Court's view in an even stronger and

   more categoric terms, Sikri, J., speaking for the Bench, observed (Para 9 of

   1967 Cri LJ 1081):
“In our opinion once cognizance has been taken by the Magistrate,
       he takes cognizance of an offence and not the offenders; once he takes
       cognizance of an offence it is his duty to find out who the offenders
       really are and once he comes to the conclusion that apart from the
       persons sent up by the police some other persons are involved, it is
       his duty to proceed against those persons. The summoning of the
       additional accused is part of the proceeding initiated by his taking
       cognizance of an offence.”
                                                      (Emphasis supplied)
92.From the above, it inflexibly follows that once a court of competent

   jurisdiction, be it a Magistrate or the Court of Session, takes cognizance of the

   offence, it is not only within the court's powers to summon any one who, on

   the adequate materials, appears to it to be prima facie guilty of the said offence

   but indeed it is its duty to do so.
Raghubans Dubey
's case (supra) arose under

   the old Code of 1898, but it is manifest that the situation is identical under the

   Code of 1973 too, and the same view has then been expressly reiterated in
Hareram Satpathy vs. Tikaram Agarwala
, reported in (1978) 4 SCC 58 : AIR

   1978 SC 1568 : (1978 Cri LJ 1687) in the context of commitment on a murder

   charge to the Court of Session by a Magistrate of a person not sent up as an

   accused by the investigating agency.
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 77 of 85
93.The larger and universal principle underlying the aforesaid rationale has been

   enunciated in powerful language by Desai, J., speaking for the Constitution

   Bench in
A.R. Antulay v. Ramdas Sriniwas Nayak
, reported in (1984) 2 SCC

   500 in the following terms:
“Punishment of the offender in the interest of the society being one
       of the objects behind penal statutes, enacted for larger good of the
       society, right to initiate proceedings cannot be whittled down,
       circumscribed or fettered by putting it into a straight-jacket formula
       of locus standi unknown to criminal jurisprudence, save and except
       specific statutory exception.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
94.We shall now proceed to specifically deal with the contention canvassed by

   the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner that cognizance of an offence

   can only be taken once and, if the Magistrate has taken cognizance of an

   offence and committed it to the Court of Session, then there is no question of

   taking fresh cognizance of the offence by the Court of Session upon the case

   being committed to it. There is a basic fallacy in this contention of the learned

   counsel.    With all humility at our command we say that there is a

   misconception on the part of the learned counsel so far as the position of law

   on the subject is concerned. It appears that the learned counsel thought to

   develop such argument relying on some observations made by this Court in
Dharam Pal
(supra). The observations are:-
“27. This takes us to the next question as to whether under Section
       209, the Magistrate was required to take cognizance of the offence
       before committing the case to the Court of Session. It is well settled
       that cognizance of an offence can only be taken once. In the event,
       the Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and then commits the
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                         Page 78 of 85
case to the Court of Sessions, the question of taking fresh cognizance
       of the offence, and thereafter, proceed to issue summons, is not in
       accordance with law. If cognizance is to be taken of the offence, it
       could be taken either by the Magistrate or by the Court of Session.
       The language of Section 193 of the Code very clearly indicates that
       once the case is committed to the Court of Session by the learned
       Magistrate, the Court of Session assumes original jurisdiction and
       all that goes with the assumption of such jurisdiction. The provision
       of Section 209 will, therefore, have to be understood as the learned
       Magistrate playing a passive role in committing the case to the
       Court of session on finding from the police report that the case was
       triable by the Court of Session. Nor can there be any question of
       part cognizance being taken by the Magistrate and part cognizance
       being      taken      by    the      learned      Session      Judge.”

                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
95.The aforesaid observations made by the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Dharam Pal
(supra) should be understood to mean that when the investigating
   officer files charge sheet for the offence exclusively triable by the Court of
   Session, then the Magistrate has to look into the charge sheet and prima facie
   ascertain from the materials on record whether the case is one exclusively
   triable by the Court of Session. Once the Magistrate is prima facie convinced
   that the case is exclusively triable by the Court of Session, the next step in the
   process is to commit the case to the Court of Session under
Section 209
of the
   CrPC. At this stage, the Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and not
   the offender. Once the case is committed to the Court of Session and the Court
   of Session finds from the materials on record that a particular individual,
   though not charge sheeted, is also prima facie involved in the alleged crime,
   then the Court of Session has the power to take cognizance of the offence for
   the purpose of summoning that person not named as offender to face the trial.
One should try to understand the purport of
Section 193
CrPC. What does
Section 193
CrPC provide for?
Section 193
CrPC removes the legal embargo
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                          Page 79 of 85
for the Court of Session to take cognizance of any offence once the case is
   committed to it because upon the committal, the Court of Session assumes the
   character of the Court of original jurisdiction.
96.Let us try to understand the issue that was involved in
Dharam Pal
(supra).
The primary issue in
Dharam Pal
(supra) was one regarding the power of the

   Sessions Court to issue summons against the person who is not named in the

   police report after commitment of case to it by the Magistrate under Section

   209 of the Code.
The other question that was considered in
Dharam Pal
(supra) was whether under Section 209 of the Code, the Magistrate was

   obliged to take cognizance of the offence before committing the case to the

   Court of Sessions. This moot question was answered by the Constitution

   Bench as under:
“39. This takes us to the next question as to whether under section
        209 the Magistrate was required to take cognizance of the offence
        before committing the case to the Court of Session. It is well settled
        that cognizance of offence can only be taken once. In the event, a
        Magistrate takes cognizance of the offence and then commits the case
        to the Court of Session, the question of taking fresh cognizance of the
        offence and, thereafter proceed to issue summon is not in accordance
        with law. If cognizance is to be taken of the offence it could be taken
        either by the Magistrate or by the Court of Session. The language of
        section 193 of the Code very clearly indicates that once the case is
        committed to the Court of Session by the learned Magistrate, the
        Court of Session assumes original jurisdiction and all that goes with
        assumption of such jurisdiction. The provisions of section 209 will,
        therefore have to be understood as the learned Magistrate playing a
        passive role in committing the case to the Court of Session on finding
        from the police report that the case was triable by the Court of
        Session. Nor can there be any question of part cognizance being taken
        by the Magistrate and part cognizance being taken by the learned
        Sessions Judge.”
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                            Page 80 of 85
97.A bare reading of the observations contained in para 39 of
Dharam Pal
(supra
)
referred to above
, gives an impression that what the Court wanted to convey

   was that at the time of committal, the Magistrate does not take cognizance of

   the offence and plays a very limited and passive role in committing the case

   to the Court of Sessions. With all humility at our command and with due

   deference if this is what was in the mind of the learned Judges then we are

   afraid that is not the correct position of law. The Magistrate does take

   cognizance of the offence but only for the limited purpose of committing the

   case to the Court of Sessions, having regard to the nature of the offences.
98.At this stage, we may give one simple illustration as to in what circumstances,

   it could be said in law that cognizance of offence can only be taken once. In

   other words, if cognizance is to be taken of the offence, it could be taken either

   by the Magistrate or by the Court of Sessions.
99.Take a case where a private complaint is lodged in the Court of Magistrate for

   an offence which is exclusively triable by the Court of Sessions and the

   Magistrate takes cognizance upon the said complaint and issues process under

   Section 204 of the Code and thereafter commits the case to the Court of

   Sessions, then in such circumstances, it could be said that there is no question

   for the Court of Sessions once again to take cognizance of the offence.
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                          Page 81 of 85
100. Once again at the cost of repetition, we state that the Court of Session takes

    cognizance of the case or the offence as a whole and, therefore, is entitled to

    summon anyone who on the materials before it appears to be involved in such

    offence to stand for trial before it. It is very important and necessary to

    understand that what is committed to the Court of Session by the Magistrate

    is the “case” or the “offence” for trial and not the “individual offender”

    thereof.
101. In view of what we have explained as aforestated, we have no hesitation in

    saying that there is no merit, worth the name, in the contention of the learned

    counsel appearing for the petitioner. It is absolutely incorrect on the part of

    the learned counsel to assert that the petitioner could have been summoned as

    an accused only during the course of trial under the provisions of
Section 319
CrPC.
Section 319
CrPC stands absolutely on a different footing.
102. The matter may equally be examined from one another angle. For a moment

    one may leave the procedural provisions altogether apart. On larger principle,

    one can see no adequate reason to fetter and shackle the power of a superior

    court like that of the Court of Session from summoning a person as an

    additional accused to stand trial when, on the materials before it, it is satisfied

    that there exists a conclusive or, in any case, a prima facie case against him. It

    is for this reason that in
Raghubans Dubey
's case (supra), this Court labelled

    this power as being virtually coupled with the duty of summoning such an
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                          Page 82 of 85
additional accused and such a power is part and parcel of the proceeding

       initiated by taking cognizance of the offence. The glaring instances

       necessitating the exercise of such power or duty would be when the

       investigating agency in its report under Section 173 without any reason or

       basis whatsoever exonerates a person specifically named in the first

       information report and fully implicated in the crime. Indeed, such an example

       is provided pertinently in the present case itself. Herein the Court of Session

       has come to the categoric conclusion that the petitioner though not named at

       the earliest in the FIR, yet the investigation revealed his involvement along

       with the charge sheeted accused.
F.       CONCLUSION

103. We summarize our final conclusion as under: -

 (i)      Both under Sections 209 and 193 respectively of the Code 1973
commitment is of, the “case” and not of the “accused” as distinguished

          from Section193(3) and Section 207A respectively of the old Code where

          commitment was of the “accused” and not the “case”. For committing a

          case there must be an offence and involvement of a person who committed

          the same. Even though the case is committed yet cognizance taken is of the

          offence and not the offender. Once the case in respect of the offence qua

          the accused, who are before the Court, is committed and cognizance is

          taken, the embargo under Section 193 regarding taking cognizance only by
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                          Page 83 of 85
committal goes. Summoning additional persons will then be regarded as

        incidental to the cognizance already taken on committal and as, a part, of,

        the normal process that follows. A fresh committal of such person is not

        necessary.
(ii)    Section 319(4)(b) enacts a deeming provision in that behalf dispensing

        with the formal committal order by providing that the person added will be

        deemed to have been an accused even when cognizance was taken first.

        Cognizance is of the offence and not the offender and it is the duty of the

        court to find out who the offenders are. Proceedings could be instituted and

        cognizance taken also against persons not known at that time. This is clear

        if the provisions of Section 190 of the Code are read along with the

        definition of complaint in
Section 2(d)
which include allegations against

        unknown person also. Making the unknown persons known is therefore

        within the powers of the court. When such persons become known by the

        evidence during inquiry or trial it is not only the right but also the duty of

        court to bring them on record and proceed against them in an attempt to

        bring them to justice. There cannot, therefore, be any dispute regarding the

        powers of court to bring the person under Section 319(1).
(iii)   Once the Court takes cognizance of the offence (not of the offender), it

        becomes the Court's duty to find out the real offenders and if it comes to

        the conclusion that besides the persons put up for trial by the police some

        others are also involved in the commission of the crime, it is the Court's
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                           Page 84 of 85
duty to summon them to stand trial along with those already named, since

        summoning them would only be part of the process of taking cognizance.
104. For all the foregoing reasons we are of the view that no error not to speak of

    any error of law can be said to have been committed by the High Court in

    passing the impugned order.
105. In the result, this petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
106. The trial court shall now proceed to frame charge if not yet framed and start

    recording with the oral evidence of the witnesses. The trial shall be completed

    within a period of six months from the date of the receipt of the writ of this

    order.
107. The Registry shall circulate one copy each of this judgment to all the High

    Courts.
................................ J.
(J.B. Pardiwala)




                                                               ................................. J.
(R. Mahadevan)

 New Delhi;
5thAugust, 2025.
Special Leave Petition (Crl) No. 10010 of 2025                                   Page 85 of 85