[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam vs Thiru. C.Ve. Shanmugam on 6 August, 2025
Author:
B.R.Gavai
Bench:
B.R.Gavai
REPORTABLE

2025 INSC 976                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10259 OF 2025
                                [Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 21487 of 2025]

                         DRAVIDA MUNNETRA KAZHAGAM                      ….APPELLANT

                                                       v.


                         THIRU. C. VE. SHANMUGAM                      .…RESPONDENT
                                                     with
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10260 OF 2025
                                [Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 21995 of 2025]


                                                JUDGMENT
B.R.GAVAI, CJI
1.   Leave granted.
2.   In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, we

                         withdraw the Writ Petition No.27277 of 2025 pending before the

                         High Court of Judicature at Madras (hereinafter referred to as

                         “High Court”) and take up the same also for hearing along with

                         the present appeals.
3.   This batch of matters challenge the order passed by the
Signature Not VerifiedDivision Bench of the High Court dated 31st July, 2025 in WMP
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
Date: 2025.08.13
17:55:03 IST
Reason:               No. 30663 of 2025 in Writ Petition No. 27277 of 2025, by which

                         the learned Judges of the Division Bench have passed an
Page 1 of 15
interim order to the effect that while launching and operating

Government Welfare Schemes through various advertisements,

the names of any living personality, photograph of any former

Chief        Minister/ideological     leaders       or        party

insignia/emblem/flag      of   appellant   (Dravida      Munnetra

Kazhagam) shall not be included. The Division Bench of the

High Court was gracious enough to add that it has not passed

any order against launching, implementation or operation of

any welfare scheme of the Government.
4.      Since we have withdrawn the Writ Petition pending before

the High Court and we are hearing the Writ Petition itself, we

propose to refer to the facts as stated in the Writ Petition No.

27277 of 2025.
5.      The Writ Petition has been filed by the respondent no.1

herein, who is a sitting Member of Parliament, belonging to a

political party which is in opposition in the State of Tamil Nadu.

The State of Tamil Nadu vide the Notification G.O. (Ms) No.390

Public     (Mudhalvarin   Mugavari)   Department      (hereinafter

referred to as “said G.O.”), dated 19th June, 2025, has

promulgated a scheme known as “Ungaludan Stalin”, which as

per the English translation means “Your’s Stalin”. By the said
Page 2 of 15
scheme, what has been provided is that though various

schemes have been notified by the State Government, the

citizens encounter challenge in availing of the said schemes due

to lack of knowledge, information on eligibility and procedures

to be followed, difficulty in understanding the procedural

aspects like uploading required documents, challenges in use

of technology amongst others leading to multiple applications

and delays in service offered online.
6.    The said G.O. further states that the Chief Minister taking

into account the difficulties faced by the common people,

announced in the floor of Legislative Assembly on 25th April,

2025, that 9,000 camps will be conducted across the State to

reach out to every family and deliver eligible scheme benefits

and services to the citizens in a time bound manner. It further

states that the Chief Minister also announced that during these

camps, applications will be received from the eligible left-out

women for Kalaignar Mahalir Urimal Thittam (KMUT Scheme).

The   said   G.O.   further   states    that   based   on   these

announcements, the Chief Minister’s office has prepared

proposal for implementation of the “Ungaludan Stalin” Scheme.

It states that under the said scheme, 10,000 camps will be
Page 3 of 15
conducted across the State, to deliver the most sought-after

services and schemes through localized camps to reach out to

the people even in remote corner of the State. Under the said

scheme, it is stated that every household will be visited by a

volunteer, who will inform the family about the objective and

details of the camp, handover the application and pamphlet

containing the list of schemes/services, explain the eligibility

conditions and documents required to avail those services.
7.   The scheme further provides that the volunteers, who

handover the pamphlet of the scheme will also inform, that the

women who are eligible for KMUT Scheme, but have been left

out in the earlier phase, can attend the Ungaludan Stalin

Camps, register and submit applications in the KMUT Scheme.

Subsequently, all the KMUT applications received on the day

will be registered on the KMUT Mobile App by Illam Thedi Kalvi

(ITK) volunteers.   The details regarding the distribution of

applications and pamphlets to all households, inauguration of

camps in all districts and conducting of camps have been given

in the said G.O. The said G.O. also provides for door to door

campaign, selection, appointment and training of volunteers.
8.   Being     aggrieved     by     the     said    G.O.,        a
Page 4 of 15
representation/complaint dated 18th July, 2025, came to be

filed by the writ petitioner before the Election Commission of

India (hereinafter referred to as “ECI”) under Clause 16A of the

Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968. It is

pleaded in the petition that three days after the said

representation was made to the ECI, a writ petition came to be

filed before the High Court stating therein that though a detailed

representation dated 18th July, 2025 was sent to the ECI, and

since the complaint has to be acted upon with promptitude by

the authorities, and in the light of respondent’s failure to act on

the representation and continuing violation of legal rights and

constitutional principles, the writ petitioner was left with no

other choice than to approach the High Court in a petition

under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India for appropriate

reliefs.
9.    From the order impugned herein, it appears that the

learned Advocate General had made a submission that the writ

petition has been filed without clear pleadings and on the basis

of some print outs, which, on instructions, was stated are not a

Government publication at all. The learned Advocate General

also submitted that neither any pictorial representation/
Page 5 of 15
photograph of ideological leaders or former Chief Ministers has

been imprinted, nor the political party’s insignia/flag/emblem/

logo has been used. He had also made a submission that the

allegations are entirely based on unauthentic documents and

without any basis. He, therefore, sought time to file an affidavit

so as to place correct facts on the record. However, the Division

Bench of the High Court without giving any further time passed

the impugned order as aforesaid. Being aggrieved thereby, two

special leave petitions have been filed, one by the political party
- Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) and the other by the State

of Tamil Nadu.
10. We have heard Shri Mukul Rohatgi, Shri P. Wilson,

learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, Dr.

A.M. Singhvi, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the

State of Tamil Nadu and Shri P.S. Raman, learned Advocate

General for the State of Tamil Nadu. We have also heard Shri

Maninder Singh, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of

respondent No. 1.
11. Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, the learned senior counsel appearing

on behalf of the DMK party submits that none of the judgments
Page 6 of 15
of this Court in
Common Cause vs. Union of India1
,
Common

Cause vs. Union of India2
,
State of Karnataka vs. Common

Cause and Others3
and Centre for
Public Interest Litigation

vs. Kewal Kumar Sharma and Others4
prohibit a scheme to

be named after a political leader. It is stated that, as a matter

of fact, the judgments/orders passed by this Court from

Common Cause I to Common Cause IV, have been diluted and

now the photographs of not only the Hon’ble President, the

Prime Minister, the Governor, the Chief Ministers are permitted

to be printed in the advertisements, but also the photographs

of the Cabinet Ministers of the concerned departments. He

further submitted that as a matter of fact, no new scheme has

been framed, but what was done under the Ungaludan Stalin

Scheme was only providing a platform to the citizens in the

entire State, wherein the services of the State under the earlier

schemes would be made known to the public and made

available to them at their door steps.                  In any case, it is

submitted that, there is no prohibition with regard to the

publication of a scheme in the name of a political leader.


1    (2014) 6 SCC 552, hereinafter referred to as, “Common Cause I”
2    (2015) 7 SCC 1, hereinafter referred to as, “Common Cause II”
3    (2016) 13 SCC 639, hereinafter referred to as, “Common Cause III”
4    (2017) 16 SCC 715, hereinafter referred to as, “Common Cause IV”
Page 7 of 15
12. Dr. A.M. Singhvi, the learned senior counsel appearing on

behalf of the State of Tamil Nadu relying on an application for

placing additional documents on record, relied upon 45

documents wherein various schemes have been notified by

various Governments with a prefix of names of political leaders.
13. Though, Dr. Singhvi has taken us through the list of such

schemes, we refrain ourselves from referring to any of the

schemes in order to avoid any embarrassment to any political

party.
14. Mr. P. Wilson, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf

of the DMK party supplemented the arguments and relied upon

a publication of the ECI dated 07th October, 2016, wherein it

has directed that no political party shall henceforth, either use

or allow the use of any public funds or public place or

Government machinery, for carrying out any activity that would

amount to advertisement for the party or propagating the

election symbol allotted to the party.
15. We also had the benefit of the assistance of Mr. P.S

Raman, learned Advocate General for the State of Tamil Nadu,
Page 8 of 15
through video conferencing, who had appeared before the

Division Bench of the High Court. He states that without giving

an opportunity to the State, the ad interim order came to be

passed on the very same day.
16. Per contra, Mr. Maninder Singh, learned senior counsel

appearing on behalf of the respondent no.1 (original writ

petitioner), submits that the cumulative effect of all the four

judgments in Common Cause I, Common Cause II, Common

Cause III and Common Cause IV would show that this Court

has frowned upon personal glorification of any political leader,

it has also frowned upon using of public funds for glorifying a

person in office. Learned senior counsel specifically relied upon

the paragraph 6 of the Common Cause II, wherein detailed

guidelines have been framed by this Court. The guidelines were

framed by a Committee constituted by this Court under the

Chairmanship of Prof.(Dr.) N.R. Madhava Menon, Former

Director, National Judicial Academy, Bhopal. He submits that

the paragraph 4 of the Guidelines provides that the possibility

of any misuse of public funds on advertisement campaigns in

order to gain political mileage by the political establishment has

to be totally excluded. He further submits that the paragraph
Page 9 of 15
5 of the Guidelines requires that the guidelines must be used

by the Government only to inform the citizens about their rights

and responsibilities, about government policies, programmes,

services or initiatives. He also refers to a guideline in clause (i)

of sub-para (3) of paragraph 6 of the guidelines which provides

that the advertisement materials should be objective and not

directed at promoting political interest of a political party. He

also relies on clause (ii) of sub-para (3) of paragraph 6 of the

guidelines which provides that the government advertising shall

maintain political neutrality and avoid glorification of political

personalities and projecting a positive impression of the party

in power or a negative impression of parties critical of the

Government.
17. The Common Cause cases dealt with the use of

photographs of the political leaders and particularly, the heads

of the Executive in the advertisements issued through the

public funds.   In Common Cause I, this Court appointed a

Committee consisting of three persons, namely, Prof. (Dr.) N.R.

Madhava Menon, Former Director, National Judicial Academy,

Mr. T.K. Viswanathan, Former Secretary General, Lok Sabha

and Mr. Ranjit Kumar, Senior Advocate.
Page 10 of 15
18. In Common Cause II, after considering the report of the

said Committee, this Court after approving and adopting the

recommendations of the Committee, with the exception(s) that

are carved out by the judgment, permitted publication of the

photographs of the President, Prime Minister, and Chief Justice

of India. No doubt that it was left to their own wisdom to make

a decision in this regard.
19. In Common Cause III, the Court permitted, in addition to

the publication of the photographs of the President, Prime

Minister, and Chief Justice of India, the Cabinet Minister and

Minister in-charge of the Ministry concerned. This Court also

permitted the photograph of the Chief Minister of the State to

be published.
20. The launching of schemes in the name of political leaders

is a phenomenon which is followed throughout the Country. As

already stated hereinabove, Dr. Singhvi, learned senior counsel

appearing on behalf of the State of Tamil Nadu has given a list

of 45 such schemes, wherein the schemes have been portrayed

in the name of the various political leaders. We, however, do not

wish to refer to the list of those schemes in order to avoid any

embarrassment to any of the political party.
Page 11 of 15
21. When such schemes are floated in the name of leaders of

all the political parties, we do not appreciate the anxiety of the

writ petitioner to choose only one political party and one

political leader. If the writ petitioner was so concerned about

the misuse of public funds by the political parties, the writ

petitioner would have made a challenge to all such schemes

across the Country. However, singling out only one scheme by

one political party in the name of one political leader, smacks

about the motives of the writ petitioner. Apart from that, the

manner in which the petition has been filed, also smacks about

the motives of the writ petitioner.
22. A representation/complaint was made before the ECI on

18th of July, 2025. Whether such a representation is tenable or

not, itself, is a debatable question. The power under Clause 16A

of the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order,

1968 is available to the Commission when it deals with

suspension or withdrawal of recognition of a recognized political

party for its failure to observe Model Code of Conduct or to

follow lawful directions and instructions of the Commission.

Undisputedly, there is no Model Code of Conduct operating in

the State of Tamil Nadu. The moot question, that would arise,
Page 12 of 15
therefore, is as to whether such a representation before the ECI

was tenable or not.      In any case, even without giving an

opportunity to the ECI to decide the said representation, the

writ petitioner had rushed to the High Court on 21st July, 2025,

i.e., within three days of making the representation.
23. After approaching the Court in such a hurried manner, the

writ petitioner had the audacity to state in paragraph 20 of the

writ petition, thus:
“In light of the respondent’s failure to act on the
         representation and the continuing violation of
         legal and constitutional principles, I am left
         with no choice but to approach this Hon’ble
         Court for appropriate reliefs. The issues raised
         in the present Writ Petitions concern larger
         questions of governance ethics and democratic
         fairness.”
24. Not giving even a breathing period to the ECI and making

such statements with regard to the Commission’s failure to act

on the representation within a reasonable period, the writ

petitioner, in our view, has also tried to castigate the ECI.
25. Time and again we have observed that the political battles

should be fought before the electorate. At the cost of repetition,

we observe that the Courts should not be used to settle the
Page 13 of 15
political scores between the rival political parties.
26. We are, therefore, of the considered view that the Writ

Petition itself was not only misconceived in law, but also totally

an abuse of the process of law.
27. Accordingly, while allowing the appeals, by quashing and

setting aside the impugned order, we are also inclined to

dismiss the Writ Petition with costs.
28. In the result, we pass the following order:
i.    The appeals are allowed;

ii.    The impugned order dated 31st July, 2025, passed by the
High Court of Judicature at Madras is hereby quashed and

       set aside;
iii.   The Writ Petition No. 27277 of 2025 pending before the

       High Court is withdrawn and transferred to this Court and

       is dismissed with costs quantified at Rs.10,00,000/-

       (Rupees Ten Lakh), to be deposited with the State of Tamil

       Nadu;
iv.    The writ petitioner shall deposit the cost within a period of

       one week from today. On deposit of the said amount, the

       State shall use it only for the purposes of implementation

       of   any     of   the   welfare   schemes   floated   for     the
Page 14 of 15
underprivileged in the State; and

v.    On failure to deposit the cost within a period of one week,

      as aforesaid, the writ petitioner would be liable to be

      proceeded against for having committed the Contempt of

      this Court.
29. We place on record our appreciation for the valuable

assistance provided by Mr. P.S. Raman, learned Advocate

General for the State of Tamil Nadu, Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, Dr.

A.M. Singhvi, Mr. P. Wilson, learned senior counsels and Mr.

Maninder Singh, learned senior counsel ably assisted by Mr.

Balaji Srinivasan, learned counsel.
30. All pending Interlocutory Applications stand disposed of.
..…………………………………CJI
                                           [B.R.GAVAI]


                                 ....…………………………………J
                                       [K. VINOD CHANDRAN]


                               ………………………………………J.
                                       [N.V. ANJARIA]

     NEW DELHI,
     AUGUST, 06 2025.
Page 15 of 15