[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Saldanha Real Estate Private Limited vs Bishop John Rodrigues on 22 August, 2025
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Surya Kant
2025 INSC 1016                                                                        REPORTABLE

                                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          Civil Appeal No. __________ / 2025
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 15454 / 2024)

             Saldanha Real Estate Private Limited                                    ….Appellant(s)
                                                          versus
             Bishop John Rodrigues and others                                      ….Respondent(s)
                                                           with

                                          Civil Appeal No. __________ / 2025
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 15711 / 2024)

             Shri Kadeshwari CHS Ltd (proposed)                                      ….Appellant(s)
                                                          versus
             Bishop John Rodrigues and others                                      ….Respondent(s)
                                                           with

                                          Civil Appeal No. __________ / 2025
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 16209 / 2024)

             The Slum Rehabilitation Authority and another                           ….Appellant(s)
                                                          versus
             Bishop John Rodrigues and others                                      ….Respondent(s)


                                                       JUDGEMENT
SURYA KANT, J.
Leave granted.
2.             The dispute under consideration in these Civil Appeals concerns the
Signature Not Verified
validity of the acquisition of a portion of land located at CTS No. B-960
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2025.08.22
12:23:03 IST
Reason:                  in Village Bandra, Taluka Andheri, Mumbai, measuring 1,596.40 sq. m.
(Subject Land) under the Maharashtra Slum Areas (Improvement,
Page 1 of 39
Clearance and Redevelopment) Act, 1971
(Slums Act
). The High Court of

     Judicature at Bombay (High Court), vide the Impugned Judgement

     dated 11.06.2024, has: (i) allowed the writ petition filed by the

     landowner, declaring the acquisition void; and (ii) directed the Slum

     Rehabilitation Authority (SRA) to consider the proposal of the landowner

     for redevelopment. The instant appeals have thus been preferred by the

     proposed housing society of slum dwellers, the developer selected by the

     said society, and the SRA.
3.   The instant appeals involve an in-depth analysis of the text as well as the

     legislative policy behind
Chapter I-A of the Slums Act
, specifically

     regarding the rights of landowners to redevelop a Slum Rehabilitation

     Area (SR Area) and the corresponding duties of the SRA. At the outset,

     we note that by a judgement of even date, titled Tarabai Nagar Co-Op.

     Hog.
Society (Proposed) v. The State of Maharashtra
and others,1 a

     2-Judge Bench of this Court, including one of us (Surya Kant, J.), has

     dealt with a substantial part of the arguments raised in these appeals.
The Bench, therein, upheld the decision of another Division Bench of the

     High Court in
Indian Cork Mills (P) Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra,2
laying down that: (i) the private owner of a Slum Rehabilitation Area has

     a preferential right to develop it; (ii) as part of this right, the owner must

     be notified and invited to undertake such redevelopment; and (iii)

     without such notice being issued and such right being extinguished, it



1 Supreme Court of India, Civil Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 19774 of

2018, judgement dated 22.08.2025.
2 2018 SCC OnLine Bom 1214.
Page 2 of 39
would be untenable for the State or the SRA to acquire the land under
Section 14
.
4.   The legislative interpretation we are tasked with undertaking in these

     appeals has largely been addressed by the Bench in Tarabai (supra).

     Having previously examined the law regarding the questions answered

     therein, this Court does not need to revisit the analysis of the
Slums Act
.

     The only remaining issue for us to consider through this judgement is

     the    Maharashtra        Slum     Areas   (Improvement,   Clearance   and

     Redevelopment) (Amendment) Act, 2017 (2018 Amendment).


A.   LEGISLATIVE SCHEME
5.   The legislative scheme of the
Slums Act
prior to the 2018 Amendment

     has already been detailed extensively in Tarabai (supra).3 However,

     before delving into the facts of this case, it would be apposite to first

     explore the impact of the said Amendment on the slum rehabilitation

     framework envisaged in
Chapter I-A of the Slums Act
.
6.   The     Maharashtra       Slum     Areas   (Improvement,   Clearance   and

     Redevelopment) (Amendment) Act, 2017, which came into force on

     26.04.2018, was enacted to improve the practical implementation of the
Slums Act
and to expand the scope of slum rehabilitation. It introduced

     various improvements, both significant and minor, into the legislative

     framework for slum rehabilitation.
3 See Paragraphs 5 to 38 of Tarabai (supra).
Page 3 of 39
7.   Section 3B is one of the key areas where such a change was

     implemented.4


7.1. In sub-section (1), the Legislature introduced the ability for the SRA to

     amend an already operative General Slum Rehabilitation Scheme

     (General SR Scheme).
7.2. Further, the provisions which, prior to the Amendment, were included in

     sub-section (4),5 namely, the matters which shall be provided for in the

     General SR Scheme, have now been relocated to sub-section (5). While

     the scheme itself and its tenor remain unchanged, the scope of these

     matters has been broadened. For example, provisions for compensation

     in lieu of transit accommodation, as well as for the grant of tenements to

     non-protected occupiers, were introduced. Most notably, the Legislature

     has amended the stakeholders specified in Clauses (c) and (g) (which

     correspond to Clauses (c) and (e), respectively, before the 2018

     Amendment) from ‘landholders and occupants’ to ‘owners, landholders

     and occupants’. It is worth noting that although the term ‘owner’ was

     already defined in Section 2(f) of the Slums Act,6 it has been included in

     the procedure for Slum Rehabilitation Schemes (SR Schemes) only after

     the 2018 Amendment.
7.3. In its place, a new sub-section (4) has been added, stipulating that the

     General SR Scheme shall be deemed to be ‘Development Control



4 For pre-2018 Amendment version, see Paragraph 19 of Tarabai (supra).

5 See Paragraph 19 of Tarabai (supra).
6 See Paragraph 7 of Tarabai (supra).
Page 4 of 39
Regulations’ under the
Maharashtra Town Planning Act, 1966
for an SR

    Area and clarifying that the General SR Scheme shall prevail over any

    other   Development      Control    Regulations     in   force,   such    as     the

    Development Control and Promotion Regulations for Greater Mumbai,

    2034 (DCPR 2034).
7.4. For complete clarity, the relevant portion of the amended version of

    Section 3B is reproduced below:
“3B. Slum Rehabilitation Schemes. – (1) The Slum Rehabilitation
         Authority concerned, with the previous sanction of the State
         Government, shall prepare or amend the general Slum Rehabilitation
         Scheme for the areas specified under sub-section (1) of section 3A, for
         rehabilitation or relocation of protected occupiers and other occupiers
         of the building in such areas.
[xxxx]
         (4) The general Slum Rehabilitation Scheme published under sub-
section (3) shall be deemed Development Control Regulations under the
         provisions of
Chapter III of the Maharashtra Regional and Town
         Planning Act, 1966
(Mah. XXXVII of 1966), for the said area and the
         provisions of the general Slum Rehabilitation Scheme shall prevail over
         the Development Control Regulations, published under the
Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966
(Mah. XXXVII of
         1966).
(5) The Slum Rehabilitation Scheme so notified under sub-section (3)
         shall, generally lay down the parameters for declaration of any land
         as the Slum Rehabilitation Area and indicate the manner in which
         rehabilitation of the occupants of the area declared as Slum
         Rehabilitation Area shall be carried out. In particular, it shall provide
         for all or any of the following matters, that is to say,-
[xxxx]
(c) provision for obligatory participation of the owners,
               landholders and occupants of the land declared as the Slum
               Rehabilitation Area under the approved Slum Rehabilitation
               Scheme in the implementation of such Scheme;
(d) provision relating to transit accommodation or entitlement of
               compensation in lieu of transit accommodation to the slum
               dwellers pending development of the Slum Rehabilitation Area;
(e) provision relating to allotment of tenements either in-situ or
               otherwise, on development free of cost to the protected occupiers
               of the building in such Slum Rehabilitation Area;
(f) provision relating to allotment of tenements either in-situ or
               otherwise, on ownership or on rent, to the other non-protected
               occupiers up to the 1st January 2011, subject to the availability
               of tenements as per the terms and conditions and guidelines so
Page 5 of 39
notified in the Official Gazette, by the Chief Executive Officer with
                the prior approval of the State Government;
(g) scheme for development of the Slum Rehabilitation Areas
                under the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme by the landholders and
                occupants by themselves or through a developer and the terms
                and conditions of such development; and the option available to
                the Slum Rehabilitation Authority for taking up such development
                in the event of non-participation of the landholders or occupants;
[xxxx] ”
8.   The process for declaring land as an SR Area under Section 3C(1) was

     also augmented.7 Following the amendment, the CEO must provide the

     owners and other stakeholders a 30-day notice and an opportunity to be

     heard before issuing a reasoned order. Only then can the CEO declare

     the land an SR Area (Section 3C(1) Declaration). However, the method

     of publication/publicity of the Section 3C(1) Declaration remains

     unchanged. For reference, the text of the amended Section 3C(1) is

     provided below.
“3C. Declaration of a slum rehabilitation area. – (1) As soon as
          may be, after the publication of any Slum Rehabilitation Scheme, the
          Chief Executive Officer on being satisfied about the circumstances in
          respect of any land, whether or not previously declared as slum area,
          justifying its declaration as the Slum Rehabilitation Area which may
          include community economic activity area, for implementing the Slum
          Rehabilitation Scheme, shall after giving the land owners, including
          any public authorities or local bodies under the State Government
          constituted under any law enacted by the State Legislature, thirty
          days notice and after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard,
          by an order published in the Official Gazette, and thereafter within
          forty-five days, declare such land to be a “Slum Rehabilitation Area”.
          The order declaring the Slum Rehabilitation Area (hereinafter referred
          to as “the slum rehabilitation order”), shall also be given wide publicity
          in such manner as may be specified by the Chief Executive Officer of
          the Slum Rehabilitation Authority. Thereafter, notwithstanding
          anything contained in any law for the time being in force, in such Slum
          Rehabilitation Area, the permission or the No Objection Certificate of
          the land owning authority or agency shall not be required:
Provided that, only in respect of any land which is required for Vital
          Public Project purpose, as per orders of the State Government and
          where the State Government either directly or through any public

7 For pre-2018 Amendment version, see Paragraph 20 of Tarabai (supra).
Page 6 of 39
authority has undertaken the responsibility of relocation and
          rehabilitation of the protected and other occupiers of the building, then
          the Chief Executive Officer shall, exclude the land required for Vital
          Public Project from the Slum Rehabilitation Area and issue an order to
          omit such land from the Slum Rehabilitation Area. Where the State
          Government either directly or through any public authority has
          undertaken the responsibility of relocation and rehabilitation of the
          protected and other occupiers of the building, such public authority
          shall prepare the Scheme of such rehabilitation or relocation and get it
          approved by the Chief Executive Officer within the period specified in
          the Scheme which shall not be more than ninety days.
          (2) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Chief Executive Officer
          may, within thirty days of the publication of such slum rehabilitation
          order, prefer an appeal to the Apex Grievance Redressal Committee.
          The decision of the Apex Grievance Redressal Committee in such
          appeal shall be final.
(3) On the completion of the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme, the Slum
          Rehabilitation Area shall cease to be such area.”
9.   Substantial changes were also made to Section 3D, which, inter alia,

     modifies
Sections 13
and
14
for their applicability to
Chapter I-A of the

     Slums Act
.8


9.1. Sub-clause (iii) of Clause (c) of this Section describes the applicability of
Section 13
to an SR Area. Through the 2018 Amendment, significant

     changes have been made to the text of the provision. For reference,
Section 13
, as it would apply under Chapter I-A after the amendment,

     reads as follows:
“13. Power of Slum Rehabilitation Authority to develop Slum
          Rehabilitation Area. – (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
          sub-section (10) of
section 12
, the Chief Executive Officer shall, after
          any land has been declared as the Slum Rehabilitation Area, including
          community economic activity area, if the owners, landholders or
          occupants of such land do not come forward within a reasonable time,
          which shall not be more than one hundred and twenty days, required
          for relocation and rehabilitation of protected and other occupiers
          justifying with the Slum Rehabilitation Scheme for redevelopment of
          such land, by order, determine to redevelop such land by entrusting
          into any agency or other developer for the purpose.
8 For pre-2018 Amendment version, see Paragraphs 27 and 28 of Tarabai (supra).
Page 7 of 39
(2) Where on declaration of any land as Slum Rehabilitation Area, the
         Chief Executive Officer is satisfied that, the land in the Slum
         Rehabilitation Area has been or is being developed by the owners,
         landholders or occupants or developers in contravention of the plans
         duly approved, or any restrictions or conditions imposed under sub-
         section (10) of
section 12
, or in contravention of any provision of any
         Slum Rehabilitation Scheme or any condition specified in the approval
         or has not been developed within the time, as specified under such
         conditions of approval, he may, by order, determine to develop the land
         declared as Slum Rehabilitation Area by entrusting it to any agency or
         the other developer recognized by him for the purpose.
         (3) The agency or the other developer so appointed shall within a period
         of forty-five days of the order of the Chief Executive Officer, be required
         to deposit an amount of compensation payable to the outgoing
         landowners or occupants or developers, as the case may be, for
         expenditure incurred by them on payment made to any public
         authority, local bodies for receiving approvals for the Slum
         Rehabilitation Scheme and construction of rehabilitation tenements as
         determined by the Chief Executive Officer:
Provided that, such compensation shall not be payable by the agency
         appointed by the Chief Executive Officer, for any expenditure incurred
         towards construction to meet conditional obligations made to any third
         party by the landowners or occupants or previous developers, as the
         case may be. The Chief Executive Officer before passing such order
         shall obtain report from approved valuer independently appointed on
         his behalf and by the concerned parties to the proceeding before the
         Chief Executive Officer:
Provided further that, before passing such order by the Chief Executive
         Officer, the concerned landowner or occupant or developer, as the case
         may be, shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard and
         time which shall not be more than thirty days of showing cause why
         the order should not be passed:
Provided also that, an appeal, if any, against the order of the Chief
         Executive Officer shall be filed before the Apex Grievance Redressal
         Committee and order of the Apex Grievance Redressal Committee shall
         be final and binding on all the parties.”


9.2. With this amendment, the notion of ‘reasonable time’ in sub-section (1)

    has been qualified with the phrase, “which shall not be more than one

    hundred and twenty days.” Previously, no such qualification was

    provided for. Additionally, the pre-condition under sub-section (1) has

    changed from ‘come forward … with a scheme for redevelopment’ to

    ‘come forward … for redevelopment of such land’.
Page 8 of 39
9.3. Notably, when the 2018 Amendment was originally introduced, the final

     proviso in
Section 13
referred to the Grievance Redressal Committee

     (GRC). However, in 2023, with a retrospective amendment, this body was

     renamed as the Apex Grievance Redressal Committee (AGRC).9


9.4. Although the amendment has kept the procedure for land acquisition

     under Chapter I-A untouched, it would be prudent for us to reproduce
Section 14
, as it applies to the said Chapter:
“14. Power of State Government to acquire land. – (1) Where on
           any representation from the Chief Executive Officer it appears to the
           State Government that, in order to enable the Slum Rehabilitation
           Authority to carry out development under the Slum Rehabilitation
           Scheme in any Slum Rehabilitation Area it is necessary that such area,
           or any land within adjoining or surrounded by any such area should
           be acquired, the State Government may acquire the land by publishing
           in the Official Gazette, a notice to the effect that the State Government
           has decided to acquire the land in pursuance of this section:
Provided that, before publishing such notice, the State Government, or
           as the case may be, the Competent Authority may call upon by notice
           the owner of, or any other person who, in its or his opinion may be
           interested in, such land to show cause in writing why the land should
           not be acquired with reasons therefor, to the Competent Authority
           within the period specified in the notice; and the Competent Authority
           shall, with all reasonable despatch, forward any objections so
           submitted together with his report in respect thereof to the State
           Government and on considering the report and the objections, if any,
           the State Government may pass such order as it deems fit.
           Provided further that, the State Government may delegate its powers
           under this sub-section to any officer not below the rank of
           Commissioner.
(1A) The acquisition of land for any purpose mentioned in sub-section
           (1) shall be deemed to be a public purpose.
(2) When a notice as aforesaid is published in the Official Gazette, the
           land shall, on and from the date on which the notice is so published,
           vest absolutely in the State Government free from all encumbrances.”




9 Maharashtra Slum Areas (Improvement, Clearance and Redevelopment) (Amendment, Re-
enactment of Rules and Notification of Apex and other Grievance Redressal Committees and
Validation) Act, 2023, s 4.
Page 9 of 39
10. As in Tarabai (supra), the instant case also pertains to an SR Area

      under Chapter I-A. It is, thus, clarified that wherever the provisions of

      Chapters IV and V are referred to in this Judgement, the reference is to

      the modified provisions which are now encapsulated in Section 3D.


 B.   FACTS
11. Having    considered    the   changes    introduced   through   the    2018

      Amendment, we now proceed to observe the facts in detail, as portrayed

      below.
11.1. The plot bearing CTS No. B-960 in Village Bandra, Taluka Andheri,

      Mumbai, admeasuring a total area of 9,371.30 sq. m., is owned by the

      Basilica of Our Lady of the Mount (Church Trust), a Public Trust based

      in Mumbai. The Church Trust operates the Mount Mary Church in

      Bandra, Mumbai, where, at the relevant time, Bishop John Rodrigues

      served as the Rector and the sole trustee. The Subject Land, measuring

      1,596.40 sq. m., is part of this larger plot.
11.2. The Subject Land has reportedly been encroached upon by hutment

      dwellers since the 1930s, and a section admeasuring 1,334 sq. m. was

      thereupon declared a Slum Area under
Section 4
of the Slums Act on

      30.11.1978. Over time, the hutment area (Subject Slum) expanded, and

      the notification dated 30.11.1978 was accordingly amended on

      12.06.2002, increasing the declared Slum Area to 1,532 sq. m.

      Subsequently, through further expansion, the Subject Slum extended
Page 10 of 39
into an adjoining plot bearing CTS No. B-967, owned by the

      Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC).
11.3. In the intervening period, the dwellers of the Subject Slum formed the

      Shri   Kadeshwari     Cooperative    Housing    Society    Ltd.   (Proposed)

      (Kadeshwari Society). It appears from the records that there were 35

      identified tenements in the Subject Slum, prior to 01.01.2000, who are

      all members of Kadeshwari Society.
11.4. Since 2012, Kadeshwari Society and the Church Trust (through its sole

      trustee) have been in communication regarding the redevelopment of the

      Subject Slum. The record indicates that the parties had initially met for

      this purpose, but it was subsequently identified that the land fell within

      the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ), which impacted the feasibility of any

      attempted redevelopment project.
11.5. In due course, however, the Government sought to relax restrictions on

      the redevelopment of slums in CRZ areas, making rehabilitation on the

      Subject Land feasible. This sparked a fresh round of communication

      among the parties.
11.6. In this context, vide letter dated 13.06.2013, the Church Trust called on

      Kadeshwari Society to: (i) submit written consent of all the 35 slum

      dwellers eligible for rehabilitation; (ii) procure a resolution passed by the

      General Body of Kadeshwari Society authorising redevelopment; and (iii)

      to permit the Society’s chosen developer to submit a tentative offer for

      redevelopment, subject to the outcome of a tender process.
Page 11 of 39
11.7. Kadeshwari Society initially appointed M/s Accord Estates as its

      preferred developer and notified the Church Trust accordingly. The

      Society also appears to have entered into development agreements,

      individual agreements, and tripartite agreements with this developer.

      However, no further steps were taken in the following years until 2017.


 11.8. Citing inaction on the part of M/s Accord Estates, Kadeshwari Society

      terminated all agreements with this firm and its promoter. It, instead,

      resolved to enter into an agreement with another developer, namely, M/s

      Saldanha Real Estates Pvt. Ltd. (Saldanha), for the redevelopment of the

      Subject Slum. Consequently, on 28.12.2017, Kadeshwari Society entered

      into a Development Agreement with and executed a Power of Attorney in

      favour of Saldanha. The developer also entered into individual

      Development Agreements with the slum dwellers.
11.9. Having crystallised this relationship, Kadeshwari Society then besought

      the Church Trust to grant a No-Objection Certificate to Saldanha,

      allowing it to redevelop the Subject Land and to rehabilitate the slum

      dwellers on it.
11.10. Meanwhile, Saldanha also approached the Church Trust with a proposal

      to purchase the Subject Land on an ‘as-is-where-is’ basis. Saldanha and

      the sole trustee of the Church Trust deliberated on this issue on

      21.03.2018, pursuant to which the developer forwarded an offer of INR

      2.5 crores for the Subject Land. The offer was later revised to INR 3

      crores, but the parties did not proceed with this deal.
Page 12 of 39
11.11. It is pertinent to highlight at this stage that the Church Trust intended

       to develop the Subject Land along with the rest of its land in CTS No.

       B-960, as well as some other adjoining plots, totalling approximately

       10,709 sq. m. in land area. The plan was to redevelop ‘Nirmala Colony’,

       including the Subject Land, as a contiguous project.


11.12. However, when this proposal was presented to the slum dwellers,

       Kadeshwari Society sent a communication dated 04.02.2019 to the

       Church Trust, opposing a composite project and requesting the Trust to

       allow independent redevelopment of the Subject Land by Saldanha.


11.13. This was followed by a series of communications between Kadeshwari

       Society and the Church Trust, where the former sought an NOC for

       redevelopment by Saldanha, while the latter attempted to obtain consent

       from the slum dwellers for combined development.
11.14. In this backdrop, Kadeshwari Society submitted a proposal dated

       24.09.2019 before the SRA for the declaration of the entire Subject Slum,

       now covering 1,976.60 sq. m. (1,596.40 sq. m. being the Subject Land

       and 380.20 sq. m. being BMC’s land), as an SR Area under Section

       3C(1).10


11.15. Parallelly, the Church Trust sent a letter dated 07.02.2020 to the Chief

       Executive Officer of the SRA (CEO), informing that it was in

       communication with the slum dwellers. It stated that the representatives

       of the Trust had met with the members of Kadeshwari Society, and the


  10 Reproduced in Paragraph 8.
Page 13 of 39
dwellers had accepted the feasibility of the composite development. The

       Church Trust also submitted a feasibility report prepared by its architect

       for the redevelopment of the area.
11.16. The SRA, however, disregarded the Church Trust’s communication and,

       instead, acted on the proposal of the Kadeshwari Society. It issued public

       notices as well as a specific notice to the Trust on 30.09.2020, calling for

       objections to the proposal for a Section 3C(1) Declaration.


11.17. The Church Trust filed its written objections and attended the

       subsequent hearing on the proposal. It conveyed its intention to

       redevelop the Subject Property on its own, without the interference of a

       third-party. The Trust also averred that the Subject Land was not densely

       populated, and the structures thereon had sufficient ventilation, light,

       sanitation, and facilities, considering which it should not be designated

       as a slum.
11.18. The CEO after the hearing the parties, vide order dated 29.12.2020,

       rejected the objections of the Church Trust and declared the Subject

       Slum as an SR Area. The Section 3C(1) Declaration dated 29.12.2020

       was published in the Official Gazette on 31.12.2020, and the order and

       the declaration were also forwarded by the SRA to the Church Trust on

       05.01.2021.
11.19. Aggrieved, the Church Trust challenged the order dated 29.12.2020

       through statutory appeal under Section 3C(2)
11
bearing Application No.


  11 Reproduced in Paragraph 8.
Page 14 of 39
20 of 2021 before the AGRC on 01.02.2021. The AGRC does not appear

       to have heard the appeal even a single time, and it has remained pending

       to date.
11.20. Following the declaration dated 29.12.2020, Saldanha and the Church

       Trust filed their respective proposals for redevelopment.


11.21. Saldanha filed its proposal dated 23.04.2021 in accordance with SRA’s

       Circular No. 14412 and
Regulation 33(10)
of the DCPR 203413 for

       redevelopment of the Subject Slum. This proposal was filed with support

       from Kadeshwari Society.
11.22. On the other hand, the Church Trust filed its proposal through a letter

       dated 04.05.2021, sent by its architect to the SRA. It envisaged the

       rehabilitation of the Subject Slum through the aforementioned composite

       development of the Nirmala Colony and included relevant maps and

       design plans. It was clarified in the communication that the proposal was

       made without prejudice to and subject to the outcome of Application

       No. 20 of 2021. The Church Trust also submitted its composite proposal

       before the BMC.
11.23. The record reveals that the SRA only took steps to consider Saldanha’s

       proposal, completing various internal processes by July 2021. However,

       faced with the objection of the Church Trust to this proposal, Kadeshwari




  12 See Paragraph 38 of Tarabai (supra).
13 See Paragraph 35 of Tarabai (supra).
Page 15 of 39
Society submitted an application on 09.09.2021 for the acquisition of the

       Subject Land under
Section 14
.14


11.24. The SRA, in response to the above-stated application, issued a public

       notice dated 29.10.2021, calling for objections from all interested parties

       to the proposal for acquisition. The Church Trust submitted its written

       objections, and in the course of the acquisition proceedings, the

       representatives of the Trust were also heard on 14.12.2021. Thereafter,

       another hearing was set for 31.12.2021.
11.25. Before the second hearing could be conducted, the Executive Engineer,

       SRA, vide order dated 22.12.2021, rejected the Church Trust’s proposal

       dated 04.05.2021. The reasons given in the order were that: (i) the

       proposal was not within the prescribed format; (ii) it was not submitted

       to the correct authority/officer; and (iii) the proposal filed by Saldanha

       was already being processed.
11.26. After the second hearing on 31.12.2021, anticipating irreversible

       consequences of the acquisition, the Church Trust moved the AGRC for

       an urgent interim stay on the Section 3C(1) Declaration dated

       29.12.2020, but it was promptly declined on 07.01.2022.


11.27. The Church Trust, thus, aggrieved by the initiation of acquisition

       proceedings, approached the High Court through Writ Petition No. 1212

       of 2022, seeking quashing of the notice dated 29.10.2021.




  14 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.4.
Page 16 of 39
11.28. During the pendency of the Writ Petition, the SRA completed the scrutiny

       of Saldanha’s SR Scheme and granted an in-principle approval on

       28.03.2022. This acceptance was, however, restricted to that area of the

       Subject Slum which was on the BMC’s land. It was clarified that

       consideration for the proposal qua the Subject Land would be taken up

       only after its acquisition was completed.
11.29. On the very next day, the CEO, vide order dated 29.03.2022, approved

       the acquisition proposal on the premise that the Church Trust had not

       filed an SR Scheme within 120 days. The proposal for acquisition was,

       as such, directed to be forwarded to the State Government for approval.


11.30. Consequently, the Church Trust sought to amend its Writ Petition, which

       was allowed by the High Court, vide order dated 08.04.2022, so as to

       enable the Church Trust to bring these subsequent events on record. In

       the amended Writ Petition, an additional prayer to set aside the order

       dated 29.03.2022 was also incorporated. The High Court, while

       entertaining the amended Writ Petition, directed as an interim measure

       that no further steps towards the acquisition would be taken till the next

       date of hearing. That order remained operative till the Writ Petition was

       finally decided.
11.31. The High Court vide the Impugned Judgement dated 11.06.2024,

       allowed the Writ Petition and, relying upon the reasoning assigned in
Indian Cork Mills
(supra), held that the Church Trust had a preferential

       right to develop the Subject Land. It further held that: (i) the SRA
Page 17 of 39
neglected this right of the Trust; (ii) the acquisition proceedings were

       marred by the absence of any proper notice to the Trust; and (iii) the

       questionable conduct of the SRA, Saldanha, and Kadeshwari Society

       vitiated the entire acquisition. The High Court, consequently, set aside

       the notice dated 29.10.2021 and the order dated 29.03.2022, allowing

       the Church Trust to proceed with development of the Subject Land.


11.32. Kadeshwari Society, Saldanha, and the SRA, being aggrieved, have filed

       separate appeals challenging the Impugned Judgement.


  C.   CONTENTIONS
12. Mr. Shyam Divan, learned Senior Counsel, representing Kadeshwari

       Society, highlighted the alleged shortcomings in the Church Trust’s

       development     proposal.   In   this   regard,      he   made   the   following

       submissions:
(a)   The High Court, even preliminarily, ought not to have entertained

             the Church Trust’s Writ Petition. The notice dated 29.10.2021 and

             the order dated 29.03.2022 neither caused any prejudice to the

             Trust nor created any rights in favour of a third-party. The notice

             and the order were merely procedural and did not merit

             interference, since no final decision had been taken on the proposed

             acquisition.
(b)   The mandatory notice and hearings before a Section 3C(1)

             Declaration    eliminate   the    need   for    another    notice   under
Page 18 of 39
Section 13
.15 The 120-day time limit further indicates a shift in

           legislative policy, where the onus of submitting a proposal is placed

           on the landowner. The provisions amended in 2018 render the

           judicial mandate for a specific notice to invite the landowner for

           redevelopment incompatible.
(c)   The Church Trust has acted lackadaisically towards the interests of

           the slum dwellers as well as its own interests in the Subject Land.
It never exercised its right to develop the Subject Land since 1978,

           when part of it was declared as Slum Area. Even after the

           Section 3C(1) Declaration, the Trust never submitted any SR

           Scheme as per
Regulation 33(10)
of DCPR 2034.
(d)   The Church Trust’s proposal dated 04.05.2021 is belated. The

           period of 120 days prescribed under Section 1316 would start from

           the publication of the Section 3C(1) Declaration in the Official

           Gazette, viz., 31.12.2020. As such, the 120 days were over on

           30.04.2021, and the Trust was 5 days late in submitting its

           proposal.
(e)   Although this Court, through successive orders passed in Suo Motu

           Writ Petition (Civil) No. 3 of 2020 and connected matters, has

           generally extended the period of limitation from 2020 till 2022 due




15 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.1.
16 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.1.
Page 19 of 39
to the then ongoing COVID-19 Pandemic, such extension does not

           apply to the time limit in
Section 13(1)
.17
(f)   SR Schemes are to be submitted in the format prescribed by the

           Guidelines for the Implementation of Slum Rehabilitation Policy in

           Greater Mumbai, 199718 and
Regulation 33(10)
of the DCPR 2034.

           As per SRA’s Circular No. 144, strict conformity with the format is

           a prerequisite for consideration of the proposed SR Scheme. The

           Church Trust’s proposal dated 04.05.2021 does not adhere to any

           of these stipulations and was thus rightly rejected by the SRA vide

           order dated 22.12.2021. The Trust has not challenged this order

           before any forum, so it cannot rely on the said proposal to claim that

           it has fulfilled its duty under
Section 13
.
(g)   There was no procedural infirmity in or ulterior motive behind the

           notice dated 29.10.2021 and order dated 29.03.2022. The former

           was only to invite objections to the acquisition proposal, in line with

           the first proviso to
Section 14
. The latter is a reasoned order, passed

           after hearing all the parties, merely recommending the acquisition

           of the Subject Land to the State Government.
13. Mr. Sudhanshu S. Choudhari, learned Senior Counsel on behalf of the

     SRA, in response to a specific query, clarified that the SRA was not

     intending to take any sides among the parties. The appeal was filed to

     challenge the High Court’s interpretation of the owner’s preferential


17 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.1.
18 See Paragraph 36 of Tarabai (supra).
Page 20 of 39
right. His contentions, however, have already been considered and

     negatived by this Court in Tarabai (supra).
14. Mr. Nikhil Sakhardande, learned Senior Counsel representing Saldanha,

     apart from adopting the arguments made by Mr. Divan, sought to

     impress upon this Court that the proposed acquisition was not an

     attempt to grab the Church Trust’s land. Rather, it was a bona fide effort

     to ensure redevelopment of the Subject Slum, motivated by the incentive

     of reasonable profits.
15. Dr. Milind Sathe and Mr. Chander Uday Singh, learned Senior Counsels

     appearing on behalf of the Church Trust, asserted the correctness of the

     Impugned Judgement and underlined the attempted breach of the

     Trust’s preferential rights through the acquisition. They made the

     following averments:
(a)   The time limit of 120 days in Section 1319 is only directory in nature

           and not mandatory. Even if it is considered mandatory, the period

           would only begin when a specific notice is received by the owner.
The Church Trust has submitted its proposal within 120 days of

           05.01.2021, when it was informed of the Section 3C(1) Declaration.
(b)   In any event, the directions of this Court in Cognizance for

           Extension of Limitation, In re20 generally extending the period of

           limitation from 2020 till 2022, would also apply to the limit of 120



19 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.1.
20 (2022) 3 SCC 117.
Page 21 of 39
days. Additionally, even as a matter of equity, the Church Trust

      should not be deprived of its inherent ownership rights due to an

      inconsequential delay of a few days.
(c)   There is no legislative requirement to submit the proposal as per
Regulation 33(10)
of the DCPR 2034. It is only applicable when

      development incentives are sought under that Regulation, and the

      landowner can choose not to invoke
Regulation 33(10)
. As such, the

      proposal of the Church Trust was wrongly disregarded merely for

      alleged inconsonance with format requirements.
(d)   The SRA or the private parties have shown no necessity to acquire

      the land for redevelopment. The CEOs’ order dated 29.03.2022 only

      mentions that an acquisition is required because 120 days have

      passed and the owner has not submitted any SR Scheme.
(e)   Moreover, there is a mala-fide intention behind the acquisition, i.e.,

      Saldanha’s objective to grab the Subject Land. When the developer’s

      original attempt to purchase the land fell through, it initiated the

      process to acquire it through Kadeshwari Society and the SRA for a

      very low price.
(f)   The SRA, for the reasons best known to it, exhibited a singular focus

      towards opposing the Church Trust’s attempts to redevelop, so as

      to pave the way for Saldanha’s SR Scheme. The Trust’s proposal was

      discarded    on   hyper-technical      grounds,   while   Saldanha’s

      submission was processed despite its own defects. It is in pursuance
Page 22 of 39
of this resolve of the SRA that the acquisition process was initiated

            under Saldanha’s SR Scheme without formally rejecting the Trust’s

            proposal.
(g)     The decisions taken by Kadeshwari Society are highly suspect, as

            only 7 out of 35 members are signatories to them. This assertion is

            further fortified by the fact that the Society refuses to accept the

            owner’s proposal for larger units with better facilities as compared

            to the smaller units offered by Saldanha. The Society has no

            justification for not accepting a composite development. Kadeshwari

            Society cannot dictate the manner of development; its members only

            have a right to rehabilitation as per the law, not to a specific

            rehabilitation of their choice.
D. ISSUES
16. Having regard to the issues already adjudicated upon in Tarabai

    (supra), we deem it appropriate to confine our analysis to the following

    three questions:
I.      Whether the High Court has rightly rejected Kadeshwari Society’s

            preliminary objection?
II.      Whether the 2018 Amendment impacts the law laid down in
Indian

            Cork Mills
(supra) and as reiterated in Tarabai (supra)?
III.      Whether, in the facts of the instant case, the High Court rightly set

            aside the notice dated 29.10.2021 and the order dated 29.03.2022?
Page 23 of 39
E.   ANALYSIS

E.1 Issue I: Preliminary Objection
17. It would be suitable, at the outset, to address the preliminary issue

     raised by Mr. Divan on behalf of Kadeshwari Society. He argued that the

     notice dated 29.10.2021 was merely an invitation for objections to the

     acquisition proposal, and the order dated 29.03.2022 was simply a

     recommendation to the State. He further submitted that these orders, at

     best, were a preliminary exercise for acquisition of the Subject Land and

     therefore, it was premature for the High Court to have interfered when

     no actual step causing prejudice to the Church Trust had been taken.
18. Although the contention appears to be attractive at first blush, it is liable

     to fall flat when a deeper analysis is undertaken. We say so for the reason

     that the High Court, in exercise of its plenary jurisdiction under
Article

     226
of the Constitution, can prevent or annul any executive overreach,

     arbitrary decision-making process, action tainted with mala fides, or

     colourable exercise of power. Where the solitary object of the notice and

     order, namely, to acquire the Subject Land, has not been disputed by the

     SRA, the High Court was justified to intervene at a preliminary stage. Not

     doing so would have invited more complications on account of creation

     of third-party rights by the private builder and consequential multiplicity

     of litigation. Mere absence of any direct impact on the entitlement of the

     Church Trust does not take away from the administrative nature of the

     notice and the order or the jurisdiction of the High Court to consider their

     validity.
Page 24 of 39
19. Moreover, the notice and the order are traceable to the statutory

     framework of the
Slums Act
, especially in
Section 14
,
21
and the same

     having been issued in purported exercise of statutory power were

     amenable to judicial review. Therefore, these actions must be taken

     strictly in accordance with the legislative framework, and any challenge

     that raises questions about the legality and integrity of such acts is

     maintainable under
Article 226.
This preliminary objection raised by the

     Appellants, thus, would fail. The appeals must, instead, be considered

     on their merits.
E.2 Issue II: The Impact of the 2018 Amendment on the Slums Act
20. The learned Senior Counsels for the Appellants strenuously argued that,

     as a consequence of the 2018 Amendment, there is no statutory

     requirement to issue a separate notice for initiation of proceedings under
Section 13
of the Slums Act.22 The reason attributed to this inference

     was that such a notice already stands effected on a landowner under

     Section 3C, as a rule of audi alteram partem within the process of

     notifying the land as an SR Area. It was thus elaborated that in view of

     the changed legislative policy, the precondition of a separate notice under
Section 13
as outlined in
Indian Cork Mills
(supra) and upheld by this

     Court in Tarabai (supra) would no longer be applicable. It was clarified

     that the cited decisions pertain to the situation as it stood prior to the

     2018 Amendment and are, thus, distinguishable.
21 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.4.
22 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.1.
Page 25 of 39
21. In this regard, a pointed reference was also made to the phrase, ‘which

     shall not be more than one hundred and twenty days’ in
Section 13
,
23
to buttress the submission that the onus has been shifted

     onto the landowner to remain vigilant and submit the SR Scheme within

     the stipulated period once the Section 3C(1) Declaration is issued.
22. On a bare perusal of the 2018 Amendment, it seems to us that no attempt

     has been made to remove or dilute the preferential right of the landowner

     to redevelop an SR Area. All those provisions which have been analysed

     in Tarabai (supra) lead to only one conclusion, i.e., that the owner has

     a primary right to undertake development, and none of the provisions

     have been amended. Rather, the owner’s right is now further entrenched

     into the legislative scheme, with the addition of the term ‘owner’ into the

     text of Section 3B(5) and
Section 13
,
24
along with the existing expressions

     of ‘landholders’ and ‘occupants’. The Legislature has, thus, expressly

     acknowledged the distinct rights enjoyed by the owner or a landlord

     within Chapter I-A.
23. In order to address the Appellants’ contention, it is germane, firstly, to

     observe that, under Chapter I-A, no occasion arises for any stakeholder

     to develop an area unless it has been finally notified as an SR Area. In

     other words, the Section 3C(1) Declaration is a stage prior to

     redevelopment being initiated under
Section 13
.25 The issuance of a




23 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.1.
24 Reproduced in Paragraphs 7.4 and 9.1.
25 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.1.
Page 26 of 39
notice under Section 3C26 is meant to accord hearing to a landowner and

     invite objections, if any, against declaration as an SR Area. By contrast,

     this Court, in Tarabai (supra), has expressly held that the purpose of a

     specific notice under
Section 13
is to invite and enable the owner to

     initiate redevelopment. Keeping in mind the fact that both the provisions

     operate in different directions and for different purposes, what is deemed

     to be mandated under
Section 13
cannot be rendered moot by the

     stipulations in Section 3C. With this view of the matter, the plea of the

     Appellants that the new mechanism within Section 3C no longer

     necessitates a separate notice-cum-invitation on the landowner cannot

     be accepted.
24. Further, Tarabai (supra) outlines very cogent and critical reasons for

     why the specific notice under Section 1327 is a mandatory requirement.

     This Court, considering the practical realities of preparing an SR Scheme

     as well as the potentially drastic consequences of not submitting the

     same, held that it would not be feasible for the owner to file the scheme

     without being invited to do so. The newly added qualification of 120 days

     in
Section 13
in no way impacts or has any relation to such an invitation

     or the reasons behind its necessity. The incorporation of this condition

     cannot lead to the conclusion that the notice-cum-invitation is no longer

     required. Rather, the stipulated time-limit would come into effect after

     the owner is notified and invited to redevelop the SR Area, whereupon




26 Reproduced in Paragraph 8.
27 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.1.
Page 27 of 39
they must come forward within the time-ceiling. The claim of the

    Appellants that the owner is expected to present an SR Scheme within

    120 days of the Section 3C(1) Declaration without any notice-cum-

    invitation is wholly misconceived and, thus, accordingly rejected.
25. On a conspectus of the 2018 Amendment and the perceived resultant

    variation on the pre-amendment legislative policy, we are satisfied that

    the holistic interpretation of the
Slums Act
made by this Court in

    Tarabai (supra) is also squarely applicable on post-2018 Amendment

    actions/events, barring the now legislatively stipulated timeline within

    which a redevelopment scheme has to be submitted by an interested

    landowner. It, then, goes without saying that SRA’s actions initiating the

    acquisition in the instant case must also be tested against the same

    principles, which we shall now proceed to assess in the following issue.


E.3 Issue III: Validity of Acquisition
26. This Court in Tarabai (supra) has unequivocally established that: (i) the

    private owner of an SR Area has a preferential right to develop it; (ii) the

    SRA must invite the landowner to come forward with a redevelopment

    proposal and give them reasonable time to do so before the said

    preferential right extinguishes; and (iii) the State or the SRA cannot move

    to acquire the land before the preferential right of the owner is

    extinguished. These principles will also apply mutatis mutandis to the

    case in hand.
Page 28 of 39
27. Consequently, there vests a preferential right in favour of the Church

    Trust, over and above the SRA, occupants, or other stakeholders, to

    develop the Subject Land. The Trust ought to have been invited by the

    SRA to submit a proposal and undertake such redevelopment after the

    declaration dated 29.12.2020 was issued. Thus, the SRA cannot proceed

    for acquisition of the Subject Land unless (i) such a notice-cum-

    invitation is extended, and (ii) thereafter, the right of the Church Trust

    is extinguished if it fails to submit a redevelopment scheme within the

    prescribed period of 120 days.
28. The High Court has held that there was no compliance of these

    preconditions by the SRA before initiating the acquisition, and the entire

    process was liable to be invalidated. The High Court has further found

    from the   conduct of the Appellants that the acquisition proceedings

    arose from an exercise of power in bad faith. We, therefore, now proceed

    to examine whether the High Court was right in drawing such a

    conclusion.
E.3.1 Prerequisites for Acquisition
29. At the cost of repetition, it may be reiterated that Mr. Divan advanced a

    two-pronged submission. First, he contended that all statutory

    requirements for initiating acquisition, particularly the issuance of notice

    to the Church Trust, had been duly complied with. Second, he argued

    that the Church Trust, by failing to proactively develop the Subject Land

    or submit a proposal in the prescribed format under
Regulation 33(10)
of the DCPR 2034, had effectively waived its preferential right. On this
Page 29 of 39
basis, he asserted that the acquisition proceedings were valid and did

     not merit interference.
E.3.1.1 No Notice-cum-Invitation for Redevelopment
30. Regarding the first strand of these claims, we hasten to observe at the

     very outset that there is no notice or invitation under
Section 13
on the

     record that was issued to the Church Trust.
31. The only communication relied upon by the Appellants is the Deputy

     Collector, SRA forwarding the Section 3C(1) Declaration to the Church

     Trust. We have already held that such notice does not amount to

     compliance with the procedure contemplated under
Section 13
of the

     Slums Act.28
32. The inevitable consequence of the SRA’s omission to issue a separate

     notice under Section 1329 is that the Church Trust’s preferential right to

     redevelop the Subject Land remains intact. In the absence of a valid

     notice or opportunity, there existed no legal basis to extinguish this right.

     The acquisition was, therefore, vitiated in law, falling afoul of the

     prescribed procedure.
E.3.1.2 No Waiver of Preferential Right
33. Having held so, we shall now consider whether the Church Trust has,

     through its conduct, waived the preferential right to develop the Subject

     Land. Since such right can extinguish only after the owner is invited for



28 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.1.
29 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.1.
Page 30 of 39
redevelopment, the threshold for how such right may be waived, even

    before an invitation is extended, is inevitably high. In our view, if there

    is no clear and overt communication by the owner that it does not wish

    to exercise its preferential right to develop the SR Area, there cannot be

    an automatic waiver of the right.
34. The record demonstrates that the Church Trust has, since 2013,

    consistently expressed its intent to redevelop the Subject Land. Following

    the Section 3C(1) Declaration dated 29.12.2020, the Trust reiterated its

    willingness to undertake redevelopment, including by submitting a

    consolidated proposal to the SRA and BMC, which addressed both, the

    slum dwellers’ entitlements and the utilisation of its remaining land.

    During the pendency of the Writ Petition, it also appointed a developer

    through a bidding process to implement its development plan. In these

    circumstances, there is no basis to infer any waiver of its preferential

    right.
35. Although some concerns were raised during the course of the hearing

    regarding the permissibility of an amalgamated development, these

    issues do not fall for adjudication in the instant appeals. As such, we

    need not delve into the validity of the Church Trust’s proposal in terms

    of the applicable Regulations. Suffice it to say that these contentions do

    not undermine the Church Trust’s clear and consistent intent to

    undertake the rehabilitation of the Subject Slum.
Page 31 of 39
36. Given the above findings in respect of the invitation to the Church Trust

     and its persistent effort to redevelop the Subject Land, the prerequisites

     of initiating an acquisition under
Section 14
,
30
as laid out in Tarabai

     (supra), have not been fulfilled. The High Court has thus made no error

     in holding that the acquisition ought to be ex facie illegal.


E.3.2 Questionable Conduct of the Parties
37. We now turn to the second ground on which the High Court quashed the

     acquisition. The High Court not only found the integrity and objectivity

     of the acquisition process compromised but also cast suspicion on the

     motives of the Appellants. Upon our own independent scrutiny of the

     facts, we too are impelled to draw adverse inferences from the Appellants’

     disconcerting conduct throughout the acquisition proceedings.
38. While the record reveals a concerted and motivated attempt by the

     parties to acquire the Subject Land, we shall now proceed to examine, in

     detail, the conduct of the private and official Appellants separately.


     E.3.2.1 Conduct of Kadeshwari Society and Saldanha
39. The primary ground for doubting the bona fide of Kadeshwari Society lies

     in its persistent resistance to the Church Trust’s efforts to redevelop the

     Subject Slum. The Trust has overwhelmingly demonstrated that the

     proposed redevelopment ensures all statutory entitlements to slum

     dwellers, including allotment of units on the Subject Land itself. These

     units exceed the minimum size mandated under
Regulation 33(10)
of the



30 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.4.
Page 32 of 39
DCPR 2034, with all other entitlements either matching or surpassing

    the regulatory requirements.
40. Despite the Church Trust’s proposal offering significantly better benefits,

    Kadeshwari Society has persisted in pursuing redevelopment exclusively

    through Saldanha. This choice inevitably disadvantages the slum

    dwellers, who stand to receive smaller units and reduced benefits.

    Meanwhile, Saldanha gains the opportunity to commercially exploit the

    Subject Land, acquired at a fraction of its market value, in one of

    Mumbai’s most land-constrained areas. This stark divergence between

    the welfare of slum dwellers and the Society’s perplexing allegiance to

    Saldanha compels us to conclude that Saldanha is, in effect,

    orchestrating the Society’s actions from behind the scenes.
41. Saldanha’s actions suggest a calculated attempt to wrest the Subject

    Land from the Church Trust, along with over 380 sq. m. of adjoining

    BMC land, by exploiting the markedly low acquisition rates for

    commercial gain. This intent surfaces as early as its proposal to privately

    purchase the land from the Church Trust. While seemingly a bona-fide

    negotiation, the text of the correspondence reveals a veiled threat aimed

    at pressuring the Trust into relinquishing its property. This is

    particularly evident in Saldanha’s letter dated 03.04.2018, addressed to

    Bishop John Rodrigues, the relevant portion of which is reproduced

    hereafter:
“ [xxxx]
         As you are already aware, the Pawar Chawl has been in existence
         since 1935 and the members are in possession and occupation of this
Page 33 of 39
portion of land admeasuring approximately 1590 sq.mtrs of which
        1532 sq.mtrs has been declared as slum. The members of Pawar
        Chawl have been paying the municipal taxes and water bills
        since inception and are in a position to make a claim that they
        are in adverse possession of the land or even approach the CEO,
        SRA to acquire this portion of land declared slum and occupied
        by them under the SRA rules and regulations with regard to
        acquisition as per the legal advice given to them. If
        implemented, it would take a maximum time of three months to
        acquire or claim adverse possession as the structures of the
        slum are in a total dilapidated condition.
Owing to the above, I request you to take a quick decision to
        execute the matters in this regard and to grant us the
        conveyance/perpetual lease in our favour.
We have already entered into a development agreement with
        Shree Kadeshwari Society (Proposed) for the redevelopment of
        their slum occupying B/960 (pt) under SRA Scheme 33(10) and
        awaiting your response so that we are able to execute go ahead
        with the project. We will obtain all necessary permissions including
        that of the Charity Commissioner if at all necessary.
        In case of any further queries, we will be happy to discuss to take
        things further. We do hope you will consider our offer favorably,
        assuring you of our best services at all times.
[xxxx] ”
                                                [Sic] [Emphasis supplied]
42. Subsequently, upon realising that the Church Trust was unwilling to

    part with the Subject Land, Saldanha initiated a driven attempt to usurp

    it through the machinery of the SRA. Acting through Kadeshwari Society

    as its proxy, it sought to effectuate what can only be described as a land

    grab—one that aligns squarely with the tenor of its earlier coercive

    communication. At every stage of the Section 3C(1) Declaration and the

    ensuing acquisition proceedings, the pattern of conduct exhibited by

    both Saldanha and Kadeshwari Society points unmistakably to the

    former calling the shots, while safely being in the shadows.
43. Such pervasive influence inevitably corrupts any action taken by

    Kadeshwari Society as well as Saldanha and calls upon us to impute
Page 34 of 39
patently dishonest intent on their conjoined attempt to take over

    development of the Subject Land.
E.3.2.2 SRA’s Conduct
44. Considering the other side of the coin, we find the manner in which the

    SRA and its functionaries have approached this case is even more

    shocking. The record reveals a dire lack of application of mind or any

    objective and coherent reasoning in the decisions of the SRA.
45. Despite the judgement of the High Court in
Indian Cork Mills
(supra)

    continuing to hold the field, the SRA’s actions expose its attempts to

    thwart any possibility of the Church Trust exercising its preferential

    right.
46. First, after the Subject Land was declared as an SR Area on 29.12.2020,

    the SRA never issued any specific notice to the Church Trust. It blatantly

    chose to shrug off its duty to invite the owner to come forward with a

    scheme for redevelopment. Instead, the SRA merely forwarded the

    Section 3C(1) Declaration to the Trust, trying to create an impression

    that it was completing all requisite processes, while not actually fulfilling

    the basic requirement of specific notice.
47. Second, the SRA paid no heed to the Church Trust’s attempts for a

    consolidated redevelopment. When the Trust’s proposal was forwarded

    on 04.05.2021, the SRA made no attempt to act on it. Instead, while it

    remained pending, the SRA proceeded to process and favourably

    consider Saldanha’s proposal, including advancing the acquisition
Page 35 of 39
process. Although the SRA conducted a hearing for the Church Trust, it

     turned down the Trust’s proposal during the intervening period between

     two acquisition hearing dates on the flimsy ground that it was not

     submitted in the prescribed format or to the designated Head Clerk,

     Engineering. Importantly, no attempt was made by the SRA to allow the

     Church Trust to rectify the purported deficiencies in its proposal.

     Instead, a mere general rejection of the proposal was conveyed.
48. Finally, the SRA did not consider that the Section 3C(1) Declaration

     dated 29.12.2020 was itself under challenge in Application No. 20 of

     2021 before the AGRC. By going on appeal, the Church Trust has

     challenged the very status of the Subject Land as an SR Area. Such

     status is a sine qua non for acquisition under
Section 14
.31 Given the

     irreversible consequences and third-party interests created by it, the SRA

     ought not to have gone ahead with the proposal for acquisition till the

     very foundation of the acquisition was confirmed in the statutory appeal.

     Nevertheless, for some inexplicable reason and with a sense of

     uncharacteristic urgency, which again speaks to the invisible but

     pervading influence of the powerful private developer, the SRA has

     forsaken the basic tenets of equity and recommended the acquisition.
49. Throughout this case, the SRA and its CEO appear to have abandoned

     their public duty to uphold the Rule of Law and protect the rights of the

     landowner. On the contrary, the facts reveal a prejudiced attempt by the




31 Reproduced in Paragraph 9.4.
Page 36 of 39
SRA to undermine legislative and judicial efforts and hand over the

    Subject Land and the benefits of its rehabilitation to Saldanha. Such

    actions of a public authority, marred by collusion and connivance and

    motivated by extraneous profit interests of private builders, are highly

    depreciable and underline the possibility of bureaucratic misuse of

    statutory provisions.
50. The facts of the instant case compel us to infer that Saldanha’s

    overreaching influence went beyond the slum-dwellers’ proposed society.

    In its attempt to take over the Subject Land, the developer appears to

    have gotten the typically slow-moving bureaucratic wheels of the SRA to

    run at full speed. Moreover, Saldanha was able to achieve this

    manoeuvre at a time when the entire country was under lockdown and

    the machinery of governance was overwhelmed by the unprecedented

    challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic.
51. These circumstances underpin the need for practical and actionable

    safeguards in a legal system involving competing interests among private

    parties.
The Slums Act
, while providing wholesome protection to slum

    dwellers and their homes and livelihood, does not give such express

    protection to the interests of the owner of the land. The ensuing vacuum,

    as we have seen in these appeals, allows opportunistic developers to

    swoop in, exploit the circumstances of the poor slum dwellers,

    manipulate the hand-in-glove authorities, and enrich themselves off the

    helpless owner’s land.
Page 37 of 39
52. Keeping the facts of this case and the obviously colourable conduct of

     the Appellants in mind, the acquisition proceedings cannot be allowed to

     sustain. As such, the High Court has rightly nipped these proceedings in

     the bud, protecting the statutory rights and interests of the Church Trust

     over the Subject Land and preventing the Appellants from illegally

     grabbing it.
F.   CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS
53. For the reasons set out above, the instant appeals are dismissed. The

     following conclusions and directions are accordingly issued:
i.    The Impugned Judgement of the High Court stands upheld;
ii.   Liberty is granted to the Church Trust to submit, within a period of

           120 days, an SR Scheme for the redevelopment of the Subject Slum,

           strictly in accordance with laws and regulations in force;
iii. The Church Trust shall be bound by the offer of the size of the

           apartments as well as other benefits and entitlements already made

           by it to the slum dwellers;
iv.   The SRA shall offer full support to the Church Trust for surveys,

           demarcation, etc., as per the applicable Regulations, to enable it to

           submit an SR Scheme; and


     v.    The SRA and the State shall process the Church Trust’s proposal as

           expeditiously as possible within the prescribed procedure, within a

           period of 60 days from the date of the Trust’s submission.
Page 38 of 39
54. All the matters and pending interlocutory applications, if any, stand

    disposed of in the aforementioned terms and directions.
55. Ordered accordingly.
.................…….........J.
                                                                (SURYA KANT)




                                                   .................…….........J.
                                                            (UJJAL BHUYAN)


NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 22, 2025
Page 39 of 39