[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Suresh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 1 August, 2025
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
2025 INSC 918                                                            REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.347 OF 2018

                  SURESH                                                …APPELLANT



                                                 VERSUS



                  STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.                      …RESPONDENTS

                  R1: STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH

                  R2: DEVI SINGH



                                            J U D G M E N T
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
The present appeal emanates from the Final Judgment and

                  Order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad (hereinafter

                  referred to as the ‘High Court’) in Criminal Revision No.2144/2015

                  dated 29.03.2016 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Impugned Order’)
Signature Not Verified
[2016:AHC:50543], whereby the High Court dismissed the criminal
Digitally signed by
VARSHA MENDIRATTA
Date: 2025.08.01
17:28:55 IST
Reason:
revision petition filed by the Appellant and upheld the Order passed by



                                                                                  1 of 21
the Court of the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Court No.1,

Kairana, Muzaffarnagar (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Trial Court’) on

19.05.2015, declaring Respondent No.2 as a ‘juvenile’ under the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘
Juvenile Justice Act
’) [as it then was].



BRIEF FACTS:
2.    The Appellant alleges that, on 31.08.2011, while the Appellant,

his father, mother and his brother/Rajesh Singh (hereinafter referred to

as ‘Rajesh’) had gone to their fields, his chacha (paternal uncle)/Lillu

Singh and his son Devi Singh/Respondent No.2 forcibly entered his

house at around 10 am. When restrained by his wife who was alone at

the house, the Appellant alleges that the two persons – father and son

i.e., Lillu Singh and Respondent No.2 – manhandled her. When the

said incident was narrated to the Appellant and his brother by the

Appellant’s parents who had reached the house during the incident,

Rajesh went to the accused/father-son duo, to enquire about the

same. In this interaction, it is alleged that his chacha and Respondent

No.2 forcibly took Rajesh inside their house, where the chacha

caught/held him, and Respondent No.2 took out a country-made pistol



                                                                    2 of 21
and fired it on Rajesh with the intention to kill him. It is stated that

pursuant to this, Rajesh suffered injuries and died en route to Kairana

hospital.
3.      Thereafter, the Appellant lodged a First Information Report being

Crime Case No.385/2011 at Kairana Police Station, Muzaffarnagar

against Lillu Singh and Respondent No.2 under
Sections 452
1
and
3022
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the

‘
IPC
’).
4.      This complaint proceeded to be converted into Sessions Trial

No.123/2012 before the Court of the learned Additional Sessions

Judge, Kairana, Muzaffarnagar. With a plea that his date of birth was

18.04.1995, and as on the date of the incident, he was aged 16 years,

4 months and 13 days, Respondent No.2 filed a miscellaneous

application numbered as Miscellaneous Case No.04/11/2015 before

the Trial Court seeking to establish his juvenility, which was connected

with Sessions Trial No.123/2012. The Trial Court, on appreciating the
1
‘452. House-trespass after preparation for hurt, assault or wrongful restraint.—Whoever commits house-
trespass, having made preparation for causing hurt to any person or for assaulting any person, or for
wrongfully restraining any person, or for putting any person in fear of hurt, or of assault, or of wrongful
restraint, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.’
2
‘302. Punishment for murder.—Whoever commits murder shall be punished with death, or imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine.’


                                                                                                3 of 21
evidence and material placed on record, vide Order dated 19.05.2015,

confirmed that as on the date of the incident, the Respondent No.2

was 16 years, 4 months and 13 days old and thereby established his

juvenility.
5.     Aggrieved by the Order of the Trial Court, the Appellant preferred

a criminal revision petition before the High Court, which was

dismissed vide the Impugned Order. Consequently, the juvenility of the

Respondent No. 2 stood confirmed by the High Court.




THE APPELLANT’S SUBMISSIONS:
6.     The Appellant’s submissions majorly revolved around pointing

out how the Courts below erred in establishing and confirming the

Respondent No.2’s juvenility based on a transfer certificate issued by

the first school attended by Respondent No.2, i.e., Kaushik Modern

Public School, Khurgaon, to which he was directly admitted in
Class V.

Learned
counsel for the Appellant submitted that the Courts’ reliance

on this certificate issued by the school was incorrect, when a statutory

document like the Family Register maintained under the U.P.



                                                                  4 of 21
Panchayat Raj Act, 1947
by the Gram Panchayat declared the age of

the Respondent No.2 as 20, mentioning his year of birth as 1991.

Further, the Voters’ List also, of the year 2012, mentioned Respondent

No.2’s age as 22 years as on 01.01.2012. In this light, learned counsel

urged that though there were school certificates which declared the

date of birth of the Respondent No.2 as 18.04.1995, relying on the

date of birth mentioned in the transfer certificate issued by the first

school attended, these ought not to have been relied on, when there is

evidence contradicting this claim, especially in light of the fact that the

first school attended by the Respondent No.2 directly admitted him into

Class V, recording his date of birth as 18.04.1995 – on the oral

mention of his father, without enquiring/looking into any proof for his

date of birth being such.
7.    In this light, learned counsel sought to buttress his argument on

the basis of
Section 35
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (hereinafter

referred to as the ‘
Evidence Act
’), which would make admissible a

document if it states a relevant fact or fact in issue and if it is made by

a public servant in discharge of his official duty or by any other person

in performance of a duty specially enjoined by law. It was submitted

that
Section 35
of the Evidence Act would be attracted both in civil and



                                                                   5 of 21
criminal proceedings. To support this argument, learned counsel for

the Appellant placed reliance on a decision of this Court in
Birad Mal

Singhvi v Anand Purohit
, 1988 Supp SCC 604, which held:
’15. … To render a document admissible under
Section 35
, three conditions must be satisfied, firstly,
         entry that is relied on must be one in a public or
         other official book, register or record, secondly; It
         must be an entry stating a fact in issue or relevant
         fact, and thirdly, it must be made by a public servant
         in discharge of his official duty, or any other person
         in performance of a duty specially enjoined by law.
         An entry relating to date of birth made in the school
         register is relevant and admissible under
section 35
of the Act, but the entry regarding the age of a
         person in a school register is of not much
         evidentiary value to prove the age of the person in
         the absence of the material on which the age was
         recorded. …’
8.   Importantly, learned counsel submitted that the age of the

accused-Respondent No.2 was over 18 years even as per the medical

evidence/report given by the Chief Medical Officer, on 01.12.2012,

which stated that his age was 22 years, which meant that at the time of

the incident, the accused was over 20 years of age, and thus, could

not raise any claim of juvenility. To support this submission, learned

counsel placed reliance on the decision in
Om Prakash v State of

Rajasthan
, (2012) 5 SCC 201, wherein this Court held that in cases of

serious offences like murder, rape, etcetera, an accused cannot be
6 of 21
allowed to abuse the statutory protection afforded to him by attempting

to prove himself as a minor when the documentary evidence to prove

his minority gives rise to a reasonable doubt about his assertion of

minority. This Court also held that under such circumstances, medical

evidence based on scientific investigation will have to be given due

weight and precedence over the evidence based on school

administration records, which give rise to hypothesis and speculation

about the age of the accused. It was prayed that the appeal be

allowed.
SUBMISSIONS OF RESPONDENT NO.1-STATE:
9.    Respondent No.1/State of Uttar Pradesh succinctly submitted

that since Respondent No.2 neither produced a birth certificate nor a

matriculation certificate, in such case, date of birth as mentioned in the

transfer certificate cannot be made the basis for giving benefit of the
Juvenile Justice Act
to the accused-Respondent No.2, especially when

the Appellant produced a Voters’ List, Family Register and Medical

Report which shows that at the time of the incident, Respondent No.2

was a major. Thus, the State also prayed that the Orders of the courts
7 of 21
below be interfered with and set aside, and the instant appeal be

allowed.
SUBMISSIONS OF RESPONDENT NO.2:
10.   The learned counsel for the Respondent No.2 canvassed three-
fold arguments. Firstly, learned counsel contended that the Trial Court

established the Respondent No.2’s juvenility based on the date(s) of

birth consistently recorded in the transfer certificates of multiple

schools attended by him. This date of birth, i.e., 18.04.1995, as

recorded in the school transfer certificates of 4 schools where

Respondent No.2 studied from Classes V th to IXth suggests that, as on

the date of the incident, he was 16 years, 4 months, and 13 days old

and, thus, entitled to the benefit conferred under the
Juvenile Justice

Act
read with Rule 12 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of

Children) Rules, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Rules’). Learned

counsel contended that the officials of the schools which gave these

school certificates were also examined, and the validity of these

certificates was testified by these witnesses. In light of such evidence

and testimonies placed, learned counsel contended that the Trial Court

rightly established juvenility of Respondent No.2.
8 of 21
11.   Secondly, learned counsel submitted that Rule 12 of the Rules

provide that the Court determining the juvenility of an accused can

seek evidence by obtaining a matriculation certificate, in absence

whereof, a date of birth certificate from the school first attended, in

absence whereof a birth certificate given by a corporation or a

municipal authority, and only in absence of these documents, a

medical opinion declaring the age of the juvenile would be considered.

Learned    counsel   submitted    that   in the present     case,    since

matriculation certificate in respect of Respondent No.2 was not

available, the school transfer certificate issued by the Kaushik Modern

Public School, Khurgaon, Shamli, Uttar Pradesh, which is a certificate

of the first school attended, is exclusive proof that the date of birth of

Respondent No.2 is 18.04.1995, and there is no need to consider any

other evidence such as certificate of the Municipal Corporation or

Family Register or certificate of the Medical Board.
12.   Thirdly, learned counsel submitted that Respondent No.2 has

been released by the Juvenile Justice Board after completing the

maximum punishment of three years prescribed by law. It was,

accordingly, urged that the appeal be dismissed.
9 of 21
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
13.   Having bestowed anxious thoughts to the issue, we find that the

approach adopted by the Trial Court as well as the High Court was not

proper. Though the issue of juvenility, indubitably and primarily has to

be determined as per the relevant provisions of the
Juvenile Justice

Act
and the Rules framed thereunder, as applicable at the relevant

time, yet under appropriate circumstances and with justifiable reasons,

the Court examing the issue has the discretion to take other relevant

materials and factors into account, for ultimately the cause of justice

has to prevail.
14.   In the present case, the serious allegation against Respondent

No.2 is that on the exhortation of his father, he along with his father

forcibly took the deceased Rajesh inside their house, whereafter

Respondent No.2 took out a country-made pistol and shot the

deceased Rajesh, resulting in his death.
10 of 21
15.   With regard to the modalities of the enquiry governing

determination of juvenility, Rule 12(3) of the Rules provides:
‘12. Procedure to be followed in determination of
         Age.―
         …
         (3) In every case concerning a child or juvenile in
         conflict with law, the age determination inquiry shall
         be conducted by the court or the Board or, as the
         case may be, the Committee by seeking evidence
         by obtaining –
(a) (i) the matriculation or equivalent certificates,
         if available; and in the absence whereof;
(ii) the date of birth certificate from the school
         (other than a play school) first attended; and in the
         absence whereof;
(iii) the birth certificate given by a corporation
         or a municipal authority or a panchayat;
(b) and only in the absence of either (i), (ii) or (iii)
         of clause (a) above, the medical opinion will be
         sought from a duly constituted Medical Board, which
         will declare the age of the juvenile or child. In case
         exact assessment of the age cannot be done, the
         Court or the Board or, as the case may be, the
         Committee, for the reasons to be recorded by them,
         may, if considered necessary, give benefit to the
         child or juvenile by considering his/her age on lower
         side within the margin of one year.
and, while passing orders in such case shall, after
         taking into consideration such evidence as may be
         available, or the medical opinion, as the case may
         be, record a finding in respect of his age and either
         of the evidence specified in any of the clauses (a)(i),
(ii), (iii) or in the absence whereof, clause (b) shall
         be the conclusive proof of the age as regards such
         child or the juvenile in conflict with law.’
16.   In the present case, four certificates have been produced from

schools said to have been attended by Respondent No.2 viz. Public


                                                                          11 of 21
Inter College, Kairana, Muzaffarnagar; S. N. Junior High School,

Kairana; Sarvoday Public Junior High School, Mohalla Shitla, Kairana,

Muzaffarnagar, and; Kaushik Modern Public School, Khurgaon, but all

are based on the certificates issued by the first attended school,

Kaushik Modern Public School, Khurgaon.
17.   The first school certificate issued by Kaushik Modern Public

School, Khurgaon, where Respondent No.2 was admitted in Class V,

records his date of birth as 18.04.1995. Pausing here, it is also

relevant to indicate that the Headmaster of the said School while

deposing has stated that this birth-date entry was made only on an

oral representation by Respondent No.2’s father.
18.   On the other side, the Appellant produced the relevant page from

a Family Register maintained under the
U.P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947
which records the year of birth of the Respondent No.2 as 1991. The

Appellant further relied on the Report of the Medical Board which was

constituted pursuant to a reference made by the Trial Court when the

plea of juvenility was raised before it by Respondent No.2. Such

examination was conducted and Report submitted on 01.12.2012 i.e.,

nearly after a year of the date of the incident. The Medical Board


                                                              12 of 21
through its Report opined that Respondent No.2 was aged about 22

years, which would make him between 20-21 years of age, as on the

date of the incident, whereas, as per the school certificates, his age

was estimated to be 16 years, 4 months and 13 days. Another factor

which cannot be ignored is the Voters’ List of the Kairana Legislative

Assembly Constituency of the year 2012. The List shows Respondent

No.2 to be approximately 21 years old as on 01.01.2012. This entry is

not conclusive proof, but the fact remains that such entry is made only

on    representation      of     either    person     concerned     or     his/her

parent/guardian. No objection to Respondent No.2’s name figuring in

the   Voters’   List   by      either     him   or   his   parent   was    raised

contemporaneously. In our considered view, such conduct would have

a bearing, especially when there are rival and competing documents

denying his juvenility.
19.   The relevancy of an entry in a ‘public record’ is guided by
Section 35
of the Evidence Act:
‘35. Relevancy of entry in public record or an
         electronic record, made in performance of
         duty.–– An entry in any public or other official book,
         register or record or an electronic record, stating a
         fact in issue or relevant fact, and made by a public
         servant in the discharge of his official duty, or by any
         other person in performance of a duty specially
         enjoined by the law of the country in which such


                                                                          13 of 21
         book, register or record or an electronic record, is
         kept, is itself a relevant fact.’
20.
Section 74
of the Evidence Act deals with ‘public documents’:
‘74. Public documents.––The following documents
         are public documents: ––
         (1) Documents forming the acts, or records of the
         acts ––
(i) of the sovereign authority,
(ii) of official bodies and tribunals, and
(iii) of public officers, legislative, judicial and
         executive, of any part of India or of the
         Commonwealth, or of a foreign country;
(2) public records kept in any State of private
         documents.’
21.   There is no dispute on the factum that Kaushik Modern Public

School, Khurgaon – the first attended school – is not a Government

School and thus, the records maintained by the said School would not

be ‘public documents’. Moreover, the Headmaster/Principal of such

School cannot be said to be a ‘public servant’ for the purposes of the
Evidence Act
. The Headmaster when examined has himself taken the

stand that Kaushik Modern Public School, Khurgaon was only a State

Government-recognized school.
14 of 21
22.   Therefore, neither the Headmaster/Principal of the first attended

school nor its records would qualify as ‘public servant’ or ‘public record’

or ‘public document’ respectively.
23.   Even otherwise, in the case at hand, except for the

Headmaster’s sole testimony, there is no material to establish that the

date 18.04.1995 as Respondent No.2’s date of birth, as recorded in

the certificate issued by Kaushik Modern Public School, Khurgaon,

was correct. As a matter of fact, the Principal in his cross-examination

stated that when the Respondent No.2 was leaving the school on that

day after making cutting he had written the correct date of birth.

Moreover, the Principal has also stated that the birth-date entry was

made on the basis of an oral representation alone by Respondent

No.2’s father and when he was asked for the horoscope or any other

document in support of the date of birth of the Respondent No.2,

nothing was submitted. This, in our view, discredits the certificate

issued by the Kaushik Modern Public School, Khurgaon. As noted

hereinbefore, the other school certificates were issued following this

and therefore, meet the same fate inasmuch as they cannot be treated

as correct, in the face of conflicting public records and public

documents as also the Medical Report which state to the contrary. The



                                                                  15 of 21
observations by a Bench of 2 learned Judges in
Om Prakash v State

of Rajasthan
(supra) are clearly attracted, and the relevant excerpts

therefrom read as under:
‘22. It is no doubt true that if there is a clear and
        unambiguous case in favour of the juvenile accused
        that he was a minor below the age of 18 years on
        the date of the incident and the documentary
        evidence at least prima facie proves the same, he
        would be entitled for this special protection under
        the
Juvenile Justice Act
. But when an accused
        commits a grave and heinous offence and thereafter
        attempts to take statutory shelter under the guise of
        being a minor, a casual or cavalier approach while
        recording as to whether an accused is a juvenile or
        not cannot be permitted as the courts are enjoined
        upon to perform their duties with the object of
        protecting the confidence of common man in the
        institution entrusted with the administration of
        justice.
23. Hence, while the courts must be sensitive in
        dealing with the juvenile who is involved in cases of
        serious nature like sexual molestation, rape, gang
        rape, murder and host of other offences, the
        accused cannot be allowed to abuse the statutory
        protection by attempting to prove himself as a minor
        when the documentary evidence to prove his
        minority gives rise to a reasonable doubt about his
        assertion of minority. Under such circumstance, the
        medical evidence based on scientific investigation
        will have to be given due weight and precedence
        over the evidence based on school administration
        records which give rise to hypothesis and
        speculation about the age of the accused. The
        matter however would stand on a different footing if
        the academic certificates and school records are
        alleged to have been withheld deliberately with
        ulterior motive and authenticity of the medical
        evidence is under challenge by the prosecution.
xxx



                                                                16 of 21
33. Similarly, if the conduct of an accused or the
method and manner of commission of the offence
indicates an evil and a well-planned design of the
accused committing the offence which indicates
more towards the matured skill of an accused than
that of an innocent child, then in the absence of
reliable documentary evidence in support of the age
of the accused, medical evidence indicating that the
accused was a major cannot be allowed to be
ignored taking shelter of the principle of benevolent
legislation like the
Juvenile Justice Act
, subverting
the course of justice as statutory protection of the
Juvenile Justice Act
is meant for minors who are
innocent law-breakers and not the accused of
matured mind who use the plea of minority as a ploy
or shield to protect himself from the sentence of the
offence committed by him.
34. The benefit of benevolent legislation under the
Juvenile Justice Act
obviously will offer protection to
a genuine child accused/juvenile who does not put
the court into any dilemma as to whether he is a
juvenile or not by adducing evidence in support of
his plea of minority but in absence of the same,
reliance placed merely on shaky evidence like the
school admission register which is not proved or oral
evidence based on conjectures leading to further
ambiguity, cannot be relied upon in preference to
the medical evidence for assessing the age of the
accused.
35. While considering the relevance and value of the
medical evidence, the doctor's estimation of age
although is not a sturdy substance for proof as it is
only an opinion, such opinion based on scientific
medical tests like ossification and radiological
examination will have to be treated as a strong
evidence having corroborative value while
determining the age of the alleged juvenile accused.
xxx
38.
The Juvenile Justice Act
which is certainly
meant to treat a child accused with care and
sensitivity offering him a chance to reform and settle
into the mainstream of society, the same cannot be
allowed to be used as a ploy to dupe the course of


                                                          17 of 21
         justice while conducting the trial and treatment of
         heinous offences. This would clearly be treated as
         an effort to weaken the justice dispensation system
         and hence cannot be encouraged.’
                                                  (emphasis supplied)
24.    Rule 12(3)(a) of the Rules lays down the sequential list of

certificates to be examined and the order thereof. As no ‘matriculation

or equivalent certificates’ were available under Rule 12(3)(a)(i) of the

Rules, thus under Rule 12(3)(a)(ii) of the Rules, ‘date of birth certificate

from the school (other than a play school) first attended’ was attracted

and certificate issued by Kaushik Modern Public School, Khurgaon

was taken as conclusive proof of date of birth. However, the deposition

of the School’s Headmaster, especially to the effect that the birth-date

was noted as per an oral representation by Respondent No.2’s father,

makes the said certificate unreliable. Moving on, Rule 12(3)(a)(iii) and

Rule 12(3)(b) of the Rules, respectively, provide for ‘birth certificate

given by a corporation or a municipal authority or a panchayat’ and

‘only in the absence of either (i), (ii) or (iii) of clause (a) above, the

medical opinion will be sought from a duly constituted Medical Board,

which will declare the age of the juvenile or child.’




                                                                   18 of 21
25.   From    an   overall   circumspection    of   all   the   facts   and

circumstances surrounding the case, including the Rules, the picture

which emerges is that on the one hand, there is the certificate backed

by the testimony of the Headmaster of the first school (which as

indicated supra notes that the recordal was made on the oral say-so of

Respondent No.2’s father) relating to the date of birth and the three

consequentially-made/issued certificates, whereas on the other hand,

there exists a statutory document, being a public record and a public

document, in Form (A) under Rule 2 of the Rules framed under the
U.P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947
disclosing the year of birth of

Respondent No.2 as 1991 as also the entry in the Voters’ List for the

Legislative Assembly of the year 2012 and the Medical Report apropos

the age of Respondent No.2 given by the Chief Medical Officer,

Muzaffarnagar, who opined that Respondent No.2 was aged about 22

years on 01.12.2012. As such, the certificate issued by Kaushik

Modern Public School, Khurgaon could not have been taken as

conclusive proof of date of birth of Respondent No.2, discarding Form

(A) under Rule 2 of the Rules under the U. P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947;

the entry in the Voters’ List for the Legislative Assembly of the year

2012, and; the Medical Report. On the basis of the latter three

documents, it is clear that Respondent No.2 cannot be said to have

been a ‘juvenile’ on the date of the unfortunate incident.
19 of 21
26.   Accordingly, for the reasons aforesaid, the declaration of

Respondent No.2 as a ‘juvenile’ being plainly improper, the Impugned

Order as well as the Order dated 19.05.2015 of the Trial Court holding

the Respondent No.2 to be a ‘juvenile’ are hereby set aside.

Respondent No.2 is held to have been a major as on the date of

commission of the alleged offence and liable to be tried as a major for

Crime No. 385/2011, Police Station - Kairana.
27.   The trial be expedited. The Trial Court is directed to conclude the

trial on priority basis ensuring that the same is taken to its logical

conclusion, latest by the end of July, 2026.
28.   In view of Respondent No.2’s Written Submissions to the effect

that the accused/Respondent No.2 was released by the Juvenile

Justice Board, it is directed that he shall appear before the Trial Court

within three weeks from date and shall be at liberty to pray for bail, to

be considered on its own merits by the Trial Court. Failure to appear

within three weeks will enable the State to resort to coercive measures

to ensure his production. For completeness, the Order directing his



                                                                20 of 21
release upon completing three years under the
Juvenile Justice Act
would also require to be and is set aside.
29.   The trial shall proceed on its own merits in accordance with law

without being prejudiced on merits by the instant Judgment. If the trial

results in conviction, benefit of set-off in relation to 3 years shall be

afforded to Respondent No.2.
30.   The Appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
..………………..................…..J.
                                              [PANKAJ MITHAL]




                                        ………………....................…..J.
                                        [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI
AUGUST 01, 2025




                                                                21 of 21