[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Anurag Vijaykumar Goel vs The State Of Maharashtra on 5 August, 2025
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2025 INSC 926
                                                                          Non-Reportable

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              Criminal Appeal No. 5277 of 2024

                            ANURAG VIJAYKUMAR GOEL
                                                                           …APPELLANT

                                                          VERSUS

                            STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ANR.
                                                                        …RESPONDENTS

                                                       J U D G M E NT

                            K. VINOD CHANDRAN, J.
Matrimonial acrimony has left the parties fighting in

                            courts for eight long years, after a brief conjugal life of one

                            year and nine months. The parties were both divorced once

                            and had attempted yet another experiment at marriage,

                            which too failed miserably. The appellant-husband asserts

                            that the 2nd respondent-wife (hereinafter referred to as the

                            respondent) got a fair settlement as alimony from the earlier

                            divorce; which, we find at the outset, is irrelevant in the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
adjudication of the present dispute. The appellant has an
   Date: 2025.08.05
   16:22:13 IST
   Reason:
Page 1 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
autistic child from the first marriage and the ownership of the

apartment he jointly owned with his first wife was released in

his favour in the best interest of the minor child. The parties

were residing in the said apartment, viz: A-52, Kalpataru

Habitat, Dr. S.S. Rao Road, Mumbai; which is one of the bone of

contentions in the dispute, when they became estranged.
2.      The appellant asserts that it was due to irreconcilable

disputes resulting in constant harassment by the wife that he

left the apartment and moved to Faridabad to stay with his

parents and his differently abled child, also forsaking his

lucrative employment in a private bank. The respondent on

the other hand alleges continued intimidation and domestic

violence at the hands of the appellant after which he

abandoned her and left her high and dry without any means

to survive. Only in desperation, she brought her parents to

stay with her in the flat of the appellant; her matrimonial

home.
3.      The disputes between the appellant and the respondent

resulted in a complaint Annexure P-3 filed inter-alia under
Page 2 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
Section 498-A
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for brevity,

‘
I.P.C
.’) leading to registration of an F.I.R. which resulted in the

launch of a criminal prosecution, to set aside which the

appellant approached the High Court. The Order declining

revisional jurisdiction under
Section 482
of the Criminal

Procedure Code, 1973 (for brevity, ‘
Cr.P.C
.) has led to the

present appeal. In the meanwhile, the respondent initiated a

criminal prosecution under the
Domestic Violence Act, 2005
against the appellant and his parents in May 2017, in which

month itself the appellant filed a petition for divorce in the

jurisdictional Court at Delhi. The Family Court, Saket, New

Delhi before which the application for divorce was pending

referred the matter for mediation to the Principal Counsellor.

A settlement agreement was reached, which is annexed

herewith as Annexure P-10, signed by both the parties on

01.09.2022.
4.      The first motion dated 03.09.2022 for divorce on mutual

consent under
Section 13B
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955

was moved by both the parties along with settlement entered
Page 3 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
into between them, which was recorded by the Family Court

on 14.09.2022. But before the second motion, the respondent-

wife resiled from the agreement which prompted the

appellant to approach the High Court of Bombay for quashing

the criminal proceedings pending before the Metropolitan

Magistrate, 15th Court at Sewree, Mumbai arising out of CR

No.63 of 2018 dated 19.04.2018. The principal ground raised

before the High Court was the appellant’s withdrawal from the

divorce on mutual consent, which according to the appellant

justified the quashing of the criminal proceedings. The

appellant also moved the High Court of Delhi alleging

contempt insofar as withdrawing from the consent and

refusing to follow it up on the second motion before the Family

Court. A learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court

punished the respondent for contempt which order was set

aside by the Division Bench on an appeal filed by the

respondent.
5.      We heard learned Senior Counsel, Smt. Madhavi Diwan

for the appellant and the respondent who appeared in person
Page 4 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
before us.
6.      Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellant

pointed out that the respondent had acted as per the

settlement and then resiled from it without reasonable cause;

obviously with the intention to coerce the appellant into a

better settlement. The appellant, due to the marital discord,

resigned his job to join his aged parents, who were unable to

look after his autistic child. As of now he does not have the

financial capacity he had when he was employed. The

appellant is still ready to act in accordance with the terms of

the settlement and convey the prime property; viz: the

apartment he owns in Bombay which by any reasonable

estimate would be valued at Rs.4 crores or in the alternative,

is ready to pay Rs.4 crores to the appellant who should then

vacate the premises. It is pointed out that along with the

apartment he owns two parking spaces in the apartment

complex, which also has the potential to generate income;

which would be conveyed along with the apartment to the

respondent. The appellant also gives up the claim as against
Page 5 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
the two cars in his name, now in the custody of the respondent.
7.      The respondent, however, is not agreeable to the offer

made by the appellant and vehemently opposes each and

every contention raised by the learned Senior Counsel. It is

pointed out that the respondent does not have a job and the

appellant is still lucratively employed. It is asserted from a

LinkedIn profile, that the appellant continues in his earlier

position with the Citi Bank and refers to the income tax returns

filed in proof of the income of the appellant. It is also

contended that the appellant has immovable properties worth

crores and is running two businesses which generate

sufficient income, while the respondent is in penury unable to

raise funds for her daily upkeep. The respondent also relied

on the various observations made by two Division Benches,

one of the High Court of Bombay and the other of the High

Court of Delhi which clearly brings out the attempt made by

the appellant to coerce the respondent into following up with

the application for divorce on mutual consent. It is also

alleged that the agreement was entered into under coercion,
Page 6 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
misrepresentation and fraud employed by the appellant on

the respondent.
8.        The appellant has now moved an application for divorce

on mutual consent under
Article 142
of the Constitution of

India based on the judgment of this Court in
Shilpa Sailesh v.

Varun Sreenivasan1
. The appellant pleads that the marriage

cannot be retrieved and it is best that the parties go their

respective ways and live a life of their choice. The appellant

is still agreeable to comply with the terms of the agreement.

The respondent submits that there are huge dues of

maintenance with respect to the apartment which puts the

respondent under threat of eviction. The respondent is not

agreeable to the earlier terms as per Annexure P10 and

prayed for permanent alimony of Rs.12 crores in addition to

the encumbrance-free ownership of the apartment.
9.        We are convinced that there is absolutely no way by

which there can be a reconciliation between the parties and it

would be futile on our part to attempt that, any further; which
1
(2023) 14 SCC 231
Page 7 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
persuades us to look into the facts coming out from the

records of the case. The marriage between the appellant and

the respondent was on 25.07.2015 and the first instance of a

complaint made by the respondent is Annexure P-2 dated

30.03.2017 which is a written complaint to the jurisdictional

police inter alia under
Section 498-A
of the I.P.C. The crime

was registered only as per Annexure P-3 on 19.04.2018. We

have looked at both Annexure P-2 and Annexure P-3 which

makes general allegations of abuse, threats, levelling of

allegations and accusations all relatable to marital disputes.
10.     Surprisingly, Annexure P-3, which is a statement on

which the crime was registered on 19.04.2018 speaks of the

appellant having left Bombay for Faridabad, on the pretext of

his father and son having fallen ill, on 06.04.2017. It is also

stated that despite fervent pleas through e-mail to return, the

appellant alleged schizophrenia on the respondent, accused

her of having beat his son and also raised apprehension of her

poisoning him. Allegations and counter allegations apart we

perceive nothing more than ordinary marital squabbles,
Page 8 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
skirmishes and bickerings blown out of proportion; often

leading to eternal strife, then estrangement and eventually

divorce, as has been the trajectory in this case too. The fact

remains that, in the statement to the police dated 19.04.2018

while the respondent speaks of the appellant having

abandoned her on 06.04.2017; even before that day, Ex.P2

complaint dated 30.03.2017 was made on similar allegations.

The additional reply filed to the application under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India by the respondent also states that

the appellant started quarrelling frequently from 2016

onwards with the respondent and pursuant to a fight on

28.3.2017, she was abandoned on 06.04.2017. It is also

admitted that she had been informed of the appellant’s travel

to Faridabad to look after his father and son, while the

respondent was working at her office; establishing her gainful

employment at the time of separation. It is after an year on

19.4.2018 that the FIR was registered on the statement of the

appellant.
11.     There were multiple proceedings pending against the
Page 9 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
appellant filed by the respondent, when the appellant

approached the Family Court at Mumbai for divorce, in which

the mediation was held and there was a settlement entered

into at Annexure P10. Annexure P10 dated 01.09.2022 spelt

out the clear terms on which the parties decided to separate

by way of a legal divorce on mutual consent. It specifically

referred to the various proceedings between the parties

which were agreed to be withdrawn after passing of the final

decree of divorce. It was also agreed that no further civil or

criminal cases would be filed against each other. The

agreement required a deed to be executed and registered by

the appellant gifting the apartment in Mumbai to the

respondent; prior to which, the respondent also agreed to

clear the outstanding loan with a bank, wherein the apartment

was mortgaged. A demand draft of Rs.9,91,408.41, being the

dues in the outstanding loan, was handed over to the

appellant on 14.09.2022 itself, on which date the first motion

for divorce on mutual consent was moved before the Family

Court and recorded. The respondent had agreed to pay the
Page 10 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
pending maintenance charges of the flat in which she was

residing with her parents upon which a deed was to be

drafted on mutual agreement gifting the property to the

respondent and registered.
12.     In paragraph 47 of the additional reply, the respondent

has admitted that the maintenance due to the Society with

respect to the apartment was not paid but not as a dilatory

tactic and more because of the appellant having not provided

the scanned copies of the documents relating to the

apartment and her parents having fallen ill. It is also the

specific contention of the respondent that she had requested

the appellant to deposit the maintenance by way of an e-mail

and promised to reimburse it at the time of registration of the

flat. Though the e-mail has not been produced along with the

additional reply, the appellant has stated that, after a surgery

the father of the appellant had been discharged on

13.01.2023, as is evident from Annexure A33. This clearly

indicates that the respondent was willing to go ahead with the

settlement even as on that date. The respondent then turned
Page 11 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
turtle to resile from the settlement on the ground that though

provision of residence was made, there was no provision

regarding future maintenance either on a monthly basis or a

lump sum amount towards permanent alimony; putting bare

the intention of the respondent in resiling from the agreement.

The conduct of the appellant also puts to peril her contention

that she was coerced into executing the settlement and the

allegation of misrepresentation and fraud are blandly raised

without any substantiation.
13.     We have already found that the allegations in the

statement of 19.04.2018 based on which the crime was

registered against the appellant inter-alia under Section 498-

A are common-place, banal and vague, without any specific

instances mentioned and filed one year after the admitted

separation of the couple. The High Court in the impugned

order has rejected the contention of the appellant to quash the

criminal proceedings with respect to the agreement having

been resiled from, at the second motion. We cannot fault the

findings of the High Court that the ground raised of the
Page 12 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
respondent-wife having withdrawn from her consent on the

second motion, is perfectly in exercise of the statutory right of

the respondent-wife. However, but for a casual reference to

the other grounds set out in the petition, the High Court has

not considered those at all. It was observed peremptorily that

the contrary statements of the witnesses should be tested in a

trial and there is no question of the veracity of the allegations

in the FIR or charge-sheet being considered, at this stage. This

cannot be upheld especially when the statement leading to

the charge-sheet does not have any grounds leading to an

allegation under
Section 498-A
of the IPC.
14.     We have already held, but for marital squabbles blown

out of proportion there is nothing substantial in the

complainant leading to the registration of crime under

Section 498-A. Reference can be usefully made to the trite

principle for exercise of powers under
Section 482
of Cr.P.C.

from the oft quoted decision in
State of Haryana v. Bhajan

Lal2
. Suffice to refer to one of the grounds
laid down by
the


2 1992 Supp. (1) SCC 335
Page 13 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
Constitution Bench, but with a caveat that there cannot be any

precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelized and

inflexible guideline or rigid formulae :
“(1) Where the allegations made in the first
         information report or the complaint, even if they
         are taken at their face value and accepted in
         their entirely do not prima facie constitute any
         offence or make out a case against the accused.”
15.     The      respondent   who   appeared    in   person     has

specifically taken us through the Division Bench order of the

High Court of Delhi which absolved her from the contempt

proceedings; especially the observation that the attempt of

initiating the contempt is only a coercion to participate in the

second motion for divorce. It was also found that an affidavit

of undertaking recorded at the first motion would crystallise

into an undertaking only if the terms are agreed upon and

divorce is consented to by both the parties at the second

motion. We are quite in agreement with the finding regarding

the second motion, as already observed. But on the question
Page 14 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
of the maintainability of contempt proceedings, we need not

say anything further, since it has been informed across the Bar

that there is an SLP filed from the said order and that in the

event of closure of all proceedings under
Article 142
, the

appellant would not pursue the same.
16.     The facts as detailed by us herein above and the

acrimonious relations between the parties for the last 8 years

without any let-up and the multiple legal proceedings

pending,        clearly    indicate   that   the   relationship    has

irretrievably broken down. We are convinced that the

invocation of
Article 142
is imperative
in
the above case
to do

complete justice to both the parties, on being satisfied that the

marriage has been rendered totally unworkable, emotionally

dead and beyond salvation as held in Shilpa Sailesh1. What

remains is only the terms on which the parties could go their

separate ways to live their lives independently, without the

yoke of a troubled marriage. The terms of the settlement

agreed upon according to us, does justice to the estranged

wife and does not unduly burden the husband.
Page 15 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
17.     As we noticed at the outset the alimony received by the

respondent on the dissolution of her first marriage is not a

relevant consideration. But the appellant’s responsibility to

look after an autistic child and his current financial status are

relevant considerations. The apartment bearing No.A-52,

Kalpataru Habitat, Dr. S.S. Rao Road, Mumbai is a very

valuable asset, along with the two car parking areas. The gift

of the said property by the appellant to the respondent would

reasonably take care of the respondent-wife even after

divorce. The respondent-wife is also a graduate Engineer with

a Post-Graduate qualification in Management and was

admittedly working, even at the time of the estrangement;
termed as abandonment by the respondent.
18.     As far as permanent alimony is concerned the

respondent had no such claim when entering into a

settlement. In fact, coercion, misrepresentation and fraud

were alleged by the appellant, which we found to be

unsubstantiated and remain in the realm of bland allegations.

The respondent had even at the time of recording of the first
Page 16 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
motion transferred an amount of about Rs.10 lacs by way of

demand draft to the appellant for settling the loan in which the

apartment was mortgaged. The appellant had settled the loan

and has also released the mortgage. The respondent’s

contention before the High Court of Delhi was that the

maintenance charges regarding the apartment have not been

paid to the Society and she is under threat of eviction; which

she repeated before us. The respondent had taken upon

herself the responsibility of paying the maintenance charges,

obviously since she was having possession & enjoyment of the

apartment after the estrangement of the couple, wherein she

is residing, even now, along with her parents.
19.     We see from the order of the High Court of Delhi that as

on 25.01.2025, there was a total due of Rs.25,90,701/- to the

Society being the maintenance charges. The appellant who

was present before us in-person has agreed to pay up the

entire maintenance charges as on date.
20.     Further claim of alimony is not justified, especially

looking at the appellant’s status which as of now is of an
Page 17 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
unemployed person. We have seen the Income Tax Returns of

the appellant as submitted by the respondent in her

additional reply to the application under
Article 142
which is

produced in the additional reply at Annexure A10. It clearly

indicates that the income of the appellant in 2013-2014 and

2015-2016were              respectively   Rs.2,54,60,137/-     and

Rs.2,46,28,969/- when he was employed with Citi Bank. In the

year 2018-2019, this has come down to Rs.50,34,120/- and in

2021-22 Rs.17,73,630/-. We find absolutely no reason to

disbelieve the appellant’s contention that he is no more in

employment with Citi Bank. We refuse to place any reliance

on the ‘LinkedIn’ profile as produced at Annexure A11 along

with the additional reply. We also reckon the fact that the

respondent-wife was gainfully employed and has the

educational qualifications as also the potential, by way of her

past experience in the field of information technology, to

maintain herself. The gift of the encumbrance free apartment

would suffice insofar as the compensation for separation. We

are quite conscious of the fact that the first wife of the
Page 18 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
appellant had released her half share in the apartment to the

appellant, in the best interest of their minor child, who is still

a minor and is also differently abled. We are convinced that it

is also in the minor’s best interest that the gift is made of the

property by his father to the second wife so as to effectuate

the divorce on mutual consent.
21.     We hence quash the criminal proceedings initiated as

CC No.136/PW/2018 pending before the Metropolitan

Magistrate, 15th Court at Sewree Mumbai for offence

punishable under Section 498-A, 406 r/w
Section 34
of the IPC.

We also allow the application filed under
Article 142
of the

Constitution of India dissolving the marriage between the

appellant and the second respondent finding the marriage to

have irretrievably broken down, in the best interest of both

the parties and for doing complete justice, but subject to the

following terms:
I)    The appellant shall deposit the entire arrears to

          the Society as on today and upto 1st September, 2025,

          with the Society as the maintenance charges for the
Page 19 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
apartment namely A-52, Kalpataru Habitat, Dr. S.S. Rao

          Road, Mumbai, alongwith the two car parking areas

          upon which the Society shall give a no-encumbrance

          certificate to the appellant as also issue the ownership

          certificate in his name.
II) Along with the above documents the appellant

          shall execute a gift deed on or before 30.08.2025 on

          any date informed by written notice; by the appellant

          to the respondent, with due acknowledgment taken.

          III) We have seen from the records that the draft of the

          deed was exchanged between the parties and both the

          appellant and the respondent No.2 shall be present

          before the jurisdictional Registrar for execution and

          registration on the date notified.
IV) If the respondent No.2 does not turn up on the said

          date, the jurisdictional Registrar shall acknowledge

          and record the presence of the appellant and in that

          event the appellant and the respondent shall be
Page 20 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
present on 15.09.2025 before the Registrar for

          execution of the deed.
V) If the appellant does not comply with the above,

          then the order of divorce shall not come into effect.
However, if the respondent does not present herself on

          the date notified by the appellant and on such failure

          even on the date specified by us, the divorce shall

          come into effect.
VI) All proceedings, civil and criminal, initiated by the

          parties to the marriage now dissolved, in relation to or

          arising out of such marriage, shall stand closed. There

          shall also be no further proceedings, both civil and

          criminal instituted, by the respective parties, on any

          aspect arising out of in relation to the marriage.
22.     The Criminal Appeal stands allowed along with the

application under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India

dissolving the marriage between the appellant and the

second respondent on the ground of irretrievable break
Page 21 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024
down, subject to the terms and conditions specified above. All

proceedings pending between the parties shall stand closed

and there shall be no further proceedings initiated by either

parties, relatable to their marriage, which stands dissolved by

this judgment, on the terms and conditions being complied

with.
23.     Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.
………….……………………. J.
(B.R. GAVAI)



                                  ………….……………………. J.
(K. VINOD CHANDRAN)



                                  ………….……………………. J.
(N. V. ANJARIA)



NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 05, 2025.
Page 22 of 22
Crl. A. No. 5277 of 2024