[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Aasif @ Pasha vs The State Of U.P on 6 August, 2025
1

                                                                                                   REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 944
                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.3409/2025
                                   (@SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO.11361/2025


        AASIF @ PASHA                                                                      Appellant(s)

                                                             VERSUS


        THE STATE OF U.P. & ORS.                                                           Respondent(s)

                                                           O R D E R
1.                  Leave granted.
2.                  The   impugned    Order   is    one       more    from   the    High   Court    of

        Judicature at Allahabad with which we are disappointed.
3.                  This petition arises from the order passed by the High Court

        of               Judicature    at     Allahabad    dated        29-5-2025    in    Criminal   Appeal

        No.8689/2024                  by    which   the    High       Court   declined     to   suspend    the

        substantive order of sentence passed by the Trial Court.
4.                  It appears from the materials on record that the appellant was

        put to trial in the Court of 2nd Additional Sessions Judge/Special

        Judge
(POCSO Act
), Meerut, Uttar Pradesh in Protection of Children

        from Sexual Offences Act (POCSO) Case No.270/2016 for the offence

        punishable under
Sections 7
&
8
respectively of the
POCSO Act
,

        Sections 354, 354Kha, 323 and 504 respectively of the
Indian Penal

        Code
and Section 3(1)(10) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled

        Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
Signature Not Verified
Act, 1989.
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.08.07
5.
   18:09:10 IST
   Reason:                  At the end of the trial, the appellant stood convicted.
6.                  He was sentenced to undergo one year rigorous imprisonment

        with fine of Rs.3000/- for the offence punishable under
Section 354
2
IPC for the offence under
Sections 7
and
8
respectively of the

POCSO, he came to be sentenced to undergo 4 years of RI with fine

of Rs.4,000/- and for the offence under the SC/AT Atrocities Act,

he came to be sentenced to undergo 4 years of RI with fine of

Rs.5,000/-. The Trial Court ordered that all the sentences shall

run concurrently.
7.     Being dissatisfied with the Judgment and order of conviction

passed by the Trial Court, the appellant went in appeal before the

High   Court.   His   Criminal   Appeal   No.8689/2024   is   awaiting   final

hearing. In the said appeal, the appellant preferred an application

under Section 389 of the Code seeking suspension of the substantive

order of sentence passed by the Trial Court.
8.     The High Court declined to suspend the substantive order of

sentence observing as under:-
“21. Having heard the learned counsel for applicant/appellant,
      the learned A.G.A. for State-opposite party-1, upon perusal of
      material brought on record, evidence, nature and gravity of
      offence as well as complicity of applicant/appellant, accusation
      made, this court finds that the objections raised by the learned
      AGA in opposition to this application for suspension of sentence
      could   not   be   dislodged   by   the  learned   counsel   for
      applicant/appellant with reference to the record at this stage,
      therefore, irrespective of the varied submissions urged by the
      learned counsel for applicant/appellant in support of this
      application for suspension of sentence and also considering the
      fact that the applicant/appellant has been held to be guilty of
      committing the offence which is not only immoral but also
      heinous, therefore, this Court does not find any good or
      sufficient ground so as to enlarge the applicant/appellant on
      bail during the pendency of present appeal.”
9.     In such circumstances, referred to above, the appellant is

here before this Court with the present petition.
10.    There are two types of sentence that the Trial Court can

impose depending on the nature of the offence.                Some orders of
3
sentence are for a fixed term, unlike the order of sentence of life

imprisonment.
11.   The case in hand is one of a fixed term of sentence. The

maximum punishment that has been imposed is 4 years.
12.   Way back in 1999, this Court in
“Bhagwan Rama Shinde Gosai

and Others v. State of Gujarat”
reported in (1999) 4 SCC 421 stated

that when a convicted person is sentenced to a fixed period of

sentence and when he files an appeal under any statutory right,

suspension of sentence should be considered by the Appellate Court

liberally unless there are exceptional circumstances.
13.   Of    course,   if     there   is   any    statutory     restriction    against

suspension of sentence, it is a different matter.
14.   Similarly,      when     the   sentence      is   life     imprisonment,    the

consideration for suspension of sentence could be of a different

approach.
15.   But if for any reason the sentence of a limited duration

cannot be suspended, every endeavour should be made to dispose of

the appeal on merits, more so when a motion for expeditious hearing

of the appeal is made in such cases.
16.   This Court said in so many words that otherwise the very

valuable right of the appellant would be an exercise in futility

by afflux of time.
17.   When the Appellate Court finds that due to practical reasons,

such appeals cannot be disposed of expeditiously, the Appellate

Court must show special concern in the matter of suspending the

sentence so as to make the appeal right, meaningful and effective.

At    the   same   time,      the    appellate     courts      can   impose   similar
4
conditions when appeal is granted.
18.
In
“Omprakash Sahni vs. Jai Shankar Chaudhary and Anr.
(2023)

6 SCC 123, this Court while considering the scope of 389
CrPC
in

cases of life imprisonment held as under:-
30.
In
Kishori Lal v. Rupa [Kishori Lal
v. Rupa, (2004) 7 SCC
      638 : 2004 SCC (Cri) 2021], this Court has indicated the
      factors that require to be considered by the courts while
      granting benefit under Section 389CrPC in cases involving
      serious offences like murder, etc. Thus, it is useful to refer
      to the observations made therein, which are as follows : (SCC
      pp. 639-40, paras 4-6)

         “4. Section 389 of the Code deals with suspension of
         execution of sentence pending the appeal and release of
         the appellant on bail. There is a distinction between
         bail and suspension of sentence. One of the essential
         ingredients of Section 389 is the requirement for the
         appellate court to record reasons in writing for
         ordering suspension of execution of the sentence or
         order appealed against. If he is in confinement, the
         said court can direct that he be released on bail or on
         his own bond. The requirement of recording reasons in
         writing clearly indicates that there has to be careful
         consideration of the relevant aspects and the order
         directing suspension of sentence and grant of bail
         should not be passed as a matter of routine.
5. The appellate court is duty-bound to objectively
         assess the matter and to record reasons for the
         conclusion   that  the   case  warrants  suspension  of
         execution of sentence and grant of bail. In the instant
         case, the only factor which seems to have weighed with
         the High Court for directing suspension of sentence and
         grant of bail is the absence of allegation of misuse of
         liberty during the earlier period when the accused-
respondents were on bail.
6. The mere fact that during the trial, they were
         granted bail and there was no allegation of misuse of
         liberty, is really not of much significance. The effect
         of bail granted during trial loses significance when on
         completion of trial, the accused persons have been found
         guilty. The mere fact that during the period when the
         accused persons were on bail during trial there was no
         misuse of liberties, does not per se warrant suspension
         of execution of sentence and grant of bail. What really
         was necessary to be considered by the High Court is
         whether reasons existed to suspend the execution of
         sentence and thereafter grant bail. The High Court does
         not seem to have kept the correct principle in view.”
5
31.
In
Vijay Kumar v. Narendra [Vijay Kumar
v. Narendra, (2002)
      9 SCC 364 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 1195] and Ramji Prasad v. Rattan
      Kumar Jaiswal [Ramji Prasad v. Rattan Kumar Jaiswal, (2002) 9
      SCC 366 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 1197] , it was held by this Court that
      in cases involving conviction under Section 302IPC, it is only
      in exceptional cases that the benefit of suspension of sentence
      can be granted.
In
Vijay Kumar [Vijay Kumar v. Narendra
, (2002)
      9 SCC 364 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 1195], it was held that in
      considering the prayer for bail in a case involving a serious
      offence like murder punishable under Section 302IPC, the court
      should consider the relevant factors like the nature of
      accusation made against the accused, the manner in which the
      crime is alleged to have been committed, the gravity of the
      offence, and the desirability of releasing the accused on bail
      after they have been convicted for committing the serious
      offence of murder.
32. The aforesaid view is reiterated by this Court in Vasant
      Tukaram Pawar v. State of Maharashtra [Vasant Tukaram Pawar v.
      State of Maharashtra, (2005) 5 SCC 281 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 1052]
      and Gomti v. Thakurdas [Gomti v. Thakurdas, (2007) 11 SCC 160 :
(2008) 1 SCC (Cri) 644].
33. Bearing in mind the aforesaid principles of law, the
      endeavour on the part of the court, therefore, should be to see
      as to whether the case presented by the prosecution and
      accepted by the trial court can be said to be a case in which,
      ultimately the convict stands for fair chances of acquittal. If
      the answer to the abovesaid question is to be in the
      affirmative, as a necessary corollary, we shall have to say
      that, if ultimately the convict appears to be entitled to have
      an acquittal at the hands of this Court, he should not be kept
      behind the bars for a pretty long time till the conclusion of
      the appeal, which usually takes very long for decision and
      disposal. However, while undertaking the exercise to ascertain
      whether the convict has fair chances of acquittal, what is to
      be looked into is something palpable. To put it in other words,
      something which is very apparent or gross on the face of the
      record, on the basis of which, the court can arrive at a prima
      facie satisfaction that the conviction may not be sustainable.
      The appellate court should not reappreciate the evidence at the
      stage of
Section 389
CrPC and try to pick up a few lacunae or
      loopholes here or there in the case of the prosecution. Such
      would not be a correct approach.”
19.   It   is   unfortunate   that   the   High   Court   while   passing   the

impugned order failed to take into consideration the well-settled

principles of law governing the plea of suspension of sentence on

fixed term is concerned. What the High Court did was to reiterate

the entire case of the prosecution and the oral evidence which has
6
come on record.
20.    That is not the correct approach.
21.    The High Court should have been mindful of the fact that the

appeal is of the year 2024. Appeal of 2024 is not likely to be

taken up in near future.           Ultimately, if 4 years are to elapse in

jail the same would render the appeal infructuous and that would be

travesty of justice.
22.    In such circumstances, referred to above, we set aside the

impugned order and remand the matter to the High Court for fresh

consideration of the plea of the appellant – herein for suspension

of the substantive order of sentence keeping in mind the principles

of law as explained by us aforesaid. The High Court shall keep in

mind that the sentence is for a fixed term, i.e. 4 years and it is

only    if   there   are   any   compelling    circumstances     on   record   to

indicate that the release of the appellant would not be in public

interest that the Court may order accordingly.
23.    We are once again constrained to observe that such errors

creep in at the level of High Court and only because the well-

settled principles of law on the subject are not applied correctly.

It    is   very   important   to    first   look   into   the   subject-matter.

Thereafter the court should look into the issue involved. In the

last the court should look into the plea of the litigant and then

proceed to apply the correct principles of law.
24.    With the aforesaid, the Appeal stands disposed of.
25.    The High Court shall re-hear the application filed by the

appellant – herein afresh at the earliest and pass an appropriate

order within 15 days from today.
7
26.   Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
…………………………………………J
                                             (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                             …………………………………………J
                                             (R. MAHADEVAN)
NEW DELHI
6TH AUGUST, 2025.