[Cites
36
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Xxx vs The Union Of India on 7 August, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 943
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                              WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 699 OF 2025



     XXX                                                                     … PETITIONER

                                                     VS.

     THE UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS                                             … RESPONDENTS




                                             JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
PREFACE
1.           A deeply anguished Judge of the Allahabad High Court1 has petitioned this

                  Court for enforcement of his Fundamental Rights under
Articles 14
and
21
of

                  the Constitution of India by invoking his Fundamental Right to constitutional

                  remedy guaranteed by
Article 32
thereof.
2.           Lest any observation made by us denies the petitioner a level playing field in

                  any future proceedings that he might face, we would tread the path cautiously

                  and refer to, very briefly, only the bare facts leading to presentation of this

                  writ petition as well as deal with only such of the several contentions, as
Signature Not Verified
urged, to the extent the same are absolutely necessary for our decision.
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2025.08.07
17:13:58 IST
Reason:
1
Petitioner
1
FACTS
3.   Petitioner finds himself in an unsavoury situation. While the Petitioner was a

         Judge of the Delhi High Court, there was an incident of fire at a store-room in

         the bungalow premises allotted to him. On the date of the incident, the

         Petitioner was away from home. In the process of dousing the fire, certain

         burnt currency notes were discovered in the store-room. Such discovery gave

         rise to suspicion that the Petitioner may not have followed the universally

         accepted values of judicial life including those included in the Restatement of

         Values of Judicial Life dated 31st October, 1997; consequently, his conduct fell

         for scrutiny. Without wasting time, the “In-house Procedure” devised by the

         Supreme Court in its Full Court meeting dated 15th December, 19992 was set

         in motion. The Chief Justice of the Delhi High Court 3 vide letter dated 21st

         March, 2025 sought a response from the Petitioner. In his response dated 22nd

         March, 2025, the Petitioner’s defence, inter alia, was that no cash was ever

         placed in the store-room by him or his family members and he strongly

         denounced the suggestion that the cash belonged to him or his family

         members. Petitioner also stated that the same must have been planted in the

         store-room to frame him. However, the Petitioner neither denied the incident

         of fire nor discovery of the burnt currency notes. Upon receipt of the response,

         the same was considered. Inter alia, on 22nd March, 2025, a three-member

         Committee4 was constituted by the Chief Justice of India5. A press release of
2
PROCEDURE
3
CJ, DHC
4
COMMITTEE
5
CJI
2
even date named the members of the COMMITTEE, and also disclosed that the

             CJ, DHC was asked not to assign judicial work to the Petitioner. At or about

             the   same   time,   presumably     on   the   orders   of   the   CJI,   certain

             documents/photographs/video footage linked to the fire incident and

             discovery of currency notes had been placed in the public domain. On 24 th

             March, 2025, the Collegium of the Supreme Court recommended the

             Petitioner’s repatriation to his parent High Court. Immediately thereafter, the

             COMMITTEE set out to accomplish the task assigned to it. The fire ravaged store-

             room was inspected. Versions of several witnesses having some knowledge of

             and/or relation with the incident of fire/discovery of burnt currency notes were

             recorded by the COMMITTEE. Petitioner was furnished the versions of the

             witnesses. Thereafter, he was afforded an opportunity to state his case. An

             inquiry report6 dated 3rd May, 2025 of the COMMITTEE followed. On the basis of

             appreciation of the materials collected in course of the inquiry, the COMMITTEE

             recorded in the REPORT of having found sufficient substance in the allegations

             raised in the letter dated 22nd March, 2025 of the CJI. It was recorded by the

             COMMITTEE that misconduct found proved is serious enough to call for initiation

             of proceedings for removal of the Petitioner from his office. Vide letter dated

             4th May, 2025, the CJI gave the Petitioner the option to resign or to seek

             voluntary retirement within 6th May, 2025, failing which the competent

             authorities would be intimated to initiate action for removal. Petitioner

             responded on 6th May, 2025 seeking reconsideration of the letter dated 4th

             May, 2025 and more time to submit a written representation upon thorough
6
REPORT
3
review of the REPORT. At the same time, the Petitioner further expressed his

     inability to either resign or seek voluntary retirement in the event his prayers

     for grant of additional time and reconsideration were not allowed. According

     to the Petitioner, acceptance of such advice could imply acquiescence to a

     process and outcome that he considered fundamentally unjust. Petitioner also

     urged that strict confidentiality be maintained by all stakeholders. The

     prayers, apparently, were not granted and a further press release of 8th May,

     2025 came to be issued recording that in terms of the PROCEDURE, the CJI had

     written to the nation’s Hon’ble President and Hon’ble Prime Minister and

     forwarded the REPORT of the COMMITTEE and the response of the Petitioner dated

     6th May, 2025. What exactly were the contents of the CJI’s letter is, however,

     unknown to the Petitioner as well as us.
4.   In the prevailing circumstances, the Petitioner presented this writ petition on

     17th July, 2025, claiming the following relief from the Court:
a. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction declaring Paragraphs 5(b) and
        7 of In-House Procedure dated 15.12.1999 to the extent that it enables the
        In-House Committee to inquire and comment on the existence of ‘serious
        misconduct warranting removal’ and the Hon’ble CJI to intimate the same
        to the Hon’ble President and the Hon’ble Prime Minister for initiating
        proceedings for removal and other consequential action as being
        unconstitutional and ultra vires.
b. Issue an appropriate writ, order, or direction declaring the intimation by
        the Hon’ble CJI to the Hon’ble President and the Hon’ble Prime Minister (as
        referred to in the Press Release dated 08.05.2025) for initiation of action
        for removal as being unconstitutional and ultra vires art 124 and 218 and
        quash the same.
c. Issue an appropriate writ, order, or direction to quash and set aside the
        Final Report dated 03.05.2025 submitted by the Committee, and all
        consequential actions taken pursuant to the same.
d. Pass such other order(s) as this Hon’ble Court may deem fit in the facts
        and circumstances of the case.
4
ARGUMENTS FOR THE PETITIONER
5.   Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned senior counsel, duly assisted by other senior counsel,

     advanced arguments at length in support of the writ petition. A brief note of

     submissions was also placed by Mr. Sibal before the Court, which duly

     captures the points of challenge and the contentions in support of the relief

     claimed.
6.   Mr. Sibal commenced his arguments by submitting that “it is a matter of

     moment”.
7.   According to Mr. Sibal, the Petitioner is aggrieved by the PROCEDURE to the

     extent it permits the Committee to opine as to whether the misconduct calls

     for initiation of proceedings for removal. He is also aggrieved because the

     PROCEDURE permits the CJI to intimate the President and the Prime Minister

     that the misconduct warrants initiation of proceedings for removal.
8.   In course of his arguments, Mr. Sibal outlined what the Petitioner was not

     challenging. While fairly admitting that the PROCEDURE itself is a valid in-house

     mechanism contemplated for the purpose of discipline by self-regulation by

     the higher judiciary, Mr. Sibal laid challenge to paragraphs 5(b) and 7 (ii)

     thereof on the ground that these are ultra vires the Constitution violating
Articles 124
and
218
thereof. It was also fairly admitted that even though the

     COMMITTEE’S remit was to conduct a fact-finding exercise, the subsequent

     recommendation by the COMMITTEE regarding the necessity to initiate

     proceedings for removal of a Judge is unconstitutional.
9.   Moving ahead, Mr. Sibal accepted that he did not see any wrong in the CJI in

     advising the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court not to allocate judicial
5
work to the Judge under probe or the CJI’s authority to forward the report of

            the Committee to the President and the Prime Minister along with intimation

            of the advice to the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court not to allocate

            judicial work to the concerned Judge.
10. While, however, confining the constitutional challenge to the validity of

            paragraphs 5(b) and 7 (ii) of the PROCEDURE, Mr. Sibal contended that
Articles

            124
and
218
of the Constitution are the only provisions under which a Judge

            of a High Court may be removed. In exercise of the powers under
Article

            124(5)
, the Parliament has enacted the Judges (Inquiry) Act, 19687. He

            argued that the constitutional provisions read with the
Inquiry Act
constitute

            a complete and comprehensive code which occupies the field of the process

            for removal.
11. Continuing further, Mr. Sibal stressed that the tenure of a High Court Judge is

            protected by the Constitution, and such a Judge is subject to the Constitution

            and the Constitution alone. Even Parliament is not permitted to discuss the

            conduct of any Judge either of the Supreme Court or of the High Courts except

            when a MOTION for presenting an address is admitted. Hence, any

            procedure/process for removal, other than that provided for under
Article 124
,

            would be unconstitutional. As per the constitutional scheme, removal of a

            Judge from office is subject to the Judge being found guilty of proved

            misbehaviour or incapacity in an inquiry conducted under the
Inquiry Act
;

            however, the PROCEDURE to the extent it could trigger proceedings for removal,
7
Inquiry Act
, hereafter
6
without being bound by the constitutional rigours, is liable to be held ultra

    vires.
12. Mr. Sibal further argued that the removal process, set in motion by the

    PROCEDURE with the Committee being empowered to make recommendation,

    lacks constitutional sanction or contemplation. As against the safeguards

    provided in the
Inquiry Act
, such as framing of charges, presentation of

    evidence in support of the charge(s), statement of defence, cross-examination

    of witnesses, strict proof, etc. – all of which are compliant with the overarching

    mandate of
Article 14
– the PROCEDURE contemplates such procedure as may

    be appropriate in the facts of a case. The PROCEDURE does not obligate the

    Committee to follow the codified or defined rules of evidence and permits the

    Committee to adopt such procedure as necessary, potentially leading to

    holding a Judge guilty, not just of serious misconduct but also calling for his

    removal. Such process, based only on a preliminary or prima facie view, where

    the Judge is denied the procedural safeguards which are otherwise available

    in consonance with due process, is wholly arbitrary and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution.
13. The report of the COMMITTEE, Mr. Sibal further contended, could only be used

    by the CJI to take corrective measures within his domain. It cannot possibly

    interfere with the process envisaged under
Article 124.
Separation of powers

    that is in-built in the Constitution demands that the judicial institution remains

    clear of the constitutional process undertaken for removal.
14. Finally, Mr. Sibal sought to again impress upon us that the PROCEDURE to the

    extent it permits the CJI to trigger the initiation of removal process by the
7
Parliament through his recommendation is bound to have its own impact.
Though termed as a recommendation or advice, such recommendation/advice

          from a high constitutional functionary such as the CJI would clearly be far

          more than being merely persuasive and is bound to influence the decision

          making and evaluation process. It would act as a virtual death knell for a

          Judge, particularly based on a prima facie evaluation of the allegations. Such

          process would also circumvent the constitutionally prescribed mechanisms.
15. In any case, Mr. Sibal argued, uploading of the photographs/video footage on

          the website of the Supreme Court together with the REPORT of the COMMITTEE

          has the effect of convicting the Petitioner even before the procedure under
Article 124
has been initiated. Such being the state of affairs, the powers of

          the CJI cannot extend to making such a recommendation. Hence, paragraphs

          5(b) and 7(ii) of the PROCEDURE need to be set aside not only being violative

          of the constitutional scheme for removal of Judges but also because they

          deprive the Petitioner of equal protection of the laws, thereby infringing his

          valuable right under
Article 14
of the Constitution.
16. Having completed his address on the constitutional challenge, Mr. Sibal placed

          reliance on the decisions of this Court in Indira Jaising v. Supreme Court

          of
India8 and Sahara India v. SEBI9
, to contend that the allegations against

          the Petitioner and the correspondence exchanged by and between him and

          the CJI as well as the evidence (photographs/video footage), ought not to

          have been put in the public domain. By so doing, not only has the good
8
(2003) 5 SCC 494
9
(2012) 10 SCC 603
8
reputation of the Petitioner as a Judge (which he built by years of dedicated

          work) been tarnished, the public perception based on viewing of such evidence

          led to an exercise which has held the Petitioner guilty even before an inquiry

          according to fair procedure could commence and he being afforded the

          opportunity to raise an effective defence. Highly critical of uploading of the

          photographs/video footage on the website of this Court, Mr. Sibal contended

          that the Petitioner’s precious right under
Article 21
stood abrogated right from

          the inception.
17. Relying heavily on the decision of the Constitution Bench in Sub-Committee

          on Judicial Accountability v. Union of India10, Mr. Sibal argued that the

          powers of the CJI in case of removal of a High Court Judge stand restricted.

          It was pointed out that as the CJI has no disciplinary control over Judges of

          the High Courts, the procedure for removal is not akin to removal of a

          delinquent employee. The CJI, it was contended, cannot have an authoritative

          say or partake in the process, which is otherwise the preserve of the

          Parliament.
18. Referring to the decision in
C. Ravichandran Iyer v. Justice A.M.

          Bhattacharjee11, Mr. Sibal
urged that the observations made therein were

          only intended to fill the ‘yawning gap between proved misbehaviour and bad

          conduct inconsistent with the high office’. The PROCEDURE, however, reaches

          far and beyond filling the gap and, in fact, attempts to kick-start the process

          under
Article 124(5)
, which is the sole prerogative of the Parliament.
10
(1991) 4 SCC 699
11
(1995) 5 SCC 457
9
19. While concluding, Mr. Sibal prayed that paragraphs 5(b) and 7(ii) of the

           PROCEDURE be declared ultra vires. He also prayed for a declaration that none

           including the Parliament be influenced either by the REPORT of the COMMITTEE

           or the recommendation/advice of the CJI.
20. We heard Mr. Rohatgi, learned senior counsel assisting Mr. Sibal, submit at

           the very end that the Petitioner ought to have been given an opportunity of

           personal hearing by the CJI before making his recommendation/tendering his

           advice to the President and the Prime Minister. To support such submission,

           he referred to a similar opportunity that was extended by the then CJI to a

           Judge of the Calcutta High Court who also went through the same PROCEDURE.

           Non-grant of such opportunity, according to him, breached principles of

           equality before law.
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE COURT
21. Although the challenge read with the prayers in the writ petition relate to the

           constitutionality of the PROCEDURE and the legality of the inquiry conducted by

           the COMMITTEE together with its REPORT, as part of the PROCEDURE, Mr. Sibal

           rightly did not argue the second point12 and restricted his arguments on the

           point of constitutionality.
22. It is placed on record that the Petitioner not having objected to uploading of

           the photographs/video footage at the first available opportunity and having

           participated in the inquiry conducted by the COMMITTEE without raising any

           demur, we posed a query: why should we entertain the writ petition at such
12
we need not spell out the reasons therefor in the judgment
10
a belated stage, notwithstanding the challenge laid on the constitutional

           aspect,    particularly when the inquiry had culminated in submission of the

           REPORT by the COMMITTEE to the CJI who, in turn, had written to the President

           and the Prime Minister while forwarding the REPORT together with the

           Petitioner’s response?
23. In answer thereto, Mr. Sibal submitted that since a constitutional challenge

           was being raised by the Petitioner and law being settled that there could be

           no waiver of a Fundamental Right, the Court may not decline interference and

           decide the writ petition based on the points argued by him.
24. During the course of hearing, we had also put it across to Mr. Sibal whether

           the Judges (Protection) Act, 198513 would have any application in the instant

           case. Faced with the Protection Act, Mr. Sibal sought to counter it by

           submitting two points. First, that no law as is referred to in sub-section (2) of
Section 3
- either the Constitution or any statutory enactment - confers such

           power on the Supreme Court; hence the Protection Act has no application.

           Secondly,     since   sub-section   (2)   of
Section   3
includes   Central

           Government/State Government, it would then mean that these authorities

           could also initiate proceedings for removal of a High Court Judge which would

           be wholly unconstitutional and could not have been the intention of the

           Parliament.
25. Upon hearing Mr. Sibal and Mr. Rohatgi, we did not consider it necessary to

           issue notice to the respondents and reserved judgment.
13
Protection Act
11
QUESTIONS
26. Based on Mr. Sibal’s arguments as well as the facts on record, the following

    substantial questions of law arise for an answer:
I.     Should the writ petition be entertained at all having regard to the

            conduct of the Petitioner?
II.    Does the PROCEDURE have legal sanction?
III.   Is an inquiry and the consequent report in terms of the PROCEDURE

            (which could be unfavourable to the Judge under probe) a parallel and

            extra-constitutional mechanism?
IV.    Does paragraph 5(b) of the PROCEDURE foul
Article 124
and
Article 125
read with
Articles 217
and
218
of the Constitution or abrogate any

            Fundamental Right of a Judge of a High Court?
V.     Did the CJI/the COMMITTEE constituted by the CJI act in terms of the

            PROCEDURE or in deviation thereof?
VI.    Is the requirement of paragraph 7(ii) of the PROCEDURE obliging the CJI

            to forward the report of the Committee to the President and the Prime

            Minister unconstitutional?
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS WITH REASONS
27. Appreciating the merits of the arguments advanced on behalf of the Petitioner

    and expressing our opinion ought to be preceded by an examination of the

    provisions in the Constitution relating to removal of a Judge of a High Court

    from office, the law in terms whereof inquiry has to be held, the genesis of

    the PROCEDURE, what this PROCEDURE is all about, the role of the CJI, the nature
12
of inquiry the PROCEDURE contemplates, what impact does such inquiry have

    on a Judge of a High Court whose conduct is under probe, and other related

    issues including the aspect of applicability of the Protection Act. This would

    also necessarily require us to take note of the precedents in the field which

    find place in the compilation of judgments handed over by Mr. Sibal. In our

    view, such an exercise would significantly facilitate and aid answering the

    above questions effectively and thereby enable us to complete the task at

    hand appropriately.
CONSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS AND THE INQUIRY ACT
28. That a Judge of a High Court cannot be removed from office except on the

    ground of proved misbehaviour or proved incapacity admits of no doubt. The

    provisions relatable to removal of a Judge of a High Court from office are

    traceable to
Articles 217
and
218
read with
Article 124.
Clauses (4) and (5)

    of
Article 124
read as follows:
124. Establishment and constitution of Supreme Court
         …
         (4) A Judge of the Supreme Court shall not be removed from his office
         except by an order of the President passed after an address by each
         House of Parliament supported by a majority of the total membership of
         that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of the members
         of that House present and voting has been presented to the President in
         the same session for such removal on the ground of proved misbehaviour
         or incapacity.
(5) Parliament may by law regulate the procedure for the presentation of
         an address and for the investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or
         incapacity of a Judge under clause (4).
…
29.
Articles 217 (to the extent relevant)
and
218
provide:
13
217. Appointment and conditions of the office of a Judge of a High
         Court
         (1) Every Judge of a High Court shall be appointed by the President by
         warrant under his hand and seal after consultation with the Chief Justice of
         India, the Governor of the State, and, in the case of appointment of a Judge
         other than the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court, and shall
         hold office, in the case of an additional or acting Judge, as provided in
article
         224
, and in any other case, until he attains the age of sixty-two years:
Provided that—
(a)    ***
(b)    a Judge may be removed from his office by the President in the
                manner provided in clause (4) of
article 124
for the removal of a Judge
                of the Supreme Court;
(c)    ***
         (2)    ***
         (3)    ***
218. Application of certain provision relating to Supreme Court to
         High Courts
         The provisions of clauses (4) and (5) of
article 124
shall apply in relation to
         a High Court as they apply in relation to the Supreme Court with the
         substitution of references to the High Court for references to the Supreme
         Court.
30. The law that is referred to in clause (5) of
Article 124
is the
Inquiry Act
.
31. The Constitution itself does not prescribe the procedure for the presentation

    of an address and for investigation and proof of the misbehaviour or incapacity

    of a Judge but leaves it for the Parliament to regulate the same by law. In

    exercise of such powers, as discussed above, the Parliament enacted the
Inquiry Act
.
The Inquiry Act
, inter alia, provides for constitution of a

    committee which is to conduct an investigation/inquiry into the allegation of

    misbehaviour or incapacity levelled against the Judge. The procedure

    enumerated in the
Inquiry Act
is in consonance with the principles of natural

    justice in that, formal charges are framed, the Judge is provided with the

    supporting material for each charge, opportunity is extended to cross-examine
14
witnesses as well as to present his defence. The committee has the same

    powers as that of a civil court under
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908, for

    summoning and enforcing the attendance of a person, examining a person on

    oath, requiring discovery and production of documents, receiving evidence on

    oath, issuing a commission for examination of witnesses or documents, and

    for all such other matters as may be prescribed. It is imperative to note that

    if the Judge is not found guilty of any charge(s) by the committee, then the

    pending MOTION in the House or Houses of Parliament will not be proceeded

    with. Thus, it marks the end of the proceedings.
32. The process for impeachment of a Judge, however, is very rigid at all levels –

    starting with a MOTION in the House, followed by an investigation/inquiry

    conducted by a committee comprising of persons of high calibre, adherence

    to fair procedure, then the necessity of approval by a majority of the Houses

    and finally the approval by the President whereafter a Judge can be removed

    from office by impeachment.
33. These provisions apart, there are two other similarly worded articles in the

    Constitution which, though not directly related to removal of a Judge of a High

    Court, impose restrictions on discussions in the Parliament/State Legislatures

    with respect to the conduct of a Judge of a High Court. They are
Articles 121
and
211.
34. Mr. Sibal is right in his contention that apart from proviso (b) of clause (1) of
Article 217
and
Article 218
read with clauses (4) and (5) of
Article 124
, there

    is no other provision in the Constitution relating to removal of a Judge of a

    High Court from his office. He is also right in contending that
Article 121
even
15
bars the Parliament to discuss the conduct of a Judge of a High Court except

          in the stated situation. Similar is the restriction imposed by
Article 211.
35. A reading of the Constituent Assembly debates does not reveal any discussion

          or debate on any proposed measure, other than removal by the Parliament in

          the manner constitutionally ordained, if the conduct of a Judge of a High Court

          amounts to misbehaviour but does not amount to such misbehaviour as would

          warrant the extreme measure of removal from office. The framers of the

          Constitution, in their wisdom, possibly might have thought that having regard

          to the status of a Judge, being a high constitutional functionary in whom the

          people would repose trust and faith for rendering justice, only such individuals

          possessing the highest standards of integrity and moral character, apart from

          legal acumen, would be considered for appointment to the judicial office; yet,

          should there be an exceptional situation calling for removal of a Judge from

          office and to ensure that the Constitution is not incomplete without an in-built

          mechanism      for   a   disciplinary   measure,   provisions   for   removal   (by

          impeachment) were incorporated. Indeed, it took Parliament long 18

          (eighteen) years after the advent of the Constitution to enact the law wherefor

          it was empowered by clause (5) of
Article 124.
It is also noteworthy that the

          first process of removal of a Judge by impeachment did not see the light of

          the day till the early nineties of the last century, i.e., almost 4 (four) decades

          after the people proclaimed India as a sovereign democratic republic14. It does

          suggest that the framers of the Constitution were not amiss in thinking that

          an exceptional case for disciplining a Judge might seldom arise.
14
on 26th November, 1949
16
36. Nonetheless, times have changed and changed drastically. With the process

    of appointment becoming executive-centric, fissures in the system became

    apparent; aberrations of Judges started attracting notice. However, possibly

    because of the cumbersome process that a process for removal by

    impeachment involves, many a Judge could have escaped unscathed without

    such aberration being brought in the public domain.
37. There have, however, been certain reported instances since the eighties of

    the last century of Judges having indulged in (perceived) misbehaviour leading

    to some of them being disciplined internally by the Chief Justices of the

    concerned High Courts.
38. Till date, there have been only 4 (four) instances of MOTIONs for removal of a

    Supreme Court/High Court Judges being admitted by the Parliament and not

    a single instance of the MOTION being carried through (although one cannot

    ignore that a couple of Judges strategically resigned prior to culmination of

    the proceedings).
39. Be that as it may, the Constitution was and is silent with regard to any

    disciplinary measure, short of removal by impeachment, should there be an

    aberration or bad conduct by a Judge of a High Court as distinguished from

    misbehaviour in the discharge of his judicial duties or administrative/non-

    judicial/official duties.
40. It is worthy of note that six years before the turn of the last century, the Chief

    Justice of the Bombay High Court was compelled to demit office on the ground

    of alleged misbehaviour as a sequel to exertion of pressure by the local Bar

    Council/Bar Associations. A writ petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution
17
presented by a practising advocate changed the legal landscape of the

          country. The decision on such writ petition, which laid down a precedent and

          which we propose to consider a little later, has rightly been commented in one

          of the subsequent decisions of this Court as having sowed the seeds for the

          PROCEDURE.
THE PROCEDURE - ITS GENESIS AND CONTENTS
41. The PROCEDURE (commonly known as the “In-house Procedure”), which has

          been developed by the Full Court of the Supreme Court through an

          administrative resolution, serves as an internal mechanism to deal with

          complaints of misconduct or incapacity against sitting Judges, both of the High

          Courts and the Supreme Court.
42. Reading of paragraph 32 of the decision in
Additional District and Sessions

          Judge ‘X’ v. Registrar General, High
Court of Madhya Pradesh15

          provides useful guidance as to how the PROCEDURE came to be devised. It

          reads:
“32.
In furtherance of the directions issued in
C. Ravichandran Iyer
case,
               this Court constituted a committee comprising of three Judges of this
               Court, namely, Justices S.C. Agrawal, A.S. Anand (as he then was) and
               S.P. Bharucha (as he then was), and the then two seniormost Chief
               Justices of the High Courts i.e. Justices P.S. Misra and D.P. Mohapatra
               (of the Andhra Pradesh High Court and the Allahabad High Court,
               respectively), to lay down the ‘In-House Procedure’, for taking suitable
               remedial action against Judges, who by their acts of omission or
               commission, do not follow the accepted values of judicial life, including
               the ideals expressed by the Supreme Court in the ‘Restatement of Values
               of Judicial Life’. The Committee submitted its report on 31-10-1997. The
               same was adopted with amendments, in a Full Court Meeting of the
               Supreme Court of India, on 15-12-1999. In the aforestated report, three
               sets of procedure for taking such suitable remedial action against Judges
               were laid down. The first, related to the Judges of the High Courts, the
15
(2015) 4 SCC 91
18
second, to the Chief Justices of the High Courts, and the third, to the
         Judges of the Supreme Court. …”.
43. At the outset, the PROCEDURE itself records complaints made against Judges of

    the High Court and the Supreme Court often being received either by the Chief

    Justices of the High Courts or the CJI. Such complaints, also made to the

    President of India, are generally forwarded to the CJI for being looked into.

    Considering the lack of any constitutional mechanism or otherwise based

    whereon measures could lawfully be taken when the CJI is seized of such

    complaints, the Full Court of the Supreme Court by its resolution dated 15th

    December, 1999 adopted the PROCEDURE.
44. The process under the PROCEDURE begins when a written complaint containing

    verifiable and specific allegations is received by the CJI or the Chief Justice of

    a High Court. What actions are required to be taken thereunder if the

    complaint is found to be of a serious nature have been provided in paragraphs

    1 to 3 of the PROCEDURE.
45. Should the matter merit a deeper probe, the CJI would constitute a Committee

    consisting of two Chief Justices of the High Courts (other than the High Court

    to which the Judge belongs) and one High Court Judge (paragraph 3), and the

    Committee so constituted has the liberty to devise its own procedure

    consistent with the principles of natural justice (paragraph 4). The inquiry,

    being in the nature of a fact-finding exercise, entitles the Judge under probe

    to appear and have his say recorded. Since it is not a formal judicial inquiry

    and given its fact-finding and non-punitive character, examination/cross-

    examination of witnesses and representation by lawyers are excluded.
19
46. Upon receipt of the report of inquiry from the Committee, the CJI is

    empowered to take one of three possible courses of action, depending on the

    nature and gravity of the findings qua the allegations. Firstly, if the Committee

    concludes that the allegations are unfounded or lacking in substance, the CJI

    may choose to close the matter [paragraph 5(a) read with paragraph 6].

    Secondly, if the inquiry reveals serious misconduct, the CJI may advise the

    Judge to resign his office or seek voluntary retirement [paragraph 7(i)]. If the

    concerned Judge elects not to do so, the CJI shall intimate the President and

    the Prime Minister that the allegations are serious enough to warrant initiation

    of proceedings for removal and hence, judicial work has been withdrawn

    [paragraph 5(b) read with para 7(ii)]. Thirdly, where the misconduct is

    established but it is not so serious as to warrant removal, the CJI may call the

    Judge concerned and advise him accordingly; the report of the Committee to

    be placed on record may also be directed [paragraph 5(c) read with paragraph

    8].
47. Despite the decision in
Additional District and Sessions Judge ‘X’
(supra)

    at paragraph 47 thereof having delineated the various steps in the PROCEDURE

    through which the proceedings must pass, we have given a brief overview for

    our own understanding.
PRECEDENTS
48. Having noted the genesis and the contents of the PROCEDURE, we proceed to

    consider the precedents that have been cited which directly dealt with

    proceedings/initiation of proceedings for removal of a Judge of a High Court.
20
49. The decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court in Sub-Committee on

    Judicial Accountability (supra) is, incidentally, the sheet anchor of Mr.

    Sibal’s arguments.
50. At the same time, other decisions of this Court having a material bearing for

    deciding the question of constitutionality of the PROCEDURE would also

    necessarily fall for consideration which we propose to consider in seriatim.
51. Sub-Committee on Judicial Accountability (supra) had to consider issues

    of some importance bearing on the construction of
Articles 121
and
124
of the

    Constitution as well the provisions of the
Inquiry Act
. The occasion for the

    controversy raised in the proceedings, the issues arising for decision and the

    broad contentions raised by the parties are noted in paragraphs 3, 4 and 15,

    respectively, of the majority judgment authored by Hon’ble B. C. Ray, J. (as

    His Lordship then was). For the sake of completeness but, at the same time,

    to maintain brevity, we discern that the main issues arising for decision were
(i) what is the legal position and status of a MOTION for the removal of a Judge

    under a law made pursuant to
Article 124(5)
of the Constitution? (ii) whether

    the Doctrine of Lapse would apply to such a MOTION upon the dissolution of

    the Lok Sabha? (iii) whether the matters arising out of or relating to a MOTION

    for removal of a Judge in either House of the Parliament are at all justiciable

    before courts of law? and (iv) whether the Court should decline to exercise

    jurisdiction as its decision and its writ might become infructuous (in view of

    the fact that in the ultimate analysis, the final arbiter whether at all any

    Address is to be presented rests exclusively with the Houses of Parliament and

    which are wholly outside the purview of the courts)?
21
52. One of the contentions was Contention F, reading as follows:
“Contention F:— The process of removal by means of a MOTION for
         address to the President is a political remedy. But the fundamental right
         to move the Supreme Court for enforcement of fundamental rights take
         within its sweep the right to access to a court comprising of Judges of
         sterling and unsullied reputation and integrity which is enforceable. This
         judicial remedy is independent of the constitutional remedy and that the
         court has jurisdiction to decide as to its own proper constitution. In
         exercise of this jurisdiction it should examine the grounds of the alleged
         misbehaviour and restrain the Judge from judicial functioning.”
53. While rejecting the said contention, this Court, inter alia, held thus:
“111. The relief of a direction to restrain the Judge from discharging
         judicial functions cannot be granted. It is the entire Constitutional
         Scheme including the provisions relating to the process of removal of a
         Judge which are to be taken into account for the purpose of considering
         this aspect. It is difficult to accept that there can be any right in anyone
         running parallel with the Constitutional Scheme for this purpose
         contained in clauses (4) and (5) of
Article 124
read with
Article 121.
No
         authority can do what the Constitution by necessary implication forbids.
         Incidentally, this also throws light on the question of interim relief in such
         a matter having the result of restraining the Judge from functioning
         judicially on initiation of the process under the
Judges (Inquiry) Act,
         1968
. The Constitutional Scheme appears to be that unless the alleged
         misbehaviour or incapacity is ‘proved’ in accordance with the provisions
         of the law enacted under
Article 124(5)
and a MOTION for presenting an
         address for removal of the Judge on the ground of proved misbehaviour
         or incapacity is made, because of the restriction contained in
Article 121
,
         there cannot be a discussion about the Judge’s conduct even in the
         Parliament which has the substantive power of removal under
Article
         124(4).
If the Constitutional Scheme therefore is that the Judge’s conduct
         cannot be discussed even in the Parliament which is given the substantive
         power of removal, till the alleged misconduct or incapacity is ‘proved’ in
         accordance with the law enacted for this purpose, then it is difficult to
         accept that any such discussion of the conduct of the Judge or any
         evaluation or inferences as to its merit is permissible according to law
         elsewhere except during investigation before the Inquiry Committee
         constituted under the statute for this purpose. The indication, therefore,
         is that interim direction of this kind during the stage of inquiry into the
         alleged misbehaviour or incapacity is not contemplated it being alien to
         our Constitutional Scheme.”
                                                          (emphasis laid by Mr. Sibal)
22
54. Having read what Sub-Committee on Judicial Accountability (supra) ruled

    while not accepting Contention F, we proceed to take note of the next relevant

    decision, i.e.,
C. Ravichandran Iyer
(supra).
55. Hon’ble K. Ramaswamy, J. (as His Lordship then was) speaking for the Bench

    in
C. Ravichandran Iyer
(supra), after referring to previous decisions,

    reaffirmed the importance of the CJI as the head of the institution, when a

    matter questioning the integrity of a Judge arises, in paragraphs 35 and 36 of

    the decision. In very clear words, His Lordship suggested an in-house

    procedure to be followed by the Chief Justices of the High Courts or the CJI,

    when they are seized of a complaint related to a Judge’s conduct. The CJI,

    upon receipt of information from the Chief Justice of a High Court could take

    such action as “deemed necessary or warranted”. Although, the concerned

    Judge in this case had demitted office before the judgment was delivered, this

    Court held that its statements were to be treated as a precedent. Relevant

    passages from the decision read as follows:
“35. It is true that this Court has neither administrative control over the
         High Court nor power on the judicial side to enquire into the misbehaviour
         of a Chief Justice or Judge of a High Court. When the Bar of the High
         Court concerned reasonably and honestly doubts the conduct of the Chief
         Justice of that Court, necessarily the only authority under the
         Constitution that could be tapped is the Chief Justice of India, who in
         common parlance is known as the head of the judiciary of the country. It
         is of importance to emphasise here that impeachment is meant to be a
         drastic remedy and needs to be used in serious cases. But there must
         exist some other means to ensure that Judges do not abuse the trust the
         society has in them. It seems to us that self-regulation by the judiciary
         is the only method which can be tried and adopted. …
         ***
40. Bearing all the above in mind, we are of the considered view that
         where the complaint relates to the Judge of the High Court, the Chief
         Justice of that High Court, after verification, and if necessary, after
         confidential enquiry from his independent source, should satisfy himself
23
about the truth of the imputation made by the Bar Association through
its office-bearers against the Judge and consult the Chief Justice of India,
where deemed necessary, by placing all the information with him. When
the Chief Justice of India is seized of the matter, to avoid embarrassment
to him and to allow fairness in the procedure to be adopted in furtherance
thereof, the Bar should suspend all further actions to enable the Chief
Justice of India to appropriately deal with the matter. This is necessary
because any action he may take must not only be just but must also
appear to be just to all concerned, i.e., it must not even appear to have
been taken under pressure from any quarter. The Chief Justice of India,
on receipt of the information from the Chief Justice of the High Court,
after being satisfied about the correctness and truth touching the conduct
of the Judge, may tender such advice either directly or may initiate such
action, as is deemed necessary or warranted under given facts and
circumstances. If circumstances permit, it may be salutary to take the
Judge into confidence before initiating action. On the decision being taken
by the Chief Justice of India, the matter should rest at that. This
procedure would not only facilitate nipping in the bud the conduct of a
Judge leading to loss of public confidence in the courts and sustain public
faith in the efficacy of the rule of law and respect for the judiciary, but
would also avoid needless embarrassment of contempt proceedings
against the office-bearers of the Bar Association and group libel against
all concerned. The independence of judiciary and the stream of public
justice would remain pure and unsullied. The Bar Association could
remain a useful arm of the judiciary and in the case of sagging reputation
of the particular Judge, the Bar Association could take up the matter with
the Chief Justice of the High Court and await his response for the action
taken thereunder for a reasonable period.
41. In case the allegations are against Chief Justice of a High Court, the
Bar should bring them directly to the notice of the Chief Justice of India.
On receipt of such complaint, the Chief Justice of India would in the same
way act as stated above qua complaint against a Judge of the High Court,
and the Bar would await for a reasonable period the response of the Chief
Justice of India.
42. It would thus be seen that yawning gap between proved
misbehaviour and bad conduct inconsistent with the high office on the
part of a non-cooperating Judge/Chief Justice of a High Court could be
disciplined by self-regulation through in-house procedure. This in-house
procedure would fill in the constitutional gap and would yield salutary
effect. Unfortunately, recourse to this procedure was not taken in the
case at hand, may be, because of absence of legal sanction to such a
procedure.
43. Since the 1st respondent has already demitted the office, we have
stated as above so that it would form a precedent for future.”
                                                            (emphasis ours)
24
56. After the PROCEDURE was devised in 1999 by the Full Court, acting on the

    precedent set by
C. Ravichandran Iyer
(supra), Indira Jaising (supra)

    happened to be the first reported decision that had the occasion to consider

    whether a report of the Committee, constituted by the CJI in terms of the

    PROCEDURE, ought or should be placed in the public domain. Answering the

    question in the negative, what the Court said [speaking through Hon’ble S.

    Rajendra Babu, J. (as the Chief Justice of India then was)] provides valuable

    guidance. Relevant passages read as under:
“2. In the Chief Justices’ Conference held in December 1999, sixteen
        clauses formed part of the Code of Conduct in addition to the declaration
        of assets by the Judges and in-house procedure was suggested in the
        event of any complaint against any Judge. However, sanction for these
        guidelines is absent. In our constitutional scheme it is not possible to vest
        the Chief Justice of India with any control over the puisne Judges with
        regard to conduct, either personal or judicial. In case of breach of any
        rule of the Code of Conduct, the Chief Justice can choose not to post
        cases before a particular Judge against whom there are acceptable
        allegations. It is possible to criticise that decision on the ground that no
        enquiry was held and the Judge concerned had no opportunity to offer
        his explanation particularly when the Chief Justice is not vested with any
        power to decide about the conduct of a Judge. There is no adequate
        method or machinery to enforce the Code of Conduct.
Article 124
provides for appointment of Judges of this Court and also their removal.
        Similarly,
Article 217
deals with the appointment and removal of the
        Judges of the High Court.
In the Judges (Inquiry) Act
of 1968 provisions
        are made for investigation into misbehaviour or incapacity of a Judge. It
        may be noted that since Judges of the superior courts occupy very high
        positions, disciplinary proceedings which exist in the case of all other
        employees cannot be thought of.
3. The Committee referred to by the petitioner is stated to have been
        constituted as a part of in-house procedure. A Judge cannot be removed
        from his office except by impeachment by a majority of the House and a
        majority of not less than 2/3rds present and voting as provided by
Articles 124
and
217
of the Constitution of India.
The Judges (Inquiry)
        Act, 1968
has been enacted providing for the manner of conducting
        inquiry into the allegation of judicial conduct upon a MOTION of
        impeachment sponsored by at least hundred Lok Sabha Members or fifty
        Rajya Sabha Members. The Presiding Officer of the House concerned has
        the power to constitute a committee consisting of three persons as
        enumerated therein. No other disciplinary inquiry is envisaged or
25
contemplated either under the Constitution or under the Act. On account
               of this lacuna in-house procedure has been adopted for inquiry to be
               made by the peers of Judges for report to the Hon’ble the Chief Justice
               of India in case of a complaint against the Chief Justices or Judges of the
               High Court in order to find out the truth of the imputation made in the
               complaint and that in-house inquiry is for the purpose of his own
               information and satisfaction. A report made on such inquiry if given
               publicity will only lead to more harm than good to the institution as
               Judges would prefer to face inquiry leading to impeachment. In such a
               case the only course open to the parties concerned if they have material
               is to invoke the provisions of
Article 124
or
Article 217
of the Constitution,
               as the case may be. It is not appropriate for the petitioner to approach
               this Court for the relief or direction for release of the report, for what the
               Chief Justice of India has done is only to get information from peer Judges
               of those who are accused and the report made to the Chief Justice of
               India is wholly confidential. The said report is only for the purpose of
               satisfaction of the Chief Justice of India that such a report has been made.
It is purely preliminary in nature, ad hoc and not final. If the Chief Justice
               of India is satisfied that no further action is called for in the matter, the
               proceeding is closed. If any further action is to be taken as indicated in
               the in-house procedure itself, the Chief Justice of India may take such
               further steps as he deems fit. Therefore, in the hierarchy of the courts,
               the Supreme Court does not have any disciplinary control over the High
               Court Judges, much less the Chief Justice of India has any disciplinary
               control over any of the Judges. That position in law is very clear. Thus,
               the only source or authority by which the Chief Justice of India can
               exercise this power of inquiry is moral or ethical and not in exercise of
               powers under any law. Exercise of such power of the Chief Justice of India
               based on moral authority cannot be made the subject-matter of a writ
               petition to disclose a report made to him.”
                                                                            (emphasis ours)
57. This decision was followed by
P.D. Dinakaran (1) v. Judges Inquiry

          Committee16
. In this case, no part of the PROCEDURE or any step taken in

          furtherance thereof was under challenge. The challenge in the writ petition

          under
Article 32
of the Constitution was to an order of the Chairman of the

          Rajya Sabha constituting a three-member committee under
Section 3(2)
of

          the Inquiry Act. The principle, nemo debet esse judex in propria sua causa,

          was sought to be invoked and a pointed challenge to the inclusion of a senior
16
(2011) 8 SCC 380
26
advocate in the committee in the category of ‘jurist’ was laid on the ground of

    bias. The petitioning judge had not approached the Court soon after the

    committee was constituted; on the contrary, he did so ten months later when

    he was notified of the charges. Based on such conduct, this Court held:
“80. The issue deserves to be considered from another angle. Admittedly,
         the petitioner raised the plea of bias only after receiving the notice dated
         16-3-2011 which was accompanied by the statement of charges and the
         lists of documents and witnesses. The petitioner’s knowledgeful silence
         in this regard for a period of almost ten months militates against the bona
         fides of his objection to the appointment of Respondent 3 as member of
         the Committee. A person of the petitioner’s standing can be presumed to
         be aware of his right to raise an objection. If the petitioner had the
         slightest apprehension that Respondent 3 had prejudged his guilt or he
         was otherwise biased, then, he would have on the first available
         opportunity objected to his appointment as a member of the Committee.
         The petitioner could have done so immediately after the publication of
         the Notification dated 15-1-2010. He could have represented to the
         Chairman that investigation by a Committee of which Respondent 3 was
         a member will not be fair and impartial because the former had already
         presumed him to be guilty.
81. … However, the fact of the matter is that the petitioner never thought
         that Respondent 3 was prejudiced or ill-disposed against him and this is
         the reason why he did not raise any objection till April 2011 against the
         inclusion of Respondent 3 in the Committee. This leads to an irresistible
         inference that the petitioner had waived his right to object to the
         appointment of Respondent 3 as member of the Committee. The right
         available to the petitioner to object to the appointment of Respondent 3
         in the Committee was personal to him and it was always open to him to
         waive the same.”
58. Next in line is the decision in
Additional District and Sessions Judge ‘X’
(supra). Hon’ble J. S. Khehar, J. (as the Chief Justice of India then was),

    speaking for the Court, went deep into the PROCEDURE and observed that:
“35. It is, therefore, apparent that the seeds of the “In-House Procedure”
         came to be sown in the judgment rendered by this Court in
C.
         Ravichandran Iyer
case. It is also apparent, that actions have been
         initiated under the ‘In-House Procedure’, which has the approval of the
         Full Court of the Supreme Court of India. And, based on the aforestated
         ‘In-House Procedure’, impeachment proceedings were actually initiated
         by Parliament under
Article 124
of the Constitution of India.
There can
27
therefore be no doubt whatsoever, that in the above situation, the ‘In-
House Procedure’ is firmly in place, and its adoption for dealing with
matters expressed by this Court in
C. Ravichandran Iyer
case is now a
reality.
36. Despite the above conclusion, it is imperative to take into
consideration the observations recorded by this Court in
Indira
Jaising v. Registrar General
, Supreme Court of India , as under : (SCC
pp. 496-97, paras 2-3)
       “…………”
A perusal of the observations made by this Court in the extract
reproduced above, reveals that the existence of the ‘In-House Procedure’
is now an established means for inquiring into allegations levelled against
a Judge of a superior court, through his peers. It is a confidential inquiry
for institutional credibility under the charge of the Chief Justice of India.
And therefore, its affairs are to be kept out of public domain. The
proceedings under the above procedure being sensitive, are required to
be inaccessible to third parties. And therefore, the prayer seeking the
disclosure of the report submitted on the culmination of the ‘In-House
Procedure’ was declined. The object sought to be addressed through the
‘In-House Procedure’, is to address concerns of institutional integrity.
That would, in turn, sustain the confidence of the litigating public, in the
efficacy of the judicial process.
37. It is impermissible to publicly discuss the conduct of a sitting Judge,
or to deliberate upon the performance of his duties, and even on/of court
behaviour, in public domain. Whilst the ‘In-House Procedure’ lays down
means to determine the efficacy of the allegations levelled, it is now
apparent, that the procedure is not toothless, in the sense, that it can
lead to impeachment of the Judge concerned under
Article 124
of the
Constitution of India. … But, that should not be understood to mean, that
an individual concerned, who is called upon to subject himself/herself to
the contemplated procedure, should be precluded or prevented from
seeking judicial redress. It is now well understood, that an individual who
subjects himself/herself to the jurisdiction of an authority, cannot turn
around to find fault with it at a later juncture. If there is a fault, the same
should be corrected, before one accepts to submit to the jurisdiction of
the authority concerned. The submission of the petitioner in the present
case, to the ‘two-Judge Committee’, would certainly have had the above
effect. We are therefore satisfied to hold, that those who are liable to be
affected by the outcome of the ‘In-House Procedure’, have the right to
seek judicial redressal, on account of a perceived irregularity. The
irregularity may be on account of the violation of the contemplated
procedure, or even because of contemplated bias or prejudice. It may be
on account of impropriety. The challenge can extend to all subjects on
which judicial review can be sought. The objections raised on behalf of
Respondent 3, in respect of the sustainability of the instant petition at
the hands of Addl. D & SJ X, are therefore wholly untenable. The
challenge to the maintainability of the instant writ petition, is accordingly
declined.
28
***
55. In view of the consideration and the findings recorded hereinabove,
         we may record our general conclusions as under:
55.1. The ‘In-House Procedure’ framed by this Court, consequent upon
         the decision rendered in
C. Ravichandran Iyer
case can be adopted to
         examine allegations levelled against the Judges of the High Courts, Chief
         Justices of the High Courts and Judges of the Supreme Court of India.
         55.2. The investigative process under the ‘In-House Procedure’ takes
         into consideration the rights of the complainant, and that of the Judge
         concerned, by adopting a fair procedure, to determine the veracity of
         allegations levelled against a sitting Judge. At the same time, it
         safeguards the integrity of the judicial institution.
         55.3. Even though the said procedure should ordinarily be followed in
         letter and spirit, the Chief Justice of India would have the authority to
         mould the same, in the facts and circumstances of a given case, to ensure
         that the investigative process affords safeguards, against favouritism,
         prejudice or bias.
55.4. In view of the importance of the ‘In-House Procedure’, it is
         essential to bring it into public domain. The Registry of the Supreme
         Court of India, is accordingly directed to place the same on the official
         website of the Supreme Court of India."
59. It is in the conspectus of the above noted precedents that the contentions

    urged by the Petitioner would fall for consideration.
OTHER TOPICS
60. Dwelling on a few more topics having relevance and materiality would not be

    inapt. Hence, we venture to do that now while making our own observations

    to assist us in accomplishing our task.
ROLE OF THE CJI
61. While the CJI is no doubt primus inter pares – first among equals – and also

    does not exercise powers of superintendence over the High Courts and the

    Judges of the High Court, nonetheless, the CJI bears a significant moral

    responsibility as the foremost judicial officer to ensure that the judiciary of the
29
country functions in a transparent, efficient and constitutionally appropriate

    manner.
62. Petitioner has challenged the CJI’s recommendation for initiation of

    proceedings for removal (if at all such recommendation has been made, for

    we do not know what exactly was intimated to the President and the Prime

    Minister) on the ground that the CJI, under the constitutional scheme, has no

    authority to make such recommendation and moreover, such opinion would

    prejudice the Members of the Parliament and violate the spirit of separation

    of powers.
63. The PROCEDURE contemplates withdrawal of judicial work of the Judge under

    probe. While forwarding the report of inquiry to the President/the Prime

    Minister, the CJI does so for indicating why judicial work is not assigned to the

    Judge, not as to why he should be impeached/removed. Withdrawing judicial

    work from a Judge is indeed an extreme measure and, therefore, has to be

    based on sound reasons; hence, the report of inquiry forms the plinth for the

    President and the Prime Minister to be intimated of such an action. This is an

    important distinction, not noticed by the Petitioner.
64. Assuming arguendo that the CJI endorsed the findings in the REPORT submitted

    by the COMMITTEE and did recommend initiation of proceedings against the

    Petitioner for removal from office, we have no hesitation to say that the CJI is

    not a mere post office between the COMMITTEE and the President/the Prime

    Minister     that   the   REPORT    is    to   be   forwarded     without    any

    remarks/recommendation. The CJI is clearly an important person, if not the

    most, in the larger scheme of maintaining institutional interest and credibility
30
to ascertain whether a Judge has indulged in misconduct. As per the

          PROCEDURE, after receiving a complaint against a Judge or a report from the

          Chief Justice of the High Court of which he is a Judge, the CJI has to apply his

          mind to the nature of complaint/report together with supporting materials, if

          any. If the CJI believes that the matter requires a deeper probe, he is required

          to constitute a Committee for an in-house inquiry. The report of inquiry may,

          or may not, find the allegations against the Judge to be serious, so as to call

          for any measure. However, if it does, the CJI is under an obligation to forward

          the report to the President and the Prime Minister. We see no justification to

          hold that in so forwarding, the CJI may not give his own views.
65. Moreover, the President of India is not a stranger to the judicial process.
In
K.

          Veeraswami v. Union of India17
, the Court noted that:
“51. The President is not an outsider so far as judiciary is concerned. The
               President appoints the Judges of the High Courts and the Supreme Court
               in exercise of his executive powers. Clause (1) of
Article 217
provides
               that every Judge of the High Court shall be appointed by the President
               after consultation with the Chief Justice of India, the Governor of the
               State, and in the case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief
               Justice, the Chief Justice of the High Court. Similarly the President
               appoints the Judges of the Supreme Court. Clause (2) of
Article 124
provides that every Judge of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by
               the President in consultation with such of the Judges of the Supreme
               Court and of the High Courts as the President may deem necessary for
               the purpose and in case of appointment of a Judge other than the Chief
               Justice, the Chief Justice of India shall always be consulted. The President
               exercises this power with the aid and advise of his Council of Ministers
               under
Article 74
of the Constitution. (
Shamsher Singh v. State of
               Punjab
[(1974) 2 SCC 831 : 1974 SCC (L&S) 550 : (1975) 1 SCR 814]
               and S.P. Gupta v. Union of India [1981 Supp SCC 87 : AIR 1982 SC 149]
               ). Parliament has no part to play in the matter of appointment of Judges
               except that the executive is responsible to the Parliament.”
17
(1991) 3 SCC 655
31
66. We wish to go a bit further in observing that the President is not only not an

    outsider to the judiciary but also not an outsider to the PROCEDURE itself. In the

    prefatory paragraphs of the PROCEDURE, as devised by the Full Court, it has

    been acknowledged that complaints are received by the CJI from the office of

    the President. Having received such complaints from the President, it is quite

    but natural that the CJI would not only acknowledge receipt of such complaints

    but also apply his mind and respond to the same, wherever necessary.
67. Pausing here for a moment, what else is the CJI expected to do, if he is of the

    view that the matter requires a deeper probe? We hasten to add that where

    the Committee itself (constituted by the CJI) finds substance in the allegations

    and the misconduct found is serious enough to call for initiation of proceedings

    for removal, the CJI does have the authority, in a fit and proper case, to

    endorse such finding while forwarding the report of inquiry.
68. Next, the argument that the Members of either or both houses of the

    Parliament could be influenced by the CJI’s opinion is not acceptable since the

    opinion is not forwarded either to the Speaker of the Lok Sabha or to the

    Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. For arguments sake, even if it is assumed that

    Members of Parliament have had access to the recommendation/advice of the

    CJI, if any, nothing much turns on it.
The Inquiry Act
includes a specific

    mechanism which has to be statutorily followed before any address for

    impeachment is made in the House(s). The report of the Committee being

    preliminary in nature, ad hoc and not final, as held in
Indira Jaising
(supra),

    cannot affect the Petitioner in future proceedings unless such report is relied
32
upon at a future stage of the proceedings/at the inquiry; if relied upon, the

    Petitioner would be free to exercise his rights as are available in law.
69. At the same time, it needs no emphasis that although the CJI is the head of

    the institution, he too is not above the law which is supreme; hence, utmost

    care has to be taken to ensure that any action of the CJI is not in deviation of

    the PROCEDURE which permits the in-house inquiry to be undertaken.


THE JUDGES (PROTECTION) ACT
70. The relevant provisions of the Protection Act are reproduced hereunder:
“2. Definition.—In this Act, ‘Judge’ means not only every person who is
         officially designated as a Judge, but also every person— (a) who is
         empowered by law to give in any legal proceeding a definitive judgment,
         or a judgment which, if not appealed against, would be definitive, or a
         judgment which, if confirmed by some other authority, would be
         definitive; or (b) who is one of a body of persons which body of persons
         is empowered by law to give such a judgment as is referred to in clause
(a).
3. Additional protection to Judges.—
         (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
         being in force and subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), no court
         shall entertain or continue any civil or criminal proceeding against any
         person who is or was a Judge for any act, thing or word committed, done
         or spoken by him when, or in the course of, acting or purporting to act
         in the discharge of his official or judicial duty or function.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall debar or affect in any manner the
         power of the Central Government or the State Government or the
         Supreme Court of India or any High Court or any other authority under
         any law for the time being in force to take such action (whether by way
         of civil, criminal, or departmental proceedings or otherwise) against any
         person who is or was a Judge.”
                                                                      (emphasis ours)
71. The Protection Act, we guess, may not have been brought to the notice of this

    Court in any of the previous decisions considered here by us. Viewed in that

    light, this decision could be the first of judicial pronouncements by this Court

    touching Section 3(2) of the Protection Act vis-à-vis the PROCEDURE; hence, we
33
propose to deal with it in some detail while assigning reasons for our firm

           opinion on applicability of the Protection Act in the instant case.
72. First, the definition of a
Judge in the Protection Act
is an expansive one

           intended to take into its fold anyone empowered by law to give a definitive

           judgment in a legal proceeding. Therefore, the protection envisaged

           thereunder applies not only to the Judges appointed under the Constitution

           (i.e., the Supreme Court and the High Courts) and the Judges recognised by

           the Constitution (the district Judiciary) but also to judges of various tribunals

           and quasi-judicial bodies having powers of adjudication across the country.
73. Secondly, Section 3(1) of the Protection Act provides that no Court would

           entertain any civil or criminal proceeding against a judge acting in his official

           or judicial duty or function. In the case of D.C. Saxena (Dr) v. Hon'ble The

           Chief Justice of India18, it was observed that:
“57. ….The protection of
Articles 124(4)
, 121
, 211
, the
Judicial Officers
                Protection Act, 1850
and the
Judges (Protection) Act, 1985
is to ensure
                independence to the judiciary. Threat to judicial process is a challenge to
                the authority of the court or the majesty of justice. It would be ex facie
                contumacious conduct.”
74.   While referring to the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Protection

           Act, this Court in
State of Rajasthan v. Prakash Chand19
noticed its object

           and purport as follows:
“35. Even under the
Judges (Protection) Act, 1985
immunity has been
                given to judicial officers in relation to judicial work done by them as well
                as for the judicial orders made by them. The Statement of Objects and
                Reasons for introducing the Bill in relation to the 1985 Act which reads
                thus is instructive:
18
(1996) 5 SCC 216
19
(1998) 1 SCC 1
34
‘Judiciary is one of the main pillars of parliamentary democracy as
                envisaged by the Constitution. It is essential to provide for all
                immunities necessary to enable Judges to act fearlessly and impartially
                in the discharge of their judicial duties. It will be difficult for the Judges
                to function if their actions in court are made subject to legal
                proceedings, either civil or criminal.’ …”
75. A similar sentiment was noticed in the Constitution Bench decision in

          Supreme Court
Advocates-on-Record Assn. v. Union of India20
wherein

          it was observed:
“724. Similarly,
Section 3
of the Judges (Protection) Act, 1985 provides,
               inter alia, that no court shall entertain or continue any civil or criminal
               proceeding against any person who is or was a Judge for any act, thing
               or word committed, done or spoken by him when, or in the course of,
               acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official or judicial duty
               or function. This is in addition to the protection given by Section 77 of
               the Penal Code, 1860…”
76. Indeed,
Section 3(1)
is subject to
Section 3(2)
and does not expressly prohibit

          a departmental proceeding or otherwise but bars entertainment and

          continuance of civil or criminal proceedings against a Judge as defined in
Section 2
for any act, thing or word committed, done or spoken by him when,

          or in the course of, acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his official

          or judicial duty or function.
77.
Section 3(2)
starts with a non-obstante clause with reference to
Section 3(1)
and inter alia specifically ordains that the authorities mentioned therein are

          not denuded of the power to initiate civil, criminal, or departmental

          proceedings or otherwise against any Judge as long as the law in force allows

          them to do so. We place sufficient emphasis on the word “otherwise” as
20
(2016) 5 SCC 1
35
present in
Section 3(2)
. The PROCEDURE having provisions for an in-house

    inquiry, with which we are concerned, is admittedly not akin to any inquiry

    connected with a departmental proceeding since it lacks the bearings of a true,

    valid and legal departmental proceeding. It is a proceeding akin to a

    preliminary fact-finding inquiry intended to serve a specific purpose. However,

    the PROCEDURE contemplating a fact-finding inquiry can and does very well fit

    in the mould of the word “otherwise”. It is a cardinal principle that no word in

    a statute is superfluous. We need not burden our judgment with referring to

    precedents on this point.
78. We have noted the response of Mr. Sibal earlier that no law exists conferring

    power on the Supreme Court to initiate proceedings against a Judge of a High

    Court.
79. Attractive though at first blush, and accepting that a Judge cannot be removed

    from office except in the manner ordained by the Constitution, this submission

    of Mr. Sibal fails to take note of the legal position flowing from
Article 141
of

    the Constitution. As noted in the decisions starting with
C. Ravichandran

    Iyer
(supra), the “In-house Procedure” proposes to fill the gap in the

    constitutional mechanism and the ground realties present. Paragraph 43 of

    the decision quoted above provides the guiding light for this purpose.
Parliament has saved the Supreme Court’s authority to initiate such

    proceedings and take such action as it thinks fit, provided there is a law for

    the time being in force in that regard by enacting sub-section (2) of
Section

    3
; and, the law declared by the Court in
C. Ravichandran Iyer
(supra) is

    what bridges the breach.
36
80. Moreover, the 1999 Full Court resolution has been framed on the basis of this

    decision; therefore, there is full legal sanction to the PROCEDURE when read in

    the light of guidance provided by
Article 141
of the Constitution.
81. It was also submitted that if we propose to interpret the Protection Act as

    conferring power to proceed against a Judge of a High Court, then the Central

    Government/State Government would also be able to initiate proceedings for

    such removal. While respectfully disagreeing with Mr. Sibal, we have no

    hesitation to hold that inclusion of the Central Government or the State

    Government or such other authority in sub-section (2) of
Section 3
is for the

    simple reason that ‘Judge’, as defined in the Protection Act, is not limited to

    the Judges of the Supreme Court and/or the High Court but also includes

    judges conducting judicial and quasi-judicial proceedings in the Tribunals and

    quasi-judicial bodies, thereby ensuring that the protection granted under the

    Protection Act encompasses all such individuals having authority to exercise

    judicial power under the law.
82. In our considered opinion, the Protection Act does not offend the constitutional

    scheme present; and, being in addition to the extant provisions, does not

    affect the Supreme Court’s authority to take such action, as deemed fit,

    against a Judge of a High Court who is alleged to have indulged in misconduct

    in terms of the PROCEDURE.
83.
In interpreting the Protection Act, we are once again reminded of the “yawning

    gap” in the procedure as noticed in
C. Ravichandran Iyer
(supra), on ‘who’

    sets the ball rolling. If we were to accept the contention of Mr. Sibal, the

    Supreme Court and the CJI would be powerless to initiate any action even on
37
the face of allegations of gross misconduct against a sitting Judge of a High

    Court which cannot be the legislative intention. To address the growing

    concern of incidents of misconduct, the PROCEDURE has been craftily designed

    to discipline Judges internally for such misconduct that is sufficient to tarnish

    the dignity of his office as well as the institution to which he belongs. The

    recognition that self-imposed ethical norms are integral to the judiciary’s

    credibility, forms the cornerstone of the non-statutory but wholly legal internal

    procedure for maintaining discipline and, by extension, integrity of the

    institution. On this construction, we hold that the CJI’s discretion as to

    whether, where and when to act, mindful of the substance in the complaints

    received, would obviously be a regulated discretion; but, once the ball is set

    rolling by the CJI, it must end with his recommendation/advice to the

    President and the Prime Minister depending on what the Committee records

    as its findings.
84. It does not require any emphasis that judicial officers in every rank, and more

    specifically, the Judges in the higher echelons of the Judiciary owe huge

    obligation to the people of this country. No Judge, either of the Supreme Court

    or the High Courts, being above the law, acting in the discharge of his judicial

    or administrative/non-judicial or official duties in a manner attracting a

    possible complaint of not abiding by the Restatement of Values of Judicial Life

    (widely regarded now as the Code of Conduct for Judges of the Supreme Court

    and the High Courts) has to be shunned. Frivolous complaints being lodged

    by disgruntled litigants, lawyers and others, though cannot be avoided, the

    path of probity also can never be abandoned by a Judge. Any thought of there
38
being absence of disciplinary measure other than removal by impeachment

    (which has never fructified over the years despite occasions calling for it) and

    therefore escaping unscathed despite committing a misbehaviour or indulging

    in bad conduct/misconduct, is what is normal, should be eschewed. With the

    advancement in science and technology and all other spheres of work, it is

    quite possible to bring to the CJI’s notice how a particular Judge might have

    conducted himself inappropriately calling for strict action. Withdrawal of

    judicial work from a Judge is an extreme measure that the PROCEDURE

    expressly permits. There are other measures too, which could be explored if

    Judges are found to deviate from the Code of Conduct. The Judges should,

    therefore, act cautiously and exercise their discretion wisely, to evade creation

    of a situation where initiating action becomes imperative. The judiciary in

    India   is   characterised   by   judicial   independence;   however,    judicial

    independence signifies flexibility of judicial thought and the freedom to

    adjudicate without external and internal pressure, and not unfettered liberty

    to act as one might wish. Just as judicial independence is fundamental, so too

    is judicial accountability; compromising one compromises the other.
85. Given that the only formal mechanism for addressing judicial misbehaviour

    under the Constitution is impeachment by Parliament, it must be remembered

    that not all misbehaviour of Judges necessarily rise to the level of "proved

    misbehaviour" attracting
Articles 217
and
218
read with clauses (4) and (5)

    of
Article 124.
The Constitution’s silence on cases that do not rise to the level

    of proven misbehaviour creates a significant structural vulnerability, which has

    since been addressed by the PROCEDURE. The PROCEDURE acts as a check on
39
Judges’ unbridled freedom of action and thereby seeks to prevent outcomes

      that could be harmful or unjust. Under the present set-up, impeaching the

      PROCEDURE or any part thereof may itself be viewed as unreasonable and

      unjustified. Expressing our imprimatur of the PROCEDURE, we close our

      discussion on the Protection Act without spilling further ink on this issue.


THE NATURE OF INQUIRY UNDER THE PROCEDURE
86. We wish to now dwell on the nature of inquiry that the PROCEDURE

      contemplates.
87. The inquiry that is part of the PROCEDURE is designed to be a fact-finding inquiry

      as distinguished from a guilt-finding inquiry; and it is, therefore, akin to a

      preliminary inquiry that precedes regular disciplinary proceedings against a

      delinquent employee.
88. To repeat,
Indira Jaisingh
(supra) terms the report of the in-house inquiry

      as preliminary in nature, ad-hoc and not final.
89. Once the CJI constitutes the Committee, it is required to hold an inquiry into

      the allegations contained in the complaint in the manner that the PROCEDURE

      ordains. The Committee does have some leeway to devise its own procedure

      consistent with the principles of natural justice. Though the Committee is not

      required to extend opportunity of cross-examination of the persons who come

      before it for giving their versions or opportunity to the Judge under probe to

      be represented by a lawyer, the Judge must be called upon to appear and

      given opportunity to have his say recorded. After concluding the inquiry, the

      Committee may conclude and report to the CJI that (a) there is no substance

      in the allegations contained in the complaint, or (b) there is sufficient
40
substance in the allegations contained in the complaint and the misconduct

          disclosed is so serious that it calls for initiation of proceedings for removal of

          the Judge, or (c) there is substance in the allegations contained in the

          complaint but the mis-conduct disclosed is not of such a serious nature as to

          call for initiation of proceedings for removal of the Judge.
90. Given its very nature, the Committee by preparing its report and recording its

          findings, effectively assists the CJI in arriving at a conclusion as regards the

          proposed action in a given case based thereon.
91. Admittedly, this is a case falling within the second situation where the

          COMMITTEE has recorded an opinion that there is sufficient substance in the

          allegations contained in the letter of the CJI and the misconduct disclosed is

          so serious that it calls for initiation of proceedings for removal of the Petitioner.
92. Insofar as the purpose that a preliminary enquiry seeks to serve, there are

          multiple decisions of this Court on the point. A Constitution Bench in
Champaklal Chimanlal Shah v. Union of India21
observed that a

          preliminary enquiry is usually held to determine whether a prima facie case

          for a formal departmental enquiry is made out, and it is very necessary that

          the    two    should     not    be    confused.
In
Narayan      Dattatraya

          Ramteerthakhar v. State of Maharashtra22
, it has been held that a

          preliminary inquiry has nothing to do with the inquiry conducted after the

          issue of charge-sheet; once regular inquiry is held under the rules,

          the preliminary inquiry loses its importance and whether the preliminary
21
AIR 1964 SC 1854
22
(1997) 1 SCC 299
41
inquiry was held strictly in accordance with law or by observing principles of

          natural justice remains of no consequence.
Nirmala J. Jhala v. State of

          Gujarat23
is one other decision where this Court categorically observed that

          the material collected in a preliminary inquiry has no relevance once a regular

          inquiry has started and no material obtained during such preliminary enquiry

          can be used against the delinquent employee, if such employee had no

          occasion to cross-examine the concerned witnesses. All these decisions are

          authorities on the point that generally, in the sphere of disciplinary

          proceedings   against   delinquent   officers/employees,   the   concept   of   a

          preliminary inquiry contrasted with an inquiry, which is part of a disciplinary/

          departmental enquiry, is different. The raison d'être of a preliminary enquiry

          is to determine whether a full-fledged inquiry is at all needed based on the

          materials collected in course thereof.
93. That the “In-house Procedure” is not toothless and may very well trigger

          initiation of proceedings in the Parliament for removal is acknowledged in
Additional District and Sessions Judge ‘X’
(supra); however, no action for

          removal can be taken merely on the basis of the Committee’s report since the
Inquiry Act
contemplates a full-fledged inquiry against the concerned Judge.

          To that extent, the report of the Committee may not carry much weight. Even

          though the report might record that there is sufficient substance in the

          allegations, the
Inquiry Act
does not debar the Judge charged with

          misbehaviour to raise an effective defence by presenting such evidence as are

          admissible and relevant once the evidence of the witnesses supporting the
23
(2013) 4 SCC 301
42
charge are recorded. Needless to say, if any reliance is placed by the

    Committee under the
Inquiry Act
upon the report of the Committee prepared

    under the PROCEDURE, the Judge charged has a right to be informed whereupon

    it shall be open to him to raise such points as to non-reliability/non-

    acceptability thereof as are available in law. All rights of a Judge charged with

    misbehaviour have, necessarily to be traced to the
Inquiry Act
as well as rules

    of fair play so as to facilitate a fair, reasonable and adequate opportunity of

    hearing. Nonetheless, the lack of opportunity of a fair hearing in the PROCEDURE

    cannot prejudice the concerned Judge given the nature of the inquiry.
94. In line with the previous decisions, we have no hesitation to hold that the

    nature of inquiry in the instant case is preliminary, ad-hoc and not final as

    well as not violative of any principle of natural justice.




WHY IS THE DECISION IN SUB-COMMITTEE ON JUDICIAL ACCOUNTABILITY (SUPRA) NOT

APPLICABLE?
95. Reliance placed by Mr. Sibal on the decision in Sub-Committee on Judicial

    Accountability (supra) is, in our considered view, misplaced. That decision

    is distinguishable both on facts and on law for the following reasons:
First, the issue which arose in such case was materially different from the one

    in the present case. The questions which were required to be answered by this

    Court in the said decision have been noted earlier in paragraph 51 (supra).
Anything and everything said in a decision, while answering the questions
43
which might arise, do not form a precedent. It is settled law that a decision is

an authority for what it decides. What is of the essence in a decision is its ratio

and not every observation found therein, nor what logically follows from every

observation made in the decision.
Secondly, the Constitution is not a static document. Constitutional Courts are

obligated to interpret the Constitution in the light of evolving standards and

institutional needs. The decision in
C. Ravichandran Iyer
(supra) marked a

turning point by recognising the necessity of an “In-house Procedure” to

address complaints against Judges.
The decision in Sub-Committee on

Judicial Accountability (supra), rendered years earlier, could not have

envisioned the framework developed in
C. Ravichandran Iyer
(supra) simply

because of the nature of problem that the latter had to solve.
Thirdly, C. Ravichandran Iyer
(supra), while being one amongst few

authoritative pronouncements by this Court acknowledging the primacy of the

CJI in preserving the institutional integrity of the judiciary, categorically held

that the CJI may take preliminary steps when credible allegations arise,

without encroaching upon the domain of the Parliament under
Article 124(4).
The role assigned to the CJI in this context is entirely distinct and was never

under contemplation in Sub-Committee on Judicial Accountability

(supra).
Fourthly, in
C. Ravichandran Iyer
(supra), though the concerned judge had

tendered his resignation and demitted office before the judgment was

pronounced, the Court nonetheless proceeded to lay down the legal
44
foundation for an in-house mechanism and setting it as a precedent for all

    future cases.
The Court’s stance makes it evident that Sub-Committee on

    Judicial Accountability (supra) is not applicable to the issue of “In-house

    Procedure”.
Fifthly, the Protection Act did not exercise the consideration of the Court in

    Sub-Committee on Judicial Accountability (supra).
Sixthly and finally, the evolution of the law post
C. Ravichandran Iyer
(supra) has seen consistent affirmation of the in-house mechanism of

    discipline by self-regulation by this Court. The PROCEDURE has since received

    judicial endorsement in at least three subsequent decisions.
96. The scope of the present matter, to a discerning eye, goes beyond the

    principles
laid down in
Sub-Committee on Judicial Accountability (supra),

    which did not have the occasion to address the permissibility or validity of an

    in-house mechanism. In any event, we do not see any observation in Sub-

    Committee on Judicial Accountability (supra) made by the Court

    precluding    the    judiciary    from    instituting internal,     non-punitive

    mechanisms for the purpose of fact-finding and disciplinary introspection by

    self-regulation. The constitutional silence on internal mechanisms, in our

    opinion, cannot be seen as a prohibition but rather it provided a space for

    responsible judicial innovation which has stood the test of time.
97. For all the foregoing reasons, the ruling in Sub-Committee on Judicial

    Accountability (supra) cannot be read as a limitation upon the constitutional
45
powers and responsibilities of the CJI, particularly in matters concerning

      internal judicial discipline and the preservation of institutional integrity.
98. Mr.     Sibal’s   contention    relying     on    Sub-Committee        on     Judicial

      Accountability (supra) is, thus, rejected.
ANSWERS
99.   Resting on the observations/findings given above, our endeavour to answer

      the questions is rendered easy.
ANSWER TO QUESTION (I)
100. The question of entertainability of the writ petition assumes importance,

      keeping the conduct of the Petitioner in perspective as distinguished from a

      waiver of his rights. It has been noted that not only did the Petitioner not

      object to the photographs/video footage being uploaded, he participated in

      the inquiry without demur. In his representation dated 6th May, 2025

      addressed to the CJI too, there was no whisper of the PROCEDURE fouling any

      constitutional provision. Challenge to the constitutionality of paragraph 5(b)

      and paragraph 7 (ii) of the PROCEDURE has been raised in this writ petition only

      after the CJI had written to the President and the Prime Minister, while

      enclosing therewith copy of the REPORT of the COMMITTEE together with the

      Petitioner’s response dated 6th May, 2025, as required by the PROCEDURE.
101. We had repeatedly asked Mr. Sibal as to why the Petitioner waited to invoke

      the   writ   jurisdiction.   Why   did    the   Petitioner   not   object   to   the

      photographs/video footage being uploaded? Should the Petitioner not have

      approached the Court earlier without submitting to the jurisdiction of the
46
Committee? Once the Petitioner submitted to the jurisdiction, is it not to be

    presumed that he did so expecting a favourable outcome and the writ petition

    came to be filed only when the outcome was not palatable to him? Having

    regard to the caution sounded in paragraph 37 of
Additional District and

    Sessions Judge ‘X’
(supra), was it not incumbent for the Petitioner to point

    out any perceived fault or flaw in the PROCEDURE before submitting to the

    jurisdiction of the COMMITTEE?
In view of
P.D. Dinakaran
(1) (supra), does

    the Petitioner pass the test of acting bona fide?
102.
P.D. Dinakaran
(1) (supra) emphasised that the petitioning judge should

    not have waited for 10 months to approach the Court when he had objection

    regarding inclusion of a member in the committee as a jurist. Mr. Sibal’s

    argument that there cannot be a waiver of a Fundamental Right is

    unexceptionable. However, what was said in paragraph 81 of the decision is

    important. The Petitioner can well be held disentitled to relief based on his

    tardy conduct but not, perhaps, on the ground of waiver.
103. Mr. Sibal was, however, heard to submit that if the Petitioner had approached

    it earlier, the Court could well have declined interference on the ground that

    the writ jurisdiction may be invoked if at all the report of inquiry were adverse

    to his interest.
104. We do not consider this answer worthy of acceptance. There are umpteen

    decisions of this Court ruling that when the vires of a provision is under

    challenge in a writ petition, it forms one of the four exceptions to the self-

    imposed restraint, propounded by decisions of this Court, of not entertaining

    a writ petition because an alternative remedy is available to the petitioner.
47
Then again, there are good number of decisions of this Court to the effect that

    challenge in a writ petition to a show-cause notice for stalling inquiries or

    investigative processes is not to be entertained unless the Court is satisfied

    that the notice is non-est for total lack of jurisdiction of the notice issuing

    authority to inquire into/investigate facts. This Court, in criminal matters,

    even entertains challenges to criminal proceedings after police reports

    (charge-sheets) have been filed and interfered in fit and proper cases. There

    does hardly exist any strait-jacket formula that the Courts would be loath to

    interfere or refuse to entertain a writ petition since the proceedings are yet to

    draw to a conclusion. Every case coming before the Court for adjudication

    would necessarily depend on its own facts and the nature of challenge, i.e.,

    whether challenge to the vires of a provision has been raised on prima facie

    strong grounds or whether a total lack of jurisdiction is shown to exist in the

    notice issuing authority even to inquire into or investigate facts; and, there

    can be no rule of universal application that the Courts must invariably decline

    interference for no better reason than that the proceedings, out of which the

    challenge stems, are pending. It was, therefore, not open to the Petitioner to

    believe that the Court would have refused to entertain the writ petition had

    he approached earlier, which made him wait.
105. Uploading of the photographs/video footage, according to the Petitioner,

    caused him immense harm. Not only did it lower his reputation, he was

    convicted in the public eye without even a preliminary inquiry. It could be so.

    However, what baffles us is the conduct of the Petitioner to acquiesce to such

    uploading, participate in the inquiry without demur, and to question such
48
uploading only after the COMMITTEE submitted its report to the CJI recording

    that there was sufficient substance in the allegations. The argument of Mr.

    Sibal that such uploading has had the effect of vitiating the enquiry is

    untenable. Though uploading of incriminating evidence available against a

    Judge under probe in the public domain is not a step which the PROCEDURE

    requires and while such uploading may not be considered to be proper, it is

    indeed a fait accompli. No benefit can be claimed because of such uploading

    of the incriminating evidence at this stage, once in a duly constituted inquiry

    findings have been recorded as regards the failures/omissions of the Petitioner

    to abide by the Restatement of Values of Judicial Life.
106. Even otherwise, inquiry had been initiated against the Petitioner in terms of

    the PROCEDURE which itself has been affirmed by this Court multiple times

    before. If indeed any fault were found in the PROCEDURE and questions were to

    be raised, the Petitioner ought not to have waited for completion of the fact-

    finding inquiry set in motion by the CJI.
107. The conduct of the Petitioner, therefore, does not inspire much confidence for

    us to entertain the writ petition.
108. We could have closed the writ petition based on our observation as above.

    However, we do not wish to tread the easy route but would rest our

    conclusions based on the answers to the other questions too.


ANSWER TO QUESTIONS (II) AND (III)
109. These questions being related, are taken up for consideration together.
110. Mr. Sibal has referred to the decision in
Indira Jaising
(supra) to urge that

    the only source or authority of the CJI to exercise the power of ordering an
49
inquiry is moral and ethical. According to him, the PROCEDURE has no legal

    sanction.
111. We are of the firm opinion that the argument is unacceptable for twin reasons,

    based on two key tenets.
112. The first reasoning rests on the rulings of this Court in the decisions noted

    above affirming the PROCEDURE, with which we are ad idem.
Significantly, C.

    Ravichandran Iyer
(supra) in express terms made it abundantly clear that

    the yawning gap between proved misbehaviour and bad conduct inconsistent

    with the high office of a Judge of a High Court could be disciplined by self-

    regulation through “In-house Procedure” which, in turn, while filling up the

    constitutional gap, would yield salutary effect. Even though the respondent

    Judge had demitted office as the Chief Justice, but noting the absence of legal

    sanction to such procedure, the Court ruling is a revelation that its statements

    should form a precedent for the future.
Once the dicta in
C. Ravichandran

    Iyer
(supra) constitutes a precedent, it is law declared under
Article 141
of

    the Constitution. It is judicial legislation that emerged because of the vacuum

    in the field of disciplining a Judge who shows signs of delinquency.
Additional

    District and Sessions Judge ‘X’
(supra) traced the history of the PROCEDURE

    and stamped its approval.
Merely because in
Indira Jaising
(supra) the

    source of authority was held to be moral and ethical would not assist the

    Petitioner.
We unhesitatingly hold that might have originated as moral and

    ethical authority gradually transformed into legal authority of the CJI in view

    of
C. Ravichandran Iyer
(supra).
50
113. There is one other compelling reason for us to hold that the PROCEDURE could

    be seen as having a legal sanction. Sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the

    Protection Act has been noticed by us, above. Although sub-section (1) of
Section 3
extends protection to Judges and restrains courts from entertaining

    and continuing proceedings – civil or criminal – in respect of any act, thing or

    word committed, done or spoken by a Judge when, or in the course of, acting

    or purporting to act in the discharge of his official or judicial duty or function,

    the same is subject to sub-section (2). In terms thereof, a person who is or

    was a Judge is not immune from proceedings being initiated by the Central

    Government or the State Government or the Supreme Court or any High Court

    or any other authority, as the case may be, under any law for the time being

    in force. The action that could lawfully be taken against anyone, who is or was

    a Judge, might be civil, criminal, departmental proceedings or otherwise; but,

    such an action, has to be at the instance of the named authority only if it is

    conferred with such authority by law.
114. That the PROCEDURE has its roots in the law declared by this Court under
Article

    141
of the Constitution admits of no doubt. Accordingly, we hold that ‘law for

    the time being in force’ in sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Protection Act

    would include law
laid down by
this Court and that the term ‘otherwise’ read

    in conjunction with ‘such action’, appearing in the said sub-section, is wide

    enough to encompass measures that the PROCEDURE contemplates.
115. The contention that the PROCEDURE lacks legal sanction must, accordingly, fail.
116. Having held so, we are inclined to the view that it is not the law that once the

    Committee constituted by the CJI records in its report that the conduct of the
51
Judge under probe warrants initiation of proceedings for his removal and the

CJI, in turn, upon accepting such report furnishes the same together with his

recommendation, if any, to the President and the Prime Minister, that would

invariably in all cases result in initiation of proceedings under
Article 124(4)
and
(5)
of the Constitution (for Supreme Court Judges) and
Articles 217
and
218
read with
Article 124 (for High Court Judges)
and the inquiry under

the
Inquiry Act
. Report or no report, recommendation or no recommendation,

whatever is the case, the Parliament’s power to initiate proceedings for

removal of a Judge for alleged misbehaviour or incapacity remains unfettered.

Even though there could be a case where good grounds for initiation of

proceedings do exist, the Parliament may in its wisdom elect not to go ahead

to initiate proceedings for removal. Contrarily, even if it is reported by the

Committee under the PROCEDURE that there exists any of the two situations

[para 5(a) or 5(c)] and the CJI, accepting such report, does not make any

recommendation, nothing prevents the Parliament to initiate proceedings for

removal if for reasons aliunde it considers necessary so to do. Notably, if the

Parliament, despite strong indication of a Judge either having indulged in

misbehaviour or suffering from incapacity, does not initiate any proceedings

for removal, no proceeding in a judicial forum would perhaps lie for activating

the Parliament to have such Judge removed from office. The power,

competence, authority and jurisdiction of the Parliament to decide what is in

the best interests of the nation is left untrammelled by the PROCEDURE; hence,

it is fallacious to argue that the PROCEDURE is a parallel and extra-constitutional

mechanism for removal of a Judge.
52
117. Yet again, the in-house inquiry or its report forming part of the PROCEDURE in

    itself does not lead to removal of a Judge, unlike the constitutionally ordained

    procedure. Thus, the in-house inquiry is not a removal mechanism in the first

    place, much less an extra-constitutional mechanism. We reiterate that “a

    stitch in time saves nine”.
118. Questions (II) and (III), thus, stand answered.
ANSWER TO QUESTION (IV)
119. More than once, we have observed above how the PROCEDURE found its way

    into the system. The PROCEDURE having been discussed and affirmed in multiple

    precedents since
C. Ravichandran Iyer
(supra) and we having expressed

    our agreement therewith, the argument that para 5(b) contravenes the

    constitutional scheme for removal of Judges by taking recourse to
Article 124
is unsustainable. Our observations, while dealing with the relevant topics, do

    provide ample reasons why the PROCEDURE or the inquiry contemplated

    thereunder has not been considered to be in violation of any provision of the

    Constitution, much less
Articles 14
and
21
of the Constitution. The procedure

    that has been
laid down in
the PROCEDURE is fair and just which does not

    compromise judicial independence either, a basic feature of our Constitution.

    A judge by his conduct of being fair and just is supposed to earn for himself

    as well as the judiciary the trust and respect of the members of the bar as

    well as the litigants and all other stakeholders. If a complaint of misconduct

    committed by a Judge is received and if at an inquiry conducted under the

    PROCEDURE the allegations against such a Judge are found to have sufficient

    substance, he cannot claim any immunity - either by citing abrogation of his
53
Fundamental Rights or breach of the constitutional scheme for removal of a

    Judge by initiating proceedings for impeachment - that his conduct is not open

    to be commented upon by the Committee or even by the CJI.
120. We see no reason to hold that para 5(b) of the PROCEDURE in any manner

    transgresses or is in conflict with any constitutional provision.


ANSWER TO QUESTION (V)
121. We have noticed each and every stage through which the proceedings against

    the Petitioner have passed. Right from the constitution of the COMMITTEE till

    intimations were given to the President and the Prime Minister by the CJI - we

    have neither been shown nor is it a fact proved that either the CJI constituted

    COMMITTEE or the CJI acted in any manner in deviation of the PROCEDURE, except

    when the photographs/video footage were uploaded on the website of the

    Supreme Court. We wish to observe here that placing incriminating evidence

    available against a Judge under probe in the public domain is not a measure

    provided in the PROCEDURE, either expressly or by implication.
Indira Jaising
(supra) holds in clear terms that the inquiry under the PROCEDURE is for the

    information and satisfaction of the CJI and the report of inquiry is confidential

    and, therefore, such report cannot be made public. That being the clear

    position, we are inclined to hold the entire process under the PROCEDURE too

    as confidential having ascertainment of truth as one of its objectives. The

    demands of being fair and transparent, in such cases, have to yield to the

    confidential nature of the process. Thus, uploading of the photographs/video

    footage on the website of this Court cannot be viewed as a necessary

    requirement of the “In-house Procedure” and, thus, approved. But, then
54
again, nothing really turns on the uploading of the photographs/video footage

    since the Petitioner, as observed above, did not have any grievance in relation

    thereto which is obvious from his failure to question such uploading at an

    appropriate time thereby allowing a situation to grow where the Court is faced

    with a fait accompli. Even in this writ petition, no relief is claimed in respect

    of such uploading.
122. Now that nothing is pending at the end of the Supreme Court and/or the CJI,

    the Petitioner may exercise his rights in accordance with law as and when an

    appropriate occasion arises.
Answer to Question (VI)
123. The CJI, as the leader of the judiciary, apart from his various other duties

    owes a duty to the people of the country to keep the justice delivery system

    pure, clean and unpolluted. It is unreasonable to even think that despite an

    incident of the present nature, the CJI would wait for the Parliament to take

    action. As observed before, it is up to the Parliament whether or not to activate
Article 124.
Left to him, the CJI upon being informed of a Judge’s remissness

    does have the authority – moral, ethical and legal – to take such necessary

    action as is warranted to keep institutional integrity intact. Any adverse impact

    on the credibility of the institution could prove dear. It is keeping in view such

    concerns and the legal position of the President being the ultimate appointing

    authority of Judges and the Prime Minister being the head of the Council of

    Ministers, upon whose aid and advice the President acts under our
55
Constitution, coupled with receipt of complaints from the office of the

    President that we find the provision in paragraph 7(ii) of the PROCEDURE

    requiring the CJI to write to the President and the Prime Minister along with

    the report of the Committee to be quite in order, legal and valid. We repat,

    the office of the CJI is not to be regarded as a post office that the report should

    only be routed through the CJI without his observations.
124. We say again, we are unaware like the Petitioner of what the CJI remarked

    while forwarding the REPORT of the COMMITTEE and the Petitioner’s response

    dated 6th May, 2025 to the President and the Prime Minister. However, if

    indeed, the CJI has reiterated the finding of the Committee as contained in

    the REPORT and recommended initiation of proceedings for removal of the

    Petitioner from office, such a recommendation cannot be impeached on any

    valid and legal ground. Notwithstanding that the recommendation of the CJI

    carries much weight, one has to realize that the intimation given by the CJI,

    under the PROCEDURE, is for the eyes of the President and the Prime Minister

    alone and not anyone else.
125. Therefore, we see no reason to hold paragraph 7(ii) of the PROCEDURE as

    infringing either any provision of the Constitution or the concept of separation

    of powers.
126. Before we conclude, one other contention is left to be dealt with which was

    advanced by Mr. Rohatgi. It could be true that the then CJI granted an

    opportunity of hearing to the Judge of the Calcutta High Court under probe.

    However, it must be realised that it was a step going beyond the PROCEDURE.

    Here, the CJI has scrupulously followed the PROCEDURE which does not
56
envisage a hearing to be given to the Judge under probe after he has

    expressed his inability to resign or voluntarily retire. Even though a hearing

    ‘could have been given’, it cannot be equated with ‘should have been given’

    in the absence of any such express obligation in the PROCEDURE. The

    contention, thus, fails to impress us.
CONCLUSION
127. For the foregoing reasons, no interference is called for. The writ petition stands

    dismissed.
………………………………………J.
                                                        (DIPANKAR DATTA)



                                                   ……………….………………………J.
                                                   (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)


   NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 07, 2025.
57