[Cites
60
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sukhdev Yadav @ Pehalwan vs The State Of (Nct Of Delhi) on 12 August, 2025
2025 INSC 969


                                                                                  REPORTABLE


                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.3271 OF 2025
                            (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.17915 of 2024)

                   SUKHDEV YADAV @ PEHALWAN                                    …APPELLANT

                                        VERSUS

                   STATE OF (NCT OF DELHI) & OTHERS                            …RESPONDENTS




                                                 JUDGMENT
NAGARATHNA, J.
Leave granted.
2.       The salient question that arises in this appeal is, whether,

                   an accused/convict who has completed his “life imprisonment for

                   a fixed term” such as twenty years of actual sentence without

                   remission, as in the instant case, is entitled to be released from
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
BORRA LM VALLI
Date: 2025.08.12
18:26:44 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 62
prison on completion of such a sentence. In other words, on

completion of the fixed term of sentence as aforesaid, should the

accused/convict    seek   remission     of   his   sentence    of     “life

imprisonment” by making an application to the competent

authority for seeking “reduction of his sentence”.


Background Facts:
3.    By the impugned order dated 25.11.2024, the learned single

Judge of the Delhi High Court in W.P. (Crl.) No.1682 of 2023

rejected the petition filed under
Article 226
of the Constitution of

India seeking release of the appellant on furlough for a period of

three weeks considering the apprehension expressed by the

complainant i.e. mother of the deceased victim and respondent

No.3 herein.
3.1 Being aggrieved by the said order dated 25.11.2024, the

appellant has preferred this appeal.
3.2 The relevant facts of the case are that on 17.02.2002, FIR

No.192/2002     was   registered   at   P.S.   Kavi   Nagar,    District

Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh under
Section 364
/
34
of the Indian

Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter, “
IPC
”) on the basis of a complaint
Page 2 of 62
filed by Smt. Nilam Katara i.e. complainant and mother of the

deceased. On 28.05.2008, after completion of investigation and

trial, his co-convicts - Vikas Yadav and Vishal Yadav - were

convicted for commission of offences under
Sections 302
,
364
,
201
read with
Section 34
of the IPC in SC No.78/2002 by the Additional

Sessions Judge (01), New Delhi, (“Sessions Court”). Thereafter,

they were sentenced to undergo life imprisonment as well as fine

of Rs.1,00,000/- each under
Section 302
of the IPC and in default

of payment of fine, to undergo simple imprisonment for one year.

They were sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for ten years and

fine of Rs.50,000/- each for their conviction under
Section 364
/
34
IPC and in default of payment of fine, to undergo simple

imprisonment of six months, and rigorous imprisonment for five

years and fine of Rs.10,000/- each under
Section 201
/
34
IPC and

in default of payment of fine, to undergo simple imprisonment for

three months. All sentences were to run concurrently.


3.3 On 06.07.2011, the appellant herein was found guilty of

commission of offences under
Sections 302
,
364
,
201
read with
Section 34
of the IPC in SC No.76/2008 by the Sessions Court.
Page 3 of 62
Subsequently, on 12.07.2011, the appellant was sentenced to

undergo life imprisonment and fine of Rs.10,000/- for commission

of the offence under
Section 302
IPC and in default of payment of

fine to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years; rigorous

imprisonment for seven years and fine of          Rs.5,000/- for

commission of the offence under
Section 364
IPC, and in default

of payment of fine, rigorous imprisonment for six months; rigorous

imprisonment for three years and fine of      Rs.5,000/- for his

conviction under
Section 201
IPC and in default of payment of

fine, rigorous imprisonment for six months. All sentences were to

run concurrently.
3.4 Aggrieved by their conviction, the co-convicts and the

appellant herein preferred criminal appeals before the High Court

of Delhi. By judgment dated 02.04.2014, the Criminal Appeal

No.145/2012 preferred by the appellant herein was dismissed by

the High Court of Delhi and his conviction was upheld. During the

pendency of the aforesaid appeals, the State had also preferred

Criminal Appeal No.1322/2011 against the appellant along with

Criminal Appeal No.958/2008 against the co-convicts seeking
Page 4 of 62
enhancement of sentence of life imprisonment to imposition of

death penalty. The complainant had also preferred Criminal

Revision Petition No.369/2008 against the order of the Sessions

Court, seeking enhancement of sentence for all convicts including

the appellant herein. By judgment dated 06.02.2015, the High

Court disposed of all appeals and the revision petition by modifying

the sentence imposed upon the appellant by judgment and order

dated 12.07.2021 and directed that he shall undergo the sentence

as extracted hereunder:-
“881                                xxx
      (I)
     For              Sentences awarded to       Sentence   awarded
     commission       each of Vikas Yadav &      to Sukhdev Yadav
     of    offences   Vishal Yadav
     under
     Section          Life      imprisonment     Life    imprisonment
     302/34
IPC
which shall be 25 years    which shall be 20
                      of actual imprisonment     years     of    actual
                      without consideration      imprisonment
                      of remission, and fine     without consideration
                      of Rs.50 lakh each         of remission, and fine
                                                 of Rs.10,000/-.”
                      Upon      default     in   Upon      default    in
                      payment of fine, they      payment of fine, he
                      shall be liable to         shall be liable to
                      undergo rigorous           undergo         simple
                      imprisonment of 3          imprisonment for one
                      years.                     month
     Section          Rigorous                   10 years rigorous
     364/34
IPC
imprisonment for 10        imprisonment      with
                      years with a fine of Rs.   fine of Rs. 5,000/-,
                      2 lakh each,
Page 5 of 62
For             Sentences awarded to       Sentence   awarded
 commission      each of Vikas Yadav &      to Sukhdev Yadav
 of   offences   Vishal Yadav
 under
                 Upon      default     in   Upon      default    in
                 payment of fine, they      payment of fine, he
                 shall be liable to         shall be liable to
                 undergo        rigorous    undergo          simple
                 imprisonment for 6         imprisonment for 15
                 months                     days.
 Section         Rigorous                   5    years     rigorous
 201/34
IPC
imprisonment for 5         imprisonment       with
                 years with a fine of Rs.   fine of Rs. 5,000/-,
                 2 lakh each,
                 Upon      default     in   Upon    default   in
                 payment of fine, they      payment of fine, he
                 shall be liable to         shall be liable to
                 undergo        rigorous    undergo       simple
                 imprisonment for 6         imprisonment for 15
                 months                     days.
                                            (underlining by us)
(II) It is directed that the sentences for conviction of the
offences under
Section 302
/
34
and
Section 364
/
34
IPC
shall run concurrently. The sentence under
Section
201
/
34
IPC shall run consecutively to the other sentences
for the discussion and reasons in paras 741 to 745 above.

(III) The amount of the fines shall be deposited with the
trial court within a period of six months from today.
xxx
(V) Amount of fines deposited by Sukhdev Yadav and other
fines deposited by Vikas Yadav and Vishal Yadav shall be
forwarded to the Delhi Legal Services Authority to be
utilized under the Victims Compensation Scheme.

(VI) In case an application for parole or remission is moved
by the defendants before the appropriate government,
notice thereof shall be given to Nilam Katara as well as Ajay
Katara by the appropriate government and they shall also
be heard with regard thereto before passing of orders
thereon.”
Page 6 of 62
3.5 Aggrieved by the order of the High Court, the appellant herein

preferred Criminal Appeal Nos.1528-1530/2015 before this Court

which, along with appeals preferred by co-convicts, was disposed

of by a common judgment dated 03.10.2016, with a singular

modification in the sentence, i.e. the sentence under
Section

201
/
34
IPC shall run concurrently.
3.6 Since the year 2015, the appellant herein has been

intermittently granted parole for short periods. On 30.11.2022, the

appellant moved an application seeking grant of first spell of

furlough for a period of three weeks as per Rule 1223 of the Delhi

Prison Rules, 2018 (for short, “2018 Rules”) before the Director

General of Prisons, Prison Headquarters, Tihar (hereinafter,

“Competent Authority”). However, the same came to be rejected

vide order dated 28.04.2023 considering the nature of crime

committed, the sentence awarded and apprehension that the

appellant may abscond, disturb law and order and cause

irreparable damage to the victim’s family.
3.7 Aggrieved by the order rejecting the application for grant of

furlough, the appellant filed Writ Petition Criminal No.1682/2023
Page 7 of 62
before the High Court of Delhi seeking a writ of mandamus

directing the State to release the petitioner on furlough for a period

of three weeks. By impugned order dated 25.11.2024, the writ

petition preferred by the appellant was dismissed by the High

Court on the ground, inter alia, that there were serious

apprehensions with regard to threat to life and liberty of the

complainant and the star witness.
4.    Hence, this appeal.
5.    By Order dated 06.01.2025, this Court issued notice in the

instant matter. During subsequent hearings, this Court passed

the following order on 24.02.2025:
“We have perused the judgment of the High Court dated
     6th February, 2025 in Criminal Appeal No.145 of 2012. As
     regards the sentence awarded to the petitioner, in
     paragraph 881 of the operative part of the judgment, it is
     stated thus:
"Life imprisonment which shall be 20 years of actual
       imprisonment without consideration of remission, and
       fine of Rs.10,000/-."
The learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for
     the respondent State of Delhi states that even after
     completion of 20 years of actual imprisonment, the State
     Government     will    not    release   the    petitioner,
     notwithstanding what is stated in paragraph 881 of the
     judgment of the High Court which has attained finality.
Page 8 of 62
We direct the Secretary of the Home Department of the
      State of NCT of Delhi to file an affidavit making a statement
      on oath on the question whether after completing 20 years
      of actual sentence, the petitioner will be released. An
      affidavit to be filed by 28th February, 2025.
List on 3rd March, 2025.”
                                             (underlining by us)

5.1    On 03.03.2025, this Court adjourned the matter for two

weeks on the assurance of the learned Additional Solicitor General

(ASG) appearing for the State that the case of the appellant for

remission shall be considered and decided within a period of two

weeks from the date of the order. However, as the same was not

done by the next date of hearing i.e. 17.03.2025; this Court issued

notice to the Principal Secretary of the Home Department of Delhi

Government calling upon him to indicate why action under the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971
should not be initiated against him.

The order of this Court recorded as follows:
“A solemn statement on instructions of the State
      Government was recorded in this order. Now we are
      informed that Sentence Review Board is likely to consider
      the case of the petitioner today. The State Government has
      not shown elementary courtesy of making an application
      for grant of extension of time.
We, therefore, issue notice to the Principal Secretary of the
      Home Department of Delhi Government calling upon him
      to show why action under the
Contempt of Courts Act,
      1971
should not be initiated against him.
Page 9 of 62
Notice of contempt is made returnable on 28th March,
      2025. We direct the Secretary to remain present through
      video conference.”

5.2    Pertinently, during the pendency of the instant appeal, the

appellant completed twenty years of actual incarceration on

09.03.2025.
5.3    On 28.03.2025, this Court listed the matter on 22.04.2025

for considering the issue whether the appellant is entitled to be

released on completion of actual twenty years of incarceration.
However, on 22.04.2025, despite its clear and advance notice to

all parties that this Court will consider the aforesaid substantive

question of sentencing, the learned ASG raised a preliminary

objection after a half an hour of arguments that since the appellant

had not canvassed this ground in his petition, this Court could not

go into the question. In these circumstances, the appellant was

directed to file an amended petition within three days from the date

of the order, which recorded as follows:
“The learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner
      completed his submissions. The learned ASG appearing
      for the State of NCT of Delhi, after making submissions for
      half an hour, raised a preliminary objection that the
      petitioner has not raised a plea in this Petition that he is
      entitled to be released after undergoing actual sentence of
Page 10 of 62
20 years. Thus, the submission in short was that this
    Court cannot go into this question. As indicated in the
    earlier two orders, which we have quoted above, make it
    clear that we had put the learned counsel for the parties
    to the notice that the issue whether the petitioner is
    entitled to be released on completion of 20 years of
    incarceration will be considered today. While the learned
    ASG was arguing, we thought that the Advocates waiting
    for other cases should not be made to wait as remaining
    part of the day’s time was likely to be consumed in this
    case. Therefore, at 3:15 p.m., we discharged the rest of the
    cases on the cause list and informed the members of the
    Bar that those cases will not be taken up. Fifteen minutes
    thereafter, this preliminary objection was raised by the
    learned ASG. Therefore, raising such a preliminary
    objection after arguing the case for half an hour especially
    in the light of the two orders which we have quoted above,
    is unfair to the other litigants whose cases were listed
    before this Court today. Since this strong objection has
    been raised, we permit the petitioner to amend the Petition
    for raising the contention noted in the earlier orders,
    though this amendment is strictly not required in view of
    our earlier orders. We direct the petitioner to file an
    amended petition within three days from today with an
    advance copy to the learned counsel representing the
    respondents.”


5.4 On 07.05.2025, the application seeking permission to amend

the special leave petition was allowed by this Court. Having

completed twenty years of actual incarceration on 09.03.2025, the

appellant also moved I.A. No.147782/2025 seeking release on

furlough for a suitable period during the pendency of instant

special leave petition. By Order dated 25.06.2025, this Court
Page 11 of 62
allowed the application and granted the relief of furlough to the

appellant for a period of three months from the date of release,

subject to appropriate terms and conditions to be imposed by the

learned trial court. The said order reads as under:
“I.A. No.147782/2025 in SLP (Crl.) No.17915/2024

        We have heard Shri Siddharth Mridul, learned senior
    counsel for the petitioner, Mrs. Archana Pathak Dave,
    learned A.S.G. for the respondent(s)/State and Ms. Vrinda
    Bhandari, learned counsel for respondent No.2.
This interlocutory application has been filed by the
    petitioner seeking the relief of his release on furlough for a
    suitable period during the pendency of the related special
    leave petition.
Be it stated that the related SLP(Crl) No. 17915/2024
    has been preferred by the petitioner against the order
    dated 25.11.2024 passed by the High Court of Delhi in
    W.P. (Crl.)
No.1682/2023 [Sukhdev Yadav @ Pehalwan Vs.
    State (NCT of Delhi
] whereby and whereunder prayer of the
    petitioner for grant of furlough was rejected.
Be it stated that petitioner was convicted by the Trial
    Court under Sections 302, 364 and 201 read with
Section
    34
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (
IPC
) and sentenced to
    undergo imprisonment for life.
In Criminal Appeal No.145/2012, the High Court
    passed judgment and order dated 06.02.2015 enhancing
    the sentence of the petitioner to life imprisonment which
    shall be 20 years of actual imprisonment without
    consideration of remission and fine of Rs.10,000/-. This
    order of the High Court has been affirmed by this Court.
Learned senior counsel for the petitioner submits that
    petitioner had completed 20 years of actual imprisonment
Page 12 of 62
without consideration of remission on 09.03.2025.
However, prior thereto the related Writ Petition, i.e., W.P.
(Crl.) No.1682/2023 was filed before the High Court
seeking furlough for a period of three weeks.
As noted above, by the impugned order dated
25.11.2024, the said prayer was rejected.
In the course of hearing of the main SLP, this Court
permitted the petitioner to amend the Special Leave
Petition incorporating the ground that petitioner’s
sentence would come to an end on undergoing 20 years of
actual incarceration without remission.
In the hearing today, learned A.S.G very fairly submits
that since it is a matter of furlough, Court may consider
passing appropriate order. But, at the same time, the
security of the informant should also be taken into
consideration by the Court as she has already been offered
security by the State because of the circumstances
surrounding the case.
Learned counsel for respondent No.2 vehemently
objects to the prayer of the petitioner. She submits that
conduct of the petitioner leaves much to be desired and
would not entitle him to any discretionary relief from the
Court. In this connection, she has referred to an order
dated 06.02.2025 passed by a learned Judge of the High
Court in W.P. (Crl.) No.1848/2020 whereby the learned
Judge recused herself from hearing the matter observing
that attempts have been made to influence the Court.

    While such conduct is highly deplorable and
condemnable, there is nothing on record to show whether
any enquiry was conducted to find out who had indulged
in such reprehensible activity. In the absence thereof, it
would not be just and proper to deny relief to the petitioner
on that count.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and
taking an overall view of the matter, more particularly the
Page 13 of 62
factum that petitioner has completed 20 years of
     uninterrupted incarceration without remission, as ordered
     by the High Court which was affirmed by the Supreme
     Court, we are of the view that it is a fit case where
     petitioner deserves to be released on furlough at least for
     a limited duration. Of course, necessary conditions would
     have to be imposed on the petitioner so that liberty of
     furlough is not misused. That apart, safety and security of
     respondent Nos.2 and 3 are also required to be protected.
That being the position, we grant furlough to the
     petitioner for a period of three months from the date of
     release. Petitioner shall be produced before the learned
     Trial Court within a maximum period of seven days from
     today, whereafter the learned Trial Court shall release the
     petitioner on furlough on appropriate terms and
     conditions including concerning safety and security of
     respondent Nos.2 and 3.
The Interlocutory Application is disposed of.

         List the matters before the Regular Bench on
     29.07.2025, as already ordered.”
6.    Admittedly, during the pendency of the appeal before this

Court, on 09.03.2025 the appellant has completed his jail

sentence inasmuch as he served the sentence which was awarded

to him under
Section 302
/
34
of the IPC vide paragraph 881 of the

order of the High Court of Delhi dated 06.02.2015. For

convenience, the same is extracted as under:
“Life Imprisonment which shall be twenty years of actual
     imprisonment without consideration of remission and fine
     of Rs.10,000/-.”
                                           (underlining by us)
Page 14 of 62
Submissions:
7.    We have heard learned senior counsel Sri Siddharth Mridul

for the appellant and learned ASG Ms. Archana Pathak Dave

appearing for the respondent(s)-State and learned senior counsel

Ms. Aparajita Singh for the respondent No.2/complainant and

perused the material on record.
7.1    It was submitted by learned senior counsel appearing on

behalf of the appellant that the appellant has complied with the

sentence imposed on him and learned Additional Solicitor General

appearing for the respondent(s)-State has also acknowledged the

fact that he has completed twenty years of actual imprisonment.

In the circumstances, the appellant is entitled to be released on

completion of his sentence. Consequently, it was contended that

it would be unnecessary to go into the question of the correctness

or otherwise of the impugned order dated 25.11.2024 and the

appeal may be allowed and disposed of in the aforesaid terms on

the basis of the aforesaid admitted facts.
7.2    Learned senior counsel Sri Mridul further contended that

although the application filed by the appellant for release on
Page 15 of 62
furlough has not been accepted and in fact, the writ petition filed

by the appellant under
Article 226
of the Constitution has been

dismissed by the High Court, the significant fact that on

09.03.2025, the appellant has completed his sentence inasmuch

as he has undergone incarceration for twenty years and has also

paid the fine would entitle him to be released. Since by interim

order dated 25.06.2025, this Court has released the appellant on

furlough, the appellant may be stated to have been released from

jail on completion of his sentence, if not wanted in any other case.


7.3   Per contra, learned ASG appearing for the respondent-State

contended that the appellant has been sentenced to undergo life

imprisonment. That the period of incarceration being twenty years

is to be construed as the period without remission. However, on

completion of the period of twenty years, the Sentence Review

Board would have to consider whether the appellant is entitled to

be released from jail or not. This would be on remission of his life

sentence. That having regard to the serious crime in which the

appellant has been convicted of and the fact that he has sustained

the sentence of life imprisonment, he cannot straightaway seek
Page 16 of 62
release from jail in the absence of any application being made

seeking remission of his sentence. In other words, it was

contended that it is necessary to consider as to, whether, the

appellant is entitled for release from jail at all inasmuch as he has

been sentenced to life imprisonment and hence, unless there is

an order of remission of sentence passed in favour of the appellant

remitting his sentence of life imprisonment, he cannot be released

from jail. Therefore, on completion of the period of three months

furlough granted by this Court, the appellant has to surrender

and return to jail.
7.4   Learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent-

complainant also echoed the very same submission and in that

regard referred to the judgments of this Court in the case of Navas

alias
Mulanavas vs. State of Kerala
, 2024 SCC OnLine SC

315 (“Navas alias Mulanavas”) and Maru Ram vs. Union of

India, (1981) 1 SCC 107 (“Maru Ram”), to contend that the

appellant cannot be simply released from jail only because he has

completed twenty years of incarceration when in fact he has been

sentenced to life imprisonment. It was therefore vehemently
Page 17 of 62
submitted by the learned senior counsel for the respective

respondents that the appeal would not call for any further

consideration and the same may be dismissed.
7.5   By way of reply arguments, learned senior counsel Sri

Mridul submitted that there is a distinction between release from

jail on completion of sentence of imprisonment and remission of

a sentence. He pointed out that remission of a sentence is

considered when the sentence is not yet complete whereas release

from jail is only upon completion of the period of incarceration

that the convict was sentenced to undergo. It is not in dispute that

on 09.03.2025, the appellant herein completed his jail sentence

of imprisonment being twenty years and therefore was entitled to

be released from jail; however, the respondents have raised highly

technical and irrelevant submissions before this Court which has

delayed the release. Nevertheless, this Court has been pleased to

grant a furlough order dated 25.06.2025 only for a period of three

months, which implies that he would have to surrender on

completion of the said period.
Page 18 of 62
7.6   Learned senior counsel argued that the course of action

suggested by the State to be taken in the case of the appellant,

that is, the appellant for seeking remission of his sentence must

be made by him (which could also be rejected) would be illegal and

contrary to the sentence of imprisonment imposed on the

appellant and in violation of appellant’s right to liberty. That the

submissions of the learned senior counsel for the respondents

would tantamount to sitting in judgment over a judicial order

imposing the sentence on the appellant herein by the High Court

which has been sustained by this Court and, therefore, no other

authority can interfere with the sentence imposed on the

appellant. Learned senior counsel therefore contended that the

appellant would no longer require to plead for remission of a

sentence or for furlough in future as he has completed his period

of imprisonment being twenty years and is, therefore, entitled to

be released on such completion of a sentence, if not wanted in any

other case. Learned senior counsel for the appellant submitted

that the objections raised by the respondents are wholly

unsustainable and therefore, bearing in mind the aforesaid facts,

the appeal may be allowed.
Page 19 of 62
8.     In light of the aforesaid rival contentions, it is necessary to

delineate on the distinction between remission of sentence and

release on completion of a sentence of an accused-convict in the

case of a life sentence. But before that, it is necessary to

understand the meaning of the phrase “life imprisonment”.

Life Imprisonment:
8.1
Section 53
of the IPC speaks about various punishments

which could be ordered against the offenders and imprisonment

for life is one of such punishment. The said Section reads as under:
“53. Punishments.- The punishments to which offenders
      are liable under the provisions of this Code are –

      First. – Death;
Secondly. – Imprisonment for life;
***[Clause “Thirdly” omitted by Act 17 of 1949,
sec. 2
(w.e.f. 6.4.1949].
Fourthly. – Imprisonment, which is of two descriptions,
      namely :-
(1) Rigorous, that is, with hard labour;
(2) Simple;
Fifthly. – Forfeiture of property;
Sixthly. – Fine.”
Section 57
of the IPC is also relevant and is extracted as

under:
Page 20 of 62
“57. Fractions of terms of punishment.– In calculating
      fractions of terms of punishment, imprisonment for life
      shall be reckoned as equivalent to imprisonment for
      twenty years.”

8.2     The expression life imprisonment has been considered in

various decisions of this Court which could be adverted to at this

stage.
In
Gopal Vinayak Godse vs. State of Maharashtra
, AIR

1961 SC 600 (“Gopal Vinayak Godse”), it was observed that a

sentence of imprisonment for life must prima facie be treated as

imprisonment for the whole of the remaining period of the

convicted person’s natural life.
In Ashok Kumar alias
Golu vs.

Union of India
, AIR 1991 SC 1792, it was observed that the

expression “imprisonment for life” must be read in the context of
Section 45
, IPC. Then, it would ordinarily mean imprisonment for

the full or complete span of life.
In
Saibanna vs. State of

Karnataka
, (2005) 4 SCC 165, it was observed that life

imprisonment means to serve imprisonment for the remainder of

his life unless sentence is commuted or remitted. It cannot be

equated with any fixed term.
In
Swamy Shraddananda (2) vs.

State     of   Karnataka
,   (2008)   13   SCC    767      (“Swamy
Page 21 of 62
Shraddananda (2)”), it was observed that it is conclusively settled

by a catena of decisions that the punishment of imprisonment for

life handed down by the Court means a sentence of imprisonment

for the convict for the rest of his life. However, further discussion

of this case is made later.
In
Mohinder Singh vs. State of

Punjab
, (2013) 3 SCC 294, it was observed that life imprisonment

cannot be equivalent to imprisonment for fourteen years or twenty

years or even thirty years, rather it always means the whole

natural life.
In
Yakub Abdul Razak Memon vs. State of

Maharashtra
,      (2013)   13    SCC   1,   it   was   observed        that

imprisonment for life is to be treated as rigorous imprisonment for

life. It was also observed that life imprisonment cannot be

considered as equivalent to imprisonment for fourteen years or

twenty years or even thirty years, rather it always means the whole

natural life.
8.3    However, in a catena of cases, the punishment of

imprisonment for life has been restricted to certain number of

years, for instance twenty years or thirty years or thirty-five years.
In such a situation, would it mean, on completion of the fixed term

of imprisonment, say twenty years as in the instant case, that the
Page 22 of 62
accused-convict would have to continue to remain in jail for the

remainder of his life or become entitled to be released from jail on

completion of the term of twenty years?
8.4   Krishna Iyer, J. in
Mohd. Giasuddin vs. State of A.P.
,

(1977) 3 SCC 287, quoted (at SCC p. 290, para 9) George Bernard

Shaw, the famous satirist who said, “If you are to punish a man

retributively, you must injure him. If you are to reform him, you must

improve him and, men are not improved by injuries.” According to

him, humanity today views sentencing as a process of reshaping a

person who has deteriorated into criminality and the modern

community has a primary stake in the rehabilitation of the

offender as a means of social defence.       Thus, the reformative

approach to punishment should be the object of criminal law, in

order to promote rehabilitation without offending communal

conscience and to secure social justice.
9.    In Swamy Shraddananda (2), a three-Judge Bench of this

Court considered the question as to how would the sentence of

imprisonment for life works out in actuality. This Court pondered

over the definition of the word “life” in
Section 45
of the IPC which
Page 23 of 62
has been defined to denote the life of the human being, unless the

contrary appears from the context. Further, whether this Court,

which commutes the punishment of death awarded by the trial

court and confirmed by the High Court as life imprisonment, would

mean literally for life or in any case, for a period far in excess of

fourteen years. It was observed that this Court in its judgment may

make its intent explicit and state clearly that the sentence handed

over to the convict is imprisonment till his last breath or, life

permitting, imprisonment for a term not less than twenty, twenty-

five or even thirty years. But once the judgment is pronounced, the

execution of the sentence passes into the hands of the executive

and is governed by the different provisions of law. This Court

questioned as to how the sentence of imprisonment for life (till its

full natural span) given to a convict as a substitute for the death

sentence be viewed differently and segregated from the ordinary

life imprisonment given as the sentence of first choice.


9.1 The appellant in the said case, on conviction, was imposed

the death sentence, which was confirmed by the High Court. A

two-Judge Bench of this Court concurred on the conviction of the
Page 24 of 62
appellant but was unable to agree on the punishment to be meted

out to him. Sinha, J. felt that in the facts and circumstances of the

case the punishment of life imprisonment, rather than death

would serve the ends of justice. However, he opined, the appellant

would not be released from prison till the end of his life. Katju, J.

on the other hand, was of the view that the appellant therein

deserves nothing but death penalty. Hence, the matter was

referred to a three-Judge Bench.
9.2   Aftab Alam, J. speaking for the three-Judge Bench, after

discussing the manner in which the crime was committed referred

to the judgments in
Machhi Singh vs. State of Punjab
, (1983) 3

SCC 470 (“Machhi Singh”) and Bachan Singh vs. State of

Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 684 (“Bachan Singh”). It was observed

that in Bachan Singh, the principle of “the rarest of rare” cases

was laid down and in Machhi Singh, this Court for practical

application, crystallised the principle into five definite categories of

cases of murder and in doing so also considerably enlarged the

scope for imposing death penalty. It was also observed that in

reality in the later decisions neither “the rarest of rare cases”
Page 25 of 62
principle nor the Machhi Singh categories were followed

uniformly and consistently. Holding that this Court was reluctant

to confirm the death sentence of the appellant therein, the

question about the punishment being commensurate to the

appellant’s crime was considered. Not accepting the fact that life

imprisonment could be equated to a term of fourteen years, it was

observed that “the answer lies in breaking this standardisation

that, in practice, renders the sentence of life imprisonment equal

to imprisonment for a period of no more than fourteen years: in

making it clear that the sentence of life imprisonment when

awarded as a substitute for death penalty would be carried out

strictly as directed by the Court.” This Court, therefore, thought it

fit to lay down a good and sound legal basis for imposing the

punishment of imprisonment for life, when awarded as substitute

for death penalty, beyond any remission so that it may be followed

in appropriate cases as a uniform policy not only by this Court but

also by the High Courts, being the superior courts in their

respective States.
Page 26 of 62
9.3 Referring to Sinha, J. order, that a life sentence was meant

to be “life sentence”, reference was also made to the judgments of

this Court in
Subash Chander vs. Krishan Lal
, (2001) 4 SCC

458;
Shri Bhagwan vs. State of Rajasthan
, (2001) 6 SCC 296;
Prakash Dhawal Khairnar (Patil) vs. State of Maharashtra
,

(2002) 2 SCC 35;
Ram Anup Singh vs. State of Bihar
, (2002) 6

SCC 686;
Mohd. Munna vs. Union of India
, (2005) 7 SCC 417

(“Mohd.
Munna”);
Jayawant Dattatraya Suryarao vs. State of

Maharashtra
, (2001) 10 SCC 109; and
Nazir Khan vs. State of

Delhi
, (2003) 8 SCC 461.
9.4 In the aforesaid seven decisions, this Court modified the

death sentence to imprisonment for life or in some case

imprisonment for a term of twenty years with a further direction

that the convict must not be released from prison for the rest of

his life or before actually serving the term of twenty years, as the

case may be, primarily on two premises: one, an imprisonment for

life, in terms of Section 53 read with
Section 45
of the IPC meant

imprisonment for the rest of life of the prisoner and two, a convict

undergoing life imprisonment has no right to claim remission. In
Page 27 of 62
support of the second premise, reliance was placed on the line of

decisions beginning from Gopal Vinayak Godse and upto Mohd.

Munna.
9.5 In Swamy Shraddananda (2), this Court took note of the

contention that to say that a convict undergoing a sentence of

imprisonment has no right to claim remission was not the same

as the Court, while imposing the punishment of imprisonment,

suspending the operation of the statutory provisions of remission

and restraining the appropriate Government from discharging its

statutory function. It was contended in the said case that just as

the Court could not direct the appropriate Government for

granting remission to a convicted prisoner, it was not open to the

Court to direct the appropriate Government not to consider the

case of a convict for grant of remission in sentence. It was

contended therein that giving punishment for an offence is a

judicial function but the execution of the punishment passes into

the hands of the executive and under the scheme of statute, the

Court had no control over the execution. This contention was

however, not accepted and held to be untenable. Referring to
Page 28 of 62
Sections 45
,
53
,
54
,
55
and
57
of the IPC, it was observed that

Section 57 provides that in calculating fractions of terms of

punishment, imprisonment for life shall be reckoned as equivalent

to imprisonment for twenty years. That
Section 57
of the IPC does

not in any way limit the punishment for imprisonment for life to a

term of twenty years. It only provides that imprisonment for life

shall be reckoned as imprisonment for twenty years while

calculating fraction of terms of punishment. It was observed that

the object and purpose of Section 57 would be clear by referring to
Sections 65
,
116
,
119
,
129
and
511
of the IPC.
9.6 Discussing on remission, it was pointed out that under the

Prison Acts and the Rules for good conduct and for doing certain

duties, etc. inside the jail, the prisoners are given some days’

remission on a monthly, quarterly, or annual basis. The days of

remission so earned by a prisoner are added to the period of his

actual imprisonment (including the period undergone as an

undertrial) to make up the term of sentence awarded by the Court.


9.7 Taking note of the way in which remission is actually allowed

in cases of life imprisonment, it was found necessary to make a
Page 29 of 62
special category for the very few cases where the death penalty

might be substituted by the punishment of imprisonment for life

or imprisonment for a term in excess of fourteen years and to put

that category beyond the application of remission. This Court

further observed that if the Court’s option is limited only to two

punishments, one a sentence of life imprisonment, for all intents

and purposes, of not more than fourteen years and the other

death, the Court may feel tempted and find itself nudged into

endorsing the death penalty which would be disastrous in certain

cases. The Court observed thus:
“A far more just, reasonable and proper course would be
    to expand the options and to take over what, as a matter
    of fact, lawfully belongs to the Court i.e. the vast hiatus
    between 14 years’ imprisonment and death. It needs to be
    emphasized that the Court would take recourse to the
    expanded option primarily because in the facts of the case,
    the sentence of 14 years’ imprisonment would amount to
    no punishment at all.”

9.8 Consequently, the three-Judge Bench agreed with the view

taken by Sinha, J. and substituted the death sentence given to the

appellant therein by imprisonment for life and directed that he

shall not be released from prison till the rest of his life.
Page 30 of 62
10. Thereafter, the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Union of

India vs. V. Sriharan
, (2016) 7 SCC 1 (“Sriharan”) considered,

inter alia, the following two questions:
“(i) As to whether the imprisonment for life means till the
    end of convict's life with or without any scope for
    remission?
(ii) Whether a special category of sentence instead of death
    for a term exceeding 14 years can be made by putting that
    category beyond grant of remission?”
10.1 The Constitution Bench speaking through Kalifulla, J.- for

the majority- observed that the first question relates to
Sections

53
and
45
of the IPC vis-à-vis the meaning of “life imprisonment”

as to whether it means imprisonment for the rest of one’s life or a

convict has a right to claim remission. The second question is

based on the ruling of Swamy Shraddananda (2).
10.2 Having noted the judgments of this Court in Gopal Vinayak

Godse and Maru Ram as well as other cases discussed therein

which have followed those decisions, it was observed that, “The

first part of the first question can be conveniently answered to the

effect that imprisonment for life in terms of Section 53 read with

Section 45 of the Penal Code only means imprisonment for rest of

the life of the prisoner subject, however, to the right to claim
Page 31 of 62
remission, etc. as provided under
Articles 72
and
161
of the

Constitution to be exercisable by the President and the Governor of

the State and also as provided under
Section 432
of the Criminal

Procedure Code.”


10.3 On the concept of remission in paragraph 62, it was

observed as under:
“62……Similarly, in the case of a life imprisonment,
    meaning thereby the entirety of one's life, unless there is a
    commutation of such sentence for any specific period,
    there would be no scope to count the earned remission. In
    either case, it will again depend upon an answer to the
    second part of the first question based on the principles
laid down in
Swamy Shraddananda (2).”
                                          (underlining by us)


10.4 With regard to the second part of the first question which

pertains to the special category of the sentence to be considered in

substitute of death penalty by imposing a life sentence i.e., the

entirety of the life or a term of imprisonment which can be less

than full life term but more than fourteen years and put that

category beyond application of remission which has been

propounded in paragraphs 91 and 92 of Swamy Shraddananda

(2), it was observed that the said dictum “has come to stay as on

this date”.
Page 32 of 62
10.5     Analysing the decision in Swamy Shraddananda (2) and

endorsing the same, it was observed that the death penalty
in that

case
was set aside although much anguish was expressed on the

nature of the crime and the life sentence for the rest of the life of

the convict therein was ordered by this Court. The justification for

the same was stated in paragraph 68 of Sriharan in the following

words:
“68. … But in an organised society where the Rule of Law
    prevails, for every conduct of a human being, right or
    wrong, there is a well-set methodology followed based on
    time tested, well-thought out principles of law either to
    reward or punish anyone, which were crystallised from
    time immemorial by taking into account very many factors,
    such as the person concerned, his or her past conduct, the
    background in which one was brought up, the educational
    and knowledge base, the surroundings in which one was
    brought up, the societal background, the wherewithal, the
    circumstances that prevailed at the time when any act was
    committed or carried out whether there was any pre-plan
    prevalent, whether it was an individual action or personal
    action or happened at the instance of anybody else or such
    action happened to occur unknowingly, so on so forth. It
    is for this reason, we find that the criminal law
    jurisprudence was developed by setting forth very many
    ingredients while describing the various crimes, and by
    providing different kinds of punishment and even relating
    to such punishment different degrees, in order to ensure
    that the crimes alleged are befitting the nature and extent
    of commission of such crimes and the punishments to be
    imposed meets with the requirement or the gravity of the
    crime committed.”
Page 33 of 62
10.6   After referring in detail to the judgment of this Court in

Swamy Shraddananda (2), it was observed that when by way of

a judicial decision, after a detailed analysis, having regard to the

proportionality of the crime committed, it is decided that the

offender deserves to be punished with the sentence of life

imprisonment i.e. till end of his life or for a specific period of twenty

years, thirty years or forty years, such a conclusion should survive

without any interruption. In such an event, it can be stated that

such punishment imposed will have no remission or other such

liberal approach should not come into effect to nullify such

imposition. Accepting the submission of learned Solicitor General

that there is no restriction to fix any period beyond fourteen years

and up to the end of one’s life span, it was stated that the Court

can sentence the accused to undergo imprisonment for a specified

period even beyond fourteen years without any scope for remission.
The Court can direct that such offender is not to be released early

and be kept in confinement for a longer period by imposition of an

appropriate sentence.
Page 34 of 62
10.7 Moving further it was observed that nowhere under the
IPC
is there any prohibition that the imprisonment cannot be imposed

for any specific period within the lifespan. Thus, when life

imprisonment is imposed, the Court can specify the period up to

which the said sentence of life should remain, befitting the nature

of the crime committed, when the Court’s conscience does not

persuade the death penalty. Therefore, the dictum in Swamy

Shraddananda (2) was approved by this Court by observing that

within the prescribed limit of life imprisonment, imprisonment for

a specified period would be a proportionate punishment having

regard to the nature of the crime as well as the interest of the

victim.
10.8      Therefore, the law-makers have thought it fit to prescribe

the minimum and maximum sentence to be imposed having regard

to the nature of crime and have left it to the Courts to determine

the kind of punishments that have to be imposed within the

prescribed limit under the relevant provision. In other words, while

the maximum extent of punishment of either death or life

imprisonment is provided for under the relevant provisions, it will
Page 35 of 62
be for the Courts to decide if, in its opinion, the imposition of death

may not be warranted, what should be the number of years of

imprisonment that would be judiciously and judicially more

appropriate. This is by taking into account, apart from the crime

itself, the interest of the society at large and other relevant factors

which cannot be put in any straight jacket formula.           The said

process of determination must be held to be available with the

courts by virtue of extent of the punishments provided for such

specified nature of crimes and such power is also to be derived

from those penal provisions themselves.
10.9    Further, it was noted that even with regard to the nature

of punishment imposed by the Sessions Court insofar as capital

punishment is concerned, the reference made to the Division

Bench of the High Court is in order to give a second look to the

findings arrived by the Sessions Court, both with regard to

conviction as well as with regard to the death penalty imposed. In

a death reference case, the High Court can commute the death

penalty to life imprisonment or for any specific period of more than

fourteen years i.e. twenty, thirty or so on, depending upon the
Page 36 of 62
gravity of the crime committed and the exercise of judicial

conscience vis-à-vis the offences proved to have been committed.

In conclusion, it was observed as under:
“105. We, therefore, reiterate that the power derived from
    the Penal Code for any modified punishment within the
    punishment provided for in the Penal Code for such
    specified offences can only be exercised by the High Court
    and in the event of further appeal only by the Supreme
    Court and not by any other court in this country. To put it
    differently, the power to impose a modified punishment
    providing for any specific term of incarceration or till the
    end of the convict's life as an alternate to death penalty,
    can be exercised only by the High Court and the Supreme
    Court and not by any other inferior court.”


10.10     Consequently,     the
ratio
laid   down   in
Swamy

Shraddananda (2) with regard to special category of sentence was

affirmed.
It was expressed that the opinion of this Court in
Sangeet vs. State of Haryana
, (2013) 2 SCC 452 that the

deprival of remission power of the appropriate Government by

awarding sentences of twenty or twenty-five years without any

remission was not permissible, was not in consonance with law

and hence
,
the said judgment
was overruled.
11. Recently, this Court in
Shiva Kumar             vs. State       of

Karnataka
, (2023) 9 SCC 817 (“Shiva Kumar”) reiterating the
Page 37 of 62
aforesaid observations made in Sriharan, observed that there is a

power which can be derived from the
IPC
to impose a fixed term

sentence or modified punishment which can only be exercised by

the High Court or in the event of any further appeal, by the

Supreme Court and not by any other Court.           It was further

observed that the Constitution Bench in Sriharan held that power

to impose a modified punishment of providing any specific term of

incarceration or till the end of convict’s life as an alternative to

death penalty, can be exercised only by the High Court and the

Supreme Court and not by any other inferior Court. More

pertinently, it was observed that the observations of the

Constitution Bench in Sriharan cannot be construed in a narrow

perspective. Oka, J. speaking for the Bench observed that “the

majority view in Sriharan cannot be construed to mean that such

a power cannot be exercised by the Constitutional Courts unless

the question is of commuting the death sentence”. For this,

paragraph 104 of the judgment of the Constitution Bench in

Sriharan was relied upon. Clarifying the position at paragraph 14

of the judgment in Shiva Kumar, Oka, J. held as under:
Page 38 of 62
“14. Hence, we have no manner of doubt that even in a
    case where capital punishment is not imposed or is not
    proposed, the constitutional courts can always exercise
    the power of imposing a modified or fixed-term sentence
    by directing that a life sentence, as contemplated by
    “secondly” in Section 53IPC, shall be of a fixed period of
    more than fourteen years, for example, of twenty years,
    thirty years and so on. The fixed punishment cannot be for
    a period less than 14 years in view of the mandate of
Section 433-A
CrPC.”
                                            (Underlining by us)
11.1 In the said case, the sentence imposed by the Fast Track

Court (Sessions Court) on the appellant therein to undergo

rigorous imprisonment for rest of his life for an offence punishable

under
Section 302
IPC was modified to the extent that the

appellant was directed to undergo thirty years of actual sentence

and to be released thereafter. The appeal was partly allowed to the

above extent.
12. Navas alias Mulanavas was a criminal appeal which arose

out of a death reference from the judgment of the Additional

Sessions Judge, Fast Track Court, Thrissur in Sessions Case

No.491 of 2006. The High Court had modified the death penalty to

imprisonment for life with the further direction that the accused

shall not be released from prison for a period of thirty years
Page 39 of 62
including the period already undergone with set off under
Section

428
of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, “
CrPC
”) alone.

The accused approached this Court assailing the aforesaid

judgments both on conviction as well as on sentence.              While

considering the alternative submission regarding the sentence of

imprisonment for thirty years without remission being excessive

and disproportionate, this Court speaking through one of us

(Viswanathan, J.) considered the judgments discussed above and

after a chronological survey of a large number of cases, observed

in paragraph 59 as under:
“59. A journey through the cases set out hereinabove
    shows that the fundamental underpinning is the principle
    of proportionality. The aggravating and mitigating
    circumstances which the Court considers while deciding
    commutation of penalty from death to life imprisonment,
    have a large bearing in deciding the number of years of
    compulsory imprisonment without remission, too. As a
    judicially trained mind pores and ponders over the
    aggravating and mitigating circumstances and in cases
    where they decide to commute the death penalty they
    would by then have a reasonable idea as to what would be
    the appropriate period of sentence to be imposed under
    the
Swamy Shraddananda
(supra) principle too. Matters
    are not cut and dried and nicely weighed here to formulate
    a uniform principle.
That is where the experience of the
    judicially trained mind comes in as pointed out in
V.
    Sriharan
(supra). Illustratively in the process of arriving at
    the number of years as the most appropriate for the case
    at hand, which the convict will have to undergo before
Page 40 of 62
which the remission powers could be invoked, some of the
    relevant factors that the courts bear in mind are : - (a) the
    number of deceased who are victims of that crime and their
    age and gender; (b) the nature of injuries including sexual
    assault if any; (c) the motive for which the offence was
    committed; (d) whether the offence was committed when
    the convict was on bail in another case; (e) the
    premeditated nature of the offence; (f) the relationship
    between the offender and the victim; (g) the abuse of trust
    if any; (h) the criminal antecedents; and whether the
    convict, if released, would be a menace to the society.
    Some of the positive factors have been, (1) age of the
    convict; (2) the probability of reformation of convict; (3) the
    convict not being a professional killer; (4) the
    socioeconomic condition of the accused; (5) the
    composition of the family of the accused and (6) conduct
    expressing remorse. These were some of the relevant
    factors that were kept in mind in the cases noticed above
    while weighing the pros and cons of the matter. The Court
    would be additionally justified in considering the conduct
    of the convict in jail; and the period already undergone to
    arrive at the number of years which the Court feels the
    convict should, serve as part of the sentence of life
    imprisonment and before which he cannot apply for
    remission. These are not meant to be exhaustive but
    illustrative and each case would depend on the facts and
    circumstances therein.”

12.1   Applying the aforesaid factors to the case, this Court

allowed the appeal in part by modifying the sentence imposed

under
Section 302
IPC by the High Court for a period of thirty

years’ of life imprisonment without remission to a period of twenty-
five years without remission, including the period already

undergone.
Page 41 of 62
13.   We have discussed the implications of the punishment

imposed on the appellant herein by analysing the same and

holding that the life imprisonment has been fixed at twenty years

of actual imprisonment without consideration of remission. This

means that within the twenty years of sentence the appellant could

not have sought any remission of his sentence. Therefore, it was

mandatory on the part of the appellant to have completed twenty

years of actual imprisonment without remission and pay fine of

Rs.10,000/- (Rupees ten thousand). This sentence imposed by the

High Court was affirmed by this Court except for the singular

modification already noted. Then, what would be the position after

completion of twenty years of actual imprisonment? Does it mean

that after the completion of twenty years of actual imprisonment

the appellant has to seek remission of his sentence inasmuch as

he has been awarded a life imprisonment or, on the other hand,

on completion of twenty years of actual imprisonment without

remission the appellant can be released from prison.
14.   The expression “remission” has been considered in a

number of judgments which we can discuss. This is as opposed to

the expression “parole and furlough” etc. With reference to the
Page 42 of 62
decisions of this Court and on a discussion of the expression

“remission”, it becomes clear that the said expression is used in

two nuances: firstly, when the remission of sentence would mean

a reduction in the sentence imposed on a convict without wiping

out of the conviction which does not amount to an acquittal. On

the other hand, remissions are also granted during the course of

undergoing a sentence on the basis of the certain legal

considerations. The same can be discussed in detail.


14.1 The principles covering grant of remission as distinguished

from concepts such as “commutation”, “pardon”, and “reprieve”

can be brought out with reference to a judgment of this Court

in
State (NCT of Delhi) vs. Prem Raj
, (2003) 7 SCC 121 (“Prem

Raj”).
Articles 72
and
161
deal with clemency powers of the

President of India and the Governor of a State respectively, and

also include the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or

remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the

sentences in certain cases. The power under
Article 72
, inter alia,

extends to all cases where the punishment or sentence is for an

offence against any law relating to a matter to which the executive
Page 43 of 62
power of the Union extends and in all cases where the sentence is

a sentence of death.
Article 161
states that the Governor of a State

shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or

remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the

sentence of any person convicted of any offence against any law

relating to a matter to which the executive power of the State

extends. It was observed in
the said judgment
that the powers

under
Articles 72
and
161
of the Constitution of India are absolute

and cannot be fettered by any statutory provision, such as,

Sections 432, 433 or 433-A of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
,

1973 (hereinafter, “
CrPC
”) or by any prison rules.

14.1.1    It was further observed in Prem Raj that a pardon is an

act of grace, proceeding from the power entrusted with the

execution of the laws, which exempts the individual on whom it is

bestowed from the punishment the law inflicts for a crime he has

committed. It affects both the punishment prescribed for the

offence and the guilt of the offender. But pardon has to be

distinguished from “amnesty” which is defined as a “general

pardon of political prisoners; an act of oblivion”. An amnesty would

result in the release of the convict but does not affect
Page 44 of 62
disqualification incurred, if any. “Reprieve” means a stay of

execution of a sentence, a postponement of a capital sentence.

“Respite” means awarding a lesser sentence instead of the penalty

prescribed in view of the fact that the accused has had no previous

conviction. It is tantamount to a release on probation for good

conduct under
Section 360
of the CrPC. On the other hand,

remission is reduction of a sentence without changing its

character. In the case of a remission, neither the guilt of the

offender is affected nor is the sentence of the court, except in the

sense that the person concerned does not suffer incarceration for

the entire period of the sentence, but is relieved from serving out

a part of it. Commutation is change of a sentence to a lighter

sentence of a different kind.
Section 432
of the CrPC empowers the

appropriate Government to suspend or remit sentences.

14.2    Further, a remission of sentence does not mean acquittal

and an aggrieved party still has every right to vindicate himself or

herself.
In this context, reliance could be placed on
Sarat

Chandra Rabha vs. Khagendranath Nath
, AIR 1961 SC 334,

wherein a Constitution Bench of this Court, while distinguishing

between a pardon and a remission, observed that an order of
Page 45 of 62
remission does not wipe out the offence and it also does not wipe

out the conviction. All that it does is to have an effect on the

execution of the sentence; though ordinarily a convicted person

would have to serve out the full sentence imposed by a court, he

need not do so with respect to that part of the sentence which has

been ordered to be remitted. An order of remission, thus, does not

in any way interfere with the order of the court; it affects only the

execution of the sentence passed by the court and frees the

convicted person from his liability to undergo the full term of

imprisonment inflicted by the court even though the order of

conviction and sentence passed by the court still stands as it is.

The power to grant remission is an executive power and cannot

have the effect which the order of an appellate or revisional court

would have of reducing the sentence passed by the trial court and

substituting in its place the reduced sentence adjudged by the

appellate or revisional court. According to Weater's Constitutional

Law, to cut short a sentence by an act of clemency is an exercise

of executive power which abridges the enforcement of the

judgment but does not alter it qua the judgment.
Page 46 of 62
14.3 Reliance       could      be      placed      on
State         of

Haryana vs. Mahender Singh
, (2007) 13 SCC 606, to observe

that a right to be considered for remission, keeping in view the

constitutional safeguards of a convict under
Articles 20
and
21
of

the Constitution of India, must be held to be a legal one. Such a

legal right emanates from not only the
Prisons Act, 1894
but also

from the Rules framed thereunder. Although no convict can be

said to have any constitutional right for obtaining remission in his

sentence (except under
Articles 72
and
161
), the policy decision

itself must be held to have conferred a right to be considered

therefor.
Whether by reason of a statutory rule or otherwise, if a

policy decision has been laid down, the persons who come within

the purview thereof are entitled to be treated equally -
vide State

of Mysore vs. H. Srinivasmurthy
, (1976) 1 SCC 817.
14.4
Satish vs. State of U.P.
, (2021) 14 SCC 580 can be

pressed into service to hold that the length of the sentence or the

gravity of the original crime cannot be the sole basis for refusing

premature release. Any assessment regarding a predilection to

commit crime upon release must be based on antecedents as well
Page 47 of 62
as conduct of the prisoner while in jail, and not merely on his age

or apprehensions of the victims and witnesses. It was observed

that although a convict cannot claim remission as a matter of

right, once a law has been made by the appropriate legislature, it

is not open for the executive authorities to surreptitiously subvert

its mandate. It was further observed that where the authorities are

found to have failed to discharge their statutory obligations despite

judicial directions, it would then not be inappropriate for a

Constitutional Court while exercising its powers of judicial review

to assume such task onto itself and direct compliance through a

writ of mandamus. Considering that the petitioners therein had

served nearly two decades of incarceration and had thus suffered

the consequences of their actions, a balance between individual

and societal welfare was struck by granting the petitioners therein

conditional premature release, subject to their continuing good

conduct. In the said case, a direction was issued to the State

Government to release the prisoners therein on probation in terms

of
Section 2
of the U.P. Prisoners Release on Probation Act, 1938

within a period of two weeks. Liberty was reserved to the

respondent State with the overriding condition that the said
Page 48 of 62
direction could be reversed or recalled in favour of any party or as

per the petitioner therein.
14.5 The following judgments of this Court are apposite to the

concept of remission:
14.5.1    In Maru Ram, a Constitution Bench considered the

validity of
Section 433-A
of the CrPC. Krishna Iyer, J. speaking for

the Bench, observed: (SCC p. 129, para 25)

    “25. … Ordinarily, where a sentence is for a definite term,
    the calculus of remissions may benefit the prisoner to
    instant release at the point where the subtraction results
    in zero.”


14.5.2    However, when it comes to life imprisonment, where the

sentence is indeterminate and of an uncertain duration, the result

of subtraction from an uncertain quantity is still an uncertain

quantity and release of the prisoner cannot follow except on some

fiction of quantification of a sentence of uncertain duration.


14.5.3    Referring to Gopal Vinayak Godse, it was observed

that
the said judgment
is an authority for the proposition that a

sentence of imprisonment for life is one of “imprisonment for the

whole of the remaining period of the convicted person's natural
Page 49 of 62
life”, unless the said sentence is commuted or remitted by an

appropriate authority under the relevant provisions of law. In the

aforesaid case, a distinction was drawn between remission in

sentence and life sentence. Remission, limited in time, helps

computation but does not ipso jure operate as release of the

prisoner. But, when the sentence awarded by the Judge is for a

fixed term, the effect of remissions may be to scale down the term

to be endured and reduce it to nil, while leaving the factum and

quantum of sentence intact. However, when the sentence is a life

sentence, remissions, quantified in time, cannot reach a point of

zero. Since Section 433-A deals only with life sentences,

remissions cannot entitle a prisoner to release. It was further

observed that remission, in the case of life imprisonment, ripens

into a reduction of sentence of the entire balance only when a final

release order is made. If this is not done, the prisoner will continue

to be in custody. The reason is that life sentence is nothing less

than lifelong imprisonment and remission vests no right to release

when the sentence is of life imprisonment nor is any vested right

to remission cancelled by compulsory fourteen years jail life as a

life sentence is a sentence for whole life.
Page 50 of 62
14.5.4    Interpreting Section 433-A, it was observed that it was

a savings clause in which there are three components. Firstly,
CrPC
generally governs matters covered by it. Secondly, if a special

or local law exists covering the same area, the latter law will be

saved and will prevail, such as short sentencing measures and

remission schemes promulgated by various States. The third

component is that if there is a specific provision to the contrary,

then it would override the special or local law. It was held that
Section 433-A
of the CrPC picks out of a mass of imprisonment

cases, a specific class of life imprisonment cases and subjects it

explicitly to a particularised treatment. Therefore,
Section 433-A
of the CrPC applies in preference to any special or local law. This

is because,
Section 5
of the CrPC expressly declares that specific

provision, if any, to the contrary will prevail over any special or

local law. Therefore,
Section 433-A
of the CrPC would prevail and

escape exclusion of
Section 5
thereof. The Constitution Bench

concluded that
Section 433-A
of the CrPC is supreme over the

remission rules and short-sentencing statutes made by various

States.
Section 433-A
of the CrPC does not permit parole or other

related release within a span of fourteen years.
Page 51 of 62
14.5.5      It was further observed that criminology must include

victimology as a major component of its concerns. When a murder

or other grievous offence is committed, the victims or other

aggrieved    persons   must     receive   reparation      and      social

responsibility of the criminal to restore the loss or heal the injury

is part of the punitive exercise although the length of the prison

term is no reparation to the crippled or bereaved.


14.5.6      Fazal Ali, J. in his concurring judgment in Maru Ram

observed that crime is rightly described as an act of warfare

against the community touching new depths of lawlessness.
According to him, the object of imposing a deterrent sentence is

threefold. While holding that a deterrent form of punishment may

not be the most suitable or ideal form of punishment, yet, the fact

remains that a deterrent punishment prevents occurrence of

offence. He further observed that
Section 433-A
of the CrPC is

actually a piece of social legislation which by one stroke seeks to

prevent dangerous criminals from repeating offences and on the

other hand, protects the society from harm and distress caused to

innocent persons. Therefore, he opined that where Section 433-A
Page 52 of 62
applies, no question of reduction of sentence arises at all unless

the President of India or the Governor of a State choose to exercise

their wide powers under
Article 72
or
Article 161
of the

Constitution respectively, which also have to be exercised

according to sound legal principles as any reduction or

modification in the deterrent punishment would, far from

reforming the criminal, be counterproductive.

14.6
State of Haryana vs. Mohinder Singh
, (2000) 3 SCC

394 is a case which arose under
Section 432
of the CrPC on

remission of sentence in which the difference between the terms

“bail”, “furlough” and “parole” having different connotations were

discussed. It was observed that furloughs are variously known as

temporary leaves, home visits or temporary community release

and are usually granted when a convict is suddenly faced with a

severe family crisis such as death or grave illness in the immediate

family and often the convict/inmate is accompanied by an officer

as part of the terms of temporary release of special leave. Parole is

the release of a prisoner temporarily for a special purpose or

completely before the expiry of the sentence, on promise of good

behaviour. Conditional release from imprisonment is to entitle a
Page 53 of 62
convict to serve remainder of his term outside the confines of an

institution on his satisfactorily complying all terms and conditions

provided in the parole order.
14.7    In
Poonam Lata vs. M.L. Wadhawan
, (1987) 3 SCC 347,

it was observed that parole is a provisional release from

confinement but it is deemed to be part of imprisonment. Release

on parole is a wing of reformative process and is expected to

provide opportunity to the prisoner to transform himself into a

useful citizen. Parole is thus, a grant of partial liberty or lessening

of restrictions on a convict prisoner but release on parole does not

change the status of the prisoner. When a prisoner is undergoing

sentence and confined in jail or is on parole or furlough, his

position is not similar to a convict who is on bail. This is because

a convict on bail is not entitled to the benefit of the remission

system. In other words, a prisoner is not eligible for remission of

sentence during the period he is on bail or when his sentence is

temporarily suspended. Therefore, such a prisoner who is on bail

is not entitled to get remission earned during the period he is on

bail.
Page 54 of 62
15.    The sentence imposed on the appellant herein, inter alia, is

recapitulated as under:
“Life imprisonment which shall be 20 years of actual
      imprisonment without consideration of remission, and fine
      of Rs.10,000/-.”

       The word “which” used after the words “life imprisonment”,

is an interrogative pronoun, related pronoun and determiner,

referring to something previously mentioned when introducing a

clause giving further information. Therefore, the sentence of life

imprisonment is determined as twenty years which is of actual

imprisonment. Further, during the period of twenty years, the

appellant cannot seek remission during his sentence of twenty

years of imprisonment i.e., after completion of fourteen years as

per
Section 433A
of the CrPC but must continue his sentence for

a period of twenty years without any remission whatsoever.

Therefore, the appellant has no right to make any application for

remission of the above sentence for a period of twenty years.


15.1 In Criminal Appeal Nos.1531-1533 of 2015 filed by Vikas

Yadav as well as in Criminal Appeal Nos.1528-1530 of 2015 which

also included the appeal filed by the appellant herein, the
Page 55 of 62
imposition of a fixed term sentence on the appellants by the High

Court was also questioned but this Court observed that such a

term of sentence on the appellants by the High Court could not be

found fault with. Placing reliance on
Gopal Singh vs. State of

Uttarakhand
, (2013) 7 SCC 545, at paragraph 84 of its judgment

in the aforesaid criminal appeal, this Court observed that “Judged

on the aforesaid parameters, we reiterate that the imposition of fixed

terms sentence is justified.”


15.2    In the instant case, as already noted, the life imprisonment

being   twenty   years   of     actual   imprisonment    was     without

consideration of remission. Soon after the period of twenty years

is completed, in our view, the appellant has to be simply released

from jail provided the other sentences run concurrently. The

appellant is not under an obligation to make an application

seeking remission of his sentence on completion of twenty years.
This is simply for the reason that the appellant has completed his

twenty years of actual imprisonment and in fact, during the period

of twenty years, the appellant was not entitled to any remission.

Thus, in the instant case, on completion of the twenty years’ of
Page 56 of 62
actual imprisonment, it is wholly unnecessary for the appellant to

seek remission of his sentence on the premise that his sentence is

a life imprisonment i.e. till the end of his natural life. On the other

hand, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent-State

and respondent-complainant contended that once the period of

twenty years is over, which was without any consideration of

remission, the appellant had to seek remission of his sentence (life

imprisonment) by making an application to the Sentence Review

Board which would consider in accordance with the applicable

policy and decide whether the remission of sentence imposed on

the appellant has to be granted or not. Such a contention cannot

be accepted for the following reasons:
(i)    firstly, because, in the instant case, the sentence of

           life imprisonment has been fixed to be twenty years

           of actual imprisonment which the appellant herein

           has completed;
(ii)   secondly, during the period of twenty years the

           appellant was not entitled to seek any remission;
and
Page 57 of 62
(iii)   thirdly, on completion of twenty years of actual

            imprisonment, the appellant is entitled to be

            released.
15.3    This is because in this case, instead of granting death

penalty, alternative penalty of life imprisonment has been awarded

which shall be for a period of twenty years of actual imprisonment.

That even in the absence of death penalty being imposed, life

imprisonment of a fixed term of twenty years was imposed which

is possible only for a High Court or this Court to do so. The period

of twenty years is without remission inasmuch as the appellant is

denied the right of remission of his sentence on completion of

fourteen years as per Section 432 read with
Section 433-A
of the

CrPC. Such a right has been denied by the High Court but that

does not mean that on completion of twenty years of imprisonment

the appellant has to still seek reduction of his sentence on the

premise that he was awarded life imprisonment which is till the

end of his natural life. If that was so, the High Court would have

specified it in those terms. On the other hand, the High Court has

imposed life imprisonment which shall be twenty years of actual
Page 58 of 62
imprisonment without consideration of remission. The High Court

was of the view that for a period of twenty years, the appellant has

to undergo actual imprisonment which would not take within its

meaning any period granted for parole or furlough.


15.4   In the instant case, the actual imprisonment of twenty

years was admittedly completed by the appellant on 09.03.2025

which was without any remission. If that is so, it would imply that

the appellant has completed his period of sentence. In fact, the

award of the aforesaid sentence was also confirmed by this Court.

On completion of twenty years of actual imprisonment on

09.03.2025, the appellant was entitled to be released. The release

of the appellant from jail does not depend upon further

consideration as to whether he has to be released or not and as to

whether remission has to be granted to him or not by the Sentence

Review Board. In fact, the Sentence Review Board cannot sit in

judgment over what has been judicially determined as the

sentence by the High Court which has been affirmed by this Court.

There cannot be any further incarceration of the appellant herein

from 09.03.2025 onwards.
On the other hand, in the instant case,
Page 59 of 62
the appellant’s prayer for furlough was refused by the High Court

and, thereafter, this Court granted furlough only on 25.06.2025 as

he had completed his actual sentence by then, pending

consideration of the amended prayer made by the appellant herein

on completion of his sentence on 09.03.2025. Therefore, the

continuous incarceration of the appellant from 09.03.2025

onwards was illegal. In fact, on 10.03.2025, the appellant ought to

have been released from prison as he had completed the sentence

imposed on him by the High Court as affirmed by this Court.


15.5   In
Bhola Kumar vs. State of Chhattisgarh
, 2022 SCC

OnLine SC 837, this Court lamented the unfortunate fate of

prisoners languishing behind bars even long after completing their

period of sentence noted as follows:
“23. …When such a convict is detained beyond the actual
    release date it would be imprisonment or detention sans
    sanction of law and would thus, violate not only
Article
    19(d)
but also
Article 21
of the Constitution of India. …”

15.6   Although, presently the appellant is not in custody but on

furlough for three months pursuant to the interim order dated

25.06.2025 passed by this Court, he need not surrender after

expiry of the period of furlough as he has completed his jail
Page 60 of 62
sentence of twenty years on 09.03.2025, if not wanted in any other

case.
15.7     Consequently, we hold that in all cases where an

accused/convict has completed his period of jail term, he shall be

entitled    to   be    released   forthwith     and   not    continued      in

imprisonment if not wanted in any other case. We say so in light

of
Article 21
of the Constitution of India which states that no

person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except

according to procedure established by law.
16. A copy of this order shall be circulated by the Registry of this

Court to all the Home Secretaries of the States/Union Territories

to ascertain whether any accused/convict has remained in jail

beyond the period of sentence and if so, to issue directions for

release of such accused/convicts, if not wanted in any other case.
Similarly, a copy of this order shall also be sent by the

Registry of this Court to the Member Secretary, National Legal

Services Authority for onward transmission to all Member

Secretaries      of   the   States/Union      Territories   Legal   Services

Authorities for communication to all the Member Secretaries of the
Page 61 of 62
District Legal Services Authorities in the States for the purpose of

implementation of this judgment.
This appeal is disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
…………………………………, J.
(B.V. NAGARATHNA)




                                     …………………………………, J.
(K.V. VISWANATHAN)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 29, 2025.
Page 62 of 62