[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Punjab vs Ex. C.Satpal Singh on 29 August, 2025
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 1056

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 312 OF 2012



             STATE OF PUNJAB AND OTHERS                              …APPELLANT(S)



                                                    VERSUS


             EX. C. SATPAL SINGH                                   …RESPONDENT(S)



                                                  JUDGMENT
VIJAY BISHNOI, J.
1.             This appeal has been preferred by the appellants challenging

                            the Judgment dated 04.08.2010 passed in R.S.A No. 3802 of

                            2004 passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
2.             The facts, in brief, are that the respondent was appointed as a

                            Constable in the Punjab Armed Forces on 04.08.1989. In the

                            year 1992, the respondent was transferred to the Commando
Signature Not Verified
Force and was posted at Bahadurgarh, Patiala Headquarter of
Digitally signed by
NIDHI AHUJA
Date: 2025.08.29
17:22:08 IST
Reason:
the 2nd Commando Battalion. The respondent applied for five
1
days leave, however, was granted leave only for one day. He

     proceeded to leave on 02.04.1994 but did not join his duties

     on 04.04.1994, and instead resumed his duties only on

     12.05.1994. The allegation against the respondent was that he

     remained absent from 04.04.1994 to 12.05.1994, i.e., for

     around 37 days.
3.   For the said unauthorized absence, the departmental enquiry

     was initiated and a chargesheet containing allegations along

     with a list of prosecution witnesses was served upon the

     respondent on 07.08.1994. During the enquiry, statements of

     the prosecution witnesses were recorded, and an opportunity

     was granted to the respondent to cross-examine those

     witnesses. The respondent was also granted an opportunity to

     produce witnesses in defence, but he refused to avail the said

     opportunity. The enquiry officer concluded the enquiry and

     submitted his report. Pursuant to the same, a show cause

     notice dated 25.05.1995 was issued to the respondent by the

     Commandant,       2nd   Commando   Battalion,   Bahadurgarh,

     Patiala. However, the respondent did not file any response to

     the show cause notice within the period as prescribed and the

     disciplinary authority vide order dated 03.05.1996 dismissed
2
the respondent from the service and ordered for treating the

     period of absence, i.e., from 04.04.1994 to 12.05.1994 as non-

     duty period.
4.   The order passed by the disciplinary authority was challenged

     by the respondent by way of an appeal before the appellate

     authority, though the said appeal came to be dismissed. The

     respondent further filed a revision petition before the revisional

     authority, which was also rejected.
5.   Being aggrieved, the      respondent instituted      a   suit for

     declaration and mandatory injunction praying that the order

     passed by the disciplinary authority, appellate authority and

     revisional authority be declared as null & void and illegal; and

     mandatory injunction be issued for his reinstatement with

     continuity of service along with back wages with interest @

     12% per annum.
6.   The said suit was dismissed by the Additional Civil Judge

     (Senior Division), Sultanpur Lodhi vide judgment dated

     18.07.2003. The first appeal, that was preferred by the

     respondent before the District Judge, Kapurthala, also came

     to be dismissed vide judgment dated 01.06.2004. Thereafter,
3
the respondent preferred second appeal before the High Court,

       wherein following substantial questions of law were framed: -
1. Whether     the   action   of       the   defendants-respondents   in
                dismissing the appellant from service by taking into
                consideration the previous conduct of the plaintiff which was
                not a part of the charge-sheet can be said to be just and fair?
2. Whether the disciplinary proceedings against the appellant in
                violation of the provisions of Rule 16.2 of Punjab Rules, 1934
                are liable to be vitiated?
7.     Learned Single Judge of the High Court by judgment dated

       04.08.2010 answered the above referred substantial questions

       of law against the appellants and in favour of the respondent,

       solely relying on the decision of this Court rendered in the case

       of
State of Mysore vs. K. Manche Gowda1
.                          The relevant

       portion of the impugned judgment is reproduced hereunder: -
“…Adverting to the instant case one, in the impugned order Ex.P-1
          dated 03.05.1996, it has been observed that 17 years approved
          service of Constable Satpal Singh (referring to the plaintiff) has
          already been forfeited and that the absence period of 224 days has
          already been considered as non-duty period and four punishments
          have already been inflicted and he has remained under suspension
          from 23.01.1993 to 13.09.1993 and two more departmental
          enquiries are pending against him. It clearly indicates that the past
          record of the plaintiff-appellant was actively taken into consideration
          by the punishing authority while passing the impugned order,
          though in the show cause notice Ex.D-2/A the above referred record
          has not been disclosed at all. In such circumstances, the question
1
AIR 1964 SC 506
4
arises as to from where the plaintiff would have presumed that his
bad record would be taken into account by the punishing authority.
It appears that the punishment inflicted vide Ex.P-1 was mainly
based upon the previous record, which was withheld from the
knowledge of the plaintiff. If the record pointed out above had been
brought to the notice of the plaintiff, he in all probabilities would have
taken the pains to explain it. In this explanation, he would have
given certain mitigating circumstances or some other explanation as
to why the earlier punishments were inflicted upon him or that
subsequent to these punishments, he had served to the satisfaction
of the authorities concerned till the time of the present enquiry.
Besides this, he may have come forward with many other
explanations. The thing is that it is to be seen whether he has been
given an opportunity to explain the past record being taken into
consideration while passing the impugned order. The plaintiff
having not been afforded the stated opportunity, he has been
condemned unheard with respect to his past record, which seems to
have sufficiently weighed with the mind of the punishing authority,
while passing the impugned order. Rule 16.2 of the Punjab Police
Rules reads as under:-
“16.2 Dismissal. (1) Dismissal shall be awarded only for the
gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued
misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police
service. In making such an award regard shall be had to the length
of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
(2) If the conduct of an enrolled police officer leads to his conviction
on a criminal charge and he is sentenced to imprisonment, he shall
be dismissed.
Provided that a punishing authority may, in an exceptional case
involving manifestly extenuating circumstances for reasons to be
recorded and with the prior approval of the next higher authority
impose any punishment other than that of dismissal.
Provided further that in case the conviction of an enrolled police
officer is set aside in appeal or revision, the officer empowered to
appoint him shall review his case keeping in view the instructions
issued by the Government from time to time in this behalf.
(3) When a police officer is convicted judicially and dismissed, or
dismissed as a result of a departmental enquiry, in consequence of
corrupt practices, the conviction and dismissal and its cause shall be
published in the Police Gazette. In other cases of dismissal when it
is desired to ensure that the officer dismissed shall not be re-
5
employed elsewhere a full descriptive roll, with particulars of the
punishments, shall be sent for publication in the Police Gazette.”
It has been manifested in the language of this rule that while passing
the dismissal order under this rule, regard shall be had to the length
of service of the delinquent employee as also his claim to pension. As
noted before, in the impugned order Ex.P-1 itself, it has been
mentioned that 17 years approved service of the plaintiff has already
been forfeited. It is thus, inferable that he has put in a long service,
which fact has not been taken into consideration, while passing the
impugned order. Thus, the punishing authority has acted in utter
violation or derogation of the mandatory provisions of Rule 16.2 ibid.
In Mohinder Paul Ex Constable’s case (supra) as mentioned in
paragraph 20 of the judgment, the petitioner had never appeared
before the disciplinary authority, nor he had filed reply challenging
the findings recorded in the enquiry report. It was held that the
appellate authority has also noticed that the petitioner had been
absent from duty wilfully for a total period of 4 months 14 days and
11 hours and 15 minutes. This point was not argued before the
Appellate or the Revisional Authority, whereas in the case at hand,
the plaintiff had approached the Deputy Inspector General of Police,
Commando (Admn.&Ops.)
BHG, Patiala who had dismissed his
appeal vide order Ex.P-2. Thereafter, he filed the revision, which also
met the same fate vide order Ex.P-3. Furthermore K. Manche
Gowda’s case does not say that it is obligatory upon the constable
to raise a contention before the Appellate or Revisional Authority that
his past record without disclosing it in the show cause notice served
upon his has been taken into consideration by the punishing
authority. As
Article 141
of the Constitution of India postulates, the
rule
laid down by
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in K. Manche Gowda’s
case is binding on this Court.
Thus to my mind, the defendant-
appellant cannot derive any mileage from the case of Mohinder Paul
Ex Constable case (supra).
In view of the above discussion, both the substantial questions of
law are decided against the defendants-respondents and in favour
of the plaintiff-appellant……………………..
In    view    of   the    preceding     discussion,     the   impugned
judgments/decrees recorded by both the courts below are hereby set
aside and suit of the plaintiff is partly decreed for declaration to the
effect that the orders impugned are illegal, null and void and
ineffective upon the rights of the plaintiff, who shall be entitled to all
consequential service benefits including seniority but not the back
6
wages. In the peculiar circumstances of the case, the parties are
       directed to bear their own costs...”
8.   The relief of back wages was denied to the respondent by the

     High Court since the respondent had filed an affidavit in the

     department whereby, he had forgone the relief of back wages.
9.   Assailing the impugned order, the learned counsel for the

     appellants has vehemently argued that the High Court has

     grossly erred in setting aside the judgment and decree passed

     by the Trial Court as well as the Appellate Court, whereby the

     suit filed by the respondent for declaration and mandatory

     injunction was dismissed. It is contended that the High Court

     has come to an erroneous conclusion that while passing the

     termination order, the disciplinary authority had taken into

     consideration the previous misconduct of the respondent

     which was not put to him in the show cause notice.
10. The learned counsel for the appellants has argued that as a

     matter of fact, the dismissal order of the respondent was not

     based on the previous misconduct but was solely based on the

     misconduct for which the disciplinary enquiry was initiated

     against him, which was for unauthorised absence of around

     37 days from 04.04.1994 to 12.05.1994. The learned counsel
7
for the appellants has submitted that the reference of the

         previous conduct of the respondent in the dismissal order was

         only for adding the weight to the decision of imposing the

         punishment of dismissal.
11. It is contended that this Court in K. Manche Gowda’s case

         (supra) had ruled that a dismissal order based on the past

         conduct must precede a show cause notice detailing out the

         previous misconduct which is to be considered by the

         disciplinary   authority   while   imposing   the   punishment.

         However, in the present case, the previous misconduct of the

         respondent was not the basis for imposing the punishment of

         dismissal and reference of the previous misconduct was only

         mentioned, apart from the indiscipline for which punishment

         was imposed.
In support of the above argument, learned

         counsel for appellants has placed reliance on the decision of

         this Court rendered in
India Marine Service Private Ltd. vs.

         Their Workmen2
and
Union of India & Ors. vs. Bishamber

         Das Dogra3
.
2
AIR 1963 SC 528
3
(2009) 13 SCC 102
8
12. The learned counsel for the appellants has further argued that

     the High Court had also erred in observing that the respondent

     had put in a long period of service and therefore as per Rule

     16.2 (1) of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter,

     referred to as “the Rules of 1934”), the duration of service

     has to be taken into consideration while passing the impugned

     order.
12.1 It is contented that as a matter of fact, the respondent has

     served only for a brief period from 04.08.1989 to 03.05.1996,

     i.e., less than 07 years. The High Court had misconstrued the

     mentioning of the forfeiture of 17 years of the service of the

     respondent in the dismissal order dated 03.05.1996. It is

     contended that the said mentioning of 17 years was only in

     respect of forfeited service of the respondent based on the

     orders passed by the departmental authority for unauthorised

     absence of the respondent for the afore-stated period. The

     mentioning of 17 years of service was only to indicate that his

     service period of 17 years was already ordered to be forfeited

     and pursuant to that, the respondent was not entitled to any

     increment during his service tenure up to 17 years if he would

     have remained in the service.
9
13. The learned counsel for the appellants has further submitted

    that Rule 16.2 (1) of the Rules of 1934 consists of two parts.

    The first part is in relation to the gravest acts of misconduct,

    which result in awarding punishment of dismissal and the

    second part speaks about the cumulative effect of continued

    misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for

    police service and that the length of service of the offender and

    his claim to pension should be taken into account in an

    appropriate case. The learned counsel for the appellants has

    contended that the disciplinary authority had exercised its

    power under the first part of Rule 16.2 (1), which is in relation

    to the gravest acts of misconduct, and therefore there is no

    question of taking into consideration the length of service of

    the delinquent for his claim for pension. The learned counsel

    for the appellants has also submitted that being a member of

    the disciplined force, the respondent remained absent for a

    considerably long period without seeking permission and even

    without   informing,   and    therefore,   in   the   facts   and

    circumstances of the case, the punishment of dismissal from

    service cannot be said to be illegal in any manner. The
10
appellants, therefore, prayed for the impugned order passed

        by the High Court to be set aside.
14. Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent

        has opposed the civil appeal and has argued that the High

        Court had not committed any illegality in passing the

        impugned order because the disciplinary authority while

        inflicting the punishment of dismissal had relied upon the past

        misconduct of the respondent without disclosing the same in

        the show cause notice and the same is not permissible as per

        the law
laid down by
this Court in K. Manche Gowda’s case

        (supra).        The learned counsel for the respondent has also

        argued that as per the mandate of Rule16.2(1) of the Rule of

        1934, the disciplinary authority ought to have taken into

        consideration the length of service of the respondent and his

        claim of pension.
15. The learned counsel for the respondent has placed reliance on

        the decision of this Court rendered in Mohd. Yunus Khan vs.

        State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.4 Consequently, he has prayed
4
(2010) 10 SCC 539
11
that there is no force in this appeal and the same may kindly

    be dismissed.
16. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, it is to be

    noted that the respondent was appointed as a Constable on

    04.08.1989 in the Punjab Armed Forces. In the year 1992, the

    respondent was transferred to the Commando Force and was

    posted at Bahadurgarh, Patiala Headquarter of the 2nd

    Commando Battalion. The respondent remained absent from

    duties for the following periods: -
1.   From 04.06.1993 to 11.08.1993 (for 68 days)
2.   From 06.09.1993 to 04.03.1994 (for 180 days)
3.   From 12.12.1993 to 04.01.1994 (for 20 days)

    And lastly, he remained absent from 04.04.1994 to 12.05.1994

    (37 days), for which the departmental enquiry was initiated,

    and he was dismissed from the service. The chargesheet dated

    27.07.1994 served upon the respondent on 07.08.1994 is

    reproduced hereunder: -
CHARGE SHEET/ANNEXURE P-12

           I, Inspector Darshan Singh, 2nd Commando Bn. Bahadurgarh,
        (Patiala) after recording the statements of prosecution witnesses
        and after examination, hereby charge you that you Constable
        Satpal Singh 2/280, when you were posted at Battalion
        Headquarters, then you were departed on one day sanctioned
12
casual leave. Your departure was recorded vide Rapat No. 19
        dated 2-4-94 in the Roznamcha, 2nd Commando Bn. You were to
        return before noon on 4.4.94. After availing the leave, instead of
        coming present in time, became absent. Your absence was
        recorded vide Rapat No. 12 dated 4.4.94 in the Roznamcha of
        Battalion Headquarters. Then TPM No. 4846-47/O.H.C. dated
        7.4.94, Attendance Notice No: 5158/OHC dated 12.4.94, and
        TPM No. 5831-32/OHC, dated 27.4.94 were sent at your home
        address. Then on 12-5-94 after remaining absent for 37 days 23
        hours 10 minutes came present at Battalion Headquarters vide
        Rapat No.10.
You being a member of discipline force, and well aware about
        discipline, remaining willful absent from 4.4.94 to 12-5-94 for 37
        days 23 hours 10 minutes, which is great indiscipline of police
        discipline. Which has also been proved clearly and correctly by
        prosecution witnesses. Your such absence, is great violation of
        police discipline, irresponsible, negligence has been proved,
        which is condemnable and punishable.
Put up for approval please.
Sd/- Commandant                         Sd/- Inspector Darshan
        Singh,
        Approved.                                    Inquiry Officer,
        Copy of charge sheet has been                2nd Commando Bn.
        received free of costs.                      Bahadurgarh,
        (Patiala)
        Sd/- Ct. Satpal Singh 2/280                 Dated : 27.7.94
17. During the course of the enquiry, as many as four prosecution

    witnesses were examined on behalf of the department and the

    respondent was granted an opportunity to cross-examine

    them, but it appears that he had not cross-examined the said

    witnesses. The respondent was also granted opportunity by

    the enquiry officer to produce evidence in defence but the

    respondent refused in writing to produce any evidence in
13
defence. The enquiry officer submitted his report and found

the respondent guilty. The disciplinary authority, thereafter,

issued a show cause notice to the respondent on 25.05.1995.

The said show cause notice dated 25.05.1995, is reproduced

hereunder: -
SHOW CAUSE NOTICE/ANNEXURE P-16
                                            No. 6191/Steno
                                          Dated 25.05.1995

  You, Constable Satpal Singh, No. 2-C/280, were posted at Battalion
  Headquarters. You were preceded on one day casual leave on
  02.04.1994 as per DDR No. 19. You had to resume your duty on
  04.04.1994 before noon. But you did not resume your duty and you
  were marked absent on 04.04.1994 as per DDR No. 12. A number of
  notices/TPMs were served on your home address vide nos. 4846-
47/OHC, Dated 07.04.1994, 5158/OHC, dated 12.04.1994 and
  5831-32/OHC, dated 27.04.1994.          But you resumed duty on
  12.05.1994 vide DDR No. 10 after remaining absent for 37 days 23
  Hours and 10 Minute. Being a member of discipline force, remaining
  willful absent for such a long period from casual leave without
  informing any reason to department or without getting permission
  from department is a grave indiscipline, which is a condemnable and
  punishable.
Due to remaining absent for 37 days 23 hours and 10 minute
  Departmental Enquiry was initiated against you vide this office Order
  No. 726874/Steno Dated 25.05.1994 which was further handed over
  to Inspector Darshan Singh of 2nd Commando Battalion. List of
  allegation along with list of prosecution witnesses was served upon
  you without free of cost by the Inquiry Officer on 22.07.1994. Inquiry
  officer gave you full opportunity to defend yourself. Inquiry Officer
  recorded the statements of prosecution witnesses on different-2
  dates. Inquiry Officers also gave you full opportunity to cross-examine
  the prosecution witnesses. Then, Inquiry Officer prepared the charge-
  sheet, got it approved and served to you free of cost on 07.08.1994.
  Inquiry Officer given 48 hours time to you to produce list of defence
  witnesses. But you denied in written application to produce list of
  defence witnesses. Inquiry Officer given you 7 days more time to
14
produce your defence, but you did not submit your written defence.
Inquiry officer then prepared the conclusion report as per rules.
     Inquiry Officer then put the conclusion report and Departmental
     Inquiry before me. I examined the Departmental Inquiry and
     conclusion report thoroughly.
Inquiry Officers held you guilty. I am agrees with the conclusion report
     of the Inquiry Officer.
Due to above allegation, I propose, why you should not be dismissed
     from service and absent period from 04.04.94 to 12.05.94 (37 days
     23 hours and 10 minutes i.e. 38 days) be treated as Non-duty period.
     But before passing such order, I want to give you one more chance to
     defend your case. After receiving this notice, within 10 days, you can
     produce your defence before me either in writing or orally after
     appearing before me.        Your oral defence will be considered
     accordingly. If you do not submit your reply within the stipulated
     period, it will be presumed that you don’t want to say anything in
     your defence and you are also accepting the allegation against you
     and orders regarding punishment referred in show cause notice will
     be passed.
One copy of show cause notice be served to Constable Satpal Singh,
     No. 2/280, free of cost.
Sd/-
Commandant,
                                               2nd Commando Battalion,
                                                   Bahadurgarh Patiala.
18. The show cause notice was duly served upon the respondent.

   However, the respondent did not file any response. Ultimately,

   the disciplinary authority passed the dismissal order dated

   03.05.1996, which is reproduced hereunder:
ORDER/ANNEXURE P-17

     “Constable Satpal Singh, No. 2-C/280, was posted at Battalion
     Headquarters, Bahadurgarh Patiala. He was preceded on one day
     casual leave on 02.04.1994. He had to resume his duty on
04.04.1994 before noon. But he did not resume his duty in time and
     was marked absent on 04.04.1994 as per DDR No. 12. A number of
15
notices/TPMs were served on his home address vide nos.
484647/OHC, dated 07.04.1994, 5158/OHC, dated 12.04.1994
and 5831-32/OHC dated 27.04.1994. But he resumed duty on
12.05.1994 vide DDR No. 10 after remaining absent for 37 days 23
Hours and 10 Minute. His being a member of discipline force,
remaining willful absent for such a long period from casual leave
without informing any reason to department or without getting
permission from department is a grave indiscipline, which is a
censurable and punishable. Due to above allegation Department
Enquiry was initiated against Constable Satpal Singh, No. 2-C/280
vide this office Order No. 7268-74/Steno, dated 25.05.1994 and
was further handed over to Inspector Darshan Singh of 2nd
Commando Battalion. Gist of allegation alongwith list of prosecution
witnesses was served to him without cost by the Inquiry Officer on
22.07.1994. Inquiry had given him full chances to defend himself.
Inquiry Officer after recording statements of prosecution witnesses
on different-2 dates, given these to him and given him a full chance
to cross examined the prosecution witnesses. Then, Inquiry Officer
prepared the charge-sheet, got it approved and served to him without
cost on 07.08.1994. Inquiry Officer also given him 48 hours time to
produce defence witnesses, but he denied in writing, to produce
defence witnesses. Inquiry Officer given him 7 days time to produce
his defence, but he did not submit his defence statement. Inquiry
Officer then prepared the conclusion report as per rules. Inquiry
Officer then put the conclusion report and Departmental Inquiry
before me. I examined the Departmental Inquiry and conclusion
report thoroughly in which Inquiry Officers held Constable Satpal
Singh, N. 2-C/280 guilty. I am agrees with the conclusion report of
the Inquiry Officer.
Due to above allegation a Show Cause Notice vide No. 6191/Steno,
Dated 25.05.1995 to dismiss him from service and treat absent
period w.e.f. 04.04.1994 to 12.05.1994 as Non Duty Period was
served upon Constable Satpal Singh No. 2-C/280, which was
received by Constable Satpal Singh, No. 2-C/280 himself. He was
given 10 days time to submit his reply but till date he did not submit
his reply, which shows that said Constable accepts the allegations
against him. Besides above his 17 years service has forfeited, 224
days absent period has treated as Non Duty Period, 04 Censures,
suspension period w.e.f. 23.01.1993 to 13.09.1993, two
Departmental Enquiries are pending in this office and one
Departmental Enquiry is under process due continue absent w.e.f.
04.03.1996.
16
After examining above facts I reached at conclusion that
     Constable Satpal Singh, No. 2-C/280, has neither interest in service
     nor he is capable of serving in Police Department. Therefore I dismiss
     Constable Satpal Singh, No. 2-C/280 from the service of Police
     Department w.e.f. 03.05.1996 forenoon and absent period w.e.f.
     04.04.1994 to 12.05.1994 marks in Non Duty Period.
     Order should be booked”.
Sd/-
Commandant
19. This Court, in K. Manche Gowda’s case (supra), has held

   that if the past conduct of an employee is the basis for

   imposing punishment, the department is obliged to disclose

   that his past record will also be taken into consideration while

   inflicting   punishment.        Now,     the    question     arises        for

   consideration is whether the disciplinary authority had taken

   into consideration the past conduct of the respondent while

   passing the dismissal order. From careful reading of the

   dismissal order reproduced hereinabove, it appears that the

   disciplinary authority had clearly observed that it had perused

   the report of enquiry and conclusion thoroughly, whereby the

   respondent was held guilty for the unauthorized absence and

   agreed with the conclusion of the enquiry officer. The

   disciplinary authority had further mentioned regarding the

   issuance of show cause notice to the respondent and had

   observed that despite the receipt of the show cause notice, the
17
respondent did not submit his reply, which shows that the

    respondent accepted the allegation against him. Thereafter,

    the disciplinary authority had noted that 17 years of service of

    the respondent were forfeited as a result of his absence for 224

    days and for which he was punished accordingly.
20. To properly understand the controversy in the light of question

    framed, it is necessary to examine the relevant judicial

    precedents, as discussed below. This Court in the case of
India Marine Services Private Ltd.
(supra), dealt with the

    case of punishment awarded to an employee in a similar

    situation, as follows: -
“7. It is true that the last sentence suggests that the past record
        of Bose has also been taken into consideration. But it does not
        follow from this that that was the effective reason for dismissing
        him. The Managing Director having arrived at the conclusion that
        Bose's services must be terminated in the interest of discipline,
        he added one sentence to give additional weight to the decision
        already arrived at. Upon this view it would follow that the
        Tribunal was not competent to go behind the finding of the
        Managing Director and consider for itself the evidence adduced
        before him. The order of the Tribunal quashing the dismissal of
        Bose and directing his re-instatement is, therefore, set aside as
        being contrary to law.”
18
21.
In the case of
Director General, RPF & Ors. vs. Ch. Sai

        Babu,5
this Court in appeal while setting aside the order of

        Division Bench of High Court, which had affirmed the order of

        Single Bench setting aside the order of removal of respondent,

        observed in para 6 as under: -
“6. … Normally, the punishment imposed by a disciplinary
               authority should not be disturbed by the High Court or a tribunal
               except in appropriate cases that too only after reaching a
               conclusion that the punishment imposed is grossly or shockingly
               disproportionate, after examining all the relevant factors
               including the nature of charges proved against, the past conduct,
               penalty imposed earlier, the nature of duties assigned having
               due regard to their sensitiveness, exactness expected of and
               discipline    required    to    be    maintained,     and     the
               department/establishment in which the delinquent person
               concerned works.”
22. Similarly, in
Bharat Forge Co. Ltd. vs. Uttam Manohar

        Nakate,6
wherein the respondent employee was dismissed

        from service on account of misconduct having been found fast

        asleep on an iron plate during working hours and had also

        been earlier imposed with minor punishment on three

        occasions, this Court observed as under: -
“32. … In the facts and circumstances of the case and having
               regard to the past conduct of the respondent as also his conduct
5
(2003) 4 SCC 331
6
(2005) 2 SCC 489
19
during the domestic enquiry proceedings, we cannot say that the
               quantum of punishment imposed upon the respondent was
               wholly disproportionate to his act of misconduct or otherwise
               arbitrary.”
23. Likewise, in the case of
Govt. of A.P. and Ors. vs. Mohd
.
Taher Ali,7 where the respondent who was employed as police

        constable was imposed with a punishment of compulsory

        retirement on the account of unauthorized absenteeism from

        election duty, this Court had held that: -
“5.             ….In our opinion there can be no hard-and-fast
               rule that merely because the earlier misconduct has not been
               mentioned in the charge-sheet it cannot be taken into
               consideration by the punishing authority. Consideration of the
               earlier misconduct is often [necessary] only to reinforce the
               opinion of the said authority.”
24. This Cout in Bishamber Das Dogra’s case (supra), has

        examined a similar issue and, after taking into consideration

        the judgment of this Court rendered in K. Manche Gowda’s

        case (supra) held as under: -
“24.In State of Mysore v. K. Manche Gowda
, this Court held that
               the disciplinary authority should inform the delinquent employee
               that it is likely to take into consideration the past conduct of the
               employee while imposing the punishment unless the proved
               charge against the delinquent is so grave that it may
               independently warrant the proposed punishment. Though his
7
(2007) 8 SCC 656
20
previous record may not be the subject-matter of the charge at
the first instance.
xx    xx      xx       xx
30.In view of the above, it is evident that it is desirable that the
delinquent employee may be informed by the disciplinary
authority that his past conduct would be taken into consideration
while imposing the punishment. But in case of misconduct of
grave nature or indiscipline, even in the absence of statutory
rules, the authority may take into consideration the indisputable
past conduct/service record of the employee for adding the
weight to the decision of imposing the punishment if the facts of
the case so require.                        [Emphasis Supplied]
31.It is settled legal proposition that habitual absenteeism
means gross violation of discipline [vide Burn & Co.
Ltd. v. Workmen
(
AIR p. 530, para 5) and L&T Komatsu Ltd. v. N.
Udayakumar
(SCC p. 226, para 6).]
32.The instant case is required to be examined in the light of the
aforesaid settled legal propositions.
33.Admittedly, the respondent employee has not completed the
service of six years and had been imposed punishment three
times for remaining absent from duty. On the fourth occasion
when he remained absent for ten days without leave, the
disciplinary proceedings were initiated against him. The show-
cause notice could not be served upon him for the reason that he
again deserted the line and returned back after fifty days.
Therefore the disciplinary proceedings could not be concluded
expeditiously. The respondent submitted the reply to the show-
cause notice and the material on record reveal that during the
pendency of the enquiry he further deserted the line for ten days.
There is nothing on record to show any explanation for such
repeated misconduct or absenteeism. The court/tribunal must
keep in mind that such indiscipline is intolerable so far as the
disciplined force is concerned.
34. The respondent was a guard in CISF. No attempt had ever
been made at any stage by the respondent employee to explain
as to what prejudice has been caused to him by non-furnishing
of the enquiry report. Nor had he ever submitted that such a
course has resulted in failure of justice. More so, the respondent
employee had never denied at any stage that he had not been
punished three times before initiation of the disciplinary
21
proceedings and deserted the line twice even after issuance of
       the show-cause notice in the instant case. No explanation could
       be furnished by the respondent employee as under what
       circumstances he has not even considered it proper to submit the
       application for leave. Rather, the respondent thought that he had
       a right to desert the line at his sweet will. It was a case of gross
       violation of discipline. Appeal filed by the respondent employee
       was decided by the statutory appellate authority giving cogent
       reasons.
35. The facts of the present case did not present special features
       warranting any interference by the Court in limited exercise of its
       powers of judicial review. In such a fact situation, we are of the
       view that the High Court should not have interfered with the
       punishment order passed by the disciplinary authority on such
       technicalities...”
25. As observed, in the present case, the absence of the

   respondent from the duty on various occasions in a short

   tenure of service of around 7 years, is a gross indiscipline on

   the part of the respondent and therefore, we do not find any

   illegality in the order passed by the disciplinary authority

   whereby the services of the respondent have been dismissed.
26. The facts of Mohd. Yunus Khan’s case (supra), upon which

   the learned counsel for the respondent has placed reliance, is

   based on different facts and therefore, is of no help to the

   respondent. In that case, the Administrative Tribunal,

   examining the punishment order, had concluded that the

   absence of the delinquent for a short period was bona fide and

   legally permissible, but on account of his subsequent
22
misconduct and disobedience, held that the dismissal order

    was justified. In that situation, this Court had held that the

    Tribunal, before taking into consideration the past conduct of

    the delinquent, must give notice to the delinquent. In such

    circumstances, the facts of the case of Mohd. Yunus Khan’s

    case (supra) are distinguishable from the case of the

    respondent.
27. So far as the finding of the High Court that the disciplinary

    authority should have taken into consideration the long

    service period of the respondent is concerned, we agree with

    the submission of the learned counsel for the appellants that

    the said observation of the learned Single Judge is erroneous

    because as per the materials on record, the respondent had

    served only for a brief period of less than 7 years as a Constable

    and therefore, it cannot be said that he served for a long period

    in the department. The mentioning of the forfeiture of 17 years

    of service in the dismissal order was in relation to the

    punishments imposed upon the respondent in the various

    proceedings for his unauthorised absence, for which he would

    not have been able to get any increment, if he would have been

    in service for a longer period.
23
28. The reliance on Rule16.2(1) of the Rules of 1934 by the High

    Court is also misplaced while observing that for the purpose of

    inflicting the punishment period of service is required to be

    taken into consideration. For ready reference Rule 16.2 (1) of

    Rules of 1934 is quoted hereunder:
“Rule 16.2 (1) Dismissal shall be awarded only for the
           gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of
           continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete
           unfitness for police service. In making such an award regard
           shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his
           claim to pension.”
29. A plain reading of Rule 16.2(1) of the Rules of 1934 suggests

    that it consists of two parts, the first part where the

    punishment of dismissal can be awarded to the delinquent for

    the gravest act of misconduct. However, in the second part,

    the punishment can be awarded as a cumulative effect of

    continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete

    unfitness for police service. While imposing punishment for

    such     continued     misconduct       proving     incorrigibility    and

    complete unfitness for police service, the length of service of

    the offender is required to be taken into consideration, which

    is missing in the case of the first part of Rule 16.2(1) of the

    Rules of 1934.
24
30. This Court, in the case of
State of Punjab & Ors. vs. Ram

        Singh Ex- Constable8
while interpreting Rule 16.2(1) of the

        Rule of 1934 has held as under: -
“7.Rule 16.2(1) consists of two parts. The first part is referable
                to gravest acts of misconduct which entails awarding an order
                of dismissal. Undoubtedly there is distinction between gravest
                misconduct and grave misconduct. Before awarding an order
                of dismissal it shall be mandatory that dismissal order should
                be made only when there are gravest acts of misconduct, since
                it impinges upon the pensionary rights of the delinquent after
                putting long length of service. As stated the first part relates to
                gravest acts of misconduct.
Under General Clauses Act
singular includes plural, “act” includes acts. The contention
                that there must be plurality of acts of misconduct to award
                dismissal is fastidious. The word “acts” would include
                singular “act” as well. It is not the repetition of the acts
                complained of but its quality, insidious effect and gravity of
                situation that ensues from the offending ‘act’. The colour of the
                gravest act must be gathered from the surrounding or
                attending circumstances. Take for instance the delinquent who
                put in 29 years of continuous length of service and had
                unblemished record; in thirtieth year he commits defalcation of
                public money or fabricates false records to conceal
                misappropriation. He only committed once. Does it mean that
                he should not be inflicted with the punishment of dismissal but
                be allowed to continue in service for that year to enable him to
                get his full pension. The answer is obviously no. Therefore, a
                single act of corruption is sufficient to award an order of
                dismissal under the rule as gravest act of misconduct.
8.The second part of the rule connotes the cumulative effect of
                continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete
                unfitness for police service and that the length of service of the
                offender and his claim for pension should be taken into
                account in an appropriate case. The contention that both parts
                must be read together appears to us to be illogical. Second part
                is referable to a misconduct minor in character which does not
                by itself warrant an order of dismissal but due to continued
8
(1992) 4 SCC 54
25
acts of misconduct would have insidious cumulative effect on
         service morale and may be a ground to take lenient view of
         giving an opportunity to reform. Despite giving such
         opportunities if the delinquent officer proved to be incorrigible
         and found completely unfit to remain in service then to
         maintain discipline in the service, instead of dismissing the
         delinquent officer, a lesser punishment of compulsory
         retirement or demotion to a lower grade or rank or removal
         from service without affecting his future chances of re-
employment, if any, may meet the ends of justice. Take for
         instance the delinquent officer who is habitually absent from
         duty when required. Despite giving an opportunity to reform
         himself he continues to remain absent from duty off and on.
         He proved himself to be incorrigible and thereby unfit to
         continue in service. Therefore, taking into account his long
         length of service and his claim for pension he may be
         compulsorily retired from service so as to enable him to earn
         proportionate pension. The second part of the rule operates in
         that area. It may also be made clear that the very order of
         dismissal from service for gravest misconduct may entail
         forfeiture of all pensionary benefits. Therefore, the word ‘or’
         cannot be read as “and”. It must be disjunctive and
         independent. The common link that connects both clauses is
         “the gravest act/acts of misconduct.”
31. In light of the judicial precedents cited above, when the factual

    matrix of the present case is appreciated, it is seen that the

    reference to the fact of forfeiture of 17 years of service of the

    respondent as a result of his absence from service on previous

    occasions was in exclusion or independent of the misconduct

    for which the enquiry officer has found him guilty. The

    consideration of the past misconduct of the respondent was

    not the effective reason for dismissing him from the service.

    The disciplinary authority had mentioned the past misconduct
26
of the respondent only for adding the weight to the decision of

    imposing the punishment.
32. We have perused the show cause notice and the order of

    dismissal passed against the respondent. After going through

    the same, it is clear that penalty of dismissal is a consequence

    of proved misconduct. Therefore, the order impugned is within

    the first part of Rule 16.2 (1) of the Rules. While passing the

    order dismissing the appeal, the disciplinary authority

    recorded the finding that the act of absence of the respondent

    from duty is a grievous act of misconduct. The respondent was

    appointed as a constable in the Punjab Armed Forces and then

    transferred to the Commando Force, which is a disciplined

    force. The authority while passing the order has referred to his

    previous act of absence from duty besides proving an gravest

    act of misconduct leading to the order of dismissal.
33. In the facts of the present case, it is clear that the respondent

    was dealt by the department earlier on three occasions having

    remained absent from duty and the penalties were inflicted for

    the same. It is the fourth time when he remained absent to

    which, a chargesheet was issued and his guilt was found
27
proved. He himself had not cross-examined the departmental

witnesses and also had not produced any witness in his

defense.    Considering all these aspects and having found

proved his misconduct, notice to show cause from dismissal

was issued to the respondent.      The disciplinary authority,

while imposing the penalty, had merely referred the past

conduct and also given weight to the gravest act of misconduct.

The order of dismissal is not based on the charge of

“cumulative    effect   of   continued   misconduct    proving

incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service”.

Therefore, mere reference of the past conduct would not

amount to constitute dismissal of the respondent based on the

second limb of Rule 16.2(1).
In our view, the High Court was

not justified to apply the principle of
K. Manche Gowda
(supra) while setting aside the judgment passed by the two

Courts.    As such, it is concluded that the dismissal of the

respondent was based on gravest act of misconduct, for which

he was dealt with by the disciplinary authority following the

procedure as prescribed and in due observance of principles of

natural justice, hence, we do not find any fault in the same.

Accordingly, the present appeal stands allowed setting aside
28
the judgment of the High Court. In consequence, suit filed by

    the respondent/plaintiff stands dismissed.        In the facts,

    parties to bear their own costs.
34. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
………………………. J.
(J.K. MAHESHWARI)




                                             ………………………. J.
(VIJAY BISHNOI)
NEW DELHI,
Dated: 29th AUGUST, 2025
29