[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S C.L. Gupta Export Ltd vs Adil Ansari on 22 August, 2025
Author:
B. R. Gavai
Bench:
B. R. Gavai
2025 INSC 1035


                                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2864 OF 2022
                                  M/s C.L. Gupta Export Ltd.
                                                                                        …Appellant
                                                                   Versus
                                  Adil Ansari & Ors.
                                                                                      …Respondents
                                                               JUDGMENT
K. VINOD CHANDRAN, J.
The respondent no.1, the applicant before the

                                  National Green Tribunal (for brevity, ‘NGT’) alleged that

                                  the appellant, the respondent no.1 before the NGT, as an

                                  industry         was      actively   perpetrating    environmental

                                  degradation and pollution as also extracting ground

                                  water; thus polluting the surroundings and also releasing

                                  effluents into the nearby river which is a tributary of the

                                  Ganga. It was also alleged that the other official
Signature Not Verified
respondents, the Pollution Control Board of the State &
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
Date: 2025.08.25
17:07:48 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
the Centre, the Central Ground Water Authority and the

      District Collector were mute spectators to the activities of

      the appellant and often colluding, in polluting and

      damaging the environment. The proceedings before the

      NGT extended over a period of three years in which

      various reports were called for from a Joint Committee

      constituted by the NGT and eventually based on the

      reports, the matter was disposed of with certain

      directions, with which the appellant is aggrieved.
2.         Sh. Vikas Singh, learned Counsel appearing for

      the appellant would point out that the environmental

      compensation (for brevity, ‘EC’) as determined by the

      statutory bodies were paid up by the appellant. The

      appellant also had brought about all the mitigating

      measures, eventually leading to a report of complete

      compliance of the statutory conditions and the terms

      imposed by the Pollution Control Board (for brevity,

      ‘PCB’). Despite that last report of 30.07.2021, clearly
Page 2 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
recording compliance, the NGT went ahead and

      imposed a compensation of Rs. 50 crores based on the

      allegedly admitted turnover of the appellant. There is no

      rational nexus in thus computing the penalty, which has

      also been deprecated by this Court in
Benzo Chem

      Industrial (P) Ltd. v. Arvind Manohar Mahajan1
.
The

      NGT also directed the Enforcement Directorate (for

      brevity, ‘ED’) to examine the matter in the light of the

      observations made in the judgment and take appropriate

      action under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act,

      20022 wherein the environmental laws are also included

      in Part-A of Schedule I. The said measure has also been

      frowned upon in
Waris Chemicals (P) Ltd. v. U.P.

      Pollution             Control   Board3
.   The   contours      of

      maintainability of a Public Interest Litigation (for brevity,

      ‘PIL’) is explicitly declared in Ashok Kumar Pandey v.
1
2024 SCC OnLine SC 3543
2
for brevity, “PMLA”
3
2025 SCC OnLine SC 1261
Page 3 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
State of W.B.4; within which contours the present

         litigation does not fall.
3.        None appears for respondent no.1 who was the

         applicant before the NGT. It is to be observed at the

         outset that we are not inclined to consider the question of

         maintainability of the PIL, at this stage especially when

         the initial reports of the Joint Committee constituted by

         the NGT clearly indicate violations of the environmental

         laws which led to the penalisation by imposition of EC.

         The proceedings were commenced by the applicant in

         the year 2019 and it was only in the year 2021 that a

         modicum of compliance was reported.
4.        Mr.    Saurabh    Mishra,   learned   Advocate-on-

         Record, appearing for the Pollution Control Board

         submits that as of now there is full compliance of the

         environmental laws. However, it is urged that the NGT

         was within its power in enhancing the penalty since it is
4
(2004) 3 SCC 349
Page 4 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
a deterrent measure. It is also pointed out that the

      calibration of the quantum of penalty could also be with

      reference to multipliers under
CPC
B, 2019 methodology,

      instead of a flat turnover percentage. It is also sought that

      structural directions in paragraph 569-571 of the NGT

      judgment may be upheld.
5.         The appellant was earlier engaged in four

      manufacturing             activities   when   the   proceedings

      commenced, which were Metal Art Ware, Glass Art

      Ware, Thermocol Blocks which later, were expanded

      with two additions; Marble Art Ware and Corrugated

      Boxes. There was also a residential area where 500-600

      people, the employees of the appellant, resided. The

      appellant is said to be an exporter of handicraft items and

      has employed around 7,000 workers.
6.         On the allegation raised, the NGT had first

      constituted a Joint Committee comprising of the Central

      Pollution Control Board (for brevity, ‘
CPC
B’), the
Page 5 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
respondent no.3 and the Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control

      Board (for brevity, ‘UPPCB’), the respondent no.2. A

      report dated 07.05.2019 was filed which noticed

      ineffective effluent treatment, storage of hazardous

      wastes and the Thermocol manufacturing unit having not

      been granted the consent to establish/operate, among

      other defects. The report proposed a show cause notice

      under the
Water Act, 1974
, the closure of the unit and

      imposition of EC of Rs.10 lakhs. This was followed up with

      a notice dated 30.03.2019 by the UPPCB to which

      objections were filed.
7.         Further reports dated 16.07.2019 and 03.12.2019

      were placed before the NGT in which EC was computed

      based          on         the    “Assessment     of    Environmental

      Compensation                in   Case   of   Illegal   Extraction     of

      Groundwater” dated 26.06.2019 brought out by
the

      CPC
B in compliance with the orders of the NGT. A total

      EC of Rs.2,49,71,157/- was imposed. The appellant is said
Page 6 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
to have deposited an EC of Rs.1,16,39,727/-; after the

      waiver effected on representations made.
8.         Subsequently,         yet   another    report      dated

      30.07.2021 was submitted before the NGT which even

      according to the NGT as is seen from page 145 of the

      order        confirms     full    compliance     with   all    prior

      recommendations/suggestions. This report was also

      partly accepted by the NGT in paragraph 466. The

      reservation expressed by the NGT seems to be of the

      amount of compensation determined/recommended by

      the Committee being not consistent with the directions of

      the NGT, issued in various other matters. Finding that the

      appellant had violated environmental laws including the

      provisions relating to extraction of groundwater, the NGT

      went ahead to discuss the provisions of the PMLA, various

      decisions with respect to that statute and also those

      decisions of the NGT, imposing compensation with

      reference to the turnover of the polluter on the principle:
Page 7 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
“polluter          pays”.   The   NGT   thus   imposed     the

      compensation, issued directions including that with

      reference to PMLA as also made a sweeping direction for

      the closure of the divisions of the appellant, in which

      requisite steps are not taken to comply with the

      prescribed standards.
9.         As has been correctly pointed out by
the CPC
B,

      the order of the Tribunal relating to fresh water audit,

      monitoring and restoration has to be retained. Insofar as,

      the compliance is concerned we refer to the following in

      the written submissions made :
“5.      Pursuant to the above directions, a joint
             inspection was undertaken between 23-
             25.08.2022 and a report dated 24.12.2022 was
             filed before this Hon’ble Court. The said report
             records inter alia that soil parameters were
             normal; yellowing of stored groundwater was
             attributable to oxidation of iron and manganese;
there was no crop damage within a 2.5 km radius
             as per the District Horticulture Officer, Amroha;
             OPD records from the Chief Medical Officer,
             Amroha did not show any air-borne disease
             burden requiring oxygen or ventilator support;
             and that other industries in the vicinity also
Page 8 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
contributed to environmental load. The report
             further records that the Appellant has installed
             extensive flow-meters and piezometers, that
             reconciliation between fresh water abstraction
             and consumption shows negligible variance
             (approximately 0.39% over a five-month period),
             and that a common STP/ETP with advanced
             treatment systems has been put in place.”



      The directions in the impugned judgment relating to

      audit, monitoring and restoration are necessarily within

      the powers of the NGT and is a continuing process. We

      also notice the submissions
of CPC
B that restoration

      measures should focus on aquifer recharge, continuous

      water balance monitoring and area wide environmental

      load management. Recycling of treated water, reduced

      usage of ground water withdrawal, continuous and

      robust monitoring would definitely guide the design of a

      prospective compliance regime.
10.        We cannot for a moment dispute that if there is

      non-compliance of any of the statutory conditions or that

      imposed by the PCBs in mitigation of the unit specific
Page 9 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
pollution, then such action sanctioned by the statute

      could be taken, including notice for closure by the

      jurisdictional PCB. We are also convinced that there

      could be constant monitoring of the unit especially

      looking at the past violations. But, we are not convinced

      that having accepted the report of compliance, there was

      any warrant for a sweeping direction to close such of the

      divisions of the appellant which are falling short of the

      compliance. Reserving the right of the jurisdictional

      PCBs to proceed against any violation of statutory or

      other conditions imposed, the direction issued by the

      NGT has to be set aside and we do so.
11.        Benzo Chem Industrial (P) Ltd.1 was a case in

      which one of us (B. R. Gavai, J, as he then was) considered

      the question of imposition of penalties on a reference to

      the annual turnover wherein the NGT having noticed the

      revenue range of the polluter to be between 100-500

      crores imposed a penalty of Rs.500 crores. This Court
Page 10 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
first noticed the huge disparity in the range noticed by

      the NGT, also taken from the public domain which would

      have clearly indicated the exact figure. It was

      categorically held that generation of revenue, or its

      quantum, would have no nexus with the amount of

      penalty to be ascertained for environmental damages.

      The methodology adopted by the NGT for imposition of

      penalty was held to be totally unknown to any principle

      of law. We fully agree with the observation and add that

      rule of law does not permit State or its agencies to extract

      a ‘pound of flesh’, even in environmental matters.

      Though in the present case there is an observation made

      that there was admitted turnover of Rs.550 crores; we still

      notice the absence of nexus between the turnover and

      the pollution alleged. In fact the penalty imposed on the

      appellant, by the statutory body was on the basis of a

      methodology framed by
the CPC
B, on the directions of

      the NGT. If at all the NGT was of the opinion that the EC
Page 11 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
imposed was minimal or low, it could have referred to the

        methodology framed by
the CPC
B and not merely

        looked at the revenue generation of the alleged polluter.

        We hence strike out the imposition of compensation of

        Rs.50 Crores by the NGT. However, we make it clear that

        we have not considered the maintainability of the EC

        imposed by the PCBs and the statement regarding the

        penalty paid by the appellant, has not been verified. If

        the appellant has avenues to challenge the same, they

        would be left liberty, subject to the laws of limitation. The

        PCB would also be entitled to recover any shortfall or

        impose any further EC on non-compliance being

        detected.
12.           Waris Chemicals (P) Ltd.3 dealt with a similar

        direction to invoke the provisions of the PMLA as in this

        case. It was held, following
Vijay Madanlal Choudhary

        v. Union of India5
that
Section 3
of the PMLA is dependent
5
(2023) 12 SCC 1
Page 12 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
on illegal gain of property as a result of the criminal

      activity relating to a scheduled offence. As in the facts of

      the cited case, here, neither is there registration of FIR

      for any scheduled offence nor any complaint is filed

      alleging such offences under the various environmental

      protection statutes scheduled under the PMLA and

      coming within its ambit. This Court had also raised

      serious doubts about the jurisdiction of the NGT to direct

      the prosecution of individuals under the PMLA; which we

      fully subscribe to. The NGT should act within the contours

      of the powers conferred on it which is
Section 15
of the

      NGT Act of 2010. Though such power would be available

      to a Court constituted under the PMLA or to constitutional

      courts, it would not be available for exercise by the NGT,

      constituted           to    ensure    effective   and   expeditious

      consideration              of cases   relating to   environmental

      protection and conservation of forests and other natural

      resources including enforcement of any legal right and
Page 13 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
giving relief and compensation for damages to persons

      and properties. We hence set aside the direction issued

      to the Enforcement Directorate; but say nothing on

      whether there is an offence made out or not, which at this

      stage is not within our ken.
13.        We have to necessarily set aside the directions

      issued other than that which permits a continuous

      monitoring and audit of the pollution control measures to

      ensure a pollution free, compliance regime. Before we

      leave the matter, with some anguish, we cannot but

      indicate that application of mind is not proportionate to

      the number of pages. The impugned judgment deals

      elaborately with the environmental law, the numerous

      pollution prevention measures, the guidelines and

      publications issued by various States as also decisions in

      that regard. It also extracts the various reports filed by

      the Joint Committee, the interim orders of the NGT and

      the objections raised by the industry; which would
Page 14 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022
anyway be available in the records of the case. In the

      context of the last of the reports having found complete

      compliance, we cannot but observe that unfortunately

      this was an exercise in futility. Judicious consideration is

      the sum and substance of adjudication and the

      Courts/Tribunals          should   restrain themselves   from

      engaging in mere rhetoric by stating the law in general

      without particular reference to the facts. We say nothing

      more and allow the appeal setting aside the order of the

      NGT to the extent noticed above.
14.        Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed

      of.
…….…………………….….. CJI.
(B. R. GAVAI)




                                    .……….…………………….….. J.
(K. VINOD CHANDRAN)
      NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 22, 2025.
Page 15 of 15
Civil Appeal No. 2864 of 2022