[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
P. Maruthi Prasada Rao vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 22 August, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1019                                                                   REPORTABLE


                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO          OF 2025
                                  [ARISING OUT OF SLP(C) NO.1253 OF 2024]



             P. MARUTHI PRASADA RAO                                        …APPELLANT


                                                      VERSUS


             THE STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH & ORS.                            …RESPONDENT




                                                   JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA J.
1.          The High Court of Andhra Pradesh1, vide its judgment and order dated

                            22nd December, 2023, allowed a writ petition2 presented by the State

                            of Andhra Pradesh, its Chief Secretary and the Principal Chief

                            Conservator of Forests3 by reversing the judgment and order dated

                            12th April, 2022 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal,

                            Hyderabad Bench at Hyderabad4, which was under challenge. The

                            Tribunal while allowing the appellant’s original application5 under
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
JATINDER
High Court
              1KAUR
   Date: 2025.08.22
   13:24:23 IST
   Reason: 2   W.P. No. 29304 of 2022
3
PCCF
4
Tribunal
5
OA/020/00628/2021
Section 19
of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 had made certain

         positive directions. This appeal, by special leave, registers a challenge

         to the said judgment and order dated 22nd December, 20236.
2.   The basic facts are not in dispute. The appellant was appointed as

         Forest Range Officer7 on 6th April, 2006. He was promoted as

         Assistant Conservator of Forests8 on 30th August, 2020 and has 14

         years’ service left. On 11th January, 2021, the appellant addressed a

         representation to the PCCF urging that the FROs be considered as

         “State Forest Service Officers” and to consider the FROs when a list

         of suitable officers is prepared for appointment in the Indian Forest

         Service9 in terms of the Indian Forest Service (Appointment by

         Promotion) Regulations, 196610, should officers in the categories of

         Deputy Conservator of Forests11 and ACFs be not available in a

         particular year. The inaction of the PCCF to consider such

         representation prompted the appellant to approach the Tribunal

         claiming inter alia the following relief:
“It is therefore humbly prayed that this Hon'ble Tribunal be pleased
            to declare the action of the Respondents in not considering the
            FRO"s/applicants service as FRO cadre as State Forest Service for
            consideration of promotion to the cadre of IFS as illegal, arbitrary
            and violative of
Art.14
and
16
of the Constitution of India and
            consequentially direct the respondents to consider the FRO's /
            applicants service as FRO cadre as State Forest Service for
            consideration of promotion to the cadre of IFS and pass such other
            order or orders as this Hon'ble Tribunal may deem fit and proper in
            the circumstances of the case.”
6
impugned order
7
FRO
8
ACF
9
IFoS
10
1966 Regulations
11
DCF
2
As noted above, the Tribunal allowed the appellant’s original

         application. The operative part of the Tribunal’s order reads as

         follows:
“By not considering the case of the applicant though he is eligible
               as per RR-1966 and the 1966 Regulation on par with ACF/DCF is
               violation of
Articles 14
& 16
of the Constitution. The applicant
               coming under SFS, for reasons expounded in paras supra, has thus
               been discriminated. Therefore, the averment of the respondents
               that
Articles 14
& 16
of the Constitution have not been violated
               does not have the force of logic.
In view of the aforesaid, the OA not only succeeds, but fully
               succeeds. Consequently, respondents are directed to treat the
               FROs as SFS officers and consider appointment of applicant to IFS
               on promotion, provided he is otherwise eligible against vacancies
               of the appropriate panel year. Time allowed to implement the
               judgment is 6 months from the date of receipt of this judgment.
               The time granted is 6 months since the Ld. Counsel for the
               applicants has submitted that the bifurcation of the posts in SFS
               between the States of A.P & Telangana is still being deliberated.”

         The impugned order has set aside the aforesaid order.
3.      We have given a patient hearing to Mr. Jayant Bhushan, learned

         senior counsel for the appellant, Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayanan,

         learned senior counsel for the respondents 1 to 3 (writ petitioners

         before the High Court) and Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional

         Solicitor General for the respondent no. 4 (Union of India).
4.      The questions that arise for our decision are:
(i)         Having regard to the provisions of the Indian Forest Service

                     (Recruitment)     Rules,    196612,   more     particularly     the

                     expression “State Forest Service” as defined in Rule 2(g),
12
Recruitment Rules
3
whether any service in a State connected with forestry

                      having members of gazetted status is required to be

                      approved by the Central Government in consultation with

                      the State Government or is the approval of the Central

                      Government relatable to and required in respect of a post in

                      the State Forest Service?
(ii)         If we answer that approval is relatable to the service and not

                      post, what relief is the appellant entitled to on facts and in

                      the circumstances?
5.      We note that the High Court upon its understanding of Rule 2(g)(i) of

         the Recruitment Rules as well as on consideration of the decision of

         this Court in
Gopal Singh vs. State Cadre Forest
Officer's

         Association13 and a decision of a Division Bench of the High Court

         for the State of Telangana in
K. Shailendra Moses vs. The State

         of Telangana14
was of the view that the posts included in the State

         Forest Services have to be approved under Rule 2(g)(i) of the

         Recruitment Rules and that the post of FRO is not a service approved

         by the Central Government for the purposes of the Recruitment Rules

         or the 1966 Regulations for appointment by promotion to IFoS.

         Accordingly, it was concluded by the High Court that:
“(1) the Forest Range Officer service, is not a 'State Forest Service'
                within the meaning of Rule 2(g)(i) of the Indian Forest Service
                (Recruitment) Rules 1966; as the same has not been approved by
                the Central Government, in consultation with the State
13
(2007) 9 SCC 369
14
W.P.No.23856 of 2016, decided on 6th January, 2021
4
Government for the purposes of the Indian Forest Service
        (Recruitment) Rules 1966, which approval is must;
        (2) the Forest Range Officer of Andhra Pradesh Forest Service do
        not fall in the zone of consideration for promotion to the post of
        Indian Forest Service under the Indian Forest Service
        (Recruitment) Rules 1966 and the Regulation 1966;
        (3) the impugned judgment of the Central Administrative Tribunal
        cannot legally be sustained.”
6.   Since we are concerned in this appeal with the meaning of “State

     Forest Service” as defined by Rule 2(g) of the Recruitment Rules,

     it is considered apt to reproduce the same hereinbelow together

     with Rules 3 and 4 providing for ‘Constitution of the Service’ and

     the’ Method of Recruitment to such Service’. The same read thus:
2. Definitions.
(g) “State Forest Service” means
(i) any such service in a State, being a service connected with
        forestry and the members thereof having gazetted status, as the
        Central Government may, in consultation with the State
        Government, approve for the purpose of these rules:
or
(ii) Omitted.
3. Constitution of the Service. - (1) The Service shall consist of
        the persons recruited to the Service in accordance with the
        provisions of these rules.
4. Method of recruitment to the Service. - (1) Omitted.
        4(2) [ ] Recruitment to the service shall be by the following
        methods, namely
(a) by a competitive examination:
(aa) Omitted.
(b) by promotion of substantive members of the State Forest
        Service,
7.   Parties are ad idem that
Gopal Singh
(supra) had interpreted

     Rule 2(g)(ii) of the Recruitment Rules, which does not fall for

     consideration here. Even otherwise, clause (ii) of Rule 2(g) has

     since been omitted. Hence, we do not consider it necessary to
5
refer to such decision for the purpose of ascertaining the

         meaning of “State Forest Service”.
8.      What appears on a plain reading of Rule 2(g) [after omission of

         clause (ii)] is that any service in a State, which is connected with

         forestry and the members whereof have gazetted status, would

         constitute the ‘State Forest Service’ subject to approval by the

         Central Government in consultation with the State Government

         for the purpose of ‘these rules’, i.e., the Recruitment Rules.
9.      Our attention has been drawn by Mr. Jayant Bhushan to the

         Andhra Pradesh Forest Service Rules, 199715. In terms of Rule 2

         thereof, the Andhra Pradesh Forest Service consists of multiple

         categories of posts forming part of Classes A, B and C. Class A is

         comprised of categories 1, 2 and 3 and we find, inter alia, the

         post of ACF and Range Officer to be included in categories 2 and

         3, respectively. It has not been disputed before us that those

         included in Class A, Categories 1, 2 and 3, are having gazetted

         status.
10.      Juxtaposing the APFS Rules with the Recruitment Rules, the

         conclusion is irresistible that the post of FRO is included in the

         Andhra Pradesh Forest Service and members of such service

         having gazetted status would count as members of the State

         Forest Service, i.e., the Andhra Pradesh Forest Service, provided

         such service has been approved by the Central Government in
15
APFS Rules
6
consultation with the State Government for the purpose of the

      Recruitment Rules.
11.   We record, Ms. Bhati did not dispute that approval of the Central

      Government which is referred to in Rule 2(g) relates to service

      and not post.
12.   No document had been produced before us either by the

      appellant or the respondents 1 to 3 to show that the Andhra

      Pradesh Forest Service, which is undoubtedly connected with

      forestry and have members of gazetted status in such service

      belonging to Class A, has been approved by the Central

      Government in consultation with the State Government. We

      turned to Ms. Bhati to throw light on this aspect. Her submission

      has been that no specific approval could be found but having

      regard to the turn of events over the years, an implied approval

      of the service may be inferred.
13.   This being the position, both factual and legal, we answer the

      first question formulated in paragraph 4 by declaring that

      members of Class A of the Andhra Pradesh Forest Service,

      including those in categories 2 and 3, are members of the State

      Forest Service if they have been substantively appointed. As a

      sequitur, we hold that they are eligible for promotion to the IFoS

      in accordance with the Recruitment Rules.
14.   We now move on to answer the second question.
7
15.     Mr. Sankarnarayanan, though conceded before us that there is

        no legal bar for consideration of the candidature of the appellant

        for promotion to the IFoS, it was asserted that the appellant

        certainly did not / does not have any legal entitlement to be

        considered for promotion in respect of the processes that have

        been undertaken till now.
16.     Mr. Sankarnarayanan submitted that presently in the State of

        Andhra Pradesh, there are 295 FROs, 62 ACFs and 33 DCFs and

        the number of vacancies under consideration of the Union Public

        Service Commission16 for recruitment is only 11. Referring to the

        1966 Regulations, he submitted that those members having

        completed not less than 8 years of continuous service would be

        considered for inclusion in the list in terms of Rule 5(2) reading

        as follows:
5(2) The Committee shall consider for inclusion to the said
            list, the cases of members of the State Forest Services in the
            order of seniority in that service of a number which is equal
            to three times the number referred in sub-regulation (1).
            Provided that ***;
Provided further that ***;
Provided also that the Committee shall not consider the case
            of a member of the State Forest Service unless on the first
            day of January of the year for which the Select List is
            prepared, he is substantive in the State Forest Service and
            has completed not less than eight years of continuous service
            (whether officiating or substantive) in post(s) included in the
            State Forest Service.
EXPLANATION 1: ***

            Provided also that ***.
16
UPSC
8
According to Mr. Sankarnarayanan, the appellant is admittedly

         positioned at serial no. 8 of the list of FROs; hence, officers senior

         to him being there, the appellant does not enter the zone of

         consideration for promotion to the IFoS and deserve a look in

         ahead of such senior officers.
17.      Mr. Bhushan responded by submitting that a bare reading of the

         UPSC’s affidavit would make it clear that since 2015, vacancies

         could not be filled up in the absence of suitable candidates.
According to him, since the appellant has been erroneously

         excluded from the list of eligible candidates owing to a clear

         misinterpretation of Rule 2(g)(i), direction ought to follow to

         facilitate consideration of the appellant's candidature even in

         respect of the vacancies that remain unfilled since 2015.
18.      Mr. Sankaranarayanan reacted by submitting that although the

         appellant had completed 8 years of service as FRO in 2014, he

         woke up from his slumber and submitted a representation voicing

         his grievance for the first time in January 2021. According to him,

         the appellant should not be permitted to steal a march over his

         seniors.
19.      This reminds us of the decision in P.S. Sadasivaswamy v.
State of T.N.17, where this Court sounded caution in the

         following words:
17
(1975) 1 SCC 152
9
“2. *** A person aggrieved by an order of promoting a junior over
         his head should approach the Court at least within six months or
         at the most a year of such promotion. It is not that there is any
         period of limitation for the Courts to exercise their powers under
Article 226
nor is it that there can never be a case where the Courts
         cannot interfere in a matter after the passage of a certain length
         of time. But it would be a sound and wise exercise of discretion for
         the Courts to refuse to exercise their extraordinary powers under
Article 226
in the case of persons who do not approach it
         expeditiously for relief and who stand by and allow things to
         happen and then approach the Court to put forward stale claims
         and try to unsettle settled matters. ... ”
20.   Although, before us, the appellant does not complain of any of

      his juniors having been promoted ahead of him, we find sufficient

      justification in the contention advanced by Mr. Sankarnarayanan

      that 7 officers being senior to the appellant, his case does not

      stand apart for being considered side-stepping his seniors only

      because he is successful in obtaining the requisite declaration

      from this Court on the interpretation of 2(g) of the Recruitment

      Rules. Cause of action for the appellant to be considered for

      promotion arose after completion of continuous substantive

      appointment for eight years. Having not ventilated his grievance

      before the PCCF any time before January, 2021 and having taken

      time to approach the Tribunal, the appellant cannot be granted

      any relief in respect of past exercises undertaken for promotion.

      As rightly apprehended by Mr. Bhushan, the appellant succeeds

      insofar as the legal issue is concerned but without any real relief

      of promotion at least at this stage.
10
21.     We are, therefore, inclined to grant limited relief to the appellant

        flowing from our answer to the first question. We, accordingly,

        direct that as and when the exercise for filling up vacancies in

        the IFoS is initiated afresh, the respondents would be bound to

        follow all the rules relating to recruitment and consider the FROs

        eligible for appointment by promotion treating the Andhra

        Pradesh Forest Service as ‘State Forest Service’ as defined in Rule

        2(g) of the Recruitment Rules.
22.     What remains is to set aside the impugned order. We order

        accordingly.
23.     The appeal is disposed of on the aforesaid terms without any

        order for costs.
…………………..…………………J.
                                                   (DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                             …….…….………....………………J.
                                             (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)

      NEW DELHI.
August 22, 2025.
11