[Cites
9
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Union Of India vs Subit Kumar Das on 15 October, 2025
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2025 INSC 1235                                                                        REPORTABLE


                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO……………OF 2025
                                   (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No………. of 2025)
                                                     (@ Diary No.57192 of 2024)



                            THE UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                APPELLANTS
                                                            VERSUS
                            SUBIT KUMAR DAS                                          RESPONDENT



                                                       JUDGMENT
ATUL S. CHANDURKAR, J.
1.   Delay condoned.
2.   Leave granted.
3.   The Union of India through the Secretary, Ministry of

                            Information and Broadcasting and the All India Radio through its

                            Director General are aggrieved by the direction issued by the

                            Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court requiring them to
Signature Not Verified
absorb the services of the respondent on the post of Technician
Digitally signed by
KAPIL TANDON
Date: 2025.10.15
14:42:52 IST
Reason:
at the Eastern Zone of All India Radio under the Scheduled
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024                    Page 1 of 22
Castes (SC) category. According to the appellants, such direction

        to absorb the services of the respondent enlarges the right of a

        candidate placed in the Reserved Panel much after its expiry and

        runs counter to the Recruitment Rules. The respondent supports

        the said direction by contending that the appellants had

        committed to absorb the respondent in service as far back as on

        15.01.1999 and the High Court rightly directed so.
4.    Facts relevant for considering the challenge as raised to the

        aforesaid direction are that pursuant to a requisition made by the

        All India Radio, Eastern Zone for making appointment on the post

        of Technician, names of various candidates maintained by the

        Employment Exchange came to be forwarded. Three posts of

        Technician were reserved for candidates belonging to the SC

        category.      The     Selection     Committee           interviewed    eleven

        candidates and finally selected three candidates in the order of

        merit against the existing vacancies. The name of the respondent

        was placed at Serial No.1 in the Reserved Panel. It was stated

        that the candidates placed in the Reserved Panel would be

        appointed only in case any of the three selected candidates did

        not join the said post for any reason. The respondent being

        aggrieved by the decision of the Selection Committee
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024                 Page 2 of 22
approached the Central Administrative Tribunal (for short, “the

        Tribunal”) by filing Original Application No.989 of 1997

        challenging its decision and seeking his appointment on the post

        of Technician. On 25.08.1997, the Tribunal passed an interim

        order and directed that any appointment made of the selected

        candidates would abide by the result of the Original Application.

        In the said proceedings, the respondent moved an interim

        application praying that no further appointment be made on the

        post of Technician without considering his name pursuant to the

        earlier recruitment process. During the course of the hearing of

        the said application, a statement was made on behalf of the

        appellants which was recorded in the order dated 15.01.1999 as

        under:
“3. Mrs. Banerjee, Ld. Counsel for the respondents
                    submits that till the filling up of post of technician from the
                    reserved quota viz. 1 OBC and 1 ST is taken by the
                    respondent authorities, the applicant’s case would not be
                    considered. She further submits as soon as vacancy
                    would arise against the SC quota, the applicant would be
                    absorbed.”


              On the basis of the said statement, no further orders were

        passed on the interim application.
5.     Original Application No.989 of 1997 came to be decided by

        the Tribunal on 09.12.2004. The Tribunal recorded various
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024                   Page 3 of 22
findings, inter alia, holding that there did not appear to be any

        departure from the procedure and instructions that were required

        to be followed while undertaking selection. It further held that the

        allegation of bias as made by the respondent against the

        members of the Selection Committee was without any basis. It

        also referred to the clear stipulation in the records of the

        Selection Committee that the right of the respondent to be

        appointed was only if any of the selected candidates did not join

        the post on which they were appointed. It also held that a

        candidate in the wait list had no vested right to be appointed

        except when the selected candidate did not join the post and the

        wait list was operative. All grounds of challenge raised by the

        respondent on merits were turned down. However, in view of the

        statement made on behalf of the appellants as recorded on

        15.01.1999 that the case of the respondent would not be

        considered till the reserved quota of candidates from the Other

        Backward Classes (OBC) category and Scheduled Tribes (ST)

        category were filled in, the appellants were directed to consider

        the case of the respondent in terms of the assurance given to the

        Tribunal and take steps to absorb him against the available
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024     Page 4 of 22
vacancy in accordance with law within a period of three months

        from the date of communication of the order.
6.    The appellants being aggrieved by the aforesaid directions

        issued by the Tribunal approached the High Court by filing WPCT

        No.276 of 2005. The Division Bench of the High Court by its order

        dated 23.02.2009 found that the various findings recorded by the

        Tribunal against the respondent as regards the right of a

        waitlisted candidate as well as the manner of conduct of the

        selection proceedings by the Selection Committee had not been

        challenged by him. It, however, observed that the direction to

        consider the case of the respondent came to be made in view of

        the concession recorded in the order dated 15.01.1999. The High

        Court, without interfering with the said direction issued by the

        Tribunal, modified the said order to the extent that the outer limit

        of consideration of six months was not to be applicable, in case

        no vacancy arose within that period.
7.    In the meanwhile, on 23.02.2013, a fresh notice of

        recruitment for various posts including that of Technician came to

        be published at the instance of Prasar Bharti. The respondent

        again approached the Tribunal by filing Original Application

        No.739 of 2013 seeking a direction that he be absorbed on the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024     Page 5 of 22
post of Technician in the SC category as per the advertisement

        dated 23.02.2013. By an interim order dated 19.07.2013, the

        appellants were directed to keep one post of Technician vacant

        under the SC category in the East Zone till the next date of the

        proceedings. The aforesaid Original Application came to be

        decided on 27.11.2015. While referring to the right of a waitlisted

        candidate to seek appointment, the Tribunal noted that the

        appellants in the year 1999 had stated that the case of the

        respondent would be considered against any available vacancy

        in the SC category. The Original Application was disposed of with

        a direction to the appellants to act in accordance with the earlier

        orders. An appropriate order in that regard was directed to be

        passed within a period of three months.
The Deputy Director General (P) passed a speaking order

        on 19.02.2016 stating therein that all the three vacancies that

        were to be filled up in 1997 had been so filled up as per the select

        list. The respondent was at Serial No.4 and he could not be

        absorbed. The general assurance for absorption against future

        available vacancies was subject to fulfilment of conditions of the

        Recruitment Rules. In absence of any vacancy in the SC

        category, absorption was not possible. It was also noted that the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024     Page 6 of 22
respondent had crossed the maximum age limit prescribed under

        the Recruitment Rules and there was no direction to absorb him

        by relaxing the Recruitment Rules. It was, thus, stated that in

        absence of any vacant post being available, the respondent

        could not be absorbed against the vacancies notified in the

        advertisement dated 23.02.2013, more so, as he was not eligible

        for appointment as per the Recruitment Rules.
8.    The respondent being aggrieved by the aforesaid speaking

        order again approached the Tribunal by filing Original Application

        No.436 of 2016. The Tribunal on 09.01.2020 observed that the

        earlier Original Application No.739 of 2013 was decided on

        27.11.2015. The documents placed on record, however,

        indicated the vacancy position prior to that date. The Tribunal,

        therefore, directed the appellants to issue a fresh speaking order

        indicating the number of vacancies on the post of Technician that

        occurred after its earlier order dated 27.11.2015 and also indicate

        whether the respondent was entitled to be considered in

        accordance with the directions of the Tribunal. The respondent,

        being aggrieved by the said order, preferred WPCT No.24 of

        2021 before the High Court. Besides challenging the order of the

        Tribunal dated 09.01.2020, the respondent also sought a
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024    Page 7 of 22
direction for being appointed on the post of Technician. The High

        Court passed interim orders on 21.06.2021 and 06.09.2021

        directing that an affidavit to be filed indicating if any vacancy on

        the post of Technician had arisen from 2009 onwards. The

        Deputy Director General (P), All India Radio filed an affidavit

        dated 09.09.2021 stating therein that there was no vacancy on

        the post of Technician at the All India Radio, Calcutta since 2009

        till date. The Division Bench thereafter on 25.06.2024 decided

        the said writ petition. It was of the view that the appellants on

        15.01.1999 had given an assurance before the Tribunal that the

        respondent would be considered in the next available vacancy.

        However, that statement was not honoured despite a vacancy

        being available. It further held that the rejection of the

        respondent’s claim on the ground that he was age barred was

        illegal. The Division Bench accordingly set-aside the order dated

        09.01.2020 passed by the Tribunal and directed the appellants to

        absorb the respondent on the post of Technician in any vacancy

        under the SC category in the Eastern Zone within a period of four

        weeks. The respondent’s absorption was directed to be given

        effect from 19.07.2013 onwards on a notional basis. Being
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024     Page 8 of 22
aggrieved by this decision, the appellants have come up in

           appeal.
9.       Ms. Madhusmita Bora, learned Advocate appearing for the

           appellants submitted that the High Court committed an error in

           directing the appellants to absorb the respondent on the post of

           Technician. The vacancy in question was of the year 1997 and

           admittedly the respondent was placed at Serial No.1 in the

           Reserved Panel. He was entitled to be considered for

           appointment only in the event any of the three selected

           candidates failed to join the post of Technician. Since all the three

           candidates had joined their posts, there was no occasion for the

           respondent to claim any entitlement to be appointed by virtue of

           his placement in the Reserved Panel. The respondent was

           merely a waitlisted candidate and had no vested right to seek

           appointment. The direction issued by the High Court, if

           implemented, would result in a waitlisted candidate of the year

           1997 being absorbed in service after more than twenty five years.
In that regard, the learned counsel referred to the decision in
Sri

           Sanjoy Bhattacharjee Vs. Union of India & Ors.1 It
was then

           submitted that the only basis for the High Court to have issued
1
1997 INSC 250
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024         Page 9 of 22
the impugned direction was the statement made on behalf of the

           appellants on 15.01.1999 that the respondent would be

           considered against any vacancy in the SC category in future. The

           said statement amounted to a concession in law which was

           contrary to the statutory Rules of Recruitment. The said

           statement, therefore, would not bind the appellants as the

           appellants would be required to disregard the Recruitment Rules

           for absorbing the services of the respondent. It was permissible

           for the appellants to place the correct position in law while not

           proceeding in accordance with such statement.
To substantiate

           this contention, the learned counsel referred to the decisions in
Director of Elementary Education, Odisha Vs. Pramod

           Kumar Sahoo2
and
The Employees’ State Insurance

           Corporation Vs. Union of India
and others3. It was, thus,

           submitted that the impugned judgment of the High Court was

           liable to be set aside and the respondent was not entitled to any

           relief whatsoever.
10. On the other hand, Mr. Rakesh Kumar learned Advocate

           appearing for the respondent supported the impugned direction

           issued by the High Court. He submitted that it was not
2
2019 INSC 1092
3
2022 INSC 77
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024    Page 10 of 22
permissible for the appellants to disregard the statement made

         on their behalf on 15.01.1999 before the Tribunal. As such

         statement was made on behalf of the appellants, no further relief

         was granted to the respondent by the Tribunal. Despite

         availability of various vacancies since then, the appellants failed

         to absorb the respondent on the post of Technician. It was also

         not permissible for the appellants to now change their stand by

         stating that the respondent had crossed the age limit for being

         appointed.
In that regard, the learned counsel placed reliance on

         the decisions in
Prem Prakash Vs. Union of India4
, H.P. ST

         Employees Federation Vs. H.P.S.V.K.K.5 and Rameshwar

         Prasad Goyal, Advocate, In Re6. It was then submitted that the

         High Court had rightly found that on 19.07.2013, the

         respondent’s right was crystalized as a vacancy had arisen and

         hence, the Tribunal had directed one post to be kept vacant. It

         was not in dispute that vacancies in the SC category were

         available and the respondent could not be deprived of the relief

         of absorption. As a model employer, the Union of India ought to

         honour its assurance and it could not take a stand contrary to the
4
1984 INSC 150
5
[2013] 10 SCC 308
6
2013 INSC 550
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024    Page 11 of 22
statement as made. Denying relief to the respondent would result

           in the appellants taking advantage of their own wrong.
The

           learned counsel referred to the decision in
Union of India and

           others Vs. Hindustan Development Corporation
and others7

           in that regard. It was, thus, submitted that the High Court having

           rightly found that as the respondent was being deprived of the

           benefit of absorption, no interference with the directions issued

           by it was called for. The appeal was, thus, liable to be dismissed.
11. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length

           and with their assistance we have also perused the documents

           on record. It is not in dispute between the parties that in the year

           1997, three vacancies for the post of Technician from the SC

           category were sought to be filled in. The respondent along with

           ten other candidates came to be interviewed by the Selection

           Committee. Three candidates were chosen and placed serially in

           the order of merit. The respondent was placed at Serial No.1 in

           the Reserved Panel by noting that if any of the three selected

           candidates did not join the post of Technician, the candidates

           placed in the Reserved Panel would be appointed. All the three

           selected candidates did join the post of Technician as a result of
7
1993 INSC 154
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024       Page 12 of 22
which the respondent remained at Serial No.1 in the Reserved

           Panel.
12. While considering the entitlement of the respondent to any

           relief on the basis of his placement in the Reserved Panel, it

           would be necessary to bear in mind the settled position that mere

           placement in the wait list does not create any vested right for

           being so appointed. The right to be considered for appointment

           would spring only in the contingency of a selected candidate not

           joining on his post. The wait list operates for a limited period. It

           cannot extend for an indefinite period and in any event after a

           fresh process of recruitment has commenced. This legal position

           is well settled and reference can be made to the decision of a

           three Judge Bench in
Gujarat State Dy. Executive Engineers'

           Association Vs. State of Gujarat
and others8. In paragraph 9,

           it has been held as under:
“9. A waiting list prepared in an examination conducted
                    by the Commission does not furnish a source of
                    recruitment. It is operative only for the contingency that if
                    any of the selected candidates does not join then the
                    person from the waiting list may be pushed up and be
                    appointed in the vacancy so caused or if there is some
                    extreme exigency the Government may as a matter of
                    policy decision pick up persons in order of merit from the
                    waiting list. But the view taken by the High Court that
                    since the vacancies have not been worked out properly,
                    therefore, the candidates from the waiting list were liable
                    to be appointed does not appear to be sound. This
8
1994 INSC 199
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024                Page 13 of 22
practice, may result in depriving those candidates who
                    become eligible for competing for the vacancies
                    available in future. If the waiting list in one examination
                    was to operate as an infinite stock for appointments,
                    there is a danger that the State Government may resort
                    to the device of not holding an examination for years
                    together and pick up candidates from the waiting list as
                    and when required. The constitutional discipline requires
                    that this Court should not permit such improper exercise
                    of power which may result in creating a vested interest
                    and perpetrate waiting list for the candidates of one
                    examination at the cost of entire set of fresh candidates
                    either from the open or even from service.”

                                                (emphasis supplied by us).
From the aforesaid, it is clear that any right that the

        respondent could claim as a waitlisted candidate extinguished

        when all the selected candidates joined on their respective posts.
13. The sole basis for the claim of the respondent of seeking

        appointment/absorption on the post of Technician is the

        statement made on behalf of the appellants as recorded in the

        order dated 15.01.1999. As per the said statement, on a vacancy

        arising against the SC quota, the respondent was to be

        absorbed. According to the appellants, such statement cannot

        bind them since its compliance would result in breach of the

        Recruitment Rules. The respondent, however, relies upon the

        said statement as it was given in all solemnity before the Tribunal.
For considering the binding nature of such statement made

        before the Tribunal, certain factual aspects would have to be
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024              Page 14 of 22
borne in mind. Though the placement of the respondent was at

        Serial No.1 in the Reserved Panel, all the selected candidates

        had joined on the post of Technician and, thus, there was no

        occasion to operate the wait list is an admitted position. No

        vacancy from 1997 was carried forward and a vacancy, if any,

        that was to arise in the future would have been a fresh vacancy.

        The entitlement of the respondent, if any, was as a waitlisted

        candidate qua the select list of 1997. There was no vested right

        in favour of the respondent to urge that he was entitled to be

        considered and appointed on any fresh vacancy arising in the

        future. Secondly, the statement as recorded on 15.01.1999 would

        have a limited operation to the extent that only if any of the

        selected candidates for the post of Technician in the SC category

        failed to join on the said post, the respondent could be appointed

        on such vacant post being the candidate at Serial No.1 in the

        Reserved Panel. The statement as recorded that the claim of the

        respondent, a waitlisted candidate, would be considered as and

        when any vacancy would arise against the SC quota cannot

        operate in eternity contrary to the Recruitment Rules. Thirdly, it is

        necessary to note that the respondent’s challenge to his

        placement in the Reserved Panel and the selection of three other
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024     Page 15 of 22
candidates on merit was not disturbed either by the Tribunal or

        by the High Court. This is clear on a perusal of the judgment of

        the Tribunal dated 09.12.2004 in Original Application No.989 of

        1997. The High Court in WPCT No.276 of 2005 decided on

        23.02.2009 affirmed the findings of the Tribunal that a waitlisted

        candidate did not have any legal right to claim appointment and

        noted that the said finding recorded by the Tribunal was not under

        challenge by the respondent. These material aspects would be

        relevant while considering the legal effect of the statement

        recorded on 15.01.1999 by the High Court.
14. It is, thus, clear that having failed to assail the success of

        the selected candidates, the only string for the respondent to

        cling on was the statement recorded on 15.01.1999. The effect

        of such statement cannot result in wiping out the adjudication of

        the respondent’s claim on merits. In other words, the respondent

        cannot claim any higher right especially when it was found by the

        Tribunal and affirmed by the High Court that his placement in the

        Reserved Panel was correct and requiring no interference. The

        appellants are justified in contending that such statement as

        made on 15.01.1999 cannot have the effect of requiring them to

        act in violation of the Recruitment Rules.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024   Page 16 of 22
15. At this stage, it would be necessary to refer to a few

           decisions of this Court on the binding effect of a concession made

           by counsel on a question of law in the field of service

           jurisprudence.
In
Uptron India Limited Vs. Shammi Bhan
and

           another9, the issue pertained to the legality of a Standing Order

           permitting automatic termination of the services of a permanent

           employee on account of overstaying leave without permission for

           more than seven days. The employer sought to support the

           relevant Standing Order on the basis of the concession of the

           employee’s counsel that the Standing Order was not invalid. In

           paragraphs 22 and 23, this Court observed as under:
“22.    Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed
                    strong reliance upon a decision of this Court in
Civil
                    Appeal No.3486 of 1992, Scooters India & Ors. vs. Vijay
                    E.V. Eldred
, decided on 03.10.1996, in support of his
                    contention that any stipulation for automatic termination
                    of Services made in the Standing Orders could not have
                    been declared to be invalid. We have been referred to a
                    stray sentence in that judgment, which is to the following
                    effect:
“It is also extraordinary for the High Court to have
                      held clause 9.3.12 of the standing orders as
                      invalid.”
                    This sentence in the judgment cannot be read in isolation
                    and we must refer to the subsequent sentences which
                    run as under:
“Learned counsel for the respondent rightly made
                      no attempt to support this part of the High Court’s
                      order. In view of the fact that we are setting aside
9
1998 INSC 74
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024               Page 17 of 22
the High Court’s judgment, we need not deal with
                       this aspect in detail.”
23.       In view of this observation, the question whether
                     the stipulation for automatic termination of services for
                     overstaying the leave would be legally bad or not, was
                     not decided by this Court in the judgment relied upon by
                     Mr. Manoj Swarup. In that judgment the grounds on
                     which the interference was made were different. The
                     judgment of the High Court was set aside on the ground
                     that it could not decide the disputed question of fact in a
                     writ petition and the matter should have been better left
                     to be decided by the Industrial Tribunal. Further, the High
                     Court was approached after more than six years of the
                     date on which the cause of action had arisen without
                     there being any cogent explanation for the delay. Mr.
                     Manoj Swarup contended that it was conceded by the
                     counsel appearing on behalf of the employee that the
                     provision in the Standing Orders regarding automatic
                     termination of services is not bad. This was endorsed by
                     this Court by observing that “Learned counsel for the
                     respondent rightly made no attempt to support this part
                     of the High Court’s order.” This again cannot be treated
                     to be a finding that provision for automatic termination of
                     services can be validly made in the Certified Standing
                     Orders. Even otherwise, a wrong concession on a
                     question of law, made by a counsel, is not binding on his
                     client. Such concession cannot constitute a just ground
                     for a binding precedent. The reliance placed by Mr.
                     Manoj on this judgment, therefore, is wholly out of place.”
16.
In Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda & Siddha &

           another Vs. Dr. K. Santhakumari10
, the issue pertained to

           promotion on a selection post. Though the principle of merit-cum-

           seniority was prescribed, the employer in its affidavit before the

           High Court stated that the principle of seniority-cum-merit was

           applicable. On that basis, the employee was held entitled to be
10
2001 INSC 259
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024               Page 18 of 22
promoted. Before this Court, the relevant rules indicating the

        principle of merit-cum-seniority were placed. In that context, it

        was held :
“In the instant case, the selection was made by
                    Departmental Promotion Committee. The Committee
                    must have considered all relevant facts including the
                    inter-se merit and ability of the candidates and prepared
                    the select list on that basis. The respondent though
                    senior in comparison to other candidates, secured a
                    lower place in the select list, evidently because the
                    principle of "merit-cum-seniority" had been applied by the
                    Departmental Promotion Committee. The respondent
                    has no grievance that there was any malafides on the
                    part of the Departmental Promotion Committee. The only
                    contention urged by the respondent is that the
                    Departmental Promotion Committee did not follow the
                    principle of "seniority-cum-fitness". In the High Court, the
                    appellants herein failed to point out that the promotion is
                    in respect of a ’selection post’ and the principle to be
                    applied is "merit-cum-seniority". Had the appellants
                    pointed out the true position, the learned Single Judge
                    would not have granted relief in favour of the respondent.
                    If the learned Counsel has made an admission or
                    concession inadvertently or under a mistaken impression
                    of law, it is not binding on his client and the same cannot
                    enure to the benefit of any party.
This Court in
Uptron India Ltd. Vs. Shammi Bhan and
                    Another
AIR 1998 SC 1681 pointed out that a wrong
                    concession on question of law made by counsel is not
                    binding on his client and such concession cannot
                    constitute a just ground for a binding precedent.
Therefore, even if the appellants had mistakenly
                    contended in the High Court that the principle of
                    seniority-cum-fitness was to be followed for promotion to
                    the post of Research Officer, the departmental rules
                    clearly show that the promotion was in respect of a
                    ’selection post’ and the promotion was to be made on the
                    basis of the inter-se merit of the eligible candidates. In
                    that view of the matter, the respondent was not entitled
                    to get promotion to the post of Research Officer on the
                    strength of her seniority alone. The seniority list prepared
                    by the Departmental Promotion Committee was not
                    challenged by the respondent on other grounds and we
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024               Page 19 of 22
also do not find any ground to assail that select list. Thus,
                    the Writ Petition is liable to be dismissed by setting aside
                    the orders made therein and in the writ appeal arising
                    therefrom. Therefore, the appeal succeeds and is
                    allowed, however, without costs.”


              Reliance placed on the decisions in
Director of Elementary

        Education and The Employees’ State Insurance Corporation
(supra) by the learned counsel for the appellants is also apposite.
The appellants are, thus, within their right in canvassing the

        correct position of law by urging that the absorption of the

        respondent at this stage would result in violation of the

        Recruitment Rules. In this factual and legal backdrop, the ratio of

        the decisions relied upon by the learned counsel for the

        respondent cannot further the case of the respondent.
17. It appears that the High Court was much impressed by the

        fact that the statement made on 15.01.1999 on behalf of the

        appellants was not being honoured. It is true that a statement

        made before the Court has its solemnity and the party making

        such statement is bound to comply with the same. At the same

        time, it has to be seen as to whether such statement in the form

        of a concession, if given effect to would result in violation of any

        statutory rules or regulations. If such consequence is likely to

        flow, it would be open for the affected party on whose behalf such
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024                Page 20 of 22
concession in law was made to place before the Court the correct

        position of law and urge that it may not be compelled to give

        effect to an erroneous concession made on law. In the present

        case, giving effect to such statement made on 15.01.1999 would

        result in a waitlisted candidate being given an appointment

        notwithstanding the fact that all selected candidates in the said

        recruitment process had duly joined their posts and there was no

        occasion to operate the wait list. It would amount to filling in one

        post in the subsequent recruitment on the basis of an exercise

        carried out in the previous recruitment. This would definitely

        cause prejudice to the candidates seeking recruitment in the

        subsequent process as the vacancies would stand reduced.

        Moreover, it would also extend the life of the wait list though all

        vacancies stand filled in, which would be impermissible.
In these facts therefore, we find that the appellants are

        justified in contending that the statement dated 15.01.1999

        cannot be acted upon as it would result in conferring benefit on a

        waitlisted candidate to which he otherwise in law is not entitled

        to. The same is also not shown to be permissible under the

        Recruitment Rules. It appears that the High Court glossed over

        these vital aspects while directing the appellants to absorb the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024    Page 21 of 22
services of the respondent. The available vacancies having been

        filled up in 1997 resulted in exhaustion of the wait list and the said

        process of recruitment had come to an end. The High Court has,

        therefore, erred in directing the absorption of the respondent.
18. For all these reasons, the judgment of the High Court dated

        25.06.2024 in WPCT No.24 of 2021 is found to be unsustainable

        in law. It is accordingly set-aside and the writ petition preferred

        by the respondent stands dismissed. The civil appeal is allowed

        in the aforesaid terms with no order as to costs. Pending

        applications stand disposed of accordingly.
…………………………………………..J.
                                         [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]




                                                         …..………………………..J.
                                                         [ATUL S. CHANDURKAR]


       NEW DELHI,
       OCTOBER 15, 2025.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP(Civil) Diary No. 57192 of 2024      Page 22 of 22