[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
K.S. Shivappa vs Smt. K. Neelamma on 7 October, 2025
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
2025 INSC 1195                                                          REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11342 OF 2013



                      K. S. SHIVAPPA                                    …APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS

                      SMT. K. NEELAMMA                                …RESPONDENT(S)




                                             JUDGMENT
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.   One Mahadevappa, son of Waderahalli Basappa of Village

                           Shamanur was the owner of sites measuring 42 ft. x 30 ft.

                           and 41 ½ ft. x 30 ft., which were carved out of Survey Nos.

                           113/2 and 114/1. These revenue sites were described as

                           plots Nos. 56 and 57 respectively. The aforesaid plots Nos. 56
Signature Not Verified
and 57 were purchased by Rudrappa on 15.09.1971, in the
Digitally signed by
geeta ahuja
Date: 2025.10.07
name of his three minor sons, namely, Maharudrappa,
17:36:22 IST
Reason:
1
Basavaraj and Mungeshappa. Thus, all the three minors

     became the joint owners of the aforesaid two plots.
2.   Rudrappa, the father and the natural guardian of the three

     minors, transferred one of the two plots i.e. plot No. 56 in

     favour of one S.I. Bidari by a registered sale deed without the

     court’s permission. The said S.I. Bidari further transferred

     the said plot i.e. plot No. 56 to one Smt. B.T. Jayadevamma

     vide sale deed dated 31.01.1983. Subsequently, when the

     two surviving minors (as one of them died) attained majority,

     they along with their mother transferred the aforesaid plot in

     favour of one K.S. Shivappa vide sale deed dated 03.11.1989.

     Acting in furtherance of the above registered sale deed, K.S.

     Shivappa started working on the said land due to which Smt.

     B.T. Jayadevamma thought there was interference with her

     rights on the said land.
3.   As a result, Smt. B.T. Jayadevamma filed an Original Suit

     No. 120/1997 in the Court of II Additional Civil Judge (Sr.

     Div.), Davanagere for declaration, possession and permanent

     injunction. The Trial Court decreed the suit in favour of B.T.

     Jayadevamma holding that the minors on attaining majority
2
failed to file a suit to get the sale deed executed by their father

     repudiated. Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order,

     K.S. Shivappa filed Regular First Appeal No. 1522/2003

     before the High Court. The appeal was allowed, and the

     judgment and order passed by the Trial Court was reversed,

     holding that the sale deed of the said plot executed by the

     father of the minors was voidable at the instance of the

     minors and that the minors can repudiate the same within

     the prescribed time, upon attaining majority either by filing

     a suit or by unequivocal conduct, such as, by transferring

     the property to a third party. Thus, the transfer of the

     property by the minors, on attaining majority within the

     period of limitation, amounted to repudiation of the contract

     of sale of the property executed by their father without

     seeking the permission of the District Judge.
4.   In a similar fashion, as above, Rudrappa, the father and

     natural guardian of the minors, transferred the second plot,

     i.e. plot No. 57 through a registered sale deed dated

     13.12.1971 in favour of one Krishnoji Rao without taking any

     permission from the court. The said purchaser Krishnoji Rao
3
vide Sale Deed dated 17.02.1993 transferred the said plot in

     favour of Smt. K. Neelamma. On the other hand, the

     surviving minors on attaining majority, along with their

     mother within the prescribed time sold the property, i.e., plot

     No. 57 to K. S. Shivappa, the purchaser of the earlier plot No.
56. The said Shivappa clubbed both the properties, i.e. plot

     Nos. 56 and 57 and built a house to live therein.
5.   In the above background of the facts and circumstances,

     Smt. K. Neelamma, the purchaser of plot No. 57 who

     purchased it from Krishnoji Rao, as a plaintiff instituted O.S.

     No. 76/1997 in the Court of Additional Civil Judge, (Jr. Div.),

     Davanagere against K.S. Shivappa. The said suit was

     dismissed on 14.02.2003 by the Trial Court holding that the

     sale deed under which the predecessor-in-title of the plaintiff

     had purchased the aforesaid plot from the father and natural

     guardian of the minors was voidable as no permission of the

     court was taken for its sale. The minors could repudiate the

     same on attaining majority, which in fact, has been done by

     them by executing the sale deed in favour of K.S. Shivappa.
4
Therefore, the plaintiff, Smt. K. Neelamma derives no legal

     rights in the said plot.
6.   Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment, order and decree, the

     plaintiff Smt. K. Neelamma preferred Regular Appeal No.

     67/2003    before the Principal Civil Judge (Sr. Div.),

     Davangere. The said appeal was allowed, and the judgment

     and order of the Trial Court was reversed. It was held that

     since the minors have not challenged the earlier sale deed

     executed by their guardian, they could not have sold the plot

     subsequently on attaining majority.
7.   The Second Appeal preferred by K.S. Shivappa against the

     aforesaid judgment and order was dismissed by the High

     Court vide judgment and order dated 19.03.2013 on the

     same reasoning that since no suit for cancellation of the

     earlier sale deed was filed by the minors on attaining

     majority, the sale deed executed by their natural guardian

     had attained finality. Thus, the plaintiff Smt. K. Neelamma is

     the valid title holder of the plot No. 57.
5
8.   This is how, K.S. Shivappa, the purchaser of the two plot Nos.
56 and 57 has come up before this Court by way of this

     appeal.
9.   It may be pertinent to clarify herein itself that the dispute in

     the present appeal is confined to plot No. 57 only. The dispute

     regarding plot No. 56 stands conclusively settled by the

     judgment and order of the High Court, which was never

     challenged by either party before any higher forum. No

     material is on record to indicate that any special leave

     petition or appeal was filed against it.
10. Upon hearing learned counsel for the parties, the moot

     question which falls for our consideration in this appeal is:
whether it is necessary for the minors to have filed a suit

     upon attaining majority within the prescribed time period, to

     set aside the earlier sale deed executed by their natural

     guardian, with respect to plot no.57 or such a sale deed could

     be repudiated through their conduct within three years of

     attaining majority.
11. In order to answer the above question of law, it would be

     beneficial to refer and quote the relevant provisions of Section
6
8 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 19561. The

         relevant provisions are sub-Section (2) and sub-Section (3) of

         Section 8 of the Act, which are being reproduced hereinbelow:
“8. Powers of natural guardian.—(1) The natural
                 guardian of a Hindu minor has power, subject to
                 the provisions of this section, to do all acts which
                 are necessary or reasonable and proper for the
                 benefit of the minor or for the realisation, protection
                 or benefit of the minor's estate; but the guardian
                 can in no case bind the minor by a personal
                 covenant.
(2) The natural guardian shall not, without the
                 previous permission of the court,—
(a) mortgage or charge, or transfer by sale, gift,
                 exchange or otherwise, any part of the immovable
                 property of the minor, or
(b) lease any part of such property for a term
                 exceeding five years or for a term extending more
                 than one year beyond the date on which the minor
                 will attain majority.
(3) Any disposal of immovable property by a
                 natural guardian, in contravention of sub-section
                 (1) or sub-section (2), is voidable at the instance of
                 the minor or any person claiming under him.
.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..

                 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ”




1 Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’
7
12. A simple reading of the aforesaid provisions makes it

     abundantly clear that a natural guardian of a minor has no

     authority in law to mortgage, sell, gift or otherwise transfer

     any part of the immovable property of the minor or even to

     lease out any part of such property for a term exceeding five

     years or for a term extending more than one year beyond the

     date on which the minor will attain majority without the prior

     permission of the court. Therefore, prior permission of the

     court is a sine qua non for a guardian of a minor to transfer

     the property of the minor in any of the manners provided

     under sub-Section (2) of Section 8 of the Act.
13. Sub-Section (3) of Section 8 of the Act in unequivocal terms

     provides that the disposal of any immovable property by the

     natural guardian in contravention of sub-Section (1) or sub-

     Section (2) is voidable at the instance of the minor or any

     person claiming under him. In other words, if the natural

     guardian or a minor disposes of the immovable property of a

     minor in contravention of sub-Section (1) and sub-Section (2)

     particularly without the permission of the court, such a

     transaction would be voidable at the instance of the minor.
8
14. The aforesaid provision, however, nowhere categorically

    provide the manner in which such a transaction of disposal

    of the property of a minor by a guardian without the

    permission of the court would be a voidable. Such a

    transaction can be avoided or repudiated by the minor

    expressly by filing a suit for the cancellation of such a

    transaction   or   impliedly   by   his   conduct   namely   by

    transferring the property himself on attaining the majority

    within the time prescribed. The avoidance of such a

    transaction by conduct appears to be permissible for two

    reasons. First, at times the minor may not be aware of such

    a transaction and as such may not be in a position to

    institute any suit; secondly, the transaction of such a nature,

    if any, may not have been given effect to and the party

    acquiring right in the property may not be having possession

    of the property giving an impression that the property is

    intact in the hands of the minor, in which case also the minor

    on attaining majority may not deem it proper to institute a

    suit.
9
15. ‘Travellyan’ in his well-known book on Minors 5th Edition, on

     Page No.202 stated:
“A transaction which is voidable at the instance
              of the minor may be repudiated by any act or
              omission of the late minor, by which he intends to
              communicate the repudiation, or which has the
              effect of repudiating it, for instance, a transfer of
              land by him avoids a transfer of the same land
              made by his guardian before he attained the age
              of majority. It is not necessary that he should
              bring a suit.”
16. Mulla’s Hindu Law, 12th Edition, on Page No.276 observes as

     under:
“An alienation made by a Hindu widow……….
              without legal necessity and without the consent
              of the next reversioners is ………. voidable at their
              option. They may affirm it, or treat it as a nullity
              without the intervention of a court, and they show
              their election to do the latter by commencing an
              action to recover possession of the property.”
17. Both the above texts indicate that the transfer which is

     voidable, can be repudiated by the minor on attaining

     majority by his action and not necessarily by the intervention

     of the court.
10
18. In a century and quarter old case of Abdul Rahman vs.

       Sukhdayal Singh,2 a property of the minor was leased out

       by the guardian but not for the benefit of the minor. The

       minor sold the property on attaining majority. The court

       observed that it is not necessary that a suit should be

       instituted to set aside the lease which was executed by the

       guardian of the minor and that the act of the minor of selling

       the property on attaining majority is enough to repudiate the

       lease deed.
19.
In
G. Annamalai Pillai vs The District Revenue Officer,

       Cuddalore3, Madras
a lease deed of minor’s land was

       executed by his father in contravention of Section 8 (1) and

       (2) of the Act. The transferee moved an application for

       registering himself as a cultivating tenant on the basis of the

       above lease. The minor on attaining majority resisted the

       application on the ground that the lease is not valid and is in

       violation of sub-Section (2) of Section 8 of the Act. It was held

       that the lease having been avoided by the minor after



2 1905 SCC OnLine All 106
3 1984 SCC OnLine Mad 185
11
attaining the age of majority, there was no valid lease and as

        such the transferee under the lease cannot claim the status

        of a cultivating tenant.
20. The above decision is certainly not binding upon this Court,

        nonetheless, it has some persuasive value. It in clear term

        reveals that the minor on attaining majority can avoid a

        transaction which is voidable under sub-Section (2) of

        Section 8 by his conduct such as by resisting the application

        of the transferee to register him as a cultivating tenant. It

        means that it is not mandatory to file a suit for the

        cancellation of the lease deed.
21.
In another case reported in
Chacko Mathew v. Ayyappan

        Kutty4
, it was held thus:
“It is not always necessary that a party entitled to
            avoid a transaction not binding on him should sue
            for its rescission. He can himself avoid it by an
            unequivocal act repudiating it”.
The opinion so expressed throw enough light to support the

        view that a transaction which is in violation or contravention

        of sub-Section (2) of Section 8 of the Act can be avoided by


4 1961 SCC OnLine Ker 24
12
the minor not only by suing for the recession of such a

        transaction but by otherwise also.
22. In view of the legal opinion expressed by Travellyan, Mulla

        and the High Courts of Allahabad, Madras and Kerala, it is

        amply clear that a transaction in relation to the property of a

        minor executed in contravention of the express provisions of

        Section 8 of the Act is voidable at the option of the minor or

        any person claiming under him and such an option to avoid

        a transaction of the above nature can be by initiating a law

        suit or may be by conduct as enumerated above.
23.
In
Madhegowda vs Ankegowda5
, this Court in paragraph

        25 held as under:
“25. …The minor, on attaining majority, can
            repudiate the transfer in any manner as and when
            occasion for it arises. After attaining majority if
            he/she transfers his/her interest in the property in
            a lawful manner asserting his/her title to the same
            that is sufficient to show that the minor has
            repudiated the transfer made by the “de facto
            guardian/manager”.”




5 (2002) 1 SCC 178
13
24.
In
Vishwambhar and Ors. vs Laxminarayan (Dead
)

        through Lrs. and Anr.6 a Division Bench in a matter where

        the minor filed a suit for possession contending that the sale

        deeds executed by their guardian (mother) were inoperative

        and not binding upon them as the same were affected

        without the permission of the court in contravention of

        Section 8 (2) of the Act, and wherein the relief for setting aside

        the sale deeds was added after the period of limitation had

        expired, the Court held that though the sale deeds were

        executed without legal necessity and in contravention of

        Section 8 (2), but the suit was rightly dismissed as the relief

        for cancellation of the sale deeds could not have been added

        after the expiry of the limitation.
25. The aforesaid decision is not one which lays down that the

        filing of a suit by the minor on attaining majority for the

        cancellation of the sale deeds executed by the guardian is

        mandatory. It only lays down that the relief of cancellation of

        sale deeds, if added after expiry of limitation period, cannot

        be granted. The said decision, therefore, has no application


6 (2001) 6 SCC 163
14
to the facts and circumstances of the case at hand to answer

        the question whether a voidable transaction can be

        repudiated by the minor only by filing a civil suit or otherwise

        by his conduct also.
26. Another Division Bench of this Court in Nangali Amma

        Bhavani Amma vs Gopalkrishnan Nair and Ors.7 while

        holding that a transaction entered into by the guardian of a

        minor in violation of Section 8 (2) is voidable at the instance

        of the minor and is not void and that the minor can avoid the

        same on attaining majority.
The Division Bench relying upon
Vishwambhar
(Supra) observed that a suit must be filed by

        minor in order to avoid transaction within period prescribed

        under
Article 60
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
. The aforesaid

        decision also nowhere rules that there are no other

        alternative modes to avoid the transaction which is in

        contravention of
Section 8 (2)
of the Act and that the filing of

        the suit alone is the remedy thereof.
7 (2004) 8 SCC 785
15
27. The decision of this Court in
Murugan & Ors. vs Kesava

        Gounder (Dead
) through legal representatives & Ors.8,

        though in the facts and circumstances of the said case, states

        that alienations which are voidable at the instance of minor

        are required to be set aside before relief of possession can be

        claimed by such minor but even then
the said decision
is of

        no help to answer the question before us in this appeal.
28. The aforesaid decision is only an authority to the effect that

        relief of possession cannot be claimed by the minor without

        getting the sale deeds, which are voidable, set aside.

        However, the aforesaid decision also falls quite short of laying

        down that the suit for setting aside the voidable sale deeds is

        mandatory to repudiate a transaction entered into by the

        guardian on behalf of the minor in contravention of
Section

        8 (2)
of the Act.
29. Apart from the above decisions of the Apex Court, there is

        another important decision of this Court in
G. Annamalai

        Pillai vs District Revenue Officer and Ors.9 In
the said



8 (2019) 20 SCC 633
9 (1993) 2 SCC 402
16
case, the guardian of a minor who was the owner of the

property, had executed the lease deed of the property of the

minor in contravention of
Section 8
of the Act. The lease was

avoided by the minor on attaining majority. The Court held

that the effect of such avoidance would be that though the

lease was voidable but once it is avoided it becomes void from

its very inception and no statutory rights accrue in favour of

the lessee. It was held that the avoidance relates back to the

date of the transaction. The Court quoted Salmond on

Jurisprudence, 12th edition, page no.341 as under:
“… A valid agreement is one which is fully
     operative in accordance with the intent of the
     parties. A void agreement is one which entirely
     fails to receive legal recognition or sanction, the
     declared will of the parties being wholly destitute
     of legal efficacy. A voidable agreement stands
     midway between these two cases. It is not a
     nullity, but its operation is conditional and not
     absolute. By reason of some defect in its origin it is
     liable to be destroyed or cancelled at the option of
     one of the parties to it. On the exercise of this power
     the agreement not only ceases to have any efficacy
     but is deemed to have been void ab initio. The
     avoidance of it relates back to the making of it. The
     hypothetical or contingent efficacy which has
     hitherto been attributed to it wholly disappears, as
     if it had never existed. In other words, a voidable
17
agreement is one which is void or valid at the
             election of one of the parties to it.”
30. The Court in the aforesaid decision went further ahead to

       state that the Privy Council in
Satgur Prasad vs Mahant

       Har Narain Das10
and in
S. N. R. Sundara Rao & Sons,

       Madurai vs Commissioner of Income-Tax, Madras11
, held

       that when a person dissents from the alienation, his dissent

       is in relation to the whole transaction and not merely to the

       possession. In the result, the effect is to get rid of the

       transaction as if the transaction had never taken place.
31.
In the light of the above observations, this Court in
G. Annamalai Pillai
(supra) went on to record that when

       the respondent avoided the lease deed executed by his father,

       the lease became void from its inception and no statutory

       rights could therefore accrue in favour of the other party.
32. In view of the above discussion, it can safely be concluded

       that a voidable transaction executed by the guardian of the

       minor can be repudiated and ignored by the minor within
10 1932 SCC OnLine PC 2
11 1956 SCC OnLine Mad 300
18
time on attaining majority either by instituting a suit for

    setting aside the voidable transaction or by repudiating the

    same by his unequivocal conduct.
33. In the case at hand, undisputedly the surviving minors on

    attainment of majority had repudiated the transaction of sale

    executed by their father by entering into a fresh contract of

    sale of the property in question. It is admitted on record that

    on the basis of the sale deed executed by the father of the

    minors, the purchaser or the subsequent purchasers have

    not entered into possession and the name of the minors

    continued to appear in the revenue records. There is no

    material on record that the minors had the knowledge of the

    execution of the sale deed by their father. In the facts and

    circumstances, if they have avoided the sale executed by their

    father on attaining majority, it is sufficient repudiation of the

    said sale and it was not necessary for them to have instituted

    the suit for the cancellation of such a sale rather the

    purchasers of the property of the minors through the

    guardian on acquiring knowledge of the sale executed by the

    minors on attaining majority ought to have instituted a suit
19
either for the cancellation of the sale deed executed by the

     minors or for declaration of their right, title and interest in

     the property.
34. The above discussion leads us conclusively to hold that it is

     not always necessary for a minor to institute a suit for

     cancellation of a voidable sale transaction executed by his

     guardian on attaining majority within the limitation provided

     and that such a transaction can be avoided or repudiated by

     his conduct. The question stands answered accordingly.
35. There is one another issue which goes in favour of K.S.

     Shivappa.
36. The plaintiff, Smt. K. Neelamma in instituting the original

     suit in the plaint simply pleaded that she had purchased the

     property vide registered sale deed dated 17.12.1993 for a

     valuable consideration from Krishnoji Rao. She has nowhere

     stated or pleaded that she had verified the title of the vendor

     or that the vendor, Krishnoji Rao, was having a valid title over

     the property so as to transfer it in her favour.
37. She further pleaded that the cause of action for the suit arose

     on 27.01.1997 when she noted certain waste products on the
20
suit land and requested the defendant, K.S. Shivappa to

    remove them, who refused to clear the same denying the title

    of the plaintiff.
38. The aforesaid plaintiff, Smt. K. Neelamma had not entered

    the witness box to prove her plaint case or to assert her title

    over the suit property. She had not even proved the sale deed

    dated 17.12.1993 under which she has allegedly purchased

    the suit land from Krishnoji Rao or to state that Krishnoji Rao

    was having a valid title over the said land to transfer her. In

    fact, she could not even upon entering the witness box could

    have proved the valid title of Krishnoji Rao in the absence of

    any plaint allegations to the above effect. It is settled that the

    evidence either ocular or documentary cannot travel beyond

    the pleadings.
39. The power-of-attorney holder of the plaintiff, Smt. K.

    Neelamma namely Shivaji Rao Salanki, PW-1 was not

    competent to depose or to prove anything which was not

    within his personal knowledge or was otherwise personally

    known to the plaintiff, Smt. K. Neelamma. The testimony of

    such a witness i.e. a power-of-attorney holder is inadmissible
21
with regard to the facts within the personal knowledge of the

       plaintiff who has failed to enter the witness box. This is

       settled by this Court in
Janki Vashdeo Bhojwani vs.

       IndusInd Bank Ltd.12 In
the recent case of
Rajesh Kumar

       vs Anand Kumar and Ors.,13
a Division Bench of this Court

       in which one of us (P. Mithal, J. was a member) reaffirmed

       the principle that where the plaintiff refuses to testify, the

       proxies cannot substitute his personal testimony on key

       issues within the personal knowledge of the plaintiff. A

       Power-of-Attorney holder is thus, not entitled to depose in

       place of the principal.
40. In the overall facts and circumstances of the case, firstly for

       the reason that the plaintiff failed to enter the witness box so

       as to testify and prove her plaint case; and secondly for the

       reason that the sale deed executed by the father of the minors

       was repudiated by the minors within time on attaining

       majority, no valid right or title stood transferred to Krishnoji




12 (2005) 2 SCC 217
13 2024 SCC OnLine SC 981
22
Rao from whom Smt. K. Neelamma had allegedly purchased

     the suit land. Therefore, the suit as instituted has to fail.
41. Accordingly, the judgment and order of the High Court dated

     19.03.2013 and that of the First Appellate Court dated

     30.06.2005 are set aside and that of the Trial Court is

     restored so as to decree the suit.
42. The appeal is allowed accordingly with no order as to costs.
.............……………………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)



                             .............……………………………….. J.
(PRASANNA B. VARALE)
NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 07, 2025.
23