[Cites
40
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Lifestyle Equities C.V vs Amazon Technologies Inc on 7 October, 2025
2025 INSC 1190                                                               REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (C) No.19767 of 2025




                LIFESTYLE EQUITIES C.V. & ANR.                           …PETITIONER(S)


                                                      VERSUS


                AMAZON TECHNOLOGIES INC.                                   …RESPONDENT



                                                   JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.10.07
16:09:58 IST
Reason:
J.B. PARDIWALA J.,

      For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided
      into the following parts:-
INDEX




A. FACTUAL MATRIX ................................................................. 3

B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PLAINTIFFS .................. 11

C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE DEFENDANT ................. 13

D. REJOINDER TO THE SUBMISSIONS CANVASSED ON BEHALF
OF THE DEFENDANTS ............................................................. 15

E. ANALYSIS............................................................................ 16

  i. History of the Legislation in Question ................................................ 18

  ii. Principles required to be followed while Interpreting a Provision of a
  Statute ................................................................................................. 22

  iii. Decisions of various High Courts on the Subject .............................. 33

  iv. Meaning and Import of “sufficient cause” under
Order XLI Rule 5 of the
  CPC
...................................................................................................... 38

  v. Service of Summons and Irregularity in the Service of Summons ...... 39

  vi. Reading of
Section 36
of the Arbitration Act and Order XLI Rule 3 and
  Rule 5 respectively
of the CPC
.............................................................. 41

  vi. Relevant aspects which the High Court looked into for the purpose of
  granting unconditional stay .................................................................. 53

F. CONCLUSION ...................................................................... 69
Page 1 of 73
1.   Our Order dated 24.09.2025 passed in the instant petition reads thus:
“1. Exemption Application is allowed.
2. Heard Mr. Mukul Rohatgi and Mr. Gaurav
              Pachnanda, the learned Senior counsel appearing
              for the petitioners and Dr. Abhishek Manu
              Singhvi, Mr. Neeraj Kishan Kaul and Mr. Arvind
              Nigam, the learned Senior counsel appearing for
              the respondent.
3. We are of the view that there is no good reason
              for us to interfere with the impugned Judgment
              and Order passed by the High Court.
4. The Special Leave Petition is, accordingly,
              dismissed.
5. In view of the dismissal of the Special Leave
              Petition, no orders are required to be passed on
              the application for intervention/impleadment and
              the same stands disposed of.
6. However, reasons to follow by a separate
              Order.”
2.   This petition arises from the judgment and order passed by the High
     Court of Delhi, dated 01.07.2052 in the CM Application No. 26455 of
     2025 filed in the RFA(O.S.)(COMM) No.11 of 2025 by which the
     application filed by the respondent herein (judgment debtor-original
     defendant) under Order XLI Rule 5(1) and Rule 5(3) of the Civil
     Procedure Code, 1908, (for short, “
the CPC
”) respectively came to be
     allowed, and thereby the Court stayed the operation of the judgment
     and money decree dated 25.02.2025 passed by a learned Single Judge
     in the suit instituted by the petitioner herein. In short, the Division
     Bench of the High Court granted stay of the execution of the money
     decree suffered by the respondent herein without insisting for the
     deposit of the decretal amount.
3.   For the sake of convenience, the petitioners herein shall be referred to
     as the original plaintiffs and the respondent herein shall be referred to
     as the original defendant.
Page 2 of 73
A. FACTUAL MATRIX
4.   The plaintiffs along with its subsidiaries and licensees claim to be
     engaged in the business of manufacturing, distribution and sale of a
     wide range of products including garments, apparels, footwear for men,
     women    and    children,   furniture,   textiles,   watches   and   other
     lifestyle/personal care products under the trademark Beverly Hills Polo
     Club (hereinafter referred to as, “BHPC”).
5.   The plaintiff No. 1 is an Amsterdam based company and is the
     proprietor of the BHPC trademark and claims to hold exclusive rights
     for its use and commercialisation. The BHPC trademark consists of a
     distinctive look featuring a charging Polo pony with a mounted rider
     wielding a raised polo stick (mallet) symbolising the sport of Polo.
6.   The plaintiff no. 2 is the licensee of the said trademark pursuant to the
     Master License and Licensing Service Agreement dated 20.05.2008.
7.   The plaintiffs instituted Civil Suit (COMM) No. 443 of 2020 in the Delhi
     High Court, inter alia, seeking permanent injunction and damages
     against the defendant for the alleged infringement of their registered
     trademark BHPC.
8.   It is the case of the plaintiffs that they are the rightful proprietors of
     the BHPC Mark which enjoys extensive goodwill and recognition in the
     domestic and international markets. The plaintiffs instituted the suit
     contending that the defendant has been unlawfully using a mark
     identically or deceptively similar to the plaintiffs’ trademark, thereby
     violating their statutory and common law rights.
Page 3 of 73
9.   In such circumstances referred to above, the plaintiffs prayed for the
     following reliefs:
“a. Decree for permanent injunction restraining
              die    Defendants,     its    partners,     directors,
              shareholders or proprietor as the case may be, its
              assigns in business, franchisees affiliates,
              subsidiaries, licensees, and agents from selling,
              offering for sale, advertising, directly or indirectly
              dealing in any products or reproducing or using in
              any manner whatsoever, the Infringing Logo
              Mark or any other trade mark or logo/device,
              which is identical to and/or deceptively similar to,
              or is a deceptive variant of, and/or includes the
              Plaintiffs' well known Logo Mark amounting to
              infringement of the Plaintiffs' registered trade
              marks as disclosed in the Plaint.
b. Decree for permanent injunction restraining the
              Defendants, its partners, directors, shareholders
              or proprietor as the case may be, its assigns in
              business, franchisees, affiliates, subsidiaries,
              licensees and agents from selling, offering for
              sale, advertising, directly or indirectly dealing in
              any products or reproducing or using in any
              manner whatsoever, the infringing Logo Mark or
              any other trade mark or logo/device, which is
              identical to and/or deceptively similar to or
              imitation of, or is a deceptive variant of, and/or
              includes the Plaintiffs' artistic Logo Mark
              amounting to infringement of the Plaintiffs'
              copyright in the said logo.
c. Decree for permanent injunction restraining the
              Defendants, its partners, directors, shareholders
              or proprietor as the case may be, its assigns in
              business, franchisees, affiliates, subsidiaries,
              licensees and agents from selling, offering for
              sale, advertising, directly or indirectly dealing in
              any products or using in any manner whatever,
              the infringing Logo Mark or any other mark or
              logo/device, which is identical to, or is a deceptive
              variant of and/or deceptively similar to and/or
              includes the Plaintiff’s well known Logo Mark
              amounting to passing off of the goods/services
Page 4 of 73
and/or business of the Defendants for those of
             the Plaintiffs, dilution of goodwill and unfair
             competition.
d. A decree for delivery up of all products and
             material including stationery, visiting cards, hill
             boards, brochures, promotional material, letter-
             heads, cash memos, sign boards, sign posts,
             leaflets, cartons, or any other items of
             whatsoever, bearing the infringing Logo Mark
             and/or any other mark, logo or device which may
             be identical and/or deceptively similar, or is a
             deceptive variant of and/or includes the Plaintiff's
             well-known Logo Mark.
e. A decree for damages amounting to Rs.
             2,00,05,000/- (Rupees Two Crores and Five
             Thousand only) or any such amount as found due
             in favour of the Plaintiffs. The Plaintiffs submit
             that the valuation of damages is an approximate
             figure only, and the Plaintiffs undertake to pay
             further Court fees as may be determined by this
             Hon'ble Court upon the damages that the
             Plaintiffs are able to prove in the course of trial.
f. An order for rendition of accounts of profits in
             favour of the Plaintiffs and against the
             Defendants to ascertain the profits made by
             Defendants through sale of its apparel products
             or any other products which bear the infringing
             Logo Mark. The Court fees as and when the
             accounts of profit are determined precisely and
             accurately in the course of trial, and upon
             disclosure of profits made by the Defendants.
g. An order awarding costs of this suit to the
             Plaintiffs;
h. Any other and further relief(s) as this Hon'ble
             Court may deem fit and proper to meet the ends
             of justice.”
10. It appears from the materials on record that in the suit filed by the
    plaintiffs there were three defendants including the respondent herein
Page 5 of 73
as the original defendant No. 1. The plaint computed the damages
    claimed from all the defendants to the tune of Rs. 2,00,05,000/-
    (Rupees Two Crore and Five Thousand Only), or such other amount as
    the court would find it to be payable.
11. It further appears that the defendant No. 1 was proceeded ex parte vide
    Order dated 20.04.2022. Of the remaining two defendants, the suit was
    decreed against the defendant No. 2 for Rs. 4,78,484/- vide the Order
    dated 02.03.2023. The very same order deleted the defendant No. 3
    from the array of parties.
12. In such circumstances, the respondent before us is the only defendant
    now contesting the litigation.
13. It appears that upon institution of the suit by the plaintiffs the following
    Order dated 12.10.2020 came to be passed:
“1. Allowed, subject to all just exceptions.
2. Original documents, if any, be filed within two
              weeks of the resumption of the normal functioning
              of the Court.
3. Application is disposed of.
I.A. 9256/2020 (under Order           XI   Rule    1
              (4)
Commercial Courts Act
)
1. Additional documents, if any, be filed within 30
              days.
2. Application is disposed of.
Signing Date:13.10.2020 07:06:56 This file is
              digitally signed by PS to HMJ Mukta Gupta
              CS(COMM) 443/2020 I.A. 9254/2020 (under
              Order XXXIX Rule 1 and 2
CPC
)
1. Plaint be registered as a suit.
2. Issue summons in the suit and notice in the
              application to the defendants.
Page 6 of 73
3. Learned counsel for the defendant No.2 and
defendant No.3 accept summons in the suit and
notice in the application.
4. Summons in the suit and notice in the
application be now issued to defendant No.1 on
the plaintiff taking steps through email and
whatsapp, returnable before this Court on 2nd
February, 2021.
5. Written statement and reply affidavit along
with affidavit of admission/denial be filed within
30 days of the receipt of summons in the suit and
notice in the application.
6. Replication and rejoinder affidavit, along with
affidavit of admission/denial, be filed within
three weeks thereafter.
7. Case of the plaintiff is that the plaintiff is a
brand-owner of "BEVERLY HILLS POLO CLUB"
which was established by its predecessors in the
year 1981. The first registration for the trademark
"BEVERLY HILLS POLO CLUB" was applied on
3rd December, 1992 and thereafter the plaintiff
has number of registrations for the said mark.
The mark of the plaintiff is a device mark, that is,
and the plaintiff is the owner of the registered
trademark and the copyright thereof.
8. Grievance in the present suit of the plaintiff is
limited to defendant No.1 which is a group
company of defendant No.3 but not working as an
intermediary but is selling its own brand, copying
the logo of the plaintiff as….. It is thus claimed
that by infringing the plaintiff's device mark as
also the copyright in the logo, the defendant No.1
is selling its goods representing them to be as the
plaintiff's brand. Learned counsel further states
that defendant No.2 is selling the products of the
defendant No.1 under the impugned logo mark by
listing the same on the platform of defendant
No.3.
9. None appears on behalf of defendant No.1
despite advance notice however, learned counsel
for defendant No.3, that is, Amazon Seller Service
Pvt. Ltd. enters appearance and states that in an
earlier suit filed by the plaintiff being CS(COMM)
1015/2018
Lifestyle Equities C.V. and Ors. vs.
Amazon Seller Services Pvt. Ltd.
, vide order dated
Page 7 of 73
16th July, 2018, this Court had already directed
the defendant No.3 to take down the URLs
wherein the brand/logo/device mark of the
plaintiff is copied including those mentioned in
the plaint and as and when the plaintiff gives any
further information in this regard. Learned
counsel for the defendant No.3 states that since
the defendant No.3 is covered by the said order
of this Court dated 16th July, 2018, no fresh suit
is maintainable and the plaintiff was only
required to intimate the same to the defendant
No.3 and hence the present suit is mala fide.
10. Learned counsel for the defendant No.2 states
that the defendant No.2 has already taken down
the listing and will further investigate into the
matter and take down any further listing which is
either on the defendant No.3's platform or any
other platform.
11. Case of the plaintiff is that in the earlier suit,
that is, CS (COMM) No.1015/2018, the plaintiff
had impleaded parties who were selling their
products on the defendant No.3's listing by
infringing the plaintiff's device mark and the
copyright and in the earlier suit the defendant
No.1 was not a party and in the present suit, not
only does the plaintiff seek delisting of the brand
of the defendant No.1 from the defendant No.3's
platform but also seeks the relief of injunction
against the defendant No.1 which is infringing
and diluting the plaintiff's mark by selling its
products on a much cheaper rates representing to
be that of the plaintiff.
12. Considering that the defendant No.1 is a
separate entity, this Court is prima facie of the
view that the present suit would be maintainable.
From the averments in the plaint as also the
documents filed therewith, this Court finds that
the plaintiff has made out a prima facie case in
its favour and in case no ex-parte ad-interim
injunction is granted, the plaintiff would suffer an
irreparable loss. Balance of convenience also lies
in favour of the plaintiff. Consequently, till the
next date of hearing, defendant No.1 and
defendant No.2, their Partners, Directors,
Proprietors, Shareholders, Affiliates, Licensees,
Page 8 of 73
Agents etc. are restrained from selling, offering for
             sell, advertising, directly or indirectly dealing in
             any products or reproducing or using in any
             manner whatsoever the infringing logo mark
             which is identically/deceptively similar to the
             plaintiff's logo mark "BEVERLY HILLS POLO
             CLUB". In the meantime, defendant No.3 is
             directed to take down the products of the
             defendant No.1 with the infringing logo within 72
             hours of the URLs being provided by the plaintiff.
13. Compliance under
Order XXXIX Rule 3
             CPC
be made within one week.”
14. Thus, the Court while registering the plaint as a suit noted that the
    defendant No. 1, i.e., the respondent before us despite an advance
    notice failed to enter appearance, and accordingly granted an ex parte
    ad interim injunction restraining the defendants, their partners,
    directors, proprietors, shareholders, etc., from selling, offering for sale,
    advertising, directly or indirectly dealing in any products which is
    identically/deceptively similar to the plaintiffs’ logo mark “BHPC”.
15. The suit ultimately came to be adjudicated ex parte, and came to be
    decreed in favour of the plaintiffs and against the defendant No. 1, i.e.,
    the respondent before us in the following terms:
“121. The suit is accordingly decreed as under in
             favour of Plaintiffs and against Defendant No. 1
             in the following terms:
(i) A decree of permanent injunction is granted in
             terms of paragraphs 64(a), (b) and (c) of the plaint,
(ii) A decree of damages to the tune of $38.78
             million as on date Rs. 336,02,87,000.00/- is
             granted in favour of the Plaintiffs against
             Defendant No. 1. If the said amount is paid within
             three months, no interest would be liable to be
             paid. However, if the same is not paid by the
             Defendant No.1, interest @ 5% per annum would
             he payable from the date of this judgment until
             the full realization of the said amount.
Page 9 of 73
(iii) A decree of costs to the tune of Rs.
3,23,10,966.60/- along with the Court Fee.
122. The details of the relief granted are
            summarized below:
S.NO.      DECREE              AMOUNT/TERMS
                      DETAILS
           1          Compensatory
                      Damages
           1A         Lost Royalties   USD 33.78 million
                                       (Rs.292,70,37,000,00/)
           1B         Increased        USD 5 million
                      Advertising &    (Rs.43,32,50,000.00/-)
                      Promotional
                      Expenses
           1C         Total            USD 38.78 million
                      Compensatory     (Rs.336,02,87,000.00/)
                      Damages
           2          Costs             Rs.3,23,10,966.60/-
                                        along with the Court
                                          Fee.
           3          Grand Total       Rs.339,25,97,966.60/-
                      (Damages +        + Court Fee
                      Costs)

            123. Decree sheet be drawn up in the above
            terms.
124. The suit along with all pending applications,
            if any are disposed of.”
16. The defendant being dissatisfied with the judgment and money decree
    passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court challenged the
    same by filing RFA (O.S.) (COMM) No. 11 of 2025.
17. In the appeal filed by the defendant, an application was filed under
    Order XLI Rule 5(1) and Rule 5(3)
of the CPC
respectively, seeking stay
    of the operation of judgment and money decree passed by the learned
    Single Judge
referred to above
.
Page 10 of 73
18. The Division Bench of the High Court after hearing the decree-holders
    and the judgment-debtor allowed the stay application in the following
    terms:
“181. We, therefore, dispose of the present
             application by staying the operation of the
             impugned judgment dated 25 February 2025,
             passed by the learned Single Judge, insofar as it
             awards damages of Rs. 336,02,87,000/-, and
             costs of Rs. 3,23,10,966.60/-.
182. This shall, however, be subject to an
             undertaking being furnished by the appellant
             Amazon Tech to comply with the impugned
             judgment, in the event of its failing in the present
             appeal, to be furnished with the Registry of this
             Court within a period of two weeks from
             pronouncement of the present judgment.
183. CM Appl 26455/2025 stands flowed to the
             aforesaid extent.
184. Observations and findings contained in the
             present judgment, we clarify, are only intended to
             be prima facie and for the purposes of disposing
             of the present application. They shall not be
             binding on Court while deciding the present
             appeal.”
19. In such circumstance
referred to above
, the original plaintiffs/decree-
    holders are here before us with the present petition.
B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PLAINTIFFS
20. Mr. Mukul Rohatgi and Mr. Gaurav Pachnanda, the learned Senior
    Counsel appearing for the plaintiffs submitted that the Division Bench
    of the High Court committed an egregious error in granting the benefit
    of unconditional stay of the execution of money decree. It was
    vehemently submitted that the impugned judgment and order passed
    by the Division Bench of the High Court is in gross violation and
    flagrant disregard of the mandatory provisions of Order XLI Rule 5(1)
    and Rule 5(3)
of the CPC
respectively.
Page 11 of 73
21. Mr. Rohatgi vehemently submitted that impugned judgment and order
    is erroneous on all counts. According to the learned Senior Counsel,
    the High Court is not correct in saying that there was no valid service
    of summons to the defendant.
22. The learned Senior Counsel vehemently submitted that Order XLI Rule
    1(3)
of the CPC
makes it abundantly clear that in an appeal against a
    decree for payment of amount, the appellant is obliged in law, within
    the time permitted by the Appellate Court, to deposit the amount
    awarded or furnish such security in respect thereof as the Court may
    think fit. He laid much stress on the fact that under Order XLI Rule
    5(5)
of the CPC
a deposit or security, is a condition precedent for an
    order by the Appellate Court staying the execution of the decree.
23. In other words, according to the learned Senior Counsel the provision
    is mandatory in character. With a view to fortify the submissions noted
    aforesaid, the learned Senior Counsel placed strong reliance on the
    decision of this Court in the case of
Sihor Nagar Palika Bureau v.
    Bhabhlubhai Virabhai & Co.
, reported in (2005) 4 SCC 1.
24. It was vehemently argued that, if according to the defendant it is a case
    of an ex parte decree, i.e., decree passed without service of valid
    summons, then why the defendant did not prefer any application under
Order IX Rule 13 of the CPC
? Why defendant thought fit to prefer an
    appeal against such so called ex parte decree?
25. The learned Senior Counsel invited our attention to the second Proviso
    to
Order IX Rule 13 of the CPC
. Relying on the same, it was argued that
    the defendant had the requisite knowledge of the date of hearing and
    had sufficient time to appear, file its written statement, and to contest
Page 12 of 73
the suit. It was argued that the delivery of the suit papers and the order
    passed by the High Court dated 12.10.2020 granting ex parte
    injunction subject to compliance of
Order XXXIX Rule 3 of the CPC
would amount to adequate service of summons in accordance with law.
    To fortify this submission reliance was placed on the decision of this
    Court in the case of
Sunil Poddar and Others v. Union Bank of
    India
, reported in (2008) 2 SCC 326, and the decision of the Delhi
    High Court in the case of
LT Foods Ltd. v. Saraswati Trading
    Company
, reported in 2022 SCC OnLine Del 3694.
26. It was also submitted by the learned Counsel that the Division Bench
    of the High Court committed an egregious error in staying the money
    decree on mere asking the defendant to furnish an undertaking on
    oath, that in the event, if the appeal is dismissed the defendant shall
    deposit the decretal amount. This according to the learned Senior
    Counsel cannot be termed as adequate security.
27. In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned Senior Counsel
    prayed that there being merit in his petition the same may be allowed
    and the impugned judgment and order be set aside, and further the
    defendant may be directed to deposit the decretal amount with interest
    in the court below.
C. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE DEFENDANT
28. On the other hand, Dr. Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Mr. Neeraj Kishan
    Kaul and Mr. Arvind Nigam, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for
    the defendant, while vehemently opposing this petition submitted that
    no error not to speak of any error of law could be said to have been
    committed by the High Court in passing the impugned judgment and
    order.
Page 13 of 73
29. The learned Senior Counsel submitted that all the relevant aspects of
    the matter could be said to have been looked into by the Division Bench
    painstakingly, and upon being fully convinced on all aspects, the
    Division Bench in its discretion thought fit to grant the benefit of stay
    of the execution of the money decree without insisting for the deposit
    of the decretal amount with interest or any other tangible security.
30. It was argued that the decision of this Court in
Sihor Nagar Palika
(supra) upon which strong reliance has been placed on behalf of the
    petitioner is of no avail in view of the decision of this Court in
Malwa
    Strips Pvt. Limited v. Jyoti Limited
, reported in (2009) 2 SCC 426.
31. It was pointed that in
Malwa Strips
(supra), this Court considered
Sihor Nagar Palika
(supra) and took the view that the word “shall” in
Order XLI Rule 5 of the CPC
is not mandatory, and if an exceptional
    case is made out then it is always open for the Appellate Court to grant
    the benefit of stay of the execution of a money decree without insisting
    for deposit of the entire decretal amount with interest.
32. It was argued that the Division Bench of the High Court was fully
    convinced that not only any valid summons was not served upon the
    defendants and the suit proceeded ex parte, but even on other counts,
    the judgment and decree passed by the Court, prima facie, suffers from
    various legal infirmities.
33. The learned Senior Counsel submitted that the Division Bench of the
    High Court in its impugned judgment and order has recorded few
    shocking facts like the plaintiffs enhancing the claim of damages
    consequently from Rs. 2 crore in the plaint to Rs. 3,780 crore at the
    stage of written submissions post-trial, and that too without any
Page 14 of 73
amendment and without putting the defendant to notice of such
    enhanced claim without any basis in the pleadings. It was argued that
    having regard to the gross perversities and illegalities writ large in the
    decree and conduct of the suit proceedings, asking the defendant to
    furnish security or deposit of any particular amount as a pre-condition
    for stay would be wholly disproportionate and excessive.
34. In such circumstances
referred to above
, the learned Senior Counsel
    prayed that there being no merit in the present petition the same may
    be dismissed.
D. REJOINDER TO THE SUBMISSIONS CANVASSED ON
    BEHALF OF THE DEFENDANTS
35. Mr. Gaurav Pachnanda, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
    plaintiffs in rejoinder put forward an important submission, which we
    must take record and deal with the same.
36. The learned Senior Counsel invited our attention to
Section 36(3)
of the
    Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short, “the
Arbitration
    Act
”). He would submit that the second Proviso attached to
Section
    36(3)
of the Arbitration Act is an indication that ordinarily by applying
    the principles of
Order XLI Rule 5 of the CPC
, as mentioned in
Section
    36(3)
of the Arbitration Act, the Court would not be empowered to
    unconditionally stay an arbitration award or a judgment.
37. In the alternative, the learned Senior Counsel sought to argue that,
    even if it was to be understood that the second Proviso attached to
Section 36(3)
of the Arbitration Act provides that instead of exercising
    discretion, the Court must grant unconditional stay in cases of fraud
    and corruption, the same would lead to a logical inference that the
Page 15 of 73
discretion to grant an unconditional stay under
Order XLI Rule 5 of the
    CPC
would be restricted to only cases of fraud or corruption, or grounds
    that take colour from those two grounds and not cases of an extreme
    or egregious view on the merits of the adjudication.
E. ANALYSIS
38. Having heard the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the parties and
    having gone through materials on record, the only question that falls
    for our consideration is whether the Division Bench of the High Court
    committed any error in passing the impugned judgment and order?
39. Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side, we
    must look into few relevant provisions of law and also look into few
    decisions of this Court and various High Courts.
40. Order XLI Rule 1(3)
of the CPC
reads thus:-
“1. Form of appeal – What to accompany
             memorandum.-
xxx
             (3) Where the appeal is against a decree for
             payment of money, the appellant shall, within
             such time as the Appellate Court may allow,
             deposit the amount disputed in the appeal or
             furnish such security in respect thereof as the
             Court may think fit.”
41.
Order XLI Rule 5 of the CPC
reads as under:-
“Order XLI Rule 5. Stay by Appellate Court.
(1) An appeal shall not operate as a stay of
             proceedings under a decree or order appealed
             from except so far as the Appellate Court may
             order, nor shall execution of a decree be stayed
             by reason only of an appeal having been
             preferred from the decree; but the Appellate Court
             may for sufficient cause order stay of execution of
             such decree.
Page 16 of 73
Explanation-
An order by the Appellate Court for the stay of
  execution of the decree shall be effective from
  the date of the communication of such order to
  the Court of first instance but an affidavit
  sworn by the appellant, based on his personal
  knowledge, stating that an order for the stay
  of execution of the decree has been made by
  the Appellate Court shall, pending the receipt
  from the Appellate Court of the order for the
  stay of execution or any order to the contrary,
  be acted upon by the Court of first instance.
(2) Stay by Court which passed the decree.-
Where an application is made for stay of
execution of an appealable decree before the
expiration of the time allowed for appealing
therefrom, the Court which passed the decree
may on sufficient cause being shown order the
execution to be stayed.
(3) No order for stay of execution shall be made
under sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) unless the Court
making it is satisfied-
(a) that substantial loss may result to the party
  applying for stay of execution unless the order
  is                                         made;
(b) that the application has been made without
  unreasonable delay; and
(c) that security has been given by the
  applicant for the due performance of such
  decree or order as may ultimately be binding
  upon him.
(4) [Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (3)], the
Court may make an ex parte order for stay of
execution pending the hearing of the application.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
foregoing sub-rules, where the appellant fails to
make the deposit or furnish the security specified
in sub-rule (3) of rule 1, the Court shall not make
an order staying the execution of the decree.”
Page 17 of 73
i. History of the Legislation in Question
42. The Bill No. 27 of 1974, being a Bill to amend
the CPC
and the
Limitation Act, 1963
, was introduced in the Lok Sabha on April 8,
    1974. The text of the Bill is found published in the Gazette of
    India, Extraordinary dated April 8, 1974, in Part-II,
Section 2
at pages
    203 to 293.
43. The Statement of Objects and Reasons accompanying the Bill recites in
    paragraph 5 at page 295 that after carefully considering the
    recommendations made by the Law Commission in its Twenty-seventh,
    Fortieth, Fifty-fourth and Fifty-fifth Reports, the Government had
    decided to bring forward the said Bill for the amendment
of the Code of
    Civil Procedure
, 1908, keeping in view, among others, the following
    basic considerations, namely:
(i) that a litigant should get a fair trial in accordance with the
        accepted principles of natural justice;
(ii) that every effort should be made to expedite the disposal of civil
        suits and proceedings, so that justice may not be delayed;
(iii) that the procedure should not be complicated and should, to
        the utmost extent possible, ensure fair deal to the poorer sections
        of the community who do not have the means to engage a pleader
        to defend their cases.
44. Clause 90 of the Bill provided for the amendment of Order XLI. In Rule
    1 of Order XLI, after sub-rule (2), sub-rule (3) in the following terms
    was sought to be introduced:
“(3) Where the appeal is against an order made in
             execution of a decree for payment of money, the
             appellant shall, within such time as the Appellate
             Court may allow, deposit the amount disputed in
             the appeal or furnish such security in respect
             thereof as the Court may think fit.”
Page 18 of 73
(Emphasis supplied)
45. In addition, the following provision was sought to be introduced by way
    of amendment as sub-rule (1A), after sub-rule (1), in Rule 3 of Order
    XLI:
“(1A) Where the appellant fails to make the
             deposit or furnish security specified in sub-rule (3)
             of Rule 1, the Court shall reject the memorandum
             of appeal.”
46. Sub-rule (5) of Rule 5 of Order XLI, as now enacted, did not find place
    in the Bill, in the same or any other form.
47. The Notes on Clauses annexed to the Bill point out at page 336 that
    Rule 1 of Order XLI was being amended by introduction of sub-rule (3)
    to provide for the deposit, or the furnishing of security for decretal
    amount by judgment-debtor when the appeal is against an order made
    in execution of a money decree. As regards amendment of Rule 3 of
    Order XLI by insertion of sub-rule (1A), it was mentioned that the
    provision was meant to provide that where the appellant fails to make
    the deposit of the decretal amount or to furnish security specified in
    sub-rule (3) of Rule 1, the memorandum of appeal shall be rejected.
48. After the Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on April 8, 1974, the motion
    for reference of the Bill to a Joint Committee of the Houses was moved
    in Lok Sabha on May 2, 1974, and it was adopted. The Rajya Sabha
    concurred in the said motion on May 14, 1974. The Joint Committee
    constituted accordingly submitted its Report to Lok Sabha on April 1,
    1976. The Report is found published at pages 804/3 to 804/34 in
    the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part-II,
Section 2
dated April 1,
    1976. At page 804/21, the Joint Committee offered its observations in
    paragraph 65 of the Report with regard to Clause 87 (Original clause
Page 19 of 73
90) of the Bill. The relevant portion from paragraph 65 of the Report of
    the Joint Committee is extracted hereinbelow:
“65. Clause 87 (Original clause 90),—
(i) The Committee note that under the proposed
             new sub-rule (1A) of Rule 3 in Order 41, if the
             appellant fails either to deposit the amount
             disputed in the appeal or to furnish security for
             such amount, the memorandum of appeal shall be
             rejected. The Committee feel that such a provision
             will deprive a judgment-debtor having a good
             case, to pursue the appeal on account of his
             inability to deposit the disputed amount or to
             furnish security for such amount.”
49. The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that in order to see that
    justice is done to both the parties, the proposed sub-rule might be
    amended in such a way that neither the judgment-debtor is deprived
    of his right to pursue the appeal nor the decree-holder is deprived of
    the remedy. Proposed sub-rule (1A) has been amended to provide that
    stay of execution of the decree will not be granted unless the deposit is
    made or security is furnished and has been transposed as sub-rule (5)
    of Rule 5.
50. Be it stated that the Committee made no specific recommendation in
    regard to sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of Order XLI proposed to be inserted by
    original Clause 90 of the Bill. In other words, the Committee
    recommended no change in the form or content of sub-rule (3) which
    was proposed to be inserted by way of amendment in Rule 1 of Order
    XLI. However, the Bill reported by the Committee incorporated a
    material change in the said sub-rule which will be presently noticed.
51. The
Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Bill, 1974 (Bill No. 27B of
    1974) as reported by the Joint Committee is found published in
    the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part-II,
Section 2
, dated April 1,
Page 20 of 73
1976 at pages 804/35 to 804. At page 804/111, Clause 87 finds place
    and the relevant portions of the said clause are reproduced
    hereinbelow:
“87. In the First Schedule, in Order 41,—
(i) Rule 1,—
                                       xxx
(b) after sub-rule (2), the following sub-rules shall
             be inserted, namely:
“(3) Where the appeal is against a decree for
                payment of money, the appellant shall, within
                such time as the Appellate Court may allow,
                deposit the amount disputed in the appeal or
                furnish such security in respect thereof as the
                Court may think fit.”
(ii)
                                     xxx
(iii) in rule 5,—
(a)
                                     xxx
(b)
                                     xxx

             “(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
             foregoing sub-rules, where the appellant fails to
             make the deposit or furnish the security specified
             in sub-rule (3) of rule 1, the Court shall not make
             an order staying the execution of the decree.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)
52. The Bill having been considered and passed by both the Houses of
    Parliament was enacted into
the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment)
    Act, 1976 (No. 104 of 1976).
The Act
received the assent of the President
    of India on September 9, 1976, and it was published in the Gazette of
    India, Extraordinary, Part-II,
Section-1
, dated September 10, 1976. The
    material amendments, namely, the insertion of sub-rule (3) in Rule 1
    and sub-rule (5) in Rule 5 of Order XLI were duly enacted and stood
    inserted in
the CPC
by Section 87 of the Amendment Act, which is to
Page 21 of 73
be found at page 1337 of the Gazette, and they came into force on and
    with effect from February 1, 1977.
53. The substance of the legislative history set out hereinabove is that
    Clause 90 of Bill No. 27 of 1974 stood materially altered as per clause
    87 of Bill No. 27B of 1974, as reported by the Joint Committee, in the
    following respects:
“(1) In sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of Order 41, the
             provision relating to the requirement of the
             appellant depositing the amount disputed in the
             appeal or furnishing such security in respect
             thereof as the Court may think fit in cases where
             the appeal is against an order made in execution
             of a decree for payment of money was substituted
             by the provision requiring such deposit being
             made or security being furnished where the
             appeal is against a decree for payment of money.
(2) Sub-rule (1A) of rule 3 of Order XLI requiring
             the Court to reject the memorandum of appeal
             where the appellant fails to make the deposit or
             furnish security specified in sub-rule (3) of Rule 1
             of Order 41, was deleted.
(3) Sub-rule (5) was added in Rule 5 of Order 41
             providing that where the appellant fails to make
             the deposit or to furnish the security, the Court
             shall not make an order staying the execution of
             the decree.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
54. These changes are also found reflected in
the Code of Civil Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 1978
, and they now find place in the parent Act,
    namely,
the CPC
.
ii. Principles required to be followed while Interpreting a
     Provision of a Statute
55. As the entire debate revolves around the interpretation of the provisions
    of Order XLI Rule 5(1) and Rule 5(3)
of the CPC
respectively, we must
Page 22 of 73
discuss the well settled principles required to be followed while
    interpreting a provision of a statute.
56. The well-settled principles required to be followed by a court while
    interpreting a provision of a statute is that the intention of the
    legislature is primarily to be gathered from the language used, and
    consequently, a construction which results in rejection of words as
    meaningless, has to be avoided. It is not a sound principle of
    construction to brush aside words or phrase in a statute as being
    inapposite surplusage if they can have appropriate application in
    circumstances conceivably within the contemplation of the statute. In
    interpretation of statutes, the courts always presume that the
    legislature inserted every part thereof for a purpose and the legislative
    intention is that every part of the statute should have effect. The
    legislature is deemed not to waste its words, or to say anything in vain.
    [See:
Mithilesh Singh v. Union of India
, reported in (2003) 3 SCC
    309].
57. Similarly, in the case of Padma Sundara Rao v. State of Tamil
    Nadu, reported in (2002) 3 SCC 533, it was held that two principles of
    construction – one relating to casus omissus, and the other in regard
    to reading the statute as a whole appear to be well-settled. Under the
    first principle, the rule of casus omissus cannot be supplied by the
    court except in the case of clear necessity. The rule of casus
    omissus should not be readily inferred and for that purpose, all the
    parts of a statute or section must be construed together and every
    clause of a section should be construed with reference to the context of
    the statute and other clauses thereof, so that the construction to be
    put on a particular provision makes a consistent enactment of the
    whole statute. This would be more so, if literal construction of a
Page 23 of 73
particular clause leads to manifestly absurd or anomalous results,
    which could not have been intended by the legislature. Therefore, if the
    language is plain, there is no necessity of taking aid of external aid for
    gathering the real intention of the legislature.
58. Over and above, we should bear in mind the following well-known rule
    of interpretation of the statute reiterated by this Court in the case
    of
Union of India v. Deoki Nandan Agarwal
, reported in 1992 Supp
    (1) SCC 323:
“It is not the duty of the Court either to enlarge the
             scope of the legislation or the intention of the
             Legislature when the language of the provision is
             plain and unambiguous. The Court cannot
             rewrite, recast or reframe the legislation for the
             very good reason that it has no power to legislate.
             The power to legislate has not been conferred on
             the Courts. The Court cannot add words to a
             statute or read words into it which are not there.
             Assuming there is a defect or an omission in the
             words used by the Legislature the Court could not
             go to its aid to correct or make up the deficiency.
             Courts shall decide what the law is and not what
             it should be. The Court of course adopts a
             construction which will carry out the obvious
             intention of the Legislature but could not legislate
             itself. But to invoke judicial activism to set at
             naught legislative judgment is subversive of the
             Constitutional      harmony      and      comity    of
             instrumentalities.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)
59. Applying the aforesaid principles, if we read the plain language of Order
    XLI Rule 1 sub-rule (3)
of the CPC
, we get the clear intention of the
    legislature that deposit of the decretal amount, or giving security
    thereof is not a condition precedent for maintaining a money appeal,
    and the court is vested with the discretion to grant time for depositing
    such amount and giving security before disposal of the appeal, and at
    the same time, the Appellate Court has also the power to extend the
Page 24 of 73
time by taking aid of
Section 148
of the CPC. On the other hand, a less
    grave consequence for non-compliance of such condition, was
    envisaged, namely, to disentitle the appellant to the benefit of stay of
    execution of the decree as provided in Rule 5(5) of Order XLI.
60. The aforesaid view has been expressed by this Court in the case of
Kayamuddin Shamsuddin Khan v. State Bank of India
, reported
    in (1998) 8 SCC 676, wherein it has been held as follows:-
“6. The learned counsel for the respondent has
             invited our attention to Sub‐rule (3) of Rule 1 of
             Order XLI in
the CPC
, as amended in the State of
             Maharashtra, which reads as under:
“(3) Where the appeal is against a decree for
               payment of money, the appellant shall, within
               such time as the Appellate Court may allow,
               deposit the amount disputed in the appeal or
               furnish such security in respect thereof as the
               Court may think fit:
Provided that the Court may dispense with the
               deposit or security where it deems fit to do so
               for sufficient cause.”
7. The submission of the learned counsel for the
             respondent is that the High Court was right in
             giving the direction regarding the deposit of Rs
             75,000 as per the aforesaid provision and since
             the appellant has failed to comply with the same
             the appeal has been rightly directed to be
             dismissed. We, however, find that the only
             consequence for non‐compliance with the
             direction given under Sub‐rule (3) of Rule 1 of
             Order XLI is as provided in Sub‐ rule (5) of Rule 5
             of Order XLI which reads as under:
“(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
               foregoing sub‐rules, where the appellant fails
               to make the deposit or furnish the security
               specified in Sub‐rule (3) of Rule 1, the Court
               shall not make an order staying the execution
               of the decree.”
61. It may be apposite to observe that this Court in the aforesaid decision
    was dealing with the interpretation of Order XLI Rule 1(3)
of the CPC
,
Page 25 of 73
as amended in the State of Maharashtra, where the appellate Court
    has power to dispense with making deposit or security in fit and proper
    cases.
62.
In
Malwa Strips
(supra) this Court interpreted Order XLI Rule 1(3) of
    the Code as provided in the Central legislation, i.e.,
the CPC
, and held
    that the said provision although couched with the expression “shall”
    yet must be read as directory and not mandatory.
It quoted with
    approval the
ratio
laid down in
Kayamuddin
(supra).
63.
In view of the law declared by this Court in
Kayamuddin
(supra) and
Malwa Strips
(supra), there is no escape from the conclusion that the
    obligation under Order XLI Rule 1(3) is not mandatory but directory in
    nature, and failure to comply with the same shall not result in rejection
    of the appeal, but would disentitle the appellant the benefit of stay of
    execution of the money decree.
64. The provisions of
Order XLI Rule 5 of the CPC
govern the question of
    grant or refusal of stay of execution of the decree by the appellate
    court. A mere reading of the provision makes it clear that it does not
    make any distinction between a money decree and other decrees. The
    powers of the Appellate Court to order stay of execution of the decree
    are not fettered in any way if there is “sufficient cause” for passing
    such an order. Even with regard to money decrees, the discretion of
    the court is circumscribed by the same limitations imposed under
    the provisions of Order XLI Rule 5. There is no reason why decrees
    for payment of money should receive a consideration different from
    the other decrees in the matter of stay pending appeals. In suitable
    cases, where the court is satisfied that substantial loss may result to
    the applicant, if no stay is granted or there are any exceptional
Page 26 of 73
circumstances, the court may grant stay as prayed for either with or
    without any condition whatsoever. Otherwise, in the absence of any
    exceptional circumstance, money decree ordinarily would not be
    stayed unconditionally from its execution by the appellate court
    pending the final disposal of appeal on its own merits.
65. Mere filing of an appeal would not operate as stay of execution of
    decree, but the Appellate Court may, for “sufficient cause”, order stay
    of execution of decree. The other relevant part of the rule is contained
    in sub-rule (3) of Rule 5 of Order XLI. As per the provisions of sub-
    rule (3) of Rule 5 of Order XLI, the Court has to see;
    (1) whether there will be substantial loss to the party applying for
         stay;
(2) whether the application has been made without unreasonable
         delay; and
    (3) whether security has been given by the applicant for due
         performance of the decree.
66. Thus, the provisions of the Rule are very clear and they do not make
    any distinction between money decrees and other types of decrees.
67. This Court in
Sihor Nagar Palika
(supra), observed the following as
    regards the power of the Appellate Court to stay the decree in first
    appeal:-
“Order 41 Rule 1(3)
CPC
provides that in an
               appeal against a decree for payment of amount
               the appellant shall, within the time permitted by
               the appellate court, deposit the amount disputed
               in the appeal or furnish such security in respect
               thereof as the court may think fit. Under Order 41
               Rule 5(5), a deposit or security, as abovesaid, is
               a condition precedent for an order by the
               appellate court staying the execution of the
Page 27 of 73
decree. A bare reading of the two provisions
           referred to hereinabove, shows a discretion
           having been conferred on the appellate court to
           direct either deposit of the amount disputed in the
           appeal or to permit such security in respect
           thereof being furnished as the appellate court
           may think fit. Needless to say that the discretion
           is to be exercised judicially and not arbitrarily
           depending on the facts and circumstances of a
           given case. Ordinarily, execution of a money
           decree is not stayed inasmuch as satisfaction of
           money decree does not amount to irreparable
           injury and in the event of the appeal being
           allowed, the remedy of restitution is always
           available to the successful party. Still the power
           is there, of course a discretionary power, and is
           meant to be exercised in appropriate cases.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
68.
In
Atma Ram Properties (P) Ltd. v. Federal Motors (P) Ltd.
,
   reported in (2005) 1 SCC 705, this Court while deciding a litigation
   arising from the
Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958
observed as under:-
“6. The order of eviction passed by the Rent
           Controller is appealable to the Rent Control
           Tribunal under
Section 38
of the Act. There is no
           specific provision in the Act conferring power on
           the Tribunal to grant stay on the execution of the
           order of eviction passed by the Controller, but
           sub-section (3) of
Section 38
confers the Tribunal
           with all the powers vested in a court under
the
           Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 while hearing an
           appeal. The provision empowers the Tribunal to
           pass an order of stay by reference to Rule 5 of
Order 41 of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908
           (hereinafter “the Code” for short). This position
           was not disputed by the learned Senior Counsel
           appearing for either of the parties.
xxx
8. It is well settled that mere preferring of an
           appeal does not operate as stay on the decree or
           order appealed against nor on the proceedings in
           the court below. A prayer for the grant of stay of
           proceedings or on the execution of decree or order
           appealed against has to be specifically made to
Page 28 of 73
the appellate court and the appellate court has
discretion to grant an order of stay or to refuse the
same. The only guiding factor, indicated in Rule 5
aforesaid, is the existence of sufficient cause in
favour of the appellant on the availability of which
the appellate court would be inclined to pass an
order of stay. Experience shows that the principal
consideration which prevails with the appellate
court is that in spite of the appeal having been
entertained for hearing by the appellate court, the
appellant may not be deprived of the fruits of his
success in the event of the appeal being allowed.
This consideration is pitted and weighed against
the other paramount consideration: why should a
party having succeeded from the court below be
deprived of the fruits of the decree or order in his
hands merely because the defeated party has
chosen to invoke the jurisdiction of a superior
forum. Still the question which the court dealing
with a prayer for the grant of stay asks itself is:
why the status quo prevailing on the date of the
decree and/or the date of making of the
application for stay be not allowed to continue by
granting stay, and not the question why the stay
should be granted.
9. […]In our opinion, while granting an order of
stay under
Order 41 Rule 5 CPC
, the appellate
court does have jurisdiction to put the party
seeking stay order on such terms as would
reasonably compensate the party successful at
the end of the appeal insofar as those
proceedings are concerned. Thus, for example,
though a decree for payment of money is not
ordinarily stayed by the appellate court, yet, if it
exercises its jurisdiction to grant stay in an
exceptional case it may direct the appellant to
make payment of the decretal amount with
interest as a condition precedent to the grant of
stay, though the decree under appeal does not
make provision for payment of interest by the
judgment-debtor to the decree-holder. Robust
common sense, common knowledge of human
affairs and events gained by judicial experience
and judicially noticeable facts, over and above
the material available on record — all these
Page 29 of 73
provide useful inputs as relevant facts for
             exercise of discretion while passing an order and
             formulating the terms to put the parties on. […]”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
69.
In
Malwa Strips
(supra), this Court after looking into the decision
    in
Sihor Nagar Palika
(supra) observed as under :-
“9. In terms of sub-rule (5) of Rule 5 of Order 41,
             the court shall not make an order staying the
             execution of the decree notwithstanding anything
             contained in the foregoing sub-rules, where the
             appellant fails to make the deposit or furnish the
             security specified in sub-rule (3) of Rule 1. We will
             proceed on the assumption that although the
             word “shall” has been used in Order 41 Rule 1(3)
             of the Code, the same is not mandatory in
             character, and, thus, may be read as directory.
10. In Rajasthan SEB v. Ram Deo [AIR 1999 Raj
             264] after noticing some of the aforementioned
             decisions as also the legislative history of the said
             provision, a learned Single Judge of the
             Rajasthan High Court held as under: (AIR pp.
267-68, para 19)
               “19. After close scrutiny of the aforesaid
               observations, I am of the opinion that in view
               of the provisions of sub-rule (5) of Rule 5 of
Order 41 CPC
it cannot be held that appeal
               against the decree for payment of money is not
               maintainable, if filed without making
               compliance with the provisions contained in
               sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of
Order 41 CPC
and it is
               the duty of the Registry to see that on
               application under
Order 41 Rule 5 CPC
seeking
               stay of money decree the appellant has to
               incorporate a note in regard to his readiness
               and willingness to comply with the directions
               under sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of
Order 41 CPC
. If
               the appeal is preferred against the decree for
               payment of money without any stay
               application under
Order 41 Rule 5 CPC
then in
               that event, it is the duty of the appellant to
               incorporate a note in the memo of appeal in
               respect of his readiness and willingness to
Page 30 of 73
comply with the directions issued by the court
  under sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of
Order 41 CPC
.”
11. We may, however, notice that although the
provisions of sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of Order 41
have been held not to be mandatory, this Court in
Kayamuddin Shamsuddin Khan v. SBI [(1998) 8
SCC 676] opined that non-compliance with a
direction to deposit the decretal amount or part of
it or furnish security therefor would result in the
dismissal of the stay application but not the entire
appeal, stating: (SCC p. 677, para 8)
  “8. This would mean that non-compliance with
  the direction given regarding deposit under
  sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of Order 41 would result
  in the Court refusing to stay the execution of
  the decree.
In other words, the application for
  stay of the execution of the decree could be
  dismissed for such non-compliance but the
  Court could not give a direction for the
  dismissal of the appeal itself for such non-
  compliance.”
  To the same effect is the decision of this Court
  in
Sihor Nagar Palika Bureau v. Bhabhlubhai
  Virabhai & Co.
[(2005) 4 SCC 1], wherein it
  was held: (SCC pp. 2-3, para 6)
  “6. Order 41 Rule 1(3)
CPC
provides that in an
  appeal against a decree for payment of
  amount the appellant shall, within the time
  permitted by the appellate court, deposit the
  amount disputed in the appeal or furnish such
  security in respect thereof as the court may
  think fit. Under Order 41 Rule 5(5), a deposit or
  security, as abovesaid, is a condition
  precedent for an order by the appellate court
  staying the execution of the decree. A bare
  reading of the two provisions referred to
  hereinabove, shows a discretion having been
  conferred on the appellate court to direct either
  deposit of the amount disputed in the appeal
  or to permit such security in respect thereof
  being furnished as the appellate court may
  think fit. Needless to say that the discretion is
  to be exercised judicially and not arbitrarily
  depending on the facts and circumstances of a
  given case. Ordinarily, execution of a money
Page 31 of 73
decree is not stayed inasmuch as satisfaction
 of money decree does not amount to
 irreparable injury and in the event of the
 appeal being allowed, the remedy of restitution
 is always available to the successful party.
Still the power is there, of course a
 discretionary power, and is meant to be
 exercised in appropriate cases.”

  To the same effect is the decision of this Court
  in
B.P. Agarwal v. Dhanalakshmi Bank Ltd
.
[(2008) 3 SCC 397]
12. The High Court in this case failed to notice the
provisions of sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of Order 41.
The appellate court, indisputably, has the
discretion to direct deposit of such amount, as it
may think fit, although the decretal amount has
not been deposited in its entirety by the judgment-
debtor at the time of filing of the appeal. But while
granting stay of the execution of the decree, it
must take into consideration the facts and
circumstances of the case before it. It is not to act
arbitrarily either way. If a stay is granted,
sufficient cause must be shown, which means
that the materials on record were required to be
perused and reasons are to be assigned. Such
reasons should be cogent and adequate.
13. The High Court, with respect, failed to notice
that suit was one under Order 37 of the Code.
Whether it was maintainable or not may fall for
consideration in the appeal. Even assuming that
the same was not maintainable, the question
which should have been posed by the High Court
was as to whether sufficient cause had been
made out to reverse the decree passed in favour
of the appellant. Even a decree could have been
passed having regard to the defence raised by the
respondent under Order 12 Rule 6 of the Code.
We, therefore, see no justification at all as to why
an order of stay of the nature was passed by the
High Court.
14. Even if the said provision is not mandatory,
the purpose for which such a provision has been
inserted should be taken into consideration. An
exceptional case has to be made out for stay of
Page 32 of 73
execution of a money decree. The parliamentary
             intent should have been given effect to. The High
             Court has not said that any exceptional case has
             been made out. It did not arrive at the conclusion
             that it would cause undue hardship to the
             respondent if the ordinary rule to direct payment
             of the decretal amount or a part of it and/or
             directly through the judgment-debtor to secure the
             payment of the decretal amount is granted. A
             strong case should be made out for passing an
             order of stay of execution of the decree in its
             entirety.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
70. Thus, in
Malwa Strips
(supra), this Court unequivocally observed
    that although the word “shall” has been used in
Order XLI Rule 5
    CPC
, yet the same is not mandatory in character. The Court further
    observed that the purpose for which such a provision has been
    inserted, should be taken into consideration. An exceptional case
    has to be made out for unconditional stay of execution of a money
    decree. Thus, it is necessary to imply that if an exceptional case is
    made out, the Appellate court has the discretion to stay the
    execution of the money decree without imposing any condition.
iii. Decisions of various High Courts on the Subject
71. We may now look into few old decisions of various High Courts on
    the subject.
In the case of
A.A. Khan v. Ameer Khan
, reported in
    1949 SCC OnLine Kar 11, the High Court of Mysore has observed
    as follows (headnote):-
“The court can stay execution of money decrees
             pending appeal on such security as it deems fit in
             proper cases in which sufficient cause for a stay
             has been made out, without requiring in all cases
             that the decree amount should be deposited in
             court.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
Page 33 of 73
72. Similarly, the Division Bench of the Saurashtra High Court in the
    case of Borough Municipality v. Firm Ramji Vashram, reported
    in AIR 1955 Guj 113, has in terms held that the judgment of the
    Bombay High Court in the case of
Dhunjibhoy Cowasji Umrigar v.
    Lisboa
, reported in ILR 1889 13 Bom 252, cannot serve as a useful
    guide for cases under
Order XLI Rule 5 of the CPC
.
It is further
    observed therein that when the Bombay High Court decided the case
    of
Dhunjibhoy
(supra), the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code,
    1882, were applicable and therein, there was no provision similar to
    that of
Order XLI Rule 5 of the CPC
. The relevant observations read
    thus:-
“6. We are not concerned with sub-rule (4) which
             deals with ex parte orders for stay of execution
             pending the hearing of the application. The power
             of the Court to stay execution of a decree has to
             be exercised within the four corners of the above
             Rule. The intention of the Legislature which
             appears from the language of this rule seems to
             be that an appeal should not automatically
             operate as a stay of execution of the decree and
             no order for stay of execution should be made
             merely by reason only that an appeal has been
             preferred from the decree.
7. The reason of the rule appears to be that the
             rights of the decree-holder having been
             determined by a competent Court, it is not fair
             that he should be deprived of the fruits of his
             decree merely because the judgment-debtor
             prefers an appeal against the decree. At the same
             time if execution of the decree is likely to result in
             substantial loss to the decree-holder, discretion is
             given to the Court to stay execution provided the
             other two conditions of sub-r. (3) are satisfied. It
             is, therefore, impossible to formulate any uniform
             rule of practice and each case must be decided on
             its own facts.
8.
In the case of money decrees, a Bench of the
             Bombay High Court decided in
Dhunjibhoy
             Cowasji Umrigar v. Lisboa
, 13 Bom 241 (A) that
             where a decree orders payment of money and an
Page 34 of 73
appeal is lodged against that decree by the party
           directed to pay, then on his application execution
           of the decree should be stayed, so far as it directs
           payment, on the judgment-debtor lodging the
           amount in Court, unless the other party gives
           security for the repayment of money in the event
           of the decree being reversed.
9. If such security is given by the successful
           party, then stay of execution should not be
           granted. This order was made in 1888 under
the
           Code of Civil Procedure
of 1882. That Code did
           not have any provision similar to O. 41 R. 5
of the
           CPC
and the order must be taken to have been
           passed in the exercise of the inherent power of the
           Court.
10. But after the enactment of O. 41 R. 5 in the
           Code of 1908 the discretion of the Court is very
           much limited and has to be exercised within the
           limits prescribed by the rule, and in a proper case
           where substantial loss is likely to result to the
           judgment-debtor if a decree for payment of money
           is executed, the Court can stay execution of the
           decree even before the judgment-debtor deposits
           the amount in Court. The above decision therefore
           cannot serve as an useful guide for the cases
           under O. 41 R. 5.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
73.
In the case,
Movie Enterprises v. M.S. Periasamy Mudaliar
,
   reported in 1952 SCC OnLine Kar 14, the High Court of Mysore has
   observed as under (headnote):
“Order 41, rule 5, cannot be read as imposing any
           limitation that the decrees for payment of money
           should receive a consideration different from the
           other decrees in the matter of stay pending
           appeal. Therefore, there could be no restriction on
           the discretion of the court for staying a decree for
           payment of money in suitable cases where the
           court is satisfied that substantial loss will result
           to the applicant if no stay is made. In this view, it
           cannot be contended that a decree directing
           payment of money should not be stayed unless
           the decree amount is lodged into court.”
                                          (Emphasis supplied)
Page 35 of 73
74.
In Borough Municipality (supra), the Saurashtra High Court
      referred to the Bombay High Court decision in the case of
Dhunjibhoy
(supra).
We must look into this decision of
Dhunjibhoy
(supra).
75.
In the case of
Dhunjibhoy
(supra), the Bombay High Court had
      observed that no stay of execution of money decree should be granted
      without asking the judgment debtor to deposit the decretal amount.
In
Dhunjibhoy
(supra) the Bombay High Court held that:
“A party appealing against a decree, which
                 directs him to pay money, may obtain stay of
                 execution of-decree, so far as it directs payment,
                 on his lodging the amount in court, unless the
                 other party gives security for the repayment of the
                 money in the event of the decree being reversed.
                 If such security be given by the successful party,
                 then stay of execution should not be granted.”
76.    The case of
Dhunjibhoy
(supra) was decided by the Bombay High
       Court on August 31, 1888, under the provisions of the Civil
       Procedure Code, 1882. In that Code, there was no provision similar
       to
Order 41 Rule 5 of the CPC
. Therefore, the order must be taken
       to have been passed by the court in exercise of its inherent powers.
       On the other hand, the facts and circumstances of the present case
       are governed by the provisions
of the CPC
, wherein there is an
       express provision regarding grant or refusal of stay of execution of
       decree. Hence, it is not permissible to the court to have recourse to
       the inherent powers of the court. This distinction makes a world of
       difference between the two situations.
77.    It may also be noted that in
Dhunjibhoy
(supra), the suit was for
       injunction restraining the defendant from erecting a building which
Page 36 of 73
will interfere with the free access of light and air through certain
      windows in the plaintiff's house. The plaintiff had obtained a decree
      in respect of the windows and had also obtained a decree for
      compensation by way of damages for the injury done to the
      windows. The decree also directed the defendant to pay the
      plaintiff's costs of the suit. The defendant had filed an appeal and
      a question arose regarding the execution of the decree so far as it
      related to costs. It is in this context, i.e., where the prayer was for
      recovery of the amount of costs awarded by the trial court, the
      aforesaid observations were made by the Bombay High Court.
78.   Thus, it cannot be said as a principle of universal rule that in all
      cases of money decree, the defendant should be directed to deposit
      the amount in court and then only the question of stay be
      considered.
79.   The decisions of the High Court of Mysore in
A.A. Khan
(supra) and
Movie Enterprises
(supra) have been followed by the Rajasthan
      High Court in the case of
Bansidhar v. Pribhu Dayal
, reported in
      1952 SCC OnLine Raj.
80.   Then the question is: Is there an established practice that the
      execution of money decree should not be stayed unless the
      judgment debtor deposits the decretal amount in court, and on
      such deposit, the successful party be permitted to withdraw the
      money on furnishing security to the satisfaction of the court. We do
      observe that in a large number of cases where a money decree is
      passed, this Court generally does not grant stay unless the
      defendant deposits the amount in court. But this appears to be a
      rule of prudence and not a principle of law of universal application.
Page 37 of 73
We also believe and hold that this practice based on the rule of
       prudence should ordinarily be followed by appellate courts. The
       practice of not granting stay in money decrees except on condition
       that the decretal amount be deposited in the court, and the
       successful party be permitted to withdraw the same on furnishing
       security to the satisfaction of the trial court appears to have been
       well entrenched, and for good reasons. [See:
Central Bank of India
       v. State of Gujarat
, reported in (1987) 4 SCC 407]
81.    Hence, the term “sufficient cause” occurring in
Order XLI Rule 5 of
       the CPC
has got to be interpreted and understood in the light of the
       aforesaid discussion. After all, what is “sufficient”? One may again
       turn to Black’s Law Dictionary. “Sufficient” means “adequate-
       enough” as much as may be necessary-equal or fit for end
       proposed-and that which may be necessary to accomplish an
       object.
iv. Meaning and Import of “sufficient cause” under
Order XLI
       Rule 5 of the CPC
82. Having regard to the case law discussed above and for reasons to be
      recorded, we are inclined or rather persuaded to take the view that the
      benefit of stay of execution of a money decree may be granted by the
      Appellate Court unconditionally, if it:
i.    is egregiously perverse;
      ii.    is riddled with patent illegalities;
      iii.   is facially untenable; and/or
      iv.    such other exceptional causes similar in nature.
83. The aforesaid factors would bring the case within the purview of
      “exceptional case” for the purpose of granting benefit of unconditional
      stay of the execution of money decree.
Page 38 of 73
84. We are at one with the submission canvassed on behalf of the
    defendant that in contradistinction to Order XLI, the word “deposit”
    does not figure in Rule 1(3), Rule 5(5) and Rule 5(3) respectively.
85. Under Rule 5(3) sub-clause (c) – security has to be furnished for “due
    performance” of the decree. We find it difficult to read any mandate for
    direction to deposit the decretal amount.
86. As noted above, the provision under Order XLI Rule 5(3)
of the CPC
provides for satisfaction regarding sufficient cause as a pre-condition
    for granting benefit of stay of execution of decree. It casts an obligation
    upon the court to record its satisfaction for stay of execution such
    decree. Therefore, security can be in the shape of property, bond, or by
    undertaking from the appellant to abide by the decree, seeking stay of
    execution.
87. However, there is no provision under
Order XLI Rule 5 of the CPC
imposing a mandate to deposit cash security as the only mode of
    security for execution of the decree.
v. Service of Summons and Irregularity in the Service of
     Summons
88. At this stage, we must deal with one submission canvassed on behalf
    of the petitioners that in view of the second Proviso to
Order IX Rule 13
    of the CPC
, the defendant could be said to have had the requisite
    “knowledge” of the date of hearing and sufficient time to appear. It was
    sought to be argued vehemently that the delivery of suit papers and the
    order granting ex parte injunction dated 12.10.2020 could be said to
    be valid service of summons.
In this regard, strong reliance was sought
    to be placed on the decision of this Court in the case of
Sunil Poddar
Page 39 of 73
(supra) and the Delhi High Court judgment in the case of
LT Foods
(supra) respectively
referred to above
.
89. We do not find any merit in the aforesaid submission, for the simple
    reason that the second Proviso to
Order IX Rule 13 of the CPC
would
    come into play only when there is “irregularity” in the service of
    summons (for instance, the publication in wrong newspaper, no
    acknowledgment on duplicate summons being received etc).
90. This has been well explained by this Court in its decision in
Basant
    Singh v. Roman Catholic Mission
, reported in (2002) 7 SCC 531. In
    the case in hand, the High Court has noted that prima facie there was
    nothing on record to establish valid service of “summons”. If that be so,
    the second Proviso would not come into play.
This proposition is again
    well explained by this Court in its decision
Sushil Kumar Sabharwal
    v. Gurpreet Singh & Ors.
, reported in (2002) 5 SCC 377.
91.
In the aforesaid context, the reliance placed on behalf the petitioners,
    on the decision in
Sunil Poddar
(supra) is of no avail. The undisputed
    facts in the said case were that the parties had already filed their
    pleadings before the civil court much prior to the case being transferred
    to the DRT. The parties were also aware of the transfer of the suit to
    the DRT. Despite such knowledge the party concerned consciously
    avoided service of summons in those proceedings.
The decision in
Sunil Poddar
(supra) is distinguishable on the facts.
92. In the case on hand, the Division Bench in its impugned judgment has
    prima facie noted that there was nothing to indicate whether:
(a) the plaintiffs had actually served all the documents with their
        notices under Order XXXIX Rule 3 and;
Page 40 of 73
(b) the defendant was actually made aware with sufficient time of
        the claim as regards the next date of hearing in the proceedings.
93.
In the same manner the decision of the Delhi High Court in
LT Food
(supra) is also of no avail as the same is distinguishable on the facts.
94. We now proceed to deal with the submission canvassed by Mr. Gaurav
    Pachnanda, the learned Senior Counsel in rejoinder as noted by us in
    paras 35 and 36 respectively of our judgment.
vi. Reading of
Section 36
of the Arbitration Act and Order
     XLI Rule 3 and Rule 5 respectively
of the CPC
95. At this stage, we need to clarify something important. At the outset, we
    must state that this litigation has nothing to do with
Section 36
of the
    Arbitration Act. In the present litigation, we are only concerned with
    Order XLI Rule 3 and 5 respectively,
of the CPC
. We are referring to
Section 36
of the Arbitration Act only for the limited purpose of
    answering the specific contention raised by Mr. Gaurav Pachnanda. In
    other words, whether the learned counsel is right in extending the
    analogy of
Section 36
of the Arbitration Act to the present case or rather
    to the provisions of Order XLI Rule 3 and 5
of the CPC
, is inappropriate.
    For this limited purpose only, we have thought fit to look into the two
    decisions of this Court one in the case of
Sepco Electric Power
    Construction v. Power Mech Projects Limited
, reported in 2022 SCC
    OnLine SC 1243, and the other, in the case of
Pam Developments
    Private Limited v. State of West Bengal
, reported in (2019) 8 SCC
112.
96.
Section 36
reads thus:
“36. Enforcement.—(1) Where the time for making
             an application to set aside the arbitral award
Page 41 of 73
under
section 34
has expired, then, subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2), such award shall be
enforced in accordance with the provisions
of the
Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (5 of 1908), in the
same manner as if it were a decree of the court.
(2) Where an application to set aside the arbitral
award has been filed in the Court under
section
34
, the filing of such an application shall not by
itself render that award unenforceable, unless
the Court grants an order of stay of the operation
of the said arbitral award in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (3), on a separate
application made for that purpose.
(3) Upon filing of an application under sub-section
(2) for stay of the operation of the arbitral award,
the Court may, subject to such conditions as it
may deem fit, grant stay of the operation of such
award for reasons to be recorded in writing:
Provided that the Court shall, while
  considering the application for grant of stay in
  the case of an arbitral award for payment of
  money, have due regard to the provisions for
  grant of stay of a money decree under the
  provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908
  (5 of 1908).]
  Provided further that where the Court is
  satisfied that a Prima facie case is made out
  that,—
(a) the arbitration agreement or contract
    which is the basis of the award; or
(b) the making of the award,
  was induced or effected by fraud or corruption,
  it shall stay the award unconditionally
  pending disposal of the challenge under
section 34
to the award.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is
hereby clarified that the above proviso shall apply
to all court cases arising out of or in relation to
arbitral proceedings, irrespective of whether the
arbitral or court proceedings were commenced
prior to or after the commencement of the
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Act,
2015
(3 of 2016)”
                               (Emphasis supplied)
Page 42 of 73
97.
Section 36
of the Arbitration Act was substituted vide the
Arbitration
    and Conciliation (Amendment) Act
2015 (for short, “the Amendment
    Act, 2015”). Prior to the 2015 Amendment, the mere filing of an
    application challenging arbitral award under
Section 34
of the
    Arbitration Act was understood in many quarters as a stay of the award
    in terms of the unamended
Section 36
of the Arbitration Act.
98. This “automatic stay” became a subject matter of legal debate as being
    a great obstacle to the ease of enforcement of arbitral awards. In such
    circumstances, and with a view to address this lacuna, the Amendment
    Act, 2015, was introduced in the
Arbitration Act
. Under the
    Amendment Act, 2015, the existing provision in
Section 36
was wholly
    substituted. Sub-section (2) of the amended provision provided that the
    filing of an application to set aside the arbitral award did not by itself
    render the award unenforceable unless an order was passed by
    “granting a stay on the operation of the award pursuant to a separate
    application filed to that effect”. Therefore,
Section 36(2)
of the
    Arbitration Act contemplated a separate application seeking stay.
99.
In
Hindustan Construction Company & Anr. v. Union of India &
    Ors.
, reported in (2020) 17 SCC 324, this Court held that there would
    be no automatic stay on the enforcement of an arbitral award under
Section 36
of the Arbitration Act due to the mere fact that an
    application to set aside the award under
Section 34
had been field
    before a court. In the said case, the constitutional validity of
Section
    87
of the Arbitration Act as inserted by
Section 13
of the Arbitration
    and Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2019 (for short, “the
Amendment
    Act, 2019
”) was challenged along with repeal of Section 26 of the
    Amendment Act, 2015 by
Section 15
of the Amendment Act, 2019. This
    Court in the final analysis held as under:
Page 43 of 73
i.    The language of
Section 36
of the Arbitration Act does not warrant
           an automatic stay on the enforcement of an arbitral award due to
           the mere filing of a
Section 34
petition.
    ii.    The legislature, by inserting Section 87 and deleting
Section 26
through the
Amendment Act, 2019
, had subverted the purpose of
           the
Arbitration Act, 1996
and the Amendment Act, 2015, and was
           contrary to public interest because it sought to revive the pre-2015
           Amendment automatic stay regime that was a major cause of
           delay to the disposal of arbitral proceedings, and thus, the Court
           declared
Section 13
and
15
of the Amendment Act, 2019 as
           manifestly arbitrary and unconstitutional as being violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution.
iii.   The ratio in the BCCI v. Kochi Cricket Pvt. Ltd., reported in
           (2018) 6 SCC 287, was the position of law, prevailing at that time
           and would be used to interpret the applicability of the Amendment
           Act, 2015, to the arbitral proceedings and proceedings in relation
           to them.
100.
Section 36(3)
of the Arbitration Act provides that upon such an
   application being filed, the court may grant a stay “subject to such
   conditions as it may deem fit” for reasons to be recorded in writing. In
   terms of
Section 36(3)
of the Arbitration Act, the Court is conferred with
   the discretionary power to grant a stay of an arbitral award. Such
   discretionary power flows from the usage of the words “may” for grant
   of stay and the employment of the phrase “such conditions as it may
   deem fit” for the conditions that may be imposed if a stay was granted.
   Therefore, in terms of
Section 36(3)
, the court retains its discretionary
   power to grant a stay of an arbitral award.
Page 44 of 73
101. Further, the first Proviso to
Section 36(3)
provides that if the arbitral
    award was for payment of money, the court shall have “due regard” to
    the provisions for grant of stay of money decree under
the CPC
.
102. The aforesaid was, the legal position for a period of six years from 2016
    to 2021. In 2021,
Section 36
of the Arbitration Act was once again
    amended     with    retrospective   effect    from   23.10.2015,    vide    the
    Arbitration and Conciliation Amendment Act, 2021 (for short, “the
    2021 Amendment”). The 2021 Amendment, inter alia, introduced a
    second Proviso to
Section 36(3)
which provided that if a prima facie
    case is made out that either the arbitration agreement/contract which
    is the basis of the award, or the making of the award was induced or
    effect by fraud or corruption, the Court “shall” stay the award
    “unconditionally” pending the disposal of the challenge.
103. As is clear from a plain reading of the second Proviso referred to above,
    it was provided that if, inter alia, the making of the award was induced
    or effected by fraud or corruption then the court was mandated to stay
    the award and such a stay was to be unconditional.
104. Mr. Gaurav Pachnanda, the learned Senior Counsel would argue that
    the courts cannot grant the benefit of unconditional stay of an award
    in cases other than those covered by the second Proviso to
Section 36(3)
of the Arbitration Act. In the same manner, according to the learned
    Senior   Counsel,    when    it   comes      to   staying   a   money   decree
    unconditionally, the judgment-debtor needs to make out more than a
    prima facie case of fraud or corruption, or something analogous to the
    same, and it is just not sufficient to point out our serious infirmities in
    the judgment granting money decree.
Page 45 of 73
105.
In the aforesaid context, we must look into the decision of this Court
    in the
Sepco Electric
(supra). In
the said decision
, this Court was
    dealing with an appeal against a judgment of the Delhi High Court
    where the learned Single Judge had granted a stay of the arbitral award
    subject to deposit of 100% of the award amount. This order was passed
    in an application filed under
Section 9
of the Arbitration Act which was
    heard together with an application under
Section 36(3)
of the Act in a
    connected petition. This decision was affirmed in appeal by this Court
    which held that there were no grounds made out for interfering with
    the judgment below.
106.This Court, while considering the contention of the appellant therein
    observed that a court may grant an unconditional stay if it is
    appropriate to do so. While so observing, this Court stated that
    unconditional stays were covered by the second Proviso to
Section
    36(3)
. The relevant portions of the judgement are extracted below:
“The power under subsection (3) of
Section 36
to
             grant stay of an award is coupled with the duty
             to impose conditions which could include the
             condition of securing the award by deposit in
             Court, of the amount of the Award. It may be true
             as argued by Mr. Vishwanathan that the Court
             may not impose condition for stay, if it deems
             appropriate not to do so. The power of Court to
             grant unconditional stay of an Award is not
             unfettered. The power of unconditional stay is
             subject to the condition in the second proviso that
             is:
The Court is satisfied that a prima facie case (sic)
             is made out that
(i) the arbitration agreement or contract which is
             the basis of the award; or
(ii) the making of the award, was induced or
             effected by fraud or corruption”
                                           (Emphasis supplied)
Page 46 of 73
107.While this Court acknowledged that an unconditional stay could be
    granted in appropriate cases, it quickly followed up saying that the
    power to grant an unconditional stay is governed by the second Proviso
    to
Section 36(3)
. This may indicate that the Court acknowledged the
    grant of an unconditional stay to the existence of the grounds
    mentioned in the second Proviso. This would indicate that the benefit
    of unconditional stay could be granted only in cases of fraud or
    corruption.
108.Notwithstanding the above, this Court in order to fortify its conclusion
    in the case, subsequently also noted that the appellant therein was not
    able to show any cogent and glaring error that went to the root of the
    award. This observation was repeated later where the Court stated that
    no cogent ground had been made out even, prima facie, for interference
    with the impugned award. The relevant observations are extracted
    below:
“26. It is settled law that grounds for interference
             with an award is restricted. Even before this
             court, the Appellant has not been able to advert to
             any cogent and glaring error which goes to the
             root of the award. The contention of the award
             being opposed to the public policy of India, is
             devoid of any particulars whatsoever…
                 xxx                 xxx              xxx
35. It is not in dispute that there is an award of
             Rs. 142 Crores in favour of the Respondent. No
             cogent ground has been made out even prima
             facie, for interference with the impugned award.
xxx                xxx              xxx
37. We find no ground at all to interfere. The
             Appeals are dismissed. ……”
Page 47 of 73
109.After arriving at such a finding, this Court proceeded to dismiss the
    appeal. Therefore, the observations
referred to above
formed part of this
    Court’s reasoning in arriving at its decision.
110.The aforesaid observations of this Court would suggest that the Court
    thought it fit to consider the merits of the award at a prima facie level
    in order to decide whether the conditional stay of the award was
    justified or not. In the facts of the present case, the Court felt that it
    was justified.
111.In light of the abovementioned observations, it is possible to
    legitimately argue that if the second Proviso to
Section 36(3)
was the
    sole source for granting an unconditional stay, there would have been
    no occasion for the Court to examine whether any prima facie cogent
    ground that went to the root of the award is forthcoming or not.
    Therefore, by relying upon this Court’s observations, it could be
    plausibly argued that in exceptional cases an unconditional stay can
    be granted even in cases not arising under the second proviso to
Section 36(3)
. Such unconditional stay would instead be relatable to
    the main part of
Section 36(3)
.
112.The above reading of
Sepco Electric
(supra) would also be in tune with
    the discretionary power of the court under the main part of
Section
    36(3)
both with respect to the power to grant stay and the power to
    impose conditions if a stay is granted. After all, it is not inconceivable
    to contend that a power to impose conditions would also include the
    power not to impose conditions.
113.Be that as it may,
Sepco Electric
(supra) does not clearly answer the
    question whether an unconditional stay can be granted in cases not
Page 48 of 73
covered by the second Proviso to
Section 36(3)
. This confusion remains
    because while the Court states an unconditional stay can be granted
    in cases covered by the second Proviso, it does not categorically exclude
    the possibility of an unconditional stay in cases not covered by the
    second proviso.
114.This Court in
Pam Developments
(supra) had occasion to consider the
    nature of applicability of provisions
of the CPC
vis-à-vis the proceedings
    under the
Arbitration Act
, and specifically, the interpretation of the
    phrase “due regard” appearing in the first Proviso. The respondent
    therein had preferred an application seeking an unconditional stay of
    the arbitral award on the strength of Order XXVII Rule 8A,
CPC
which
    inter alia exempted Government from furnishing a security while
    seeking stay of a decree. Aggrieved by the application being allowed by
    the Calcutta High Court, the appellant-award holder approached this
    Court.
115.This Court allowed the appeal and directed deposit of the award
    amount as a condition for continuing the stay. The Court reasoned that
    the exemption from furnishing security under Order XXVII Rule 8A that
    would otherwise be applicable to the ordinary civil proceedings could
    not be strictly applied to the arbitration proceedings. Therefore, the
    respondent-government could not have relied upon that provision to
    avoid furnishing security for staying the award. The
Court further held
that even if the exemption from furnishing security was made
    applicable to the arbitration proceedings, such exemption would not
    extend to making deposit of the award amounts. This was based on the
    Court’s interpretation of the difference between Order XXVII Rule 8A
    which was introduced in 1937 and exempted furnishing of ‘security’
    and sub-rule (5) of Rule 5 of Order XLI that was introduced in 1976
Page 49 of 73
and which differentiated between ‘security’ and ‘deposit’. The Court
    also referred to the implications of a provision introduced during the
    colonial period and its continuance in the present constitutional set-
    up.
116.This Court in
Pam Developments
(supra) held that the phrase “due
    regard” would only mean that the provisions
of CPC
are to be taken
    into consideration and not that they are mandatory. The relevant
    observations are extracted below:
“20. In our view, in the present context, the
             phrase used is “having regard to” the provisions
of CPC
and not “in accordance with” the
             provisions
of CPC
. In the latter case, it would have
             been mandatory, but in the form as mentioned in
             Rule 36(3) of the
Arbitration Act
, it would only be
             directory or as a guiding factor. Mere reference to
CPC
in the said
Section 36
cannot be construed in
             such manner that it takes away the power
             conferred in the main statute (i.e. the
Arbitration
             Act
) itself. It is to be taken as a general guideline,
             which will not make the main provision of the
Arbitration Act
inapplicable. The provisions
of
             CPC
are to be followed as guidance, whereas the
             provisions of the
Arbitration Act
are essentially to
             be first applied. Since, the Arbitration Act is a self-
contained Act, the provisions
of CPC
will apply
             only insofar as the same are not inconsistent with
             the spirit and provisions of the
Arbitration Act
.”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
117.On the strength of the above reasoning, this Court held that the
    exemption from furnishing security could not be applied to the
    arbitration proceedings. The Court clarified that while courts must
    have due regard to
the CPC
, they are not rigidly bound by its
    provisions. The
CPC
serves as a guiding framework rather than a strict
    mandate because the
Arbitration Act
being a self-contained Act is to be
    first applied by the court.
Page 50 of 73
118.Although not explicitly stated by the Court as a reason for its decision,
    yet this Court did note the consequence of accepting the contention
    that Order XXVII Rule 8A was applicable. The result would be that
    wherever the government was the judgment-debtor in the arbitration
    proceedings, it would be entitled to an unconditional stay on the mere
    filing of an application under
Section 36(2)
.
119.While Pam Developments
(supra) relied on the phrase “due regard”
    appearing in the first Proviso to decline the rigid application of an
    exemption from furnishing security provided under
the CPC
it could
    also be argued that insisting on a conditional stay in all cases of a
    money award would be a rigid application of Order XLI Rule 5. This is
    because Rule 5 mandates the furnishing of security or deposit as a
    condition for granting stay.
Relying on
Pam Developments
(supra), it
    could possibly be argued that “due regard” to the provisions
of CPC
,
    especially Order XLI Rule 5, would not mean a mandatory grant of
    conditional stay in all cases. This is because the provisions of the Act,
    especially
Section 36
, would have to be first applied wherein a
    discretionary power is vested in the court.
120. If the first Proviso has to be interpreted as done in
Pam Developments
(supra) and merits of the award have to be considered on a prima facie
    level as done in
Sepco Electric
(supra), it is difficult to rule out the
    existence of an unconditional stay in cases outside the second Proviso.
A closer analysis of the decision in
Sepco Electric
(supra) and this
    Court’s interpretation of the first proviso in
Pam Developments
(supra)
    suggests that unconditional stays can be granted even in cases outside
    the second Proviso.
Page 51 of 73
121.At this stage, we must look into one decision of the Bombay High Court
    in the case of
ITD Cementation India Ltd. v. Urmi Trenchless
    Technology Pvt. Ltd.
, reported in 2020 SCC OnLine Bom 10611,
    wherein the High Court after referring to and relying upon
Pam
    Developers
(supra) observed as under:
“11. The provision of
Section 36(3)
are clear, that
             one must have regard to the provisions
of the
             Code of Civil Procedure
1908 (“
CPC
”) and
             specifically the provisions of Order 41 Rule 5
             while addressing the question of stay. The words
             ‘have due regard’ have received judicial
             interpretation. Certainly there is no blanket
             prohibition barring a Court from unconditionally
             staying either a money award or a money decree.
             The three-fold requirement of Order 41 Rule 5(3)
             will have to be kept in mind. But, as the Supreme
             Court     held    in
Pam      Developers    Private
             Limited v. State of West Bengal
(2019) 8 SCC 112
             the provisions of Order 41 Rule 5 are for
             guidance. They do not indicate that a
Section 36
Court lacks all discretion to grant an
             unconditional stay. That said, it is equally well
             settled that a strong and exceptional case must
             be made for unconditional stay of a money decree
             or a money award. The three matters to consider
             under Order 41 Rule 5(3) are (a) whether the
             Applicant will be put to a substantial loss if stay
             is refused; (b) whether there is a delay in making
             the application and (c) whether the Applicant has
             furnish sufficient security to satisfy any ultimate
             decree. There is a delay, though slight. I do not
             see how the question of substantial loss arises.
             The fact that it has suffered an Award is neither
             here or there. The third requirement is that the
             party applying for stay must show sufficient
             security. There is no such attempt made.”
                                          (Emphasis supplied)
122.In such circumstances
referred to above
, we find it difficult to subscribe
    to the submission of Mr. Gaurav Pachnanda, that even for the purpose
    of grant of benefit of unconditional stay of money decree under Order
Page 52 of 73
XLI
Rule 5 of the CPC
, the judgment-debtor has to make out more than
    a prima facie case of fraud or corruption and not solely on the basis of
    an extreme or egregious view on the merits of the adjudication.
123.We once again clarify that the analogy of
Section 36
of the Arbitration
    Act sought to be applied is inappropriate. The decision of this Court in
Pam Developments
(supra) should also be understood and confined
    only to matters relating to arbitration, more particularly,
Section 36
of
    the Arbitration Act.
124. We are of the view that if fraud or corruption or something analogous
    to the same is only to be seen for the purpose of granting benefit of
    unconditional stay of execution of money decree then in such
    circumstances, the decree holder may argue that although there may
    not be a valid service of summons to the defendant/judgment-debtor
    yet, the same by itself would not be sufficient to grant the benefit of
    unconditional stay of execution of money decree. This would lead to
    nothing but serious miscarriage of justice.
vi. Relevant aspects which the High Court looked into for the
     purpose of granting unconditional stay
125.The first thing that the Division Bench of the High Court looked into
    was that the suit had proceeded in the absence of the respondent
    herein. In the aforesaid context, the findings recorded by the Division
    Bench may be looked into:
“168. We also find prima facie substance in the
             contentions of Mr. Nigam and Mr. Kaul that the
             manner in which, after excluding all defendants
             from the proceedings, the entire trial of the suit,
             arguments and rendition of judgment took place
             solely in the presence of the plaintiff Lifestyle,
             may not sustain legal scrutiny.
Page 53 of 73
169. The learned Single Judge has repeatedly
observed, in the impugned judgment, that
Amazon Tech was deliberately staying away
from the proceedings despite being aware of their
pendency, and has relied, for the said purpose,
on the order dated 5 September 2022 passed in
the suit. A reading of the order discloses that the
appearance of Counsels are noted only for
Defendant 2 Cloudtail and Defendant 3 ASSPL.
The mere fact that learned Senior Counsel
appearing for Cloudtail advanced a submission,
on behalf of his client as well as on behalf of
Amazon Tech, that they were willing to suffer
reasonable damages, cannot be seen as proof of
Amazon Tech being aware of the proceedings or
deliberately refraining from participating therein.
Even prior to this date, Amazon Tech had been
proceeded ex parte on 20 April 2022. As a matter
of fact, therefore, Amazon Tech was never present
before the learned Single Judge on any date of
hearing.
170. When one peruses the orders passed in the
suit, vis-à-vis the notings of the Registry, it
becomes apparent that, in fact, no summons in
the suit were ever served on Amazon Tech. This,
to our mind, is a serious infirmity, which may
plague all other proceedings. Amazon Tech was
proceeded ex parte, by the learned Single Judge,
on 20 April 2022. In the order passed by the
learned Joint Registrar on 7 July 2021, which
was the immediately preceding effective date, it
was specifically noted that there was no report
regarding service of the suit on Amazon Tech. In
the circumstances, Lifestyle was directed to file
an affidavit of service. No affidavit of service was
filed by Lifestyle, between 7 July 2021 and 20
April 2022. The only affidavit of service which
was filed by Lifestyle was of 25 March 2021. That
affidavit enclosed, by it, an email dated 8 March
2021. No email, after 8 March 2021, was sent by
Lifestyle to Amazon Tech. There is no question of
the summons having been served by the email
dated 8 March 2021, as the delay in filing process
fee was condoned only on 16 April 2021. After 16
Page 54 of 73
April 2021, the summons have never been sent to
Amazon Tech, by any means of communication
including email. It was for this reason that the
order dated 7 July 2021 of the learned Joint
Registrar required Lifestyle to file an affidavit of
service. This was never done. As such, it is
apparent that the learned Single Judge was in
error in proceeding ex parte against Amazon Tech
by order dated 20 April 2022.
171. In fact, even before us, Mr. Pachnanda, with
characteristic candour and forthrightness, did not
seek to contend that formal service of summons
on Amazon Tech, as directed by the Court while
issuing summons on 12 October 2020, ever took
place. His submission is, however, that, prior to
issuance of summons by the Court on 12 October
2020, as well as by way of attachment to the
email dated 8 March 2021, all the documents
relating to the suit, as well as applications filed
therewith, were forwarded to Amazon Tech.
Besides, due compliance with the requirements of
the proviso to
Order XXXIX Rule 13 of the CPC
was also ensured. In these circumstances, Mr.
Pachnanda’s submission is that the learned
Single Judge was correct in holding that Amazon
Tech deliberately absented itself from the
proceedings and cannot, now, therefore, seek to
raise a grievance that it was proceeded ex parte.
172. We cannot, in law, accept the submission.
173. The law does not require a defendant to
enter appearance in a suit, unless summons in
the suit are served on it.
The Commercial Courts
Act, 2015
contains strict provisions in that regard.
No amount of service, on the defendant, of the
papers relating to the suit, by the plaintiff, absent
actual summons issued by the suit, can compel a
defendant, in law, to enter appearance. The law
does not permit a defendant to be proceeded ex
parte, even before summons in the suit are served
on it. This is plain, and elementary. The learned
Single Judge could not, therefore, have proceeded
against Amazon Tech ex parte on 20 April 2022,
Page 55 of 73
even before formal summons in the suit had been
served on it. In doing so, it appears that the
learned Single Judge was not made aware of the
order passed by the learned Joint Registrar on
the immediately preceding date, i.e. 7 July 2021,
in which it was specifically noted that there was
no report regarding service of the suit on Amazon
Tech. In holding that Amazon Tech had not
appeared despite service and, therefore,
proceeding against Amazon Tech ex parte,
therefore, we are of the opinion that the learned
Single Judge materially erred in law and on facts.
174. This, by itself, is a lapse serious enough to
vitiate all proceedings in the suit after 20 April
2022, at least insofar as the appellant Amazon
Tech is concerned. It also, therefore, suffices,
even by itself and independent of all other
considerations,     as      enough     to   justify
entertainment of the present appeal without
requiring any deposit of the decretal amount to be
made by Amazon Tech.
175. We also find considerable substance in the
submission of learned Senior Counsel for the
appellant Amazon Tech that, in any event, all
these developments took place at a time when the
damage claimed by Lifestyle were only to the
tune of ₹ 2,00,05,000/-. Enhancement of these
damages are necessarily to be proceeded by an
amendment of the plaint, of which Amazon Tech
had to be put on due notice. This was never done.
In fact, the written submissions filed by Lifestyle,
which enhanced the damages, earlier computed
at ₹ 20,005,000/– to ₹ 3780 crores, were also not
served on the Appellant Amazon Tech. In
accepting the enhancement of the claim for
damages, therefore, we agree with learned Senior
Counsel for the appellant Amazon Tech that the
learned Single Judge has not acted strictly in
accordance with the law.
176. In some circumstances, we are also of the
opinion that lifestyle cannot seek sanctuary
behind Order VII Rule 2 or Order VII rule 7 of the
Page 56 of 73
CPC
, or even Rule 120 of the IPD Rules. Order VII
Rule 2, in fact requires a plaint, seeking recovery
of money, to state the precise claimed amount.
The proviso to Order VII Rule 2 applies only in
cases of suits for mesne profits, or for an amount
which would be found on rendition of accounts
between the Plaintiff and the Defendant, or for
movables in the possession of the defendant or
debts of which the value cannot be reasonably
estimated at that stage. The present suit does not
fall within any of these categories. The suit does
not claim mesne profits, or value of movables in
the possession of the defendants, or any debt of
which the value was not ascertainable. Moreover,
para 86 of the impugned judgment records the
submission of Lifestyle that it was not pressing
for its prayer for rendition of accounts. In that
view of the matter, the proviso to
Order VII Rule 2
of the CPC
would not apply, and the main
provision, which requires the precise claim to be
quantified in the suit, would apply with all force.
The precise amount quantified in the suit was
only ₹ 2,00,05,000/–. There is, therefore,
substance in the contention of learned Senior
Counsel for Amazon Tech that, without an
amendment of the plaint, the damages could not
have been enhanced, much less to ₹ 3780 crores.
177. Order VII Rule 7, plainly, does not apply, as
it exempts a plaintiff from requiring to claim
“general or other relief”, apart from the specific
relief sought in the plaint.
178. In any event, what lies at stake, here, is
something far more empirical. The question that
is required to be addressed is whether (i) a claim
for damages, assessed in the plaint at ₹
2,00,05,000/–, could be inflated to ₹ 3780 crores
merely in written submissions filed by the
plaintiff after conclusion of arguments, without
amending the plaint and without even serving a
copy of the written submissions on a defendant
against whom the enhanced damages were
claimed and (ii) the Court would, in such
circumstances, have awarded damages in excess
Page 57 of 73
of ₹ 336 crores, without any prior opportunity to
            the concerned defendant to contest the proposed
            judgment.”
126.The second relevant aspect that the Division Bench looked into was
    the fact that there were no pleadings of infringement against the
    respondent herein worth the name. In this regard, the following
    observations are relevant:
“156. Mr. Sai Deepak, appearing on behalf of
            Lifestyle and supplementing the submissions
            advanced by Mr. Pachnanda, sought earnestly to
            convince us that the requisite factual basis or
            alleging involvement of Amazon Tech in the
            infringement of Lifestyle’s registered trademark,
            is forthcoming in the plaint. We are unable to
            agree.
157. We have already set out, from para 29 of the
            present judgment on words, the relevant
            averments contained in the plaint. We do not find,
            therein, any prima facie sustainable allegation of
            involvement, by Amazon Tech, in any
            infringement of Lifestyle’s registered trademark.
158. Para 41 of the plaint alleges that Amazon
            Tech     is,  under     its    brand     ‘SYMBOL’,
            “manufacturing, offering for sale and/or selling
            products which bear the infringing logo mark.
These allegations are completely defeated by the
            assertions in the replication filed by Lifestyle, to
            the written statement of Cloudtail – also
            reproduced supra – that it was Cloudtail
            manufacturing and selling the apparel bearing
            the mark, and, thereby, infringing Lifestyle’s
            registered trademark.
159. Para 41 goes on to state that ASSPL was
            selling products of Amazon Tech on its platform
            under the trademark ‘SYMBOL’, bearing the
            infringing mark. This allegation, again, is
            incorrect. The products sold by ASSPL were not of
            Amazon Tech, but of Cloudtail. The only
            connection of Amazon Tech, with the said
Page 58 of 73
products, was the ‘SYMBOL’ mark, which
Cloudtail affixed on the said apparel under
license from Amazon Tech. This does not, in any
way, connect Amazon Tech with the infringing
mark.
160. In fact, after making such bald and
unsubstantiated allegations, Lifestyle, in the
same para 41 of the plaint, acknowledges that it
was not certain about the actual relation between
Amazon Tech, Cloudtail and ASSPL. Obviously,
the allegations against Amazon Tech, regarding
its complicity in the affixation of the mark on the
apparel sold by Cloudtail on the ASSPL platform,
were merely shots in the dark, without any
knowledge of the actual state of affairs. In fact,
para 46 of the plaint acknowledges the fact that
the invoice, raised by ASSPL, with respect to the
apparel purchased by Lifestyle, only contained
the name and details of Cloudtail. Despite this,
para 48 of the plaint alleges that it was an
“admitted case of Defendant No 3 (ASSPL) that
orders for the infringing product of the Defendant
No 1 (Amazon Tech) are being fulfilled by
Defendant No 2 (Cloudtail)”, without any such
“admitted case” being available on record. The
plaint does not disclose where this “admission” is
to be found.
161. At this juncture, we may also refer to the
affidavits dated 21 July 2022 and 1 September
2022 of ASSPL, on which Mr. Pachnanda sought
to place reliance as supporting the finding of the
learned Single Judge, in the impugned judgment,
that Amazon Tech, Cloudtail and ASSPL
constitute a “cohesive commercial entity”. We find
no such inference being forthcoming from the
affidavits. In any case, we are not concerned,
here, with the interlink, as commercial entities,
between Amazon Tech, Cloudtail and ASSPL.
They are, admittedly, independent commercial
entities, as was, in fact, noted by the learned
Single Judge in the order dated 12 October 2020,
reproduced in para 19 of the impugned
judgement. What is to be seen is whether there
Page 59 of 73
was any material to indicate involvement of
              Amazon Tech in the allegedly infringing activities
              of Cloudtail. There is, in fact, none.
162. Apart from this, the plaint only refers,
              repeatedly, to the infringing mark as belonging to
              Amazon Tech and has having been adopted by it.
              No factual basis for these allegations is
              forthcoming.
163. We have already explained, in para 18 to 26
              supra, why it cannot be said that any substantial
              allegation of involvement, by Amazon Tech, in the
              allegedly infringing activities of Cloudtail, by
              affixation of the mark on the apparel sold by it,
              can be said to exist.
164. This, therefore, is not merely a case in which
              damages have been awarded against Amazon
              Tech without any finding, by the learned Single
              Judge, of involvement, in the alleged infringing
              activities, but is, in fact, a case where no such
              pleadings exist.”
127.The third aspect which the Division Bench looked into was one
   relating   to   no   pleadings   for   the   purpose   of   claiming     Rs.
   3,36,02,87,000/- towards damages. In this regard, the findings
   recorded are:
“136. Leave alone the fact that there were no
              pleadings, claiming ₹ 336,02,87,000/-, there
              were also no pleadings on the basis of which is
              claim could be supported or sustained. The
              learned Single Judge has herself ventured into an
              exercise of computing the awardable damages as
              ₹ 336,02,87,000/-, without the said exercise
              being supported by any pleadings of Lifestyle.
              The position that has resulted is, therefore, that
(i) the pleadings of Lifestyle only justified
              damages of ₹ 2,00,05,000/–,
(ii) without amending its pleadings, Lifestyle, in
              its written submissions before the learned Single
              Judge, worked out the damages to which it was
Page 60 of 73
allegedly entitled as approximately ₹ 3780 crores,
             and
(iii) the impugned judgment decrees in favour of
             Lifestyle and against Amazon Tech, ₹
             336,02,87,000/-, again on the basis of a
             computation solely devised by the learned Single
             Judge, not pleaded by the parties and
             unsupported by any pleading on record.
137. Mr. Pachnanda sought to submit that the
             damages to which the Plaintiff is entitled need not
             be specifically computed and claimed in the
             pleadings. The submission, in our view, begs the
             issue. This is not merely a case where there are
             no pleadings, supporting the damages of ₹ 3780
             crores, claimed by Lifestyle in its written
             submissions,       or     the   damages      of      ₹
             336,02,87,000/-which ultimately came to be
             awarded by the learned Single Judge. Even the
             basis for the claim of ₹ 3780 crores, all for the
             amount of ₹ 336,02,87,000/-which was
             ultimately awarded, is not to be found anywhere
             in the pleadings of Lifestyle.
138. The basis for the claim for damages are, at
             all costs, to be contained in the pleadings of the
             Plaintiff. It cannot be reserved for evidence. It is a
             legal truism that evidence cannot traverse the
             pleadings.”
128.The fourth aspect that the Division Bench looked into was the fact
    that the learned Single Judge had recorded no findings as regards the
    role of the respondent herein in the alleged infringement. The relevant
    observations are as under:
“142. With greatest respect, it appears to us that
             the impugned judgement is more concerned with
             the fact that e-infringement is a new
             phenomenon, and that it is very difficult to
             identify the actual players in the act. Paras 42 to
             44 of the impugned judgment deal with the
             menace of e-infringement, and the difficulty in
             localising liability in such cases. Para 44, in fact,
             refers to intermediary liability, which is of no
             particular relevance, as Amazon Tech does not
             claim itself to be an intermediary. We may note,
Page 61 of 73
even at this juncture, that the learned Single
Judge has, in para 99 of the impugned judgment,
observed that Amazon Tech was identifying itself
as an intermediary. This is a prima facie
erroneous finding. At no point of time has Amazon
Tech claimed to be an intermediary. In fact, in
earlier orders passed in the suit, particularly in
the orders dated 2 March 2023 and 7 August
2023 – which the latter was passed by the
learned Single Judge herself – it has been
correctly noted that Defendant 3 ASSPL was
claiming to be an intermediary and was, in fact,
one. In the impugned judgment, therefore, the
learned Single Judge has proceeded on an
apparently mistaken assumption that Amazon
Tech was also claiming to be an intermediary.
143. Returning to the findings in the impugned
judgment, following the adverse observations
regarding the menace of e-infringement is a new
species of trademark infringement, which poses
significant challenges in localising of liability, the
learned Single Judge proceeds, in para 45, to
characterise the present case as a case of e-
infringement – with which there can be no serious
cavil. Following this, however, the learned Single
Judge was on to note that the brand ‘Symbol’,
being used by Cloudtail, was owned by Amazon
Tech. This is also; however, is difficult to
understand how the ownership, by Amazon Tech,
of the brand ‘Symbol’ is of any relevance. The
mark ‘Symbol’ is, quite clearly, not infringing in
nature.
144. In fact, even the plaint in the suit does not so
assert. The case that Lifestyle has sought to build
up, in the plaint, is that, as the infringing mark
figured on the same apparel, which bore the
‘SYMBOL’ mark of Amazon Tech, Amazon Tech
could not escape liability from the tort of
infringement by use of the mark. In our
considered view, the said plea, which has
apparently found favour with the learned Single
Judge in the impugned judgment, has no basis in
law.
145. The learned Single Judge proceeds to lay
considerable stress on order dated 5 September
Page 62 of 73
2022, passed in the suit, particularly on the
opening sentence of the order, which reads:
“The learned senior counsel for the defendant
  no. 2/applicant herein submits that the said
  defendant, including for and on behalf of the
  defendant no. 1 is willing to suffer a decree of
  injunction and also for paying reasonable
  damages to the plaintiff.”
The learned Single Judge has treated this
sentence, from the order dated 5 September
2022, as recording some kind of a concession, on
behalf of Amazon Tech, admitting its liability for
infringement and agreeing to pay damages.
Significantly, prior to the passing of this order,
Amazon Tech had already been proceeded ex
parte on 20 April 2022. Even if it were to be
assumed that Amazon Tech had agreed, through
learned Counsel who appeared on behalf of
Cloudtail, to suffer reasonable damages, that
statement, if at all, was made at the stage when
the damages claimed by Lifestyle were of ₹
2,00,05,000/–. In the face of this claim, it would
be preposterous to hold that the order dated 5
September 2022 amounts to an admission, by
Amazon Tech, to suffer damages of ₹
336,02,87,000/-.       Before     awarding     such
damages, therefore, it was incumbent on the
learned Single Judge to render specific findings of
infringement, or at least of complicity in the
infringing activities, by Amazon Tech. With
greatest respect, we do not find this to have been
done.
146. Para 47 of the impugned judgment observed
that Amazon Tech, Cloudtail and ASSPL were
“closely related to or interlinked with each other”.
Para 48 records that “it is a matter of public
knowledge that the www.amazon.in platform is
closely linked with Defendant No. 1”, i.e. the
present appellant Amazon Tech. To a large extent,
it is clear that the impugned judgement proceeds
on the premise that Amazon Tech, Cloudtail and
ASSPL, i.e., all the defendants, were acting in
concert and were one commercial entity.
147. We also find, prima facie, that the learned
Single Judge has, in para 52 of the impugned
Page 63 of 73
judgment, completely misread the Licensing
Agreement dated 23 December 2015 as fastening
liability on Amazon Tech for infringement
whereas, in fact, it does nothing of the kind. The
learned Single Judge observes that the License
Agreement dated 23 December 2015, between
Amazon Tech and Cloudtail indicated “that
Amazon       retains    significant  control   over
Cloudtail’s branding and distribution activities”.
Following this, the learned Single Judge returns
an opinion that “the clauses in the Agreement
clearly diminish Amazon’s liability to distance
itself from the alleged infringement committed by
Cloudtail”, that “the contractual restrictions on
unauthorised trademark use, coupled with
indemnification obligations, provide strong legal
grounds for (Lifestyle) to argue Amazon’s direct
involvement in trademark infringement”, “the
agreement being a license agreement, Defendant
No. 1 being a licensor an Defendant No. 2 being a
licensee, any infringement or unlawful use by the
licensee would also affix liability about the
licensor”, “while licensing the word mark
SYMBOL” Amazon would be unable to distance
itself from the use of the accompanying horse logo
device mark” and that “thus, the consequences of
infringement squarely fall upon Defendant No. 1”.
148. We are, prima facie, unaware of any law
which supports these observations and findings.
The Licensing Agreement dated 23 December
2015 was restricted to the ‘SYMBOL’ mark,
owned by Amazon Tech. Amazon Tech had, by
the agreement, licensed, to Cloudtail, the right to
use the mark ‘SYMBOL’. The agreement does
nothing beyond this. By no stretch of imagination
could be Licensing Agreement be read as
authorising Cloudtail to affix, on the apparel sold
by it, the allegedly infringing mark. In fact, the
Licensing Agreement makes no reference to the
said mark at all, obviously because Amazon Tech
had no concern with the said mark. If, therefore,
Cloudtail did affix the mark on the apparel sold
by it, it certainly did not do so by virtue of any
authorisation or permission granted by the
Licensing Agreement dated 23 December 2015. In
Page 64 of 73
fact, the Licensing Agreement contained a specific
clause proscribing any infringement, by Cloudtail,
of the trademark of any third party, and
indemnified Amazon Tech in that regard.
149. The observations contained in para 52 of the
impugned judgment, extracted by us earlier in
paragraph 139, are unsupported by law. In a
Licensing Agreement, whereby and whereunder
Amazon Tech had only licensed, to Cloudtail, the
right to use the ‘SYMBOL’ mark, we are unable to
understand how Amazon Tech could be fastened
with liability for use, by Cloudtail, of the mark,
with which the Licensing Agreement – and,
indeed, Amazon Tech itself – had no concern.
150. Needless to say, a licence by one party to
another, to do a particular act, cannot render the
first party liable for every infringing or illegal act
committed by the second, in the absence of any
material to indicate that the commission of the
illegal infringing act was also authorised by the
license. The findings in para 52 of the impugned
judgment, in our prima facie view, are contrary to
this principle which, according to us, is practically
fossilized in the law. They, therefore, suffer from
patent illegality.
151. In para 98, the learned Single Judge
observes that the judgment would proceed to
examine, inter alia, “the degree of culpability of
the Defendants”. Paras 98 to 99 proceed,
apparently, to record certain observations
regarding Amazon Tech which, in our view, are
not incriminating in any manner. Before,
however, adverting thereto, the learned Single
Judge observes, in para 98 and in the opening
part of para 99 of the impugned judgment, that
the mark ‘SYMBOL’, of which the right to use had
been licensed by Amazon Tech to Cloudtail, was
used “along with” the infringing mark, on the
apparel sold by Cloudtail. Even if it was, we are
unable to understand how any liability or
responsibility for infringement, on the ground, be
fastened on Amazon Tech. Amazon Tech was not
the manufacturer of the apparel on which the
infringing mark was used. It had never licensed,
Page 65 of 73
to Cloudtail, the right to use the infringing mark,
with which, in fact, it had no concern. In fact,
Cloudtail itself conceded, before this Court on 2
March 2023, that the decision to use the
infringing mark on the apparel sold by was not of
Amazon, but of Cloudtail itself. Unfortunately, the
learned Single Judge has entirely overlooked this
concession, regarding which no objection or
reservation was ever expressed by Lifestyle,
either before this Court on 2 March 2023 or at any
point thereafter. In view thereof, it is plainly
obvious that the affixation, on the apparel sold by
Cloudtail, of the infringing logo, could not
incriminate Amazon Tech in any manner, merely
because the same apparel also happened to carry
the ‘SYMBOL’ mark, the use of which had been
licensed by Amazon Tech to Cloudtail.
152. Para 99 of the impugned judgment proceeds
to observe that Amazon Tech was “one of the most
dominant players in the ecommerce space”, that
it “possesses ways and means to utilise its
dominant presence in the e-commerce space to
promote its own products as also products which
it might otherwise wish to promote”, and that it
had “the leverage through its own platforms to
dilute Plaintiff’s brand/logo by indulging in deep-
discounting of its own products which compete
with the Plaintiff by using a similar mark/logo”.
These findings are, prima facie, entirely in the
realm of presumption and conjecture. They reflect
an impression, by the learned Single Judge, that
Amazon Tech was in a position to indulge in
infringing activities by means such as deep
discounting – with respect to which there is not
even a whisper of an allegation against Amazon
Tech in the entire plaint of Lifestyle – and that,
therefore, it must have done so. On the face of it,
we are of the view that these findings suffer from
perversity in law, and cannot, therefore, sustain.
153. Para 99 goes on further to observe that “it is
well known reality that all 3 Defendants belong
to the Amazon Group of Companies and operate
as a cohesive commercial entity”. This finding has
nothing forthcoming, available on the record, to
support it. There is certainly no pleading to that
Page 66 of 73
effect. The plaint, filed by Lifestyle, does not
              allege, even indirectly, that Amazon Tech,
              Cloudtail and ASSPL constituted a “cohesive
              commercial entity”. A finding that 3 companies,
              which are independent corporate ventures,
              constitute a cohesive commercial entity, cannot be
              returned without any pleading to that effect. We
              are constrained to observe that the learned Single
              Judge has, in so holding, made out a case in
              favour of Lifestyle which it itself did not plead.
154. There are no other findings, in the impugned
              judgment, against Amazon Tech. Of course, the
              learned Single Judge has adversely commented
              on what she perceives as Amazon Tech’s
              deliberate absence from the proceedings in the
              suit. Even if it were to be presumed, merely for
              the sake of argument, that Amazon Tech took a
              conscious decision not to participate in the suit
              proceedings, that cannot justify mulcting it with
              damages of ₹ 336,02,87,000/-.
155. The case, therefore, is one of awarding,
              against Amazon Tech and in favour of Lifestyle,
              of damages of ₹ 336,02,87,000/-, without any
              sustainable finding of infringement, or of
              complicity in infringement, against Amazon
              Tech.”
129. If the Division Bench after looking into all the relevant aspects
referred
     to above
thought fit to grant benefit of unconditional stay of execution
     of money decree then, applying the principles of law discussed by us,
     it cannot be said that the Division Bench committed any error much
     less an error of law in passing the impugned judgment and order.
130.It goes without saying that whatever has been observed by the Division
    Bench in its impugned judgment and order is not an expression of any
    final opinion but are prima face observations for the purpose of
    granting the relief as prayed for by the respondents.
Page 67 of 73
131.It is necessary for us to observe that the Court’s jurisdiction over a
    respondent is founded on a valid service of summons. Without a valid
    service, the Court cannot acquire jurisdiction over the respondent,
    unless the defendant voluntarily submits to it. The original defendant-
    respondent must be properly be apprised of a pending action against
    him and assured of the opportunity to present his defenses to the suit.
    Proper service of summons is used to protect one’s right to due process.
132. In an action strictly in personam, personal service on the defendant is
    the preferred mode of service, i.e., by handing a copy of the summons
    to the defendant in person. If defendant, for excusable reasons, cannot
    be served with the summons within a reasonable period, then
    substituted service can be resorted to. While substituted service of
    summons is permitted, "it is extraordinary in character and in
    derogation of the usual method of service."
133.In the case in hand, what is important for us to note is the Order passed
    by the Joint Registrar (Judicial) of the High Court of Delhi dated
    01.03.2021 which reads thus:
“CS(COMM)443/2020
             “1. Written statement filed by the defendant No.
2 & 3 with affidavit of admission/denial.
2. Replication to the written statement of the
             defendant        no.3       with     affidavit       of
             admission/denial of the documents has been
             filed by the plaintiff.
3. It is submitted by counsel for the plaintiff that
             replication and affidavit of admission/denial of
             the documents qua the defendant no.2 has also
             been filed but the same is lying under scrutiny.
             Let necessary steps be taken to ensure that
             replication and affidavit of admission/denial of
             the documents are placed on record.
4. Affidavit of service filed by the plaintiff reflects
             that entire paper book was delivered to the
             defendant no.1 through speed post and courier.
Page 68 of 73
However, from the report of the Registry it
                appears that PF was not filed for service of the
                defendant no.1 and summons of the suit through
                e-mail and Whatsapp were not issued to the
                defendant no.1 as per orders of the Hon’ble Court
                which is dated 12/10/2020. Let the order be
                complied with, and process be Issued, returnable
                for the next date.
5. Re-notify the matter for completion of service,
                completion of pleadings and admission/denial of
                the documents on 22"'' April, 2021.”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)


         F. CONCLUSION
134. We summarize our final conclusion on the grant of benefit of stay of
    execution of a decree by an appellate court in term of Order XLI as
    under: -
(I)      Order XLI Rule 5 contains the provision for the grant or refusal
           of stay of execution of the decree by the appellate court under
the CPC
. It categorically stipulates that mere filing of an
           appeal against an order of execution, shall not ipso facto
           operate as stay of proceedings. Any execution proceeding or
           an order therein, shall be stayed only if a specific, reasoned
           order granting such stay is passed by the appellate court, after
           proper application of mind.
(II)     For the grant of stay of execution of a decree in terms of Order
           XLI, a prayer to such effect has to be specifically made to the
           appellate court and the appellate court has the discretion to
           grant an order of stay or to refuse the same.
(III)    Order XLI Rule 5(3)
of the CPC
provides for satisfaction
           regarding sufficient cause as a pre-condition for granting
           benefit of stay of execution of decree, and it casts an obligation
Page 69 of 73
upon the appellate court to record its satisfaction for stay of
       execution such decree.
(IV)   The power of the Appellate Court to order stay of execution of
       the decree is circumscribed and made subject to the existence
       of a “sufficient cause” in favour of the appellant being shown.
In order to ascertain whether a “sufficient cause” exists for the
       grant of stay of execution of a decree under
Order XLI of the
       CPC
, the appellate court as per sub-rule (3) of Rule 5 is
       required to examine:-
(i)      Whether there will be substantial loss to the party
                  applying for stay;
(ii)     Whether the application has been made without
                  unreasonable delay; and
(iii)    Whether security has been given by the applicant for
                  due performance of the decree.
(V)    For the grant of stay of execution of the decree, the appellate
       court is required, after perusing the materials on record, to
       assign reasons for its satisfaction regarding the existence of a
       “sufficient cause”. Such reasons should be cogent and
       adequate. The reasons assigned must indicate the necessity
       for the status quo prevailing on the date of the decree and/or
       the date of making of the application for stay, to continue by
       granting stay, and not merely the reasons why stay should be
       granted.
(VI)   Although,
Order XLI Rule 5 of the CPC
, uses the word “shall”,
       yet a combined reading of the sum and substance of Rule(s)
       1(3) and 5(5) would reveal, that for the grant of stay of
       execution, it is not mandatory for the appellate court to impose
Page 70 of 73
a condition for deposit of the amount in dispute. The aforesaid
       provisions make it abundantly clear that the appellate court,
       for the grant of stay of execution, has a discretion to impose a
       condition of deposit of the amount depending on the facts and
       circumstances of each case.
(VII) A deposit is not a condition precedent for an order of stay of
       execution of the decree by the appellate court. The only
       guiding factor and statutory mandate, for the grant of such
       stay of execution as indicated in Rule 5, is the existence of
       “sufficient cause” in favour of the appellant, on the availability
       of which the appellate court would be inclined to pass an order
       of stay.
(VIII) For the grant of benefit of an unconditional stay of execution
       of a decree, an exceptional case has to be made out before the
       appellate court. This discretion of the appellate court to grant
       an unconditional stay of execution of decree must not be
       exercised arbitrarily. It must be exercised sparingly and only
       if an exceptional case is made out for such stay in view of the
       peculiar facts and attending circumstances of the case before
       it.
(IX)   A lodestar for bringing a case within the purview of
       “exceptional case” for the purpose of granting benefit of
       unconditional stay of the execution of money decree by the
       appellate court would be, if the money decree in question: -
(i)     is egregiously perverse;
       (ii)    is riddled with patent illegalities;
       (iii)   is facially untenable; and/or
Page 71 of 73
(iv)   such other exceptional causes similar in nature.
(X)    For the purpose of the grant or refusal of stay of execution of
         the decree under Rule 5 of Order XLI, it is immaterial whether
         the decree is a money decree or any other decree. The language
         couched in the said provision is very clear. Order XLI, Rule 5
         of the makes no distinction between a money decree and other
         decrees, and the said provision applies with full rigour in both
         instances. Yet as a rule of prudence and established practice
         evolved over a period of time, no stay of execution of a money
         decree should be granted, except on the condition that the
         decretal amount be deposited in the court. However, such
         condition for deposit cannot be said to be mandatory and non-
prescription thereof does not operate as a bar to staying the
         execution of a money decree.
(XI)   There is no provision under
Order XLI Rule 5 of the CPC
imposing a mandate to deposit cash security as the only mode
         of security for execution of the decree. Security, for the
         purpose of the said provision, can be in the shape of property,
         bond and or in the form of an appropriate undertaking from
         the appellant to abide by the decree, seeking stay of execution.
135.In view of the aforesaid, we have reached the conclusion that we
    should not disturb the impugned judgment and order passed by the
    Division Bench of the High Court.
136.It is needless to clarify that the main appeal shall be decided on its
    own merits and without being influenced in any manner by any of the
    observations made in the impugned judgment and order passed by
    the High Court including our judgment.
Page 72 of 73
137.It shall be open for the parties to put forward all contentions available
    to them in law at the time of the final hearing of the Regular First
    Appeal.
138.Registry shall forward one copy each of this judgment to all the High
    Courts.
……………...................J.
                                                 [J.B. PARDIWALA]




                                             ...................................J.
                                                  [K.V. VISWANATHAN]



New Delhi;
7th October, 2025.
Page 73 of 73