[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Legislative Council U.P. Lucknow vs Sushil Kumar on 16 October, 2025
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
1


 2025 INSC 1241                                                   REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11842 OF 2025
                          (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 22746 of 2023)

                LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL U.P. LUCKNOW & ORS.          … APPELLANTS

                                             VERSUS

                SUSHIL KUMAR & ORS.                           … RESPONDENTS
                                              WITH

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11843 OF 2025
                          (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 22726 of 2023)

                LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL U.P. LUCKNOW & ORS.          … APPELLANTS

                                             VERSUS

                SUSHIL KUMAR & ORS.                           … RESPONDENTS

                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 11844-11845 OF 2025
                         (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 22970-71 of 2023)

                STATE OF U.P. & ANR.                             … APPELLANTS
                                             VERSUS
                SUSHIL KUMAR & ORS.                           … RESPONDENTS

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11846 OF 2025
                           (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 457 of 2024)

                STATE OF UP & ANR.                               … APPELLANTS
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
Gulshan Kumar Arora
Date: 2025.10.16
                                             VERSUS
14:33:14 IST
Reason:         VIPIN KUMAR & ORS.                            … RESPONDENTS
                                     2

                           J U D G M E N T
J.K. Maheshwari, J.
1.     In this batch of appeals, the common order dated

18.09.2023 passed in Special Appeal Defective No. 485 of

2023 and Writ-A No. 140 of 2022 along with order dated

03.10.2023        passed    in   Civil   Miscellaneous   Review

Application No. 117 of 2023 in Special Appeal Defective

No. 485 of 2023 by the High Court of Judicature at

Allahabad, Lucknow Bench, have been assailed. For the

sake of convenience, the parties in the instant appeals

are outlined below as thus:
Civil               Parties           Impugned order
     Appeal(s)

      C.A. No.          Legislative          Special Appeal
     11842/2025     Council, U.P. and        Defective No.
Others Vs. Sushil           485/2023
Kumar & Ors.

                        Legislative        Civil Miscellaneous
      C.A. No.      Council, U.P. and       Review Application
     11843/2025
Others Vs. Sushil       No.
117 of 2023 in
                       Kumar & Ors.           Special Appeal
                                          Defective No. 485 of
2023
3
C.A. No.          State of Uttar                   Special Appeal
       11844-             Pradesh and                    Defective No.
     11845/2025
Another Vs. Sushil
485/2023
                       Kumar and Others                        AND
                                                    Civil Miscellaneous
                                                     Review Application
                                                     No. 117 of 2023 in
                                                       Special Appeal
                                                   Defective No. 485 of
2023
State of U.P.
                            Through Addl.
Chief Secretary
      C.A. No.               (Legislative              Writ-A No. 140/2022
     11846/2025             Assembly) and
                          Others Vs. Vipin
                           Kumar Singh and
                                Others
Since the issues and facts involved in these appeals are

common, hence they are being decided by a common order.
2.      For the sake of brevity, facts of C.A. No. 11842/2025

are      being    adverted      to.   As       borne    from   records,   the

controversy was set into motion when Respondent Nos. 1

to 3 (original writ petitioners) filed writ petition1

challenging the process of selection of various posts
1   Writ-A No. 36/2021.
4
under    the    Secretariat   of   Legislative   Council,     Uttar

Pradesh as notified vide ‘Advertisement No. 1/2020’ dated

17.09.2020        and   supplementary    advertisement        dated

27.09.2020, inter-alia, contending that the said process

of selection was unfair, unjust, arbitrary, unreasonable

and collusive. The petitioners prayed for the following

reliefs: -
i)     to issue a writ, order or direction in the
               nature of certiorari quashing the entire
               process    of    selection    pursuant    to
               Advertisement No. 1/2020 dated 17.9.2020 and
               Supplementary Advertisement dated 27.9.2020
               issued by opposite party No. 1 as contained
               in Annexure No. 1 to the writ petition.
ii)    to issue a writ, order or direction in the
               nature of Mandamus commanding the opposite
               parties not to proceed with the selection
               pursuant to Advertisement No. 1/2020 dated
               17.9.2020 and Supplementary Advertisement
               dated 27.9.2020 issued by opposite party no.
1 as contained in Annexure No. 1 to the writ
               petition.
iii) to issue a writ, order or direction in the
             nature of Mandamus commanding the opposite
             parties to hold fresh process of selection
             in accordance with the scheme of U.P.
             Legislative  Council  Secretariat  Service
             (Recruitment and conditions of Services)
             Rules, 1976 as amended vide 4th Amendment
             Rules 2019.
5
iv)    to issue a writ, order or direction in the
              nature of Mandamus commanding the opposite
              parties to allow the petitioners to continue
              to work on their respective posts as per
              Scheme of Government Order dated 22.5.1998
              contained in Annexure No. 3 to the writ
              petition and further be pleased to consider
              them for regular appointment.
v)     Issue any other order or direction which this
              Hon’ble Court may deem fit and proper under
              the facts and circumstances of the case in
              favour of the petitioner in the interest of
              justice.
(vi) Allow the writ petition with costs.”
3.   During the pendency of the writ petition, counter

affidavit was filed and the learned Single Judge relying

upon the judgment of this Court in
‘Sachin Kumar & Ors

vs. Delhi Subordinate Service Selection Board (DSSSB) &

Ors.’2
, vide order dated 12.04.2023 issued the following

directions –

       “27. In view thereof, to maintain the public
            confidence in the recruitment process in the
            Legislative Assembly and Legislative Council
            in   respect   of   Class-III   posts,   the
            recruitment should be in the hands of the
            specialized statutory recruitment body, and
            not in the hands of a selection committee or
            a private agency. Therefore, it is directed
            that in future all Class-III posts in


2 (2021) 4 SCC 631
6
Assembly and Council are to be filled up by
                the selection made by the Uttar Pradesh
                Subordinate Services Selection Commission.
                In this respect, necessary amendment in the
                recruitment rules are to be carried out
                within a period of three months from today.
28.    The   petitioners,   who  have   been   given
                appointment on contractual basis should be
                allowed to work on contractual basis and paid
                remuneration accordingly, subject to their
                performing duties of the posts, if the posts
                are vacant on which they have been working,
                till regularly selected candidates come from
                Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services Selection
                Commission and join the posts.”
4.      Being    aggrieved       by   the     said   directions,   review

petition3 was filed, which was disposed-of vide order

dated 15.05.2023 maintaining the order of the learned

Single Judge. Aggrieved, special appeal4 was preferred by

Respondent Nos. 1 to 3. It is relevant to note, while the

aforesaid special appeal was pending, Writ-A No. 140/2022

was filed by other set of writ-petitioners, inter-alia

seeking        relief in      nature     of certiorari     for   quashing

entire selection and appointment made on the post of

Assistant Review Officer in Uttar Pradesh Legislative

Assembly Secretariat in pursuance to Advertisement No.


3   Civil Misc. Review Application No. 53 of 2023.
4   Special Appeal Defective No. 485 of 2023
7
1/2020    and   also   a   high-level       enquiry     into    alleged

manipulation and favoritism in selection and appointment.

Vide order dated 21.08.2023 passed in special appeal, the

matter was directed to be taken up with Writ-A No.

140/2022.     The   relevant   portion       of   the       order   dated

21.08.2023 is reproduced below as thus:
“                    xxx xxx xxx
      Put up on 24.08.2023 along with Writ-A No. 140/2022,
Vipin Kumar v. State of U.P.
through Additional
      Chief Secretary (Legislative Assembly) and others.
      The relevant records shall be produced by Sri Gaurav
      Mehrotra, learned Counsel for Legislative Council on
      the next date of listing.
xxx xxx xxx                              ”
5.   In furtherance thereto, the High Court by the common

impugned order, referred the matter to the Central Bureau

of   Investigation     (CBI)   for       conducting     a   preliminary

enquiry and to submit a report to the Court within the

time so specified and directed the office to register the

case as suo-motu P.I.L. The relevant portion of the order

is reproduced as thus: -
“(10)     Since this Court is vested with the
                jurisdiction of P.I.L., therefore the
                Court further proceeds to take suo motu
                notice in public interest on the aforesaid
8
questions for necessary directions and the
       case be listed as suo motu P.I.L. in the
       matter of recruitment of Staff in Vidhan
       Parishad and Vidhan Sabha, Secretariat,
       U.P. in the light of grievance raised in
       the Special Appeal and Writ-A No. 140 of
       2022, Vipin Kumar v. State of U.P. through
       Additional Chief Secretary (Legislative
       Assembly) and others connected thereto.
ORDER
(11)   Having regard to the facts evident from
       the record and keeping in view the
       aforesaid questions of public importance,
       we are of the opinion that the matter be
       referred    to    Central     Bureau    of
       Investigation (CBI) for conducting a
       preliminary enquiry to submit the report
       to this Court within a period of six weeks
       from the date of this order along with
       photocopies of the relevant record.
(12)   Office is directed to register the case
       separately as suo motu P.I.L. whose title
       is as under:
“Suo Motu in the matter of
           Recruitment of staff in Vidhan
           Parishad Sabha and Vidhan Sabha,
           Secretariat, U.P.”
(13)   Let a copy of this order alongwith the
       instructions placed before this Court be
       registered as part of P.I.L.
(14)   The original record supplied to the Court
       shall be kept in the sealed cover.
(15)   Photocopy of the original record shall be
       transmitted to the C.B.I. by the Senior
       Registrar of this Court in a sealed cover
       to facilitate the preliminary enquiry in
       the matter.
9
(16)       Dr. L.P. Mishra, Advocate is appointed as
                  amicus curiae to assist the Court in the
                  matter of suo motu P.I.L.
       (17)       Let the Special Appeal and P.I.L. be
                  listed before the appropriate Bench in the
                  first week of November, 2023.”
6.    On filing review5 against the above directions, the

same was dismissed on 03.10.2023 maintaining the order

impugned. Hence, the present appeals as indicated above

in para 1.
7.    Heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.

Mr. V. Giri, learned senior counsel representing the

Legislative Council as well as the State Government,

submits that by the impugned judgment, the Division Bench

by clubbing the Special Appeal with the Writ Petition

wherein       constitutionality             of   the      Uttar      Pradesh

Legislative Assembly Recruitment Rules was challenged and

by converting the said Special Appeal into a Public

Interest Litigation, the Division Bench exceeded from its

jurisdiction to decide the Special Appeal. It is further

urged that without affording the appellant an opportunity




5Civil Miscellaneous Review Application No. 117 of 2023 in Special Appeal Defective
No. 485 of 2023.
10
referring         the     matter     to   CBI    for    enquiry,    violates

principles of natural justice. He further submitted that

there are no averments in the writ petition or in the

special appeal warranting referral of matter to the CBI

insofar          as     the     allegations      specified     therein     are

concerned. Therefore, direction as issued by the High

Court is not in accordance with law. Reliance in this

regard has been placed on the judgments of this Court in

the cases of
Secretary, Minor Irrigation & Rural Engg.

Services UP vs. Sahgoo Ram6
;
Shree Shree Ram Janki, Asthan

Tapovam Mandir vs. State of Jharkhand7
.
8.      Per contra, learned counsel appearing for Respondent

Nos. 1 to 3 (petitioners before the High Court) submits

that they have not asked for any relief directing CBI

enquiry in the matter. Without there being such prayers,

the High Court suo-motu has passed the order. It is urged,

they       are        working    since    last    about      ten   years   on

contractual basis and their prayer is only to the extent

to     regularize        them     in the Uttar         Pradesh Legislative


6   (2002) 5 SCC 521
7   (2019) 6 SCC 25
11
Assembly. It is also contended that they have not made

any allegation of manipulation or malpractice in the

examination and neither pleaded for CBI investigation.

In such circumstances, appropriate orders may be passed.
9.   Having      considered    the     submissions    and    the

controversy involved, it is first necessary to examine

the circumstances in which a CBI inquiry can be directed.

This Court has addressed this issue in a series of

judgments, as outlined below from some of the cases.
10.
In
Secretary, Minor Irrigation & Rural Engg. Services

UP
(supra), this Court had the occasion to deal with a

direction of High Court whereby CBI was directed to hold

an inquiry into the allegations made against the then

Minister   for    Minor   Irrigation   and   Rural   Engineering

Services in government of Uttar Pradesh. While setting

aside the impugned order therein, following was observed–

     “5. While none can dispute the power of the High
     Court under
Article 226
to direct an inquiry by
     CBI, the said power can be exercised only in cases
     where there is sufficient material to come to a
     prima facie conclusion that there is a need for
     such inquiry. It is not sufficient to have such
     material in the pleadings. On the contrary, there
12
is a need for the High Court on consideration of
        such pleadings to come to the conclusion that the
        material before it is sufficient to direct such an
        inquiry by CBI. This is a requirement which is
        clearly deducible from the judgment of this Court
        in the case of Common Cause [(1999) 6 SCC 667].
        This Court in
the said judgment
at paragraph 174
        of the Report has held thus: (SCC p. 750, para
174)
           “174. The other direction, namely, the
           direction to CBI to investigate ‘any other
           offence’ is wholly erroneous and cannot be
           sustained.    Obviously,   direction    for
           investigation can be given only if an
           offence is, prima facie, found to have been
           committed or a person's involvement is
           prima facie established, but a direction
           to CBI to investigate whether any person
           has committed an offence or not cannot be
           legally given. Such a direction would be
           contrary to the concept and philosophy of
           ‘life’ and ‘liberty’ guaranteed to a person
           under
Article 21
of the Constitution. This
           direction is in complete negation of
           various decisions of this Court in which
           the concept of ‘life’ has been explained
           in a manner which has infused ‘life’ into
           the letters of Article 21.”
11. The issue whether the High Court, in exercise of its

jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of

India, when can direct the CBI, established under the
Delhi     Special   Police   Establishment    Act,   1946
,   to

investigate a cognizable offence which is alleged to have

taken place within the territorial jurisdiction of a
13
State without the consent of the State Government, was

referred for the opinion of the Constitution Bench in
State of W.B. v. Committee
for Protection of Democratic

Rights8. This Court while affirming exercise of such

powers        by       High   Courts    made   following   succinct

observations –

         “70. Before parting with the case, we deem it
         necessary to emphasize that despite wide powers
         conferred by
Articles 32
and
226
of the
         Constitution, while passing any order, the Courts
         must bear in mind certain self-imposed limitations
         on the exercise of these constitutional powers.
         The very plenitude of the power under the said
         articles requires great caution in its exercise.
         Insofar as the question of issuing a direction to
         CBI to conduct investigation in a case is
         concerned, although no inflexible guidelines can
         be laid down to decide whether or not such power
         should be exercised but time and again it has been
         reiterated that such an order is not to be passed
         as a matter of routine or merely because a party
         has levelled some allegations against the local
         police. This extraordinary power must be exercised
         sparingly,    cautiously   and    in   exceptional
         situations where it becomes necessary to provide
         credibility     and    instill    confidence    in
         investigations or where the incident may have
         national and international ramifications or where
         such an order may be necessary for doing complete
         justice and enforcing the fundamental rights.
         Otherwise CBI would be flooded with a large number
         of cases and with limited resources, may find it

8   (2010) 3 SCC 571
14
difficult to properly investigate even serious
     cases and in the process lose its credibility and
     purpose with unsatisfactory investigations.
71.
In
Minor Irrigation & Rural Engg. Services,
     U.P. v. Sahngoo Ram Arya
[(2002) 5 SCC 521 : 2002
     SCC (L&S) 775] this Court had said that an order
     directing an enquiry by CBI should be passed only
     when the High Court, after considering the
     material on record, comes to a conclusion that
     such material does disclose a prima facie case
     calling for an investigation by CBI or any other
     similar agency. We respectfully concur with these
     observations.”
12.
In
Shree     Shree    Ram    Janki,       Asthan    Tapovam   Mandir
(supra), High Court had issued a direction to CBI to

investigate      and     to     take        appropriate    action     qua

allegations involving illegal transfer of temple trust

property   by    trust    members       in    collusion    with   public

officials. This direction was issued in pursuance to a

PIL filed seeking such relief. On challenge, this Court

quashed    the   impugned       direction       while     observing   as

hereunder:
“21. We find that the finding recorded by the High
     Court that the deity could not transfer its land
     in any case is not tenable. The appellant relies
     upon statutory provisions in support of its stand
     to transfer of land. The sweeping remarks that the
     allegations are against the Government and the
15
Board which consist of government functionaries;
therefore, the matter requires to be investigated
by CBI are wholly untenable and such sweeping
remarks against the Government and/or the Board
should not have been made. The functioning in the
Government is by different officers and the
working of the Executive has in-built checks and
balances. Therefore, merely because, permission
has been granted by a functionary of the State
Government will not disclose a criminal offence.
The High Court has thus travelled much beyond its
jurisdiction in directing investigations by CBI in
a matter of sale of property of the deity. Still
further, the High Court has issued directions
without there being any complaint to the local
police in respect of the property of the religious
Trust.
22. It may be kept in mind that the public order
(Entry 1) and the police (Entry 2) is a State
subject falling in List II of Schedule VII of the
Constitution. It is a primary responsibility of
the investigating agency of the State Police to
investigate all offences which are committed
within its jurisdiction. The investigations can be
entrusted to Central Bureau of Investigation on
satisfaction of the conditions as specified
therein only in exceptional circumstances as
laid
down in
State of W.B. [State of W.B. v. Committee
for Protection of Democratic Rights, (2010) 3 SCC
571] case. Such power cannot and should not be
exercised in a routine manner without examining
the complexities, nature of offence and sometimes
the tardy progress in the investigations involving
high officials of the State investigating agency
itself.”
16
13.
In
Manik Bhattacharya v. Ramesh Malik9
, a direction

was issued by High Court to CBI for conducting an inquiry

while registering a case vis-à-vis allegations of grave

irregularities in West Bengal Teachers Eligibility Test,

2014. Therein, although this Court refused to quash the

impugned directions on account of CBI having proceeded

with such inquiry substantially, an observation was made

that direction of CBI inquiry in recruitment related

controversy was not appropriate. The relevant paragraph

is reproduced as thus:
“11. In our opinion, under normal circumstances,
         it would not be appropriate to straightaway direct
         CBI investigation in a recruitment related
         controversy unless, of course the allegations are
         so outrageous and the perpetrators of the alleged
         offences are so powerful that investigation by the
         State Police would be ineffectual. The reasons
         given by the learned Single Judge in directing
         investigation by CBI at such an early stage of the
         proceeding may fall short of the standards
laid
         down in
Sampat Lal [State of W.B. v. Sampat Lal
,
         (1985) 1 SCC 317]. But considering the submission
         of the learned counsel for CBI and the fact that
         investigation by the said agency has substantially
         progressed, we do not want to stall such
         investigation at this stage and wait to see if the
         State Police can carry on the same investigation
         impartially. We accordingly decline the plea of

9   (2022) 17 SCC 781
17
the petitioners to stay that part of the order
        impugned,    by    which   continuance    of    the
        investigation by CBI has been directed. Before we
        issue further order in this matter, we direct CBI
        to file a comprehensive report as regards the scope
        and nature of illegalities they have found in the
        subject-recruitment process.”
14. In view of the precedents of this Court referred

hereinabove, it is evident that while issuing directions

to CBI to hold an investigation, pleadings and material

sufficient for CBI inquiry are required to be looked

into. It is further required to be seen that based on

such material, whether the involvement of the persons is

prima     facie   established.      This   Court   while   issuing

directions observed that no inflexible guideline can be

laid down to decide whether or not such power should be

exercised, but it has been reiterated that the order of

CBI investigation or enquiry should not be passed in

routine     manner    on   mere   allegations   levelled   by   the

parties. The exercise of such power by the High Court or

by this Court must be made sparingly, cautiously and in

an      exceptional        situation    when    credibility      of

investigation is in question and to repose confidence in
18
investigation. The Court may exercise such discretion,

where the incident may have national or international

ramifications and with intent to do complete justice or

for   enforcing   the    fundamental    rights.     Mere   sweeping

remarks are not enough to direct for CBI investigation,

until prima facie disclosure of commission of criminal

offence is made out. It is further said that in the

matters   relating      to   recruitment,   it    would    not    be

appropriate to direct CBI investigation in routine course

unless the facts brought on record are so abnormal that

shake the conscience of the Court.
15. For appreciating the legal position set forth above,

it is necessary to assess the pleadings and the prayers

of the writ petitions. The prayers involving Writ-A No.

36/2021   have    already     been     reproduced     in   para    2

hereinabove and the direction as issued by the learned

Single Judge in para 3 above against which Special Appeal

Defective No. 485/2023 was filed and entertained along

with Writ-A No. 140/2022. However, at this juncture, the

relief sought in Writ-A No. 140/2022 is also required to

be referred for ready reference which is reproduced as
19
under:
“                xxx    xxx    xxx
         i.   a writ order and direction in nature of
              certiorari   Quashing   entire   selection   and
              appointment made on the post of Assistant Review
              Officer in Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly
              Secretariat in pursuance to Advertisement no.
              1/2020 dated 07.12.2020 as Contained in ANNEXURE
              NO. 1 to this writ petition;
ii.     a writ order or direction in nature of Mandamus
              commanding opposite parties to conduct a high
              level inquiry regarding allegations raised in
              the   present  writ   petition  pertaining   to
              manipulation in the Mains Written Examination
              and typing results and favoritism in the
              selection and appointment of Assistant Review
              Officers in pursuance to advertisement no.
              1/2020 dated 07.12.2020;
iii.     a writ, order or direction in the nature of
              Mandamus commanding opposite parties to conduct
              entire selection process a fresh by involving
              agencies.
xxx   xxx     xxx                       ”


    A bare reading of the prayer makes it clear that the

allegations raised in the writ petition pertained to the

favoritism     and   manipulation       in     the   result   of       mains

written examination. On the allegations, quashing of

entire selection and appointment was sought along with a

high-level enquiry. A further perusal of the pleadings

in the writ petition indicate that favoritism was alleged
20
against   the     external    agency,       which     conducted     the

examination     and   allegedly         favored     certain   set    of

candidates.
16. In the said factual conspectus, the key question that

arises for our consideration is (1) whether the Division

Bench while entertaining Special Appeal Defective No.

485/2023 against the order of learned Single Judge along

with Writ-A No. 140/2022 was justified to direct the

office to register a separate case as suo moto PIL and

to hold a preliminary enquiry through CBI asking for a

report within the specified time? (2) Whether the facts

and circumstances of the case warrant a CBI enquiry in

line with the established guidelines of this Court?
17. As discussed above, the dispute was set into motion

when challenge was laid to the selection process of

various   posts    under     the   Secretariat       of   Legislative

Council in Writ-A No. 36/2021. The prime grievance of the

petitioners     was   of     unfairness,          arbitrariness     and

collusiveness in the selection process. It is pertinent

to note that both the writ petitions did not contain any
21
prayer seeking CBI enquiry in the matter. Learned Single

Judge by a detailed order dated 12.04.2023 disposed-of

the writ petition noting that recruitment should be in

the hands of a specialized agency, rather a private

agency. It was further directed that in future, all the

posts had to be filled by Uttar Pradesh Subordinate

Services Selection Commission, and necessary amendments

be made in the recruitment rules in this regard. The

review filed against the aforesaid order was dismissed,

and subsequent thereto, Special Appeal No. 485 of 2023

was filed, wherein the impugned order has been passed.
18. It was primarily asserted in the special appeal that

learned Single Judge failed to take note of the large-

scale irregularities, favoritism and nepotism in the

process of selection. In the interregnum, another writ

petition   being Writ-A   No.    140/2022   was filed asking

identical reliefs along with high level enquiry on the

allegation   of   manipulation    and   favoritism.   Both   the

Special Appeal Defective No. 485/2023 and Writ-A No.

140/2022 were directed to be posted together vide order

dated 21.08.2023 with direction to produce the relevant
22
record. Later, vide order impugned dated 18.09.2023 by

way   of    interim      measure,     the     Division    Bench    gave

directions to CBI for conducting the preliminary enquiry

and to submit a report. The office was directed to

register the case as Public Interest Litigation. In view

of the above, it is a matter of concern and required to

be referred that the Division Bench while entertaining

the special appeal against an order of learned Single

Judge, how can direct the office to register the case

separately as suo moto PIL. If such direction is carried

out, it would amount to entertaining a public interest

litigation against the order of learned Single Judge

which primarily cannot be said to be in consonance with

the rules prevalent and demand of propriety. At present,

we are not dealing with this issue in detail and leave

it to be looked into by Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the

High Court.
19. Perusing the facts of the case in hand, the Division

Bench, was only considering the challenge to the order

dated 12.04.2023 passed by the learned Single Judge. The

appeal     was   taken   up   along    with    Writ-A    No.   140/2022
23
involving identical issue. Admittedly, neither of the

parties in the special appeal nor in the writ petitions

prayed for an inquiry by setting up the CBI into motion.

In absence of foundation and such a prayer, what prompted

the    Division       Bench     at    appellate        stage    to     direct

registration of PIL by taking suo-motu cognizance and

refer the matter to CBI to conduct preliminary enquiry

assumes significance. To appreciate the same, the record

indicate that the entire controversy revolved around the

process of recruitment of staff in the Secretariat in

Legislative Assembly because it was conducted by external

agencies.      The    original       writ   petitioners        in    sum    and

substance      challenged       the    selection       process       alleging

arbitrariness, unfairness, collusiveness and favoritism

by    such    agencies.    On    perusal     of   impugned       order,     it

reveals      that    the   Division     Bench     on    the    premise      of

fairness in public employment and credibility of the

recruitment agency, proceeded to test the entire veracity

of allegations cast upon the selection process.
20. In       this    regard,    the     challenge       was    made    by    3

petitioners in Writ-A No. 36/2021 and then before the
24
Division Bench in Special Appeal Defective No. 485 of

2023, which was later tagged with Writ-A No. 140/2022

filed by sole petitioner raising contentious allegations

in the selection process notified for 99 vacancies of 11

cadres.    It    appears           that        all     the     4    petitioners

participated     in    the     selection             process      and   on   being

unsuccessful, challenged the same. Learned Single Judge

disposed-of the writ petition with above directions vide

order dated 12.04.2023. In special appeal, the Division

Bench passed the impugned order. The Division Bench was

swayed    on    mere       doubt    on     the        process      adopted     for

identification        of    external           agencies      to    conduct     the

examination. The relevant portion of the impugned order

is quoted hereunder:
“9. The letter dated 08.07.2020 directing the
     Nodal Officer for identifying the external
     recruitment   agency    to  the    best   of    our
     understanding   restricts  the   agencies   either
     empanelled by the State/Public Service Commission
     or   other  institutions   dealing   with    public
     examinations for recruitment. We have not been
     taken through any correspondence of refusal with
     the U.P. Public Service Commission or any other
     Subordinate Services Selection Commission or any
     institution dealing with employment recruitment
     examinations before identification of the five
25
private external agencies whose consideration in
     an unnatural way leads us to doubt. On scrutiny of
     the company master data with respect to the agency
     chosen for recruitment, we came across some
     inexplicable details which, prima-facie, satisfy
     the Court for a preliminary enquiry by an impartial
     agency as regards the identification of external
     agency in the present case entrusted the function
     of recruitment in public service which in our firm
     view cannot be compromised on the hallmark of
     fairness. The Court proceeds to frame the
     following questions in Public Interest:……”

   As evident from above, the Division Bench based its

decision on an assumption of doubt and ordered a CBI

inquiry in the present case, despite not having any

necessary foundation and prayer by either of the parties.
During the course of hearing even before us, learned

counsel     appearing    on   behalf   of   the   original   writ

petitioners has made a candid prayer that their clients

are not interested for holding any CBI enquiry in the

matter except to grant of relief as prayed in the writ

petition.
21. Be that as it may, it is well settled that directions

for CBI enquiry should not be ordered by the High Courts

or this Court in a routine manner. The jurisprudence, as

developed    by   this   Court   through    judgements
referred
26
above
, qua the direction of an investigation by the

Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) is well-settled.

It imposes a significant self-restraint on the exercise

of this extraordinary constitutional power under
Article

32
or
Article 226
of the Constitution of India. The

exercise of inherent powers to direct CBI to investigate

must be exercised sparingly, cautiously, and only in

exceptional     situations.      This     Court     has    consistently

cautioned that a CBI investigation should not be directed

as a matter of routine or merely because a party casts

certain    aspersions     or    harbors    a   subjective      lack   of

confidence in the State police. It goes without saying

that for invoking this power, the concerned Court must

be   satisfied    that    the    material      placed      prima   facie

discloses commission of offences and necessitates a CBI

investigation to ensure the fundamental right to a fair

and impartial investigation, or where the complexity,

scale,    or   national   ramification         of   such   allegations

demands expertise of central agency.
22. An order directing an investigation to be carried

out by CBI should be treated as a measure of last resort,
27
justified only when the Constitutional Court is convinced

that the integrity of the process has been compromised

or has reasons to believe that it may get compromised to

a degree that shakes the conscience of Courts or public

faith in the justice delivery system. Such compelling

circumstances may typically arise when the materials

brought in notice of the court prima facie point towards

systemic failure, the involvement of high-ranking State

officials or politically influential persons, or when the

local police's conduct itself creates a reasonable doubt

in the minds of the citizenry regarding their ability to

conduct a neutral probe. In absence of such compelling

factors the principle of judicial restraint demands that

the Court must refrain from interfering. In other words,

Constitutional   Courts    must        exercise   some   degree   of

judicial   restraint      in   unnecessarily         burdening     a

specialized   central agency       with matters      that   do    not

satisfy the threshold of an exceptional case.
23. What is coming out from the above discussion is that

the directions of High Court that are impugned in the

present appeals were issued on basis of some ‘doubt’,
28
‘assumption’ and ‘inexplicable details’ qua master data

of external agency. However, the impugned order fails to

specifically point out these ‘doubts’ and ‘inexplicable

details’ that led the High Court to pass such directions.

In this context, we are of the opinion that the prima

facie threshold that is required for passing a direction

of CBI investigation has not been satisfied. Furthermore,

all the petitioners before the High Court (Respondent

Nos. 1 to 3 herein) have also fairly stated before us

that they have not sought relief for any CBI enquiry

before the High Court.
24. In view of the discussion made hereinabove, the

present appeals stand allowed and the impugned orders

dated 18.09.2023 passed in Special Appeal Defective No.

485 of 2023 and order dated 03.10.2023 passed in Civil

Miscellaneous Review     Application   No. 117   of 2023   in

Special Appeal Defective No. 485 of 2023 by the High

Court stand set-aside.
25. The Division Bench of the High Court is requested to

hear the Special Appeal Defective No. 485 of 2023 on its
29
own merits. We also set aside the direction passed in the

impugned order dated 18.09.2023 to register the said case

separately as suo motu PIL, leaving it to the discretion

of Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the High Court to look

into the prevalent rules of the High Court and to register

the said petition in the form as specified in the rules.

It is needless to observe that on the facts of the case,

for the purpose of deciding Special Leave Defective No.

485   of   2023   with     Writ-A   No.   140/2022,    we   have   not

expressed any opinion on merits of the case. The Bench

so assigned, if any, shall independently examine the

pleadings and the reliefs as prayed therein and pass

appropriate       orders     uninfluenced      by     any   of     the

observations      made      hereinabove.     The    appeals      stand

disposed-of in above terms. Pending applications, if any,

shall stand disposed of.
…………………………………………………,J.
[J.K. MAHESHWARI]



                                            …………………………………………………,J.
[VIJAY BISHNOI]
New Delhi;
October 16, 2025.