[Cites
59
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Aristo Printers Pvt. Ltd vs Commissioner Of Trade Tax U.P on 7 October, 2025
2025 INSC 1188                                                             REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 703 OF 2012
                         (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 15476/2011)



             M/S. ARISTO PRINTERS PVT. LTD.                               …APPELLANT


                                                        VERSUS


             COMMISSIONER OF TRADE TAX,
             LUCKNOW, U.P.                                             …RESPONDENT




                                                     WITH
                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 705 OF 2012
                         (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 15478/2011)




                                               JUDGMENT
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2025.10.07
15:39:20 IST
Reason:
J.B. PARDIWALA, J.
For the convenience of exposition, this judgment is divided into the
following parts:
INDEX

A. FACTUAL MATRIX .................................................................. 2

B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PARTIES .......................... 6
(i) Submissions on behalf of the Appellant....................................... 6
(ii) Submissions on behalf of the Respondent .................................. 7

C. ISSUE TO BE DETERMINED .................................................... 7

D. ANALYSIS ............................................................................... 8
(i) Relevant provisions under the Act, 1948 ..................................... 8
(ii) Works Contract – Pre and Post 46th Amendment ...................... 12
(iii) Whether the ink, chemical and other processing materials are
  liable to the levy of tax under
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the Act, 1948? .... 32

    a. Tangible Transfer of property ....................................................... 34
    b. No transfer of property due to consumption of goods .................. 42
    c. Transfer of property despite consumption of goods ..................... 48
    d. Application to the facts at hand ................................................... 52

E. CONCLUSION ........................................................................ 57
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                                         Page 1 of 59
1.   These appeals are at the instance of an assessee and are directed
     against the judgment and order passed by the High Court of
     Judicature at Allahabad, dated 8.12.2010, in Trade Tax Revision
     Nos. 106 & 121 of 2003 respectively (hereinafter, the “Impugned
     Judgment”), by which the revisions filed by Revenue came to be
     allowed and the order passed by the Trade Tax Tribunal,
     Ghaziabad, was set aside.
A. FACTUAL MATRIX
2.   The appellant-assessee is engaged in the business of printing
     lottery tickets. It would undertake the work of printing on the
     paper that was supplied to it by the parties. The ink and
     processing material, including the necessary chemicals used in
     the process of printing, were procured by the appellant itself.
3.   The Trade Tax Officer, Ward 5, Ghaziabad (hereinafter, the
     “Assessing Authority”) vide orders dated 28.10.1999 for AY
     1996-1997 and AY 1997-1998 respectively, levied trade tax on the
     value of ink, processing material and packing material used by the
     appellant for executing the printing work on the basis of Section
     3F of the Uttar Pradesh Trade Tax Act, 1948 (for short, “the Act,
     1948”).
4.   The appellant, being aggrieved by the aforementioned orders of
     the Assessing Authority, preferred appeals before the Deputy
     Commissioner (Appeals)-II, Trade Tax, Ghaziabad (hereinafter,
     the “Appellate Authority”). It was argued by the appellant before
     the Appellate Authority that the ink, chemicals and other
     processing materials had not been passed on with the lottery
     tickets and thus the value of such goods could not have been
     made liable to tax under
Section 3F
of the Act, 1948. The Appellate
     Authority vide order dated 14.03.2000 accepted the claim of the
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                        Page 2 of 59
appellant and accordingly deleted the tax assessed on the value
     of ink and other processing materials. However, the Appellate
     Authority upheld the levy of tax on the packing materials. The
     relevant finding of the Appellate Authority is as follows:
“Goods on the sale of which tax has been levied on the
             trader which includes processing material, chemicals,
             film founta etc. and which is not transferred to the
             principal after getting job-work/work contract
             undertaken done under any circumstances. These
             material are film, chemical print etc and these are used
             for preparing plate for screen printing and after the
             use, either it becomes a waste or its nature gets
             changed, but it is not transferred to principal who get
             job-work/work contact done under any of the
             circumstances. It would be pertinent to mention the
             referred portion of the judgment given by Hon'ble
             Bombay High Court about Messrs. R.M.A.C. Press
             (supra), according to which before levying tax on work
             contract, the necessary test is that transfer of goods
             either actual or in deemed manner in the contract is
             essential, while in the above-said case, no transfer of
             above-said goods viz. ink, film developer, chemicals,
             founta, disc plate etc. has taken place. Therefore,
             levying tax on the ink and other uncategorized goods
             in five appeals is unjustifiable, therefore, it is being set-
aside.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
5.   In the circumstances referred to above, two sets of appeals were
     filed before the Trade Tax Tribunal, Bench-I, Ghaziabad
     (hereinafter, the “Tribunal”) against the order dated 14.03.2000
     passed by the Appellate Authority. One set of appeals by the
     Commissioner of Trade Tax, Uttar Pradesh, against the deletion
     of tax on the ink and processing material. Another set of appeals
     by the assessee assailing the levy of tax on the packing material.
6.   The Tribunal vide an order dated 06.08.2002 allowed the
     appellant’s appeals and set aside the levy of tax on the packaging
     material. Furthermore, the Tribunal dismissed the Revenue’s
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                             Page 3 of 59
appeals and affirmed the order of the Appellate Authority, which
     had deleted the tax on the value of ink and other processing
     materials, including chemicals. The Tribunal based its decision
     on this Court’s decision in
Rainbow Colour Lab & Anr v. State
     of M.P & Ors.
, reported in (2000) 2 SCC 385, and the Bombay
     High   Court’s    decision       in
Commissioner   of   Sales   Tax,
     Maharashtra, Bombay v. R.M.D.C. Press Pvt Ltd
, reported in
     1998 SCC OnLine Bom 435.
7.   The Revenue, being aggrieved by the aforementioned order passed
     by the Tribunal, challenged it before the High Court vide two
     Revision Applications, i.e., Trade Tax Revision No. 106 of 2003
     and Trade Tax Revision No. 121 of 2003, respectively. The High
     Court, vide the impugned judgment, allowed both the Revision
     Applications and thereby quashed and set aside the order of the
     Tribunal as well as the order passed by the Appellate Authority,
     so far as they set aside the tax on the value of ink and processing
     material, i.e., chemical. The relevant findings of the High Court
     are as follows:
“In my view the order of the Tribunal is not sustainable.
Section 3-F
of the Act levies tax on the value of goods
             involved in execution of works contract. The printing
             work has been held to be works contract by the Apex
             Court in the case of State of Maharashtra Vs.
             M/s.
Sarvodaya Printing Press Fine Art Printer
(Supra).
             The question for consideration is whether in the
             printing of lottery tickets, ink and processing materials,
             namely, chemicals, etc. are passed on to the
             customers. Undoubtedly, ink passed on to the
             customers as it is apparent on the printing paper. The
             inks are diluted in chemicals (processing material) and
             such ink in the diluted forms are being used in the
             printing, therefore, both ink and chemical (processing
             material) are passed on to the customers. It was not
             the case of the assessee at any stage that the chemical
             (processing material) was consumable and evaporates
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                            Page 4 of 59
in the process of printing and is not passed on to the
             customers. Therefore, I am of the view that both the ink
             and chemical used in the printing are passed on to the
             customers. It may be mentioned here that the assessee
             had also purchased and used consumable but the
             same has not been taxed.
The Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in the
             case of
Commissioner of Sales Tax v. Matushree Textile
             Limited
(supra) has held that the contract of dyeing
             and printing of cloth is a work contract and there is a
             transfer of property in colours, dyes and chemical.
In the case of
Commissioner of Sales Tax, Mumbai, vs.
             Hari and Company
(supra), the Division Bench of
             Bombay High Court has held that the contract for
             bringing out the Xerox copies amounts to works
             contract and the ink used for providing Xerox copies is
             passed on to the customers and, therefore, its value is
             liable to tax.
It may be mentioned here that the decision in the case
             of R.M.D.C. Press Pvt. Ltd. relied upon by the Tribunal
             is no longer a good law in view of the decision of the
             Apex Court in the case of
Associated Cement
             Companies Ltd. vs. C.C.
reported in 2002 NTN
             (Vol.
20)-73 and in view of the decision of the Apex
             Court in the case of
State of Maharashtra vs.
             Sarvodaya Printing Press Fine Art Printer
.
In view of the above, the order of the Tribunal as well
             as the order of the first appellate authority are not
             sustainable and liable to be set aside, so far it deletes
             the tax on the value of ink and processing materials,
             namely, chemical, the order of the assessing authority
             in this regard is restored.”
                                              (Emphasis Supplied)
8.   The High Court allowed the revision applications on the ground
     that the diluted ink (consisting of the ink and the chemicals) was
     passed onto the customers and thus the ink and the processing
     material, i.e., the chemical, could not be considered as
     consumables.
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 5 of 59
9.   In such circumstances
referred to above
, the appellant assessee
     is here before this Court with the present appeals.
B. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PARTIES
(i) Submissions on behalf of the Appellant
10. Mr. Niraj Kumar, the Learned counsel appearing for the appellant,
     vehemently submitted that the High Court committed a gross
     error in passing the impugned judgment. According to the learned
     counsel, the High Court fundamentally misunderstood the nature
     of lottery tickets, erroneously treating them as “goods”. It was
     submitted that the legal status of lottery tickets is already settled
     law, establishing them as “actionable claims”, which are explicitly
     excluded from the definition of “goods” under the Act, 1948. Since
     the very foundation of the tax is on the transfer of property in
     goods, and lottery tickets are not goods, the entire basis for the
     tax on the printing of these tickets is incorrect from the outset.
11. The Learned counsel further submitted that the ink and chemicals
     used in the printing process were essentially consumables whose
     property is never transferred to the customer. These materials are
     entirely used up and consumed during the execution of the
     printing job. Since the customer does not receive the ink or
     chemicals in any form, but only the service of printing, these items
     should not be treated as goods that are transferred in execution
     of the works contract. Reliance was placed on
Pest Control India
     Ltd v. Union of India & Ors.
, reported in 1989 SCC OnLine Pat
     288, and Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax (Law), Board of
     Revenue (Taxes), Ernakulam v. M.K Velu, reported in 1993 SCC
     OnLine Ker 577.
12. In such circumstances referred to above, the Learned counsel
     prayed that there being merit in his appeals, the same may be
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                         Page 6 of 59
allowed and the impugned judgment passed by the High Court be
    set aside.
(ii) Submissions on behalf of the Respondent
13. On the other hand, Mr. Bhakti Vardhan Singh, Learned counsel
    appearing for the State, submitted that the High Court did not
    commit any error, not to mention any error of law, in passing the
    impugned judgment.
14. Mr. Singh, placing reliance on
Commissioner of Sales Tax v.
    Matushree Textile Limited
, reported in 2003 SCC OnLine Bom
    830, and Commissioner of Sales Tax, Mumbai v. Hari and
    Company, reported in 2006 SCC OnLine Bom 1466, submitted
    that in the facts at hand, it is evident that ink and chemicals have
    been transferred to the customer and thereby are liable to the levy
    of tax under
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the Act, 1948.
15. In such circumstances referred to above, the Learned counsel
    prayed that, there being no merit in the appeals, the same may be
    dismissed.
C. ISSUE TO BE DETERMINED
16. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and
    having gone through the materials on record, the following
    question falls for our consideration:
I.   Whether tax can be levied under
Section 3F
of the Act, 1948,
         on the ink and processing material used by the appellant in
         undertaking the printing work?
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                        Page 7 of 59
D. ANALYSIS
(i) Relevant provisions under the Act, 1948
17. Before adverting to the rival submissions canvassed on either side,
    we must look into a few relevant provisions of the Act, 1948.
Section 2(d)
of the Act, 1948, defines “goods”. The same reads
    thus:
“2(d) "goods" means every kind or class of movable
             property and includes all materials, commodities and
             articles involved in the execution of a works contract,
             and growing crops, grass, trees and things attached to,
             or fastened to anything permanently attached to the
             earth which, under the contract of sale, are agreed to
             be severed, but does not include actionable claims,
             stocks, shares, securities or postal stationery sold by
             the Postal Department;”
18.
Section 2(h)
of the Act, 1948, defines “Sale”. The same reads thus:
“2(h) 'Sale', with its grammatical variations and
             cognate expressions, means any transfer of property in
             goods (otherwise than by way of a mortgage,
             hypothecation, charge or pledge) for cash or deferred
             payment or other valuable consideration, and includes-
(i) a transfer, otherwise than in pursuance of a
              contract of property in any goods for cash, deferred
              payment or other valuable consideration;
(ii) a transfer of property in goods (whether as
              goods, or in some other form) involved in the
              execution of a works contract;
(iii) the delivery of goods on hire purchase or any
              system of payment by instalments;
(iv) a transfer of the right to use any goods for any
              purpose (whether or not for a specified period) for
              cash, deferred payment or other valuable
              consideration;
(v) the supply of goods by any unincorporated
              association or body of persons to a member thereof
              for cash, deferred payment or other valuable
              consideration; and
(vi) the supply, by way of or as part of any service
              or in any other manner whatsoever, of goods, being
              food or any other article for human consumption or
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                        Page 8 of 59
any drink (whether or not intoxicating) where such
               supply or service is for cash or deferred payment
               or other valuable consideration ;
Explanation I.--A sale or purchase shall be deemed to
             have taken place in the State,--
(i) in a case falling under sub-clause (ii) if the
               goods are in the State at the time of transfer
               of property in such goods (whether as goods
               or in some other form) involved in the
               execution         of    the      works        contract,
               notwithstanding that the agreement for the
               works contract has been wholly or in part
               entered into outside the State;
(ii) in a case falling under sub-clause (iv), if the
               goods are used by the lessee within the State
               during any period, notwithstanding that the
               agreement for the lease has been entered into
               outside the State or that the goods have been
               delivered to lessee outside the State.
Explanation II.--Notwithstanding anything contained
             in this Act, two independent sales or purchases shall,
             for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to have taken
             place-
(a) when the goods are transferred from a principal
               to his selling, agent and from the selling agent to
               his purchaser,
(b) when the goods are transferred from the seller
               to a buying agent and from the buying agent to his
               principal, if the agent is found, in either of the cases
               aforesaid,--
(i) to have sold the goods at one rate and passed
                 on the sale proceeds to his principal at another
                 rate; or
(ii) to have purchased the goods at one rate and
                 passed them on to his principal at another rate;
                 or
(iii) not to have accounted to his principal for the
                 entire collection or deductions made by him, in
                 the sales or purchases effected by him on behalf
                 of his principal; or
(iv) to have acted for a fictitious or non-existent
                 principal;”
19.
Section 2(m)
of the Act, 1948, defines “Works contract”. The same
    reads thus:
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                           Page 9 of 59
“2(m) 'Works contract' includes any agreement for
              carrying out, for cash, deferred payment or other
              valuable consideration, the building construction,
              manufacture,       processing, fabrication, erection,
              installation, fitting out, improvement, modification,
              repair or commissioning of any movable or immovable
              property;”
20.
Section 3F
of the Act, 1948, deals with the taxation of goods
     involved in the execution of the works contract. The relevant
     portion of the same reads thus:
“Section 3F - Tax on the right to use any goods or goods
              involved in the execution of works contract:
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 3A
              or Section 3AAA or Section 3D but subject to the
              provisions of Sections 14 and 15 of the Central Sales
              Tax Act, 1.956, every dealer shall, for each assessment
              year, pay a tax on the net turnover of--
(a) [...]
(b) transfer of property in goods (whether as
                goods or in some other form) involved in the
                execution of a works contract.
at such rate not exceeding twenty percent as the
                State Government may, by notification, declare and
                different rates may be declared for different goods
                or different classes of dealers.
(2) For the purposes of determining the net turnover
              referred to in sub-section (1), the following amounts
              shall be deducted from the total amount received or
              receivable by a dealer in respect of a--
(a) [...]
(b) transfer referred to in clause (b) of sub-section
                (1),-
(i) the amount representing the sales value of the
                  goods covered by
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
of the
                  Central Sales Tax Act, 1956;
(ii) the amount representing the value of the
                  goods exempted under
Section 4
;
(iii) the amount representing the value of the
                  goods, on the sale or purchase whereof tax has
                  been levied or is leviable under this Act at some
                  earlier stage;
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 10 of 59
(iv) the amount representing the value of the
                  goods manufactured in a new unit exempted
                  under Section 4A or Section 4AAA;
(v) the amount representing the value of the
                  goods supplied to the contractor by the
                  contractee:
Provided that the ownership of such goods
                  remains with the contractee under the terms of
                  the contract;
(vi) the amount representing the labour charges
                  for the execution of the works contract;
(vii) all amounts paid to the sub-contractor as the
                  consideration for execution of the works
                  contract, whether wholly or in part:
Provided that no deduction under this sub-
                  clause shall be allowed unless the dealer
                  claiming deduction produces proof that the sub-
                  contractor is a registered dealer liable to tax
                  under this Act and that such amount is included
                  in the return of turnover filed by such sub-
                  contractor under the provisions of this Act;
(viii) the amount representing the charges for
                  planning, designing and architect's fees;
(ix) the amount representing the charges for
                  obtaining on hire or otherwise machinery and
                  tools used for execution of the works contract;
(x) the amount representing the cost of
                  consumables used in the execution of the
                  works contract, the property in which is
                  not transferred in the execution of the
                  works contract;
(xi) the amount representing the cost of
                  establishment and other similar expenses of the
                  contractor to the extent it is relatable to supply
                  of labour and services;
(xii) the amount representing the profit earned
                  by the contractor to the extent it is relatable to
                  the supply of labour and services.
(3) Where in respect of transfer referred to in clause (b)
              of subsection (1), the contractor does not maintain
              proper accounts or the accounts maintained by him are
              not found by the assessing authority to be worthy of
              credence and the amount actually incurred towards
              charges for labour and other services and profit
              relating to supply of labour and services are not
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                           Page 11 of 59
ascertainable, such charges for labour and other
              services and such profit may, for the purposes of
              deductions under clause (b) of sub-section (2), be
              determined on the basis of such percentage of the
              value of the (a) transfer referred to in clause (a) of sub-
section (1), whether such transfer was agreed to during
              that assessment year or earlier, works contract as may
              be prescribed and different percentages may be
              prescribed for different types of works contract.”
(ii) Works Contract – Pre and Post 46th Amendment
21. We deem it necessary and appropriate to briefly refer to the history
     of the law relating to works contracts. Entry 54 in List II of the
     Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India enables the State
     Legislature to enact legislation providing for levying and collecting
     tax in respect of the sale and purchase of goods.
Article 286
of the
     Constitution prohibits the State Legislatures from imposing tax on
     the sale or purchase of goods where such sale or purchase takes
     place outside the State, or in the course of the import of the goods
     into, or export of the goods out of, the territory of India.
22. The scope and ambit of the powers of the States to levy sales tax
     on goods involved in the execution of works contracts have been
     the subject matter of several judicial pronouncements. The
     decision of this Court in
State of Madras v. Gannon Dunkerley
     & Co. (Madras) Ltd.
, reported in 1958 SCC OnLine SC 100
     (hereinafter, “Gannon Dunkerley-I”), is the leading case on the
     subject. That was a case where the assessee’s (Gannon Dunkerley)
     business primarily consisted of executing contracts for the
     construction of buildings, bridges, dams, roads, and other
     structural projects. During the relevant assessment year under
     consideration, sales tax was levied under the Madras General
     Sales Tax Act, 1939, on the value of materials used by the
     assessee in execution of the works contracts. The assessee
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                            Page 12 of 59
questioned the levy of sales tax on the ground that there was no
     sale of goods as understood in India and therefore, no sales tax
     could be levied on any portion of the amount which was received
     by the assessee from the persons for whose benefit it had
     constructed buildings. The Constitution Bench of this Court held:
a. In a building contract where the agreement between the
           parties was that the contractor should construct the
           building according to the specifications contained in the
           agreement and in consideration received payment as
           provided therein, there was neither a contract to sell the
           materials used in the construction nor the property passed
           therein as movables. It was held that in a building contract,
           which is one entire and indivisible contract, there was no
           sale of goods, and it was not within the competence of the
           Provincial State Legislature to impose tax on the supply of
           the materials used in such a contract, treating it as a sale.
           In a building contract, the title to the materials used in the
           construction passes to the owner of the land as an accretion,
           and there is no question of title to the materials passing as
           movables in favour of the other party to the contract.
        b. The expression “sale of goods” in Entry 48 in
List II of the
           Seventh Schedule to the Government of India Act, 1935
(similar to Entry 54 in List II) must be construed in the same
           sense it has been understood under the
Sale of Goods Act,
           1930
(for short, “the Act, 1930”) and to constitute “sale of
           goods”, the essential ingredients are: (a) there should be an
           agreement to sell movables; (b) it should be for a price; and
(c) there should be passing of goods pursuant to the
           agreement.
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                        Page 13 of 59
Thus, by virtue of this Court’s decision in
Gannon Dunkerley-I
(supra), no sales tax could be levied on the amounts received
     under a works contract by a building contractor even though it
     had supplied goods for the construction of the building.
23. The decision of this Court in
Gannon Dunkerley-I
(supra) was
     applied in various other decisions wherein courts were dealing
     with the issue of transfer of goods in execution of works contracts.
One such example is the case of
Northern India Caterers (India)
     Ltd. v. Lt. Governor of Delhi
, reported in (1978) 4 SCC 36. In
     this case, this Court held that there was no sale when food and
     drink were supplied to guests residing in a hotel and that the
     supply of meals was essentially in the nature of a service provided
     to the guests and could not be identified as a transaction of sale.
     This Court declined to accept the position that the revenue was
     entitled to split up the transaction into two parts, one of service
     and the other of the sale of food items. Accordingly, the proprietor
     of the restaurant, who provided many services in addition to the
     supply of food, was not liable to pay sales tax on the value of the
     goods supplied by him.
24. A summary of the position of law with regard to taxation of goods
     transferred in execution of works contracts before the enactment
     of the Forty-sixth Amendment is as follows: (i) works contracts are
     indivisible, i.e., the revenue could not split a single works contract
     into two – one pertaining to the provision of goods and another
     pertaining to the provision of services; (ii) to constitute ‘Sale’ all
     ingredients as mentioned under the Act, 1930 had to be fulfilled;
     and (iii) to determine whether a particular contract was a works
     contract or a contract for sale, the dominant nature of the contract
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 14 of 59
was looked into on a fact specific basis via the terms and
     conditions of contract and other related aspects.
25. To overcome the effect of various judicial decisions, the Parliament
     amended the Constitution by the
Constitution (Forty-sixth
     Amendment) Act, 1982
. The constitutional amendments relevant
     for the purpose herein are as follows:
Amendment of
Article 366
– Insertion of clause
              (29-A)
                "366. Definitions.-In this Constitution, unless the
                context      otherwise   requires,    the     following
                expressions       have    the     meanings       hereby
                respectively assigned to them, that is to say-
(29-A) 'tax on the sale or purchase of goods'
                includes—(a) […]
(b) a tax on the transfer of property in goods
                (whether as goods or in some other form)
                involved in the execution of a works contract;
(c) to (f) […]
                and such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods
                shall be deemed to be a sale of those goods by the
                person making the transfer, delivery or supply and
                a purchase of those goods by the person to whom
                such transfer, delivery or supply is made;”
              Amendment of
Article 286
– Insertion of clause (3)
                “286. Restrictions as to imposition of tax on the sale
                or purchase of goods
                (3) Any law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes,
                or authorises the imposition of,
(a) a tax on the sale or purchase of goods declared
                by Parliament by law to be of special importance in
                inter-State trade or commerce; or
(b) a tax on the sale or purchase of goods, being a
                tax of the nature referred to in sub-clause (b), sub-
                clause (c) or sub-clause (d) of clause (29-A) of
article
                366
,
                be subject to such restrictions and conditions in
                regard to the system of levy, rates and other
                incidents of the tax as Parliament may by law
                specify."
Amendment of the Seventh Schedule – Insertion
              of entry 92B
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                           Page 15 of 59
“92B. Taxes on the consignment of goods (whether
                the consignment is to the person making it or to any
                other person), where such consignment takes place
                in the course of inter-State or commerce”
26. In light of the Forty-sixth Amendment to the Constitution, several
     state governments amended their sales tax laws and made
     provisions for the imposition of sales tax in relation to works
     contracts. Each State adopted its own method of determining
     taxable turnover either by framing rules under its sales tax law or
     by issuing administrative directions. The method adopted by the
     States for determining the taxable turnover relating to works
     contracts for purposes of levy of sales tax were such that sales tax
     had to be paid by the building contractors not merely on the value
     of materials supplied by them in connection with the works
     contracts but also on the expenditure they had incurred in
     securing the services of architects and engineers who had
     supervised the execution of the works, and also on the amount
     which they were entitled to receive for supervising the execution
     of the works. While levying sales tax on the price of the materials
     supplied for the construction of houses, factories, bridges, etc.,
     the sales tax authorities of the States did not take into account
     the conditions and restrictions imposed by
Article 286
of the
     Constitution and the provisions of the
Central Sales Tax Act, 1956
(for short, “the Act, 1956”).
27. The validity of such State legislations as well as the constitutional
     validity of the Forty-sixth Amendment was considered by this
     Court in
Builders Association of India & Ors. v. Union of India
     & Ors.
, reported in (1989) 2 SCC 645. The Court upheld the
     constitutionality of the Forty-sixth Amendment. On the issue of
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 16 of 59
the validity of the State legislations, it was contended by the States
     that:
a. When a works contract is executed, what is handed over is
             a ‘conglomerate’ of all the goods used, and the goods pass in
             an indivisible manner. In such cases, it was not possible to
             disintegrate the contract into a contract for sale and a
             contract for work, and thus,
Article 366(29-A)(b)
of the
             Constitution has conferred on the legislatures of States the
             power to levy tax on works contract; and
        b. The power to levy tax provided under
Article 366(29-A)(b)
was independent of the power conferred on the legislatures
             of states under Entry 54, and the same was not bound by
             restrictions imposed under
Article 286
and the Act, 1956.
28. Rejecting the aforesaid contentions, this Court made the following
     pertinent observations:
“32 [...]Sub-clause (b) of clause (29-A) states that ‘tax
               on the sale or purchase of goods’ includes among other
               things a tax on the transfer of property in the goods
               (whether as goods or in some other form) involved in the
               execution of a works contract. It does not say that a tax
               on the sale or purchase of goods included a tax on the
               amount paid for the execution of a works contract. It
               refers to a tax on the transfer of property in
               goods (whether as goods or in some other
               form) involved in the execution of a works contract. The
               emphasis is on the transfer of property in
               goods (whether as goods or in some other form). The
               latter part of clause (29-A) of
Article 366
of the
               Constitution makes the position very clear. While
               referring to the transfer, delivery or supply of any goods
               that takes place as per sub-clauses (a) to (f) of clause
               (29-A), the latter part of clause (29-A) says that “such
               transfer, delivery or supply of any goods” shall be
               deemed to be a sale of those goods by the person
               making the transfer, delivery or supply and a purchase
               of those goods by the person to whom such transfer,
               delivery or supply is made. Hence, a transfer of
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                            Page 17 of 59
property in goods under sub-clause (b) of clause (29-A)
              is deemed to be a sale of the goods involved in the
              execution of a works contract by the person making the
              transfer and a purchase of those goods by the person
              to whom such transfer is made. The object of the new
              definition introduced in clause (29-A) of
Article 366
of
              the Constitution is, therefore, to enlarge the scope of
              ‘tax on sale or purchase of goods’ wherever it occurs in
              the Constitution so that it may include within its scope
              the transfer, delivery or supply of goods that may take
              place under any of the transactions referred to in sub-
clauses (a) to (f) thereof wherever such transfer,
              delivery or supply becomes subject to levy of sales tax.
              So construed the expression ‘tax on the sale or
              purchase of goods’ in Entry 54 of the State List,
              therefore, includes a tax on the transfer of property in
              goods (whether as goods or in some other form)
              involved in the execution of a works contract also. The
              tax leviable by virtue of sub-clause (b) of clause (29-A)
              of
Article 366
of the Constitution thus becomes subject
              to the same discipline to which any levy under entry 54
              of the State List is made subject to under the
              Constitution. The position is the same when we look at
Article 286
of the Constitution.[...]We are of the view
              that all transfers, deliveries and supplies of goods
              referred to in clauses (a) to (f) of clause (29-A) of
Article
              366
of the Constitution are subject to the restrictions
              and conditions mentioned in clause (1), clause (2) and
              sub-clause (a) of clause (3) of
Article 286
of the
              Constitution and the transfers and deliveries that take
              place under sub-clauses (b), (c) and (d) of clause (29-A)
              of
Article 366
of the Constitution are subject to an
              additional restriction mentioned in sub-clause (b) of
Article 286(3)
of the Constitution.
xxx
36. Even after the decision of this Court in the
State of
              Madras v. Gannon Dunkerley & Co. (Madras) Ltd.
it
              was quite possible that where a contract entered into
              in connection with the construction of a building
              consisted of two parts, namely, one part relating to the
              sale of materials used in the construction of the
              building by the contractor to the person who had
              assigned the contract and another part dealing with
              the supply of labour and services, sales tax was
              leviable on the goods which were agreed to be sold
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                             Page 18 of 59
under the first part. But sales tax could not be levied
              when the contract in question was a single and
              indivisible works contract. After the 46th Amendment
              the works contract which was an indivisible one is by
              a legal fiction altered into a contract which is divisible
              into one for sale of goods and the other for supply of
              labour and services. After the 46th Amendment, it has
              become possible for the States to levy sales tax on the
              value of goods involved in a works contract in the same
              way in which the sales tax was leviable on the price of
              the goods and materials supplied in a building contract
              which had been entered into in two distinct and
              separate parts as stated above. It could not have been
              the contention of the Revenue prior to the 46th
              Amendment that when the goods and materials had
              been supplied under a distinct and separate contract
              by the contractor for the purpose of construction of a
              building the assessment of sales tax could be made
              ignoring the restrictions and conditions incorporated in
Article 286
of the Constitution. If that was the position
              can the States contend after the 46th Amendment
              under which by a legal fiction the transfer of property
              in goods involved in a works contract was made liable
              to payment of sales tax that they are not governed by
Article 286
while levying sales tax on sale of goods
              involved in a works contract? They cannot do so. When
              the law creates a legal fiction such fiction should be
              carried to its logical end. There should not be any
              hesitation in giving full effect to it. If the power to tax a
              sale in an ordinary sense is subject to certain
              conditions and restrictions imposed by the
              Constitution, the power to tax a transaction which is
              deemed to be a sale under
Article 366(29-A)
of the
              Constitution should also be subject to the same
              restrictions and conditions[…]
                                          xxx
39.In view of the foregoing statements with regard to
              the passing of the property in goods which are involved
              in works contract and the legal fiction created by
              clause (29-A) of
Article 366
of the Constitution it is
              difficult to agree with the contention of the States that
              the properties that are transferred to the owner in the
              execution of a works contract are not the goods
              involved in the execution of the works contract, but a
              conglomerate, that is the entire building that is actually
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                              Page 19 of 59
constructed. After the 46th Amendment it is not
              possible to accede to the plea of the States that what
              is transferred in a works contract is the right in the
              immovable property.
40. We are surprised at the attitude of the States which
              have put forward the plea that on the passing of the
              46th Amendment the Constitution had conferred on the
              States a larger freedom than what they had before in
              regard to their power to levy sales tax under Entry 54
              of the State List. The 46th Amendment does no more
              than making it possible for the States to levy sales tax
              on the price of goods and materials used in works
              contracts as if there was a sale of such goods and
              materials. We do not accept the argument that sub-
              clause (b) of
Article 366(29-A)
should be read as being
              equivalent to a separate entry in List II of the Seventh
              Schedule to the Constitution enabling the States to levy
              tax on sales and purchases independent of Entry 54
              thereof. As the Constitution exists today the power of
              the States to levy taxes on sales and purchases of
              goods including the "deemed" sales and purchases of
              goods under clause (29-A) of
Article 366
is to be found
              only in Entry 54 and not outside it. We may
              recapitulate here the observations of the Constitution
              Bench in the case of Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd.- in
              which this Court has held that the operative provisions
              of the several parts of
Article 286
which imposes
              restrictions on the levy of sales tax by the States are
              intended to deal with different topics and one could not
              be projected or read into another and each one of them
              has to be obeyed while any sale or purchase is taxed
              under Entry 54 of the State List”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)

      Thus, this Court in
Builders Association
(supra) clarified that
      the power to levy tax under
Article 366(29A)(b)
did not vest in
      the States the power to tax works contracts themselves, nor did
      it allow the States to levy taxation dehors the restrictions
      imposed under
Article 286
of the
Constitution and the Act,
      1956
.
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 20 of 59
29.
In
Gannon Dunkerley & Co. & Ors. v. State of Rajasthan &
     Ors.
, reported in (1993) 1 SCC 364 (hereinafter, “Gannon
     Dunkerley-II”), once again, this Court was faced with a host of
     questions pertaining to the imposition of tax on the transfer of
     property in goods involved in the execution of works contracts.
     One of the contentions raised herein was that after the enactment
     of the Forty-sixth Amendment, no amendment was brought to the
     Act, 1956, applying its provision to the transfer of property in
     goods involved in the execution of the works contracts.
     Consequently,
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
of the Act, 1956 would not be
     applicable to such transfers. This Court held as follows:
“31. The legislative power of the States under Entry 54
              of the State List is subject to two limitations — one
              flowing from the entry itself which makes the said
              power “subject to the provisions of Entry 92-A of List
              I”, and the other flowing from the prohibition contained
              in
Article 286.
Under Entry 92-A of List I, Parliament
              has the power to make a law in respect of taxes on sale
              or purchase of goods other than newspapers where
              such sale or purchase takes place in the course of inter-
              State trade or commerce. The levy and collection of
              such tax is governed by
Article 269.
This shows that
              the legislative power under Entry 54 of the State List is
              not available in respect of transactions of sale or
              purchase which take place in the course of inter-State
              trade or commerce. Similarly clause (1) of
Article 286
prohibits the State from making a law imposing or
              authorising the imposition of a tax on the sale or
              purchase of goods where such sale or purchase takes
              place (a) outside the State or (b) in the course of the
              import of goods into or export of the goods out of the
              territory of India.
As a result of the said provision, the
              legislative power conferred under Entry 54 of the State
              List does not extend to imposing tax on a sale or
              purchase of goods which takes place outside the State
              or which takes place in the course of import or export
              of goods. In view of the aforesaid limitations imposed
              by the Constitution on the legislative power of the
              States under Entry 54 of the State List, it is beyond the
              competence of the State Legislature to make a law
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                           Page 21 of 59
imposing or authorising the imposition of a tax on
              transfer of property in goods involved in the execution
              of a works contract, with the aid of sub-clause (b) of
              clause (29-A) of
Article 366
, in respect of transactions
              which take place in the course of inter-State trade or
              commerce or transactions which constitute sales
              outside the State or sales in the course of import or
              export. Consequently, it is not permissible for a State
              to frame the legislative enactment in exercise of the
              legislative power conferred by Entry 54 in State List in
              a manner as to assume the power to impose tax on
              such transactions and thereby transgress these
              constitutional limitations. Apart from the limitations
referred to above
which curtail the ambit of the
              legislative competence of the State Legislatures, there
              is clause (3) of
Article 286
which enables Parliament to
              make a law placing restrictions and conditions on the
              exercise of the legislative power of the State under
              Entry 54 in State List in regard to the system of levy,
              rates and other incidents of tax. Such a law may be in
              relation to (a) goods declared by Parliament by law to
              be of special importance in inter-State trade or
              commerce, or (b) to taxes of the nature referred to in
              sub-clauses (b), (c) and (d) of clause (29-A) of Article
366. When such a law is enacted by Parliament the
              legislative power of the States under Entry 54 in State
              List has to be exercised subject to the restrictions and
              conditions specified in that law. In exercise of the
              power conferred by
Article 286(3)(a)
Parliament has
              enacted
Sections 14
and
15
of the Central Sales Tax
              Act, 1956. No law has, however, been made by
              Parliament in exercise of its power under
Article
              286(3)(b).
xxx
34. The question is whether in the absence of an
              amendment in the
Central Sales Tax Act
specifically
              applying its provisions to a transfer of property in
              goods involved in the execution of a works contract, the
              provisions of
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
contained in Chapter
              II can be held applicable to such a transfer. In this
              context, it may be mentioned that prior to the Forty-
sixth Amendment, a distinction was being made
              between a ‘works contract’ which was entire and
              indivisible and a works contract composed of two
              distinct and separate contracts — one, for transfer of
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 22 of 59
materials and other, for payment of remuneration for
              services and for work done. The non-availability of the
              legislative power of the States under Entry 54 of the
              State List, as construed by this Court in the
Gannon
              Dunkerley
case was confined, in its application, to
              works contracts falling in the first category, i.e.,
              contracts which were entire and indivisible and it was
              permissible for the States to impose tax on sale or
              purchase of goods where the parties had entered into
              distinct and separate contracts one for the transfer of
              materials and other for payment of service and for
              work done. The provisions of
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
of the
              Central Sales Tax Act were applicable where there
              were two separate contracts[...]
35. This would mean that as a result of the Forty-sixth
              Amendment, the contract which was single and
              indivisible has been altered by a legal fiction into a
              contract which is divisible into one for sale of goods
              and other for supply of labour and services and as a
              result such a contract which was single and indivisible
              has been brought on a par with a contract containing
              two separate agreements. Since the provisions of
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
were applicable to such contracts
              containing two separate agreements, there is no
              reason why the said provisions should not apply to a
              contract which, though single and indivisible, by legal
              fiction introduced by the Forty-sixth Amendment, has
              been altered into a contract which is divisible into one
              for sale of goods and other for labour and services[...]
36. If the legal fiction introduced by
Article 366(29-A)(b)
is carried to its logical end it follows that even in a
              single and indivisible works contract there is a deemed
              sale of the goods which are involved in the execution of
              a works contract. Such a deemed sale has all the
              incidents of a sale of goods involved in the execution of
              a works contract where the contract is divisible into
              one for sale of goods and the other for supply of labour
              and services.
37. For the reasons aforesaid, we are of the view that
              even in the absence of any amendment having been
              made in the
Central Sales Tax Act
(after the Forty-sixth
              Amendment) expressly including transfers of property
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                            Page 23 of 59
in goods involved in execution of a works contract, the
              provisions contained in
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
would be
              applicable to such transfers and the legislative power
              of the State to impose tax on such transfers under
              Entry 54 of the State List will have to be exercised
              keeping in view the provisions contained in
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
of the Central Sales Tax Act. For the same
              reasons
Sections 14
and
15
of the Central Sales Tax
              Act would also be applicable to the deemed sales
              resulting from transfer of property in goods involved in
              the execution of a works contract and the legislative
              power under Entry 54 in State List will have to be
              exercised subject to the restrictions and conditions
              prescribed in the said provisions in respect of goods
              that have been declared to be of special importance in
              inter-State trade or commerce.
xxx
41. It must, therefore, be held that while enacting a law
              imposing a tax on sale or purchase of goods under
              Entry 54 of the State List read with sub-clause (b) of
              clause (29-A) of
Article 366
of the Constitution, it is not
              permissible for the State Legislature to make a law
              imposing tax on such a deemed sale which constitutes
              a sale in the course of inter-State trade or commerce
              under
Section 3
of the Central Sales Tax Act or an
              outside sale under
Section 4
of the Central Sales Tax
              Act or sale in the course of import or export under
Section 5
of the Central Sales Tax Act. So also it is not
              permissible for the State Legislature to impose a tax on
              goods declared to be of special importance in inter-
              State trade or commerce under
Section 14
of the
              Central Sales Tax Act except in accordance with the
              restrictions and conditions contained in
Section 15
of
              the Central Sales Tax Act.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
30. After laying down the scope of power of the State legislatures to
     enact laws imposing tax on the transfer of property in goods
     involved in the execution of a works contract, the Court discussed
     various aspects relating to such laws. One important aspect
     discussed by the Court was when the tax could be imposed, on
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                            Page 24 of 59
what value it was to be imposed, and how to measure such value.
The relevant observations read thus:
“45. On behalf of the contractors, it has been urged
              that under a law imposing a tax on the transfer of
              property in goods involved in the execution of a works
              contract under Entry 54 of the State List read with
Article 366(29-A)(b)
, the tax is imposed on the goods
              which are involved in the execution of a works contract
              and the measure for levying such a tax can only be the
              value of the goods so involved and the value of the
              works contract cannot be made the measure for levying
              the tax. The submission is further that the value of such
              goods would be the cost of acquisition of the goods by
              the contractor and, therefore, the measure for levy of
              tax can only be the cost at which the goods involved in
              the execution of a works contract were obtained by the
              contractor. On behalf of the States, it has been
              submitted that since the property in goods which are
              involved in the execution of a works contract passes
              only when the goods are incorporated in the works, the
              measure for the levy of the tax would be the value of
              the goods at the time of their incorporation in the works
              as well as the cost of incorporation of the goods in the
              works. We are in agreement with the submission that
              measure for the levy of the tax contemplated by
Article
              366(29-A)(b)
is the value of the goods involved in the
              execution of a works contract.
In
Builders' Association
case it has been pointed out that in
Article 366(29-
              A)(b)
, “[t]he emphasis is on the transfer of property in
              goods (whether as goods or in some other form)”.)This
              indicates that though the tax is imposed on the transfer
              of property in goods involved in the execution of a
              works contract, the measure for levy of such imposition
              is the value of the goods involved in the execution of a
              works contract. We are, however, unable to agree with
              the contention urged on behalf of the contractors that
              the value of such goods for levying the tax can be
              assessed only on the basis of the cost of acquisition of
              the goods by the contractor. Since the taxable event is
              the transfer of property in goods involved in the
              execution of a works contract and the said transfer of
              property in such goods takes place when the goods are
              incorporated in the works, the value of the goods which
              can constitute the measure for the levy of the tax has
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 25 of 59
to be the value of the goods at the time of incorporation
              of the goods in the works and not the cost of acquisition
              of the goods by the contractor. We are also unable to
              accept the contention urged on behalf of the States that
              in addition to the value of the goods involved in the
              execution of the works contract the cost of
              incorporation of the goods in the works can be included
              in the measure for levy of tax. Incorporation of the
              goods in the works forms part of the contract relating
              to work and labour which is distinct from the contract
              for transfer of property in goods and, therefore, the cost
              of incorporation of the goods in the works cannot be
              made a part of the measure for levy of tax
              contemplated by
Article 366(29-A)(b).
xxx
47. Keeping in view the legal fiction introduced by the
              Forty-sixth Amendment whereby the works contract
              which was entire and indivisible has been altered into
              a contract which is divisible into one for sale of goods
              and other for supply of labour and services, the value
              of the goods involved in the execution of a works
              contract on which tax is leviable must exclude the
              charges which appertain to the contract for supply of
              labour and service[...]The value of the goods involved
              in the execution of a works contract will, therefore,
              have to be determined by taking into account the value
              of the entire works contract and deducting therefrom
              the charges towards labour and services which would
              cover—
(a) Labour charges for execution of the works;
(b) amount paid to a sub-contractor for labour and
              services;
(c) charges for planning, designing and architect's fees;
(d) charges for obtaining on hire or otherwise
              machinery and tools used for the execution of the
              works contract;
(e) cost of consumables such as water, electricity, fuel,
              etc. used in the execution of the works contract the
              property in which is not transferred in the course of
              execution of a works contract; and
(f) cost of establishment of the contractor to the extent
              it is relatable to supply of labour and services;
(g) other similar expenses relatable to supply of labour
              and services;
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                           Page 26 of 59
(h) profit earned by the contractor to the extent it is
              relatable to supply of labour and services.
The amounts deductible under these heads will have
              to be determined in the light of the facts of a particular
              case on the basis of the material produced by the
              contractor.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)

     Thus, this Court in
Gannon Dunkerley -II
(supra) held that the
     taxable event is the transfer of property in goods involved in the
     execution of a works contract, and that transfer occurs when the
     goods are incorporated in the “works”. Consequently, it is the
     value of goods at the time of incorporation which have to
     constitute the measure for the levy of the tax.
31. A Three-judge Bench of this Court in
Larsen and Toubro Limited
     & Anr. v. State of Karnataka & Anr.
, reported in (2014) 1 SCC
     708, was faced with the question whether taxing the sale of goods
     in an agreement for the sale of a flat by a developer/promoter was
     permissible. This Court, when dealing with the said issue, made
     some pertinent observations with regard to: (i) the interpretation
     of
Article 366(29-A)(b)
of the Constitution; (ii) the scope and
     meaning of works contract; and (iii) the application of the
     dominant intention test. They read as follows:
“56. It is important to ascertain the meaning of sub-
              clause (b) of clause (29-A) of
Article 366
of the
              Constitution. As the very title of
Article 366
shows, it is
              the definition clause. It starts by saying that in the
              Constitution unless the context otherwise requires the
              expressions defined in that article shall have the
              meanings respectively assigned to them in the article.
              The definition of expression “tax on sale or purchase of
              the goods” is contained in clause (29-A). If the first part
              of clause (29-A) is read with sub-clause (b) along with
              latter part of this clause, it reads like this: “tax on the
              sale or purchase of the goods” includes a tax on the
              transfer of property in goods (whether as goods or in
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                            Page 27 of 59
some other form) involved in the execution of a works
              contract and such transfer, delivery or supply of any
              goods shall be deemed to be a sale of those goods by
              the person making the transfer, delivery or supply and
              a purchase of those goods by the person to whom such
              transfer, delivery or supply is made. The definition of
              “goods” in clause (12) is inclusive. It includes all
              materials, commodities and articles. The expression
              “goods” has a broader meaning than merchandise.
              Chattels or movables are goods within the meaning of
              clause (12). Sub-clause (b) refers to transfer of property
              in goods (whether as goods or in some other form)
              involved in the execution of a works contract. The
              expression “in some other form” in the bracket is of
              utmost significance as by this expression the ordinary
              understanding of the term “goods” has been enlarged
              by bringing within its fold goods in a form other than
              goods. Goods in some other form would thus mean
              goods which have ceased to be chattels or movables or
              merchandise and become attached or embedded to
              earth. In other words, goods which have by
              incorporation become part of immovable property are
              deemed as goods. The definition of “tax on the sale or
              purchase of goods” includes a tax on the transfer of
              property in the goods as goods or which have lost its
              form as goods and have acquired some other form
              involved in the execution of a works contract.
57. Viewed thus, a transfer of property in goods under
              clause (29-A)(b) of
Article 366
is deemed to be a sale of
              the goods involved in the execution of a works contract
              by the person making the transfer and the purchase of
              those goods by the person to whom such transfer is
              made.
58. The States have now been conferred with the
              power to tax indivisible contracts of works[…]The
              taxable event is a deemed sale.
59. […] It is open to the States to divide the works
              contract into two separate contracts by legal fiction : (i)
              contract for sale of goods involved in the works
              contract, and (ii) for supply of labour and service. By
              the Forty-sixth Amendment, the States have been
              empowered to bifurcate the contract and to levy sales
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                            Page 28 of 59
tax on the value of the material in the execution of the
              works contract.
60. Whether the contract involved a dominant intention
              to transfer the property in goods, in our view, is not at
              all material. It is not necessary to ascertain what is the
              dominant intention of the contract. Even if the
              dominant intention of the contract is not to transfer the
              property in goods and rather it is the rendering of
              service or the ultimate transaction is transfer of
              immovable property, then also it is open to the States
              to levy sales tax on the materials used in such contract
              if it otherwise has elements of works contract. The view
              taken by a two-Judge Bench of this Court in Rainbow
              Colour Lab that the division of the contract after the
              Forty-sixth Amendment can be made only if the works
              contract involved a dominant intention to transfer the
              property in goods and not in contracts where the
              transfer of property takes place as an incident of
              contract of service is no longer good law, Rainbow
              Colour Lab has been expressly overruled by a three-
Judge Bench in Associated Cement.
xxx
68. There is no doubt that to attract
Article 366(29-A)(b)
there has to be a works contract but then what is its
              meaning. The term “works contract” needs to be
              understood in a manner that Parliament had in its view
              at the time of the Forty-sixth Amendment and which is
              more appropriate to
Article 366(29-A)(b).
xxx
72. In our opinion, the term “works contract” in
Article
              366(29-A)(b)
is amply wide and cannot be confined to
              a particular understanding of the term or to a particular
              form. The term encompasses a wide range and many
              varieties of contract. Parliament had such wide
              meaning of “works contract” in its view at the time of
              the Forty-sixth Amendment. The object of insertion of
              clause (29-A) in
Article 366
was to enlarge the scope of
              the expression “tax on sale or purchase of goods” and
              overcome Gannon Dunkerley (1). Seen thus, even if in
              a contract, besides the obligations of supply of goods
              and materials and performance of labour and services,
              some additional obligations are imposed, such contract
              does not cease to be works contract. The additional
              obligations in the contract would not alter the nature of
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                           Page 29 of 59
contract so long as the contract provides for a contract
              for works and satisfies the primary description of
              works contract. Once the characteristics or elements of
              works contract are satisfied in a contract then
              irrespective of additional obligations, such contract
              would be covered by the term “works contract”.
              Nothing in
Article 366(29-A)(b)
limits the term “works
              contract” to contract for labour and service only. The
              learned Advocate General for Maharashtra was right
              in his submission that the term “works contract”
              cannot be confined to a contract to provide labour and
              services but is a contract for undertaking or bringing
              into existence some “works”. We are also in agreement
              with the submission of Mr K.N. Bhat that the term
              “works contract” in
Article 366(29-A)(b)
takes within its
              fold all genre of works contract and is not restricted to
              one specie of contract to provide for labour and services
              alone. Parliament had all genre of works contract in
              view when clause (29-A) was inserted in
Article 366.
xxx
87. It seems to us (and that is the view taken in some
              of the decisions) that a contract may involve both a
              contract of work and labour and a contract of sale of
              goods. In our opinion, the distinction between contract
              for sale of goods and contract for work (or service) has
              almost diminished in the matters of composite contract
              involving both a contract of work/labour and a contract
              for sale for the purposes of
Article 366(29-A)(b).
Now by
              legal fiction under
Article 366(29-A)(b)
, it is permissible
              to make such contract divisible by separating the
              transfer of property in goods as goods or in some other
              form from the contract of work and labour. A transfer
              of property in goods under clause (29-A)(b) of
Article
              366
is deemed to be a sale of goods involved in the
              execution of a works contract by the person making the
              transfer and the purchase of those goods by the person
              to whom such transfer is made. For this reason, the
              traditional decisions which hold that the substance of
              the contract must be seen have lost their significance.
              What was viewed traditionally has to be now
              understood in light of the philosophy of
Article 366(29-
              A)
.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                            Page 30 of 59
32. This Court in the
Kone Elevator India Private Limited v. State
     of Tamil Nadu
, reported in (2014) 7 SCC 1, and in State of
     Karnataka & Ors v. M/s Pro Lab & Ors., reported in (2015) 8
     SCC 557 respectively, once again reiterated that the dominant
     intention test is not applicable when determining whether a
     particular contract is a works contract for the purposes of
Article
     366 (29-A) (b).
In
Larsen and Toubro
(supra) and Pro lab (supra)
     respectively, this Court specifically reiterated that the ruling in
Rainbow Colour Lab
(supra) was overturned by a Three-judge
     Bench of this Court in
Associated Cement Companies Ltd v.
     Commissioner of Customs
, reported in (2001) 4 SCC 593.
33. The position of law with regard to taxation of goods transferred
     under works contracts after the enactment of the Forty-sixth
     Amendment may be summarised as follows:
a. Vide
Article 366(29-A)(b)
, the States can only tax the transfer
           of property in goods (whether as goods or in some other
           form) involved in the execution of a works contract and not
           the works contract itself;
b. States cannot exercise the power conferred upon them
           under
Article 366(29-A)(b)
dehors the restrictions imposed
           under
Article 286
of the
Constitution and the Act, 1956
(specifically
Sections 3
,
4
,
5
,
14
and
15
respectively);
c. Indivisible works contracts are now, by virtue of the legal
           fiction created under
Article 366(29-A)(b)
, divided into two
           parts, one for the sale of goods and the other for the supply
           of labour and services;
d. A transfer of property in goods under
Article 366(29-A)(b)
is
           deemed to be a sale of the goods.
Article 366(29-A)(b)
serves
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                         Page 31 of 59
to bring transactions where essential ingredients of “sale”
           defined in the Act, 1930 are absent within the ambit of sale
           or purchase for the purposes of levy of sales tax. In other
           words, the transfer of movable property in a works contract
           is deemed to be a sale even though it may not be considered
           as “sale” within the meaning of the Act, 1930;
e. The term “works contract” in
Article 366(29-A)(b)
takes
           within its fold all genres of works contracts and is not
           restricted to one particular specie of contract to provide for
           labour and services alone; and

        f. The dominant nature test is no longer applicable and has
           lost its significance where transactions are of the nature
           contemplated in
Article 366(29-A).
(iii) Whether the ink, chemical and other processing materials
        are liable to the levy of tax under
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the
        Act, 1948?
34.
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the Act, 1948, levies tax on the “transfer of
     property in goods (whether as goods or in some other form) involved
     in the execution of a works contract”.
35. In the case at hand, the principal question that falls for our
     consideration is whether there has been a transfer of property in
     the ink and other processing materials used for the purpose of
     printing lottery tickets, thereby making them liable to the levy of
     tax under
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the Act, 1948.
36. The principal contention put forward by the appellant is that the
     lottery tickets are not ‘goods’ and are rather ‘actionable claims’.
     Since ‘actionable claims’ are not considered as ‘goods’ under
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                         Page 32 of 59
Section 2(d)
of the Act, 1948, according to the appellant, the
     lottery tickets cannot be brought within the ambit of
Section
     3F(1)(b)
of the Act, 1948. Consequently, it is not liable to pay any
     tax under the said section.
37. The aforesaid contention of the appellant is devoid of any merit.
On a close reading of
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the Act, 1948, it is amply
     clear that the tax levied is not on the ‘goods’ produced in
     pursuance of a works contract, i.e., the lottery tickets in the case
     at hand. The tax under
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the Act, 1948, is rather
     on the ‘goods’ which are involved in the execution of the works
     contract. Thus, the appellant's contention is misplaced, as it
     equates lottery tickets with goods involved in the execution of the
     works contract, which is clearly not the case.
38. In order to sustain a levy of tax under
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the Act,
     1948, three conditions must be fulfilled: (i) there must be a works
     contract; (ii) the goods should have been involved in the execution
     of the works contract; and (iii) the property in those goods must
     be transferred to a third party either as goods or in some other
     form.
39. In the facts of the present case, it is not in dispute that the first
     two conditions are fulfilled. The appellant has admitted that the
     contract for printing lottery tickets is a works contract. Based on
     the judgments of this Court discussed above, it cannot be said
     otherwise. Further, from the record, it is clear that the ink,
     chemical and other processing material were involved in the
     printing of the lottery tickets.
40. The primary subject of disagreement is with regard to the third
     condition. On one hand, the appellant contends that the ink and
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                        Page 33 of 59
chemical are consumed in the process of printing the tickets and
     thus,    there   is   no   transfer   of   property   in   those   goods.
     Consequently, no tax under
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the Act is
     maintainable. On the other hand, the Revenue contends that the
     ink and chemicals have been transferred to the third party in
     execution of the work contract, i.e., printing work.
41. This Court and various High Courts have, in a plethora of
     judgments, discussed this aspect of the transfer of property in
     goods involved in the execution of works contracts. For the
     convenience of exposition, these cases are categorised under three
     broad heads, in accordance with the
ratio
laid down in
the
     judgments: (a) tangible transfer of property; (b) no transfer of
     property due to consumption of goods; and (c) transfer of property
     despite consumption of goods.
a. Tangible Transfer of property
42.
In
Matushree
(supra) the question before the Bombay High Court
     was whether the coloured shade/print passed on to the fabric in
     the course of dyeing and printing amounts to transfer of property
     of the materials used in dyeing and printing under the
     Maharashtra Sales Tax on the Transfer of Property in Goods
     involved in the Execution of Works Contracts Act, 1989 (for short,
     “Maharashtra Works Contracts Act”). In the said case, the
     primary contention of the respondent was that the colours, dyes
     and chemicals are consumed in the process of dyeing and
     therefore, the property in those goods was not transferred as goods
     or in any other form. Rejecting the said contention, the Bombay
     High Court held as follows:
“32. […]According to Mr. Joshi, unless the materials
              used in dyeing and printing pass in some or the other
              physical form, there is no passing of property in goods.
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                             Page 34 of 59
In other words, according to Mr. Joshi if the property in
              goods passes as a result of some chemical reaction,
              then such passing of the property in goods is by
              accretion and not by transfer of the property in goods.
              The arguments put forth by Mr. Joshi can be best
              understood by referring to the different forms of water
              (as and by way of analogy), as stated hereinbelow:
"Water in the normal temperature is in liquid form,
                in high temperature it is in the vapour form and in
                low temperature it is in the solid form. These are all
                different physical forms of water. However, when
                the water is subjected to electrolysis and an electric
                current is passed through water, due to chemical
                reaction, the water molecules break into two,
                namely, hydrogen and oxygen. Thus, on chemical
                reaction the water is converted into a chemical form
                or gaseous form comprising of hydrogen and
                oxygen. According to Mr. Joshi, property in water
                can be said to pass, only if, there is transfer in any
                physical form (i.e., either in liquid form, solid form
                or vapour form) and not in its chemical form or
                gaseous form (i.e., as hydrogen and oxygen)."
33. We see no merit in the contentions raised by the
              respondents. When the term "sale" in the Works
              Contracts Act has been defined to include by a deemed
              fiction, the transfer of property in goods in any form,
              there is no reason to restrict the definition to cover only
              those transactions which involve transfer of goods in
              some physical form and not in some chemical form. In
              our opinion, the words "some other form" used in the
              definition of "sale" in the Works Contracts Act apply to
              the transfer of property in goods in its every form, i.e.,
              physical form or any other form, including the chemical
              form. In other words, transfer of property in goods used
              in the execution of a works contract, either in its
              physical form or any other form including the chemical
              form constitutes sale under the Works Contracts Act. In
              the present case, the coloured shade is passed to the
              fabrics due to the chemical reaction of the materials
              used in the process of dyeing. Coloured shade may be
              due to the chemical reaction of one or more materials.
              The coloured shade represents the inherent chemical
              property of the materials used. Once there is passing
              of the chemical property of the materials used in the
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                            Page 35 of 59
execution of works contract, then under the Works
              Contracts Act, there is a deemed sale of the materials
              used in the execution of the works contract.
              Accordingly we hold that in the process of dyeing, the
              coloured shade passed on to the fabrics constitutes
              sale of the materials used in dyeing, under the Works
              Contracts Act.
xxx
36. […]In the present case, due to the chemical reaction
              of colours, chemicals and dyes, the inherent property
              in those goods are passed on to the fabrics. The fact
              that after the inherent property in those goods is
              transferred to the fabrics the remaining solution is
              thrown out as waste or affluent, does not in any way
              affect the taxability on transfer of the property in goods
              already effected on the fabrics. Admittedly, after
              dyeing, the solution made of colours, chemicals and
              dyes is thrown as waste, because, on transfer of the
              property in the form of coloured shade, the said
              solution becomes worthless. Therefore, the Legislature
              has sought to tax the property in goods which passes
              and not the remnants or the affluent that remain after
              the passing of the inherent property in those goods.
xxx
39. Now, turning to the second question, the Tribunal
              has held that the coloured shade passed on to the
              fabrics represents very small quantity of the materials
              used in dyeing and hence the Works Contracts Act is
              not applicable. As rightly contended by the counsel for
              the Revenue, under the Works Contract Act, what is
              relevant is the passing of property in goods used in the
              execution of the works contract and not the quantity of
              the material that passes. It is not the case of the
              respondents that the chemical solution used for dyeing
              retains its property even after dyeing. In fact, it is the
              specific case of the respondents that the solution
              prepared for dyeing the grey fabrics of one customer,
              cannot be used for dyeing the grey fabrics of another
              customer. It is the case of the respondents that on
              completion of dyeing, of a particular fabric, the
              chemical solution becomes worthless and is thrown as
              a waste. Therefore, it is clear that on completion of
              dyeing, the entire property of the materials used in
              dyeing are passed on and what remains as solution is
              nothing but the residue or the waste. In other words,
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                           Page 36 of 59
the coloured shade on the fabrics represents the entire
              property of the materials used in dyeing. Therefore, it
              was not open to the Tribunal to hold that the coloured
              shade represents only very small quantity of the
              materials used for dyeing and, therefore, the Act is not
              applicable[…]”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)

     Thus, the Bombay High Court interpreted the meaning of the
     phrase “some other form” to include the transfer of goods not just
     in their physical form but also in other forms, such as in their
     chemical form. Having regard to the facts at hand, the High Court
     held that the inherent property in the colours, dyes and chemicals
     could be said to have been transferred in their chemical form to
     the cloth which was being dyed.
43.
In
Teaktex Processing Complex Limited v. State of Kerala
,
     reported in 2002 SCC OnLine Ker 720, the Kerala High Court
     addressed a similar question, i.e., whether dyes and chemicals
     used in the process of dyeing should be considered as
     consumables under
Section 5C
of the Kerala General Sales Tax
     Act, 1963. The Kerala High Court held that the ‘dye’ used in the
     process cannot be treated as a consumable. According to the High
     Court, if an item which is used in the process is not in existence
     in any form in the end-product, then it is to be treated as a
     consumable. Since the dyes used existed in the form of colour, the
     High Court held that it was inevitable that the property in them
     was transferred.
44.
In
Hari and Company
(supra), the respondent-assessee was
     engaged in the business of photocopying, and for this purpose, it
     used its own paper and ink. The question before the Bombay High
     Court was whether the paper and ink used by the respondent-
     assessee in the course of executing photocopying works would
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 37 of 59
constitute a transfer of property, and thus be liable to the levy of
     tax under the Maharashtra Works Contracts Act.
The Bombay
     High Court, relying on its own decision in
Matushree
(supra), held
     that the moment paper and ink changed hands, it could be
     construed as a sale within the works contract.
45. In Commissioner of Sales Tax, Maharashtra State, Bombay
     v. Ramdas Sobhraj, reported in 2012 SCC OnLine Bom 1608,
     a reference was made by the Maharashtra Sales Tax Tribunal to
     the Bombay High Court. The respondent-assessee was engaged in
     the works of plate and film making. The activities undertaken by
     the respondent-assessee are described as follows by the Bombay
     High Court:
“In the job-work of plate making the customers of the
              respondent-assessee supplies to the respondent-
              assessee duly grained zinc or aluminium plates. On
              receipt, plates are coated by dipping in water wherein
              gun bio chromate is dissolved. Thereafter positives are
              exposed on the treated plates by halogen lamps. The
              image is formed by the positives on the plates and the
              same is developed in the solution of calcium, lactic acid
              ferric chloride, cupric chloride and hydrochloride. The
              plates are thereafter washed in industrial solvent, as
              a result of which all the chemicals are washed out and
              only the images remain on the plates. Thereafter,
              lacquer and ink are applied on the plates. On a specific
              query, we were informed that lacquer and ink are
              applied on the plates so as to ensure that the images
              on the plates do not get disturbed/smudged by
              constant use. After the above process the plates are
              dried and again washed with water and returned to
              the customers.
The activity of pure labour job consists of positive
              making. In this activity, the customer supplies a design
              to the respondent-assessee for the purpose of positive
              making. The respondent-assessee thereafter takes a
              photograph of the design in four different colours, i.e.,
              yellow, red, blue and black for obtaining the final
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 38 of 59
negatives. Out of the aforesaid final negatives the
              respondent-assessee obtains/prepares a number of
              positives as required by its customers. It is the case of
              the respondent-assessee that the aforesaid activity is
              highly skilled activity requiring expertise and skill.”

     The question that fell for consideration before the Bombay High
     Court was whether the tribunal was justified in holding that there
     was no transfer of property in ink and lacquer when undertaking
     the works in the post Forty-sixth Amendment era. The Bombay
     High Court, relying upon its decision in
Matushree
(supra), held
     that lacquer and ink were materials used in the plate making
     process, and the property in the same is passed on in the
     execution of the contract under the Maharashtra Works Contracts
     Act.
46.
In M/s
Mohan Offset Printers v. State of Tamil Nadu
, reported
     in 2010 SCC OnLine Mad 587, the petitioner-assessee was
     engaged in the business of printing and supplying labels, cartons
     and drapers for notebooks on a work contract basis. While the
     paper was supplied by the customers, the printing ink was
     prepared by the petitioner-assessee. The petitioner in the said
     case sought to challenge the tribunal’s decision, which held that
     the printing ink used by the petitioner in the works contract would
     amount to a transfer of property, and thus was liable to sales tax
     under
Section 3B
of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959.
Section 3B
of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959 dealt
     with “levy of tax on the transfer of goods involved in works
     contract”. It was the petitioner’s contention that when ink is used
     for printing the materials on a work contract basis, such ink is
     consumed and no transfer of property in the ink occurs. Rejecting
     the contention of the petitioner, the Madras High Court held that
     in the printing work undertaken, the ink is transferred onto the
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 39 of 59
papers in a tangible manner and without it, the works contract
     would not be completed. Therefore, the printing ink could not be
     considered a consumable and is liable to be taxed under
Section
     3B
of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959.
47.
In
Unique Traders v. Commercial Tax Officer-1
, reported in
     2020 SCC OnLine Mad 1155, a Three-judge Bench of the Madras
     High Court was hearing a reference that originated when a
     Division Bench, noting conflicting decisions among other Division
     Benches of the High Court, deemed it necessary for the law on the
     subject to be settled. The appellant in this case was involved in
     performing job work, wherein it would receive polythene rolls from
     various parties and thereafter print on them using purchased
     ethyl acetate, toluene, and ink. The question before the court was
     whether the ink used in printing would amount to a transfer of
     property and thus be liable to tax under
Section 3B
of the Tamil
     Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. In resolving this issue, the
     Three-judge Bench extensively examined the various precedents
     of this Court, its own decisions, and those of other High Courts.
     The court answered the reference in favour of the revenue and
     held that the ink used in printing would be liable to be taxed under
Section 3B
of the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959. In
     addition, the court in the case also delineated very clearly as to
     which precedents of its High Court on this aspect of law were
     binding and which were erroneous in law.
48. The issue before this Court in
Xerox Modicorp Ltd v. State of
     Karnataka
, reported in (2005) 7 SCC 380, was whether toners
     and developers supplied in pursuance of maintenance contracts
     entered into between the parties were subject to the levy of sales
     tax. It was the contention of the appellant-assessee therein that
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                        Page 40 of 59
the toners and developers are consumed in the process of the
     execution of the maintenance agreement itself, and by virtue of
     Explanation I to Rule 6(4) of the Karnataka Sales Tax Rules, such
     consumables could not be made subject to the levy of sales tax.
     Rejecting this contention, this Court held as follows:
“16. We have considered the rival submissions. As set
              out hereinabove the word consumable in Explanation I
              to Rule 6(4) refers to such items which get consumed
              before the property in the goods can pass. We are
              informed that toners and developers are liquids which
              are put in the Xerox machine. They perform, to put it
              simply, the same function as ink in printers.
Under the
              Sale of Goods Act
if specified goods in a deliverable
              state are delivered the property in the goods passes. It
              could not be disputed that the toner and developer will
              be delivered in bottles/containers. In FSMA supplies
              are left with the customer. Thus clause 9 of the section
              dealing with the customer's obligation provides as
              follows:
“The Customer
                ***
9. shall be accountable to MX for xerographic
                supplies stock left in trust with the customer who
                shall ensure that such stock is used only in the
                equipment under this agreement. MX reserves the
                right to charge the customer for any stocks which
                are unaccounted for, to MX's satisfaction, at the
                then prevailing MX prices.”
              Thus for the extra stock there is a provision which
              provides that it is left in trust. However once the toner
              and developer are put into the machine they are no
              longer in trust. This is because the property in the toner
              and developer passed the moment they are put into the
              Xerox machine. Now they belonged to the customer. At
              this stage they are tangible movables in which
              property can pass. This is clear from the provision that
              the appellants will charge for unaccounted stock at
              prevailing prices. That they are goods in which
              property can pass is also clear from the fact that in
              SSMA the customer has to buy the toner and developer.
If as now claimed they are consumables in which
              property cannot be transferred how are the appellants
              charging for toners and developers. In our view, Mr Iyer
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                           Page 41 of 59
is right. The sale i.e. transfer of property takes place
              before the goods are consumed. The transfer takes
              place in respect of tangible goods. Just like petrol is
              consumed after sale or ink is consumed after sale in
              this case also the toners and developers get consumed
              after sale. The property passes the moment they are
              put in the machine. At that stage they are not
              consumed but are tangible goods in which property can
              pass.”
                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
49. In the aforementioned cases, the Courts were primarily dealing
     with situations where the transfer of property resulted in a
     tangible and observable presence in the final product. The judicial
     reasoning focused on how the inherent properties of the goods
     were physically incorporated and remained as a component of the
     works delivered to the customer.
b. No transfer of property due to consumption of goods
50.
In
Pest Control
(supra), the petitioner was engaged in providing
     services such as pest control, household disinfection, and anti-
     termite treatment. The question before the Patna High Court was
     whether there was a transfer of property in the chemicals that
     were involved in providing the aforementioned services. The court
     upheld the contention of the petitioner that there was no transfer
     of property in the chemicals and held as follows:
“12. From the plain reading of sub-clause (b) of clause
              (29-A) of
article 366
of the Constitution of India it
              appears that there must be a transfer of property in
              goods whether as goods or in some other form involved
              in the execution of a works contract. Clause (12) of
article 366
and
section 2(h)
of the Bihar Finance Act,
              1981 give some indication as to what is meant by
              "goods". The inclusive definition in the Constitution as
              well as in the
Bihar Finance Act
refers to materials,
              commodities and articles or all kinds of movable
              property, all materials, commodities and articles, as
              such or in some other form. Before a tax can be levied
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 42 of 59
on a works contract, it must be established that there
              is transfer of property in goods involved in the
              execution of a works contract. The goods may have
              undergone a change of form. But in whatever form,
              there must be transfer of property in goods. This
              presupposes that the goods existed and that either in
              its original form or in some other form, it is transferred
              to the principal by the contractor. If the goods do not
              exist in any form whatsoever and are consumed in the
              processor execution of the work, can it be said that in
              such a case there is a transfer of property in goods? In
              my view, the transfer of goods implies the existence of
              the goods in some form or the other. If the goods do not
              exist, there is no question of transfer of property in
              goods.
In
Northern India Caterers (India) Ltd. v. Lt.
              Governor of Delhi
[1978] 42 STC 386 ; (1978) 1 SCR
              557, the Supreme Court quoted with approval a
              passage from Electa B. Merrill v. James W. Hodson
              LRA 1915-B 481, dealing with a case of supply of food
              or drink to customers, wherein it was held that such
              supply did not partake the character of a sale of goods.
              It was observed: "The necessary incident of this service
              or ministry is the consumption of the food required.
              This consumption involves destruction and nothing
              remains of what is consumed to which the right of
              property can be said to attach. Before consumption title
              does not pass; after consumption there remains
              nothing to become the subject of title.”
13. While it is true that in view of the
Constitution
              (Forty-sixth Amendment) Act, 1982
, what was earlier
              considered to be one indivisible contract is by legal
              fiction altered into a contract which is divisible into one
              for the sale of goods and the other for supply of labour
              and services. It is now possible for the State to levy
              sales tax on the value of goods involved in a works
              contract. But even so this presupposes the existence of
              goods, because there can be no transfer of property in
              goods unless the goods themselves exist. In the instant
              case, it is not disputed that the chemicals are used for
              the purpose of eradicating pests. The chemicals are
              sprayed through machines so that when the process
              ends, nothing tangible remains in which property is
              transferred. By the process of spraying or applying
              chemicals, a place is treated against insects and pests
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                            Page 43 of 59
but in the process the chemicals are themselves
              consumed and there remains nothing in which
              property is transferred. I am of the view that a
              transaction as the one in question really does not
              involve transfer of any goods as understood in sub-
clause (b) of clause (29-A) of
article 366
of the
              Constitution of India or under the provisions of the
Bihar Finance Act, 1981
. It is a service contract pure
              and simple and does not involve any sale of goods
              since there are no goods in which property can be
              transferred. I am, therefore, of the view that the
              contract between the petitioner-company and M/s.
              Tata Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. is a mere service contract for
              eradication of pests, rodents, termites, etc., and does
              not fall within the purview of a contract for the supply
              of goods as envisaged under the Constitution of India
              and the Bihar Finance Act, 1981. In such a transaction,
              there being no transfer of property in goods, no sales
              tax is leviable under the provisions of the
Bihar
              Finance Act, 1981
.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
51. The Kerala High Court in M.K. Velu (supra) dealt with whether
     sales tax could be levied on the fireworks used in execution of a
     contract for fireworks display. Holding in the negative, the court
     held as follows:
“4. […]The only further question is whether the
              Appellate Tribunal was justified in holding that no
              transfer of property takes place in the display of
              fireworks. As the explosives are consumed, nothing
              tangible remains, in which property could be
              transferred. It is a matter of common knowledge that
              in the display of fireworks, the explosives are spent
              and do not remain, once the display takes place. In the
              process of execution of the work, the goods themselves
              (explosives) ceased to exist. No tangible property
              remains. So, there could be no transfer of property. We
              concur with the decision of the Patna High Court in
Pest
              Control India Ltd. v. Union of India
[1989] 75 STC 188.
              There can be no transfer of property unless the goods
              themselves exist. That is not the case herein. The
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 44 of 59
decision of the Appellate Tribunal taking the said view
              is justified in law.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
52.   In Dynamic Industrial and Cleaning Services (P) Ltd. v. State
      of Kerala & Anr, reported in 1994 SCC OnLine Ker 379, the
      petitioner company was engaged in the business of cleaning of
      boilers in plants like thermal power stations and fertiliser
      complexes. For the process of cleaning, the petitioner used
      chemicals like citric acid, hydrochloric acid and the like, after
      determining the precise type of cleaning agent to be used in a
      particular plant. The petitioner, being aggrieved by the levy of sales
      tax on these chemicals, contended that the chemicals are
      consumed in the process of cleaning and removing the impurities
      in the plants, and as such no transfer of goods was involved.
      Accepting the said contention, the Kerala High Court held as
      follows:
“2. A bare perusal of the above Explanation is
              sufficient to show that transfer of property in goods
              (whether as goods or in some other form) is the sine
              qua non for its application. The mere execution of a
              works contract does not by itself attract liability for tax
              under the Act unless it is accompanied by transfer of
              property in goods, involved in the execution of the
              contract. The emphasis is on the transfer of property in
              goods-Builders
Association of India v. Union of India
[1989] 73 STC 370 (SC) at page 396. When goods used
              in the process of executing a works contract are
              consumed in the process, as in the case of the
              chemicals used by the petitioner or fuel and power,
              there is no transfer of any goods from the contractor to
              the awarder of the contract, attracting liability to tax.
I
              draw inspiration for this conclusion from the decision
              of this Court in
Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax v.
              Thomas Stephen and Co. Ltd.
[1987] 66 STC 34 ;
              (1987) 1 KLT 161, (paragraph 5) which was affirmed
              by the Supreme Court in Deputy Commissioner v.
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                            Page 45 of 59
Thomas Stephen & Co. Ltd. [1988] 69 STC 320 (at
              pages 324-325); (1988) 1 KLT 568 (paragraph 12).
3. The chemicals are being used by the petitioner only
              in aid of the work undertaken by it, as a cleaning agent
              for cleaning the boilers in the plant and they are
              extinguished in the process. They are not transferred
              to the awarder in any form, either as goods or
              otherwise. The work is more or less a labour contract,
              in which the petitioner utilises the chemicals just as it
              uses any other item of its machinery or fuel or power
              in the performance of the work. There is no transfer of
              property in goods and no sale liable for tax under
              Explanation 3(A).”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
53.   In Microtol Sterilization Services Pvt Ltd v. State of Kerala
      reported in 2009 SCC OnLine Ker 1480 the question before the
      Kerala High Court was whether there was any transfer of property
      in ethylene oxide, which was used in the process of sterilization of
      goods. The Court held as follows:
“5. Besides the above, section 5C(1)(c)(iii) provides for cost
          of consumables used in the execution of works contract
          eligible for deduction in the determination of taxable
          turnover on works contract. It is obvious from the section
          and the provisions providing for determination of taxable
          turnover on works contract that sales tax is payable only
          on the value of goods that got transferred from the
          contractor in the execution of the works contract.
          Consumables are items which are lost in the course of
          execution of works contract. Even though consumables
          are lost to the contractor, it is not a gain for the awarder.
          In other words, they are used up in the process of
          executing the work. Sterilisation is a process by which
          goods are made free of germs and in order to retain the
          quality of goods, only packed commodities are subject to
          sterilisation with the use of ethylene oxide. The
          assessee's representative present in court explained the
          sterilisation process as one involving the use of a compact
          airtight room wherein the goods to be sterilised in packed
          form are exposed to ethylene oxide for around six hours
          and then the said gas is allowed to escape after mixing
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                            Page 46 of 59
with carbon dioxide at higher levels through chimney.
Ethylene oxide is a toxic gas which is highly inflammable.
          After the duration of sterilisation, the gas is released to
          air after neutralising it with carbon-dioxide. Admittedly
          after sterilisation goods do not retain any trace of
          ethylene oxide which is completely released in the air.
          Therefore, there is no transfer of ethylene oxide from the
          assessee to the customers in the course of sterilisation of
          the goods. On the other hand, it is used up as a
          consumable in the service rendered by the assessee, the
          value of which is to be excluded in the determination of
          taxable turnover of works contract under
section 5C
of the
          Act. The decision of the Patna High Court in the case of
          application of pesticide and the other decisions of this
          court in the case of fireworks squarely apply to the facts
          of this case. The decisions cited by the Government
          Pleader will not apply to this case because those are
          cases involving dyeing work where the dye is transferred
          to the fabric supplied by the customer and is retained in
          the cloth. We are therefore unable to uphold the order of
          the Tribunal confirming the levy and demand of tax on the
          value of ethylene oxide used up in sterilisation work. We
          therefore allow the sales tax revision by reversing the
          order of the Tribunal confirming the assessment and by
          declaring that no tax is leviable on the value of ethylene
          oxide used in sterilisation work.”
                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
54.
In the cases of
Pest Control
(supra), M.K. Velu (supra), Dynamic
      Cleaning (supra) and Microtol Sterilization (supra) respectively,
      the overwhelming focus of the courts was on the continued
      existence of the good as a prerequisite for a transfer of property.
      The courts in these cases operated on the notion that if the goods
      are completely consumed or disappear during the execution of the
      works, leaving no physical trace in the final product, then no
      transfer can logically occur. Since a third party does not receive
      the goods themselves in any form, the transaction is purely one of
      service, and the material used is merely a consumable whose
      property is extinguished rather than transferred.
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                         Page 47 of 59
c. Transfer of property despite consumption of goods
55.
In
Enviro Chemicals v. State of Kerala
, reported in 2011 SCC
      OnLine Ker 3685, the petitioner was engaged in providing a
      service of chemical treatment of effluent water. For the purpose of
      treating the effluent water, the petitioner used “envirofloc”, a
      chemical product developed by it. Envirofloc was consumed during
      the treatment of the effluent water. In such circumstances, the
      question before the Three-judge Bench of the Kerala High Court
      was whether to treat envirofloc as a consumable and exempt it
      from the levy of sales tax under the
Kerala General Sales Tax Act,
      1963
. The contention of the petitioner in the said case was that
      since the chemical was consumed and used up, there was no
      transfer of property. On the other hand, the revenue contended
      that the chemical was transferred the moment it was put into the
      effluent water, and the fact that it was subsequently consumed
      would not absolve the petitioner of its liability to pay tax as there
      was transfer of property. By a 2:1 majority, the court accepted the
      contention of the revenue. Justice K.M. Joseph (as His Lordship
      then was), speaking for the majority, made the following pertinent
      observations:
“32. That the chemical in question is goods, is beyond
          doubt. It cannot be disputed that the assessee was the
          owner of the goods in question, namely, the chemical. It
          is obviously the intention of the parties that the assessee
          must use the chemical in the effluent treatment process.
          It is equally indisputable that the assessee has actually
          used it. No doubt, in the judgment of the apex court in
Xerox Modicorp Ltd. v. State of Karnataka
[2005] 142 STC
          209, the apex court found that the toners and developers
          are liquids put into the xerox machine and they perform
          essentially the same function as ink in the printers and
          the court also relied on the provision in the contract that
          the assessees in the said case would charge for the
          unaccounted stock at prevailing prices. By using the
          chemical, the petitioner/assessee rendered the effluent
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                         Page 48 of 59
compliant with the standards. It could probably be said
          that in the case of the toner and developers as the
          function is that of ink in printers, it shows up in the final
          product of the xerox machines.
But, the decision of the
          apex court is not based on there being any requirement
          that the items which are used should exist in any form in
          the resultant product which is the principle
laid down by
this court in
Teaktex Processing Complex Limited v. State
          of Kerala
[2004] 136 STC 435 and also in
Microtrol
          Sterilization Services Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Kerala
[2009] 26
          VST 213 (Ker).
33. We would think that the principle "quicquid plantatur
          solo, solo cedit" is a principle which is apposite in the
          context of a building and engineering contract. We get the
          following account of the principle "quicquid plantatur solo,
          solo cedit":
"The well-known principle is that the property in all
            materials and fittings, once incorporated in or affixed
            to a building, will pass to the free-holder quicquid
            plantatur solo, solo cedit. As soon as materials of any
            description are used in a building or other erection,
            they cease to be the contractor's property and become
            that of the free-holder. The employer under a building
            contract may not necessarily be the free- holder, but
            may be a lessee or licensee, or even have no interest in
            the land at all, as in the case of a sub-contract.
            However, once the builder has affixed materials, the
            property in them passes from him, and at least as
            against him, they become the absolute property of his
            employer, whatever the latter's tenure of or title to the
            lands. The builder has no right to detach them from the
            soil or building, even though the building owner may
            himself be entitled to sever them as against some other
            person—for example, tenant's fixtures. Nor can the
            builder reclaim them if the building owner or anyone
            else has subsequently severed from the soil.
            Materials worked by one, into the property of another,
            becomes part of that property. This is equally true
            whether it be fixed or moveable property. Bricks built
            into a wall becomes part of the house, thread stitched
            into a coat which is under repair, or planks and nails
            and pitch worked into a ship under repair, become part
            of the coat or the ship. Until, however, the materials are
            actually built into the work, in the absence of some
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                           Page 49 of 59
stipulation intended to pass the property in them,
           when delivered on the site, they remain the property of
           the contractor, notwithstanding that they might have
           been approved by the employer or his agent or brought
           into the site unless the agreement between the parties
           evinces a clear intention to the contrary."
34. We would think that the said principle as such may
          not advance the case of the Revenue in a case where the
          works contract involves the effluent treatment process
          wherein chemical is poured into the effluent.
35. When the assessee has used it, will it remain the
          owner of the chemical any longer? Will not the property in
          the goods pass to the awarder? We would think that the
          moment the assessee pours the chemicals into the
          effluent, he will cease to be the owner and at that point of
          time the awarder must be deemed to have taken delivery
          of the same. In our view the fact that upon it being poured
          into the effluent, it loses its identity and that it is
          consumed will not detract from the fact that there is
          delivery of the same to the awarder. The assessee does
          not have a case that the effluent belongs to the assessee.
          We do not think that it can be their case that the effluent
          does not belong to the awarder. Let us pose a question, if
          a complaint by a third party is raised about the treated
          effluent, can the awarder absolve itself of the ownership
          of the same?
We would think, it may not be possible.
          Therefore we would be justified in holding that the
          effluent and the treated effluent both belonged to the
          awarder. It is, therefore, into the property of the awarder,
          namely the effluent, that the assessee supplies the
          chemical. The apex court in its decision in
Gannon
          Dunkerley & Co. v. State of Rajasthan
[1993] 88 STC 204
          ; (1993) 1 SCC 364 had, inter alia, held that cost of
          consumables, such as, water, electricity, fuel, etc., used
          in the execution of the works contract, the property in
          which is not transferred in the course of execution of a
          works contract, is to be deducted. In section 5C also, the
          words "not involving any transfer of property in goods"
have been incorporated. Just like the toner and developer
          having been put into xerox machine becoming the
          property of the customer in the case before the apex court
          in
Xerox Modicorp Ltd.
case [2005] 142 STC 209 and the
          sale taking place before the goods are consumed, in the
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 50 of 59
same way, the property in the chemical passed to the
          awarder the moment they are put into the effluent by the
          assessee and its subsequent consumption is the
          consumption after sale and it does not detract from the
          factum of sale and consequently the exigibility to tax
          becomes unquestionable.”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)
56.
In
State of Tamil Nadu v. S.S.M. Processing Mills
, reported in
      2013 SCC OnLine Mad 2539, the issue before the Madras High
      Court was whether the chemicals used in the process of bleaching
      were liable to the levy of sales tax under
Section 3B
of the Tamil
      Nadu General Sales Tax Act, 1959.
The court, relying on the Kerala
      High Court’s decision in
Enviro Chemicals
(supra), answered in
      the affirmative. The relevant observation reads thus:
“9. The fact that the chemicals used for bleaching is
          washed away in the process, by itself, would not be a
          justifiable ground to accept the case of the assessee that
          there was no transfer of property of any goods. The very
          fact of the yarn being bleached by a chemical process,
          by applying the chemical, will clearly point out that there
          is transfer of property of the chemical, hence, bleaching
          contract attracts sales tax as in the case of dyeing
          contract, when the chemicals are purchased from
          outside the State. Consequently, this court allow the tax
          case (revisions) filed by the State.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
57.
In the cases of
Enviro Chemicals
(supra) and
S.S.M. Processing
      Mills
(supra) respectively, the focus of the courts decisively shifted
      from the final existence of the good to the precise moment a
      transfer of property occurred.
The Kerala High Court, in
Enviro
      Chemicals
(supra), held in the facts of that case that the transfer
      occurs the moment the chemical is poured into the effluent water.
Its subsequent consumption does not negate the fact that a
      “deemed sale” has already taken place.
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                          Page 51 of 59
d. Application to the facts at hand
58.   It is true that determining whether a transfer of property in goods
      has occurred is a fact-intensive enquiry, heavily dependent on the
      circumstances surrounding a particular case, such as the subject
      and terms of the work contract itself.
In such a scenario, it is
      neither possible to lay down any “general principles” nor is it
      advisable to do so. At this juncture, it is apt to take note of the
      observations made by this Court in
Collector of Central Excise,
      New Delhi v. Ballarpur Industries Limited
, reported in (1989)
      4 SCC 566:
“18. Now a word about Shri Ganguly’s insistence on
           drawing a line of strict demarcation between what can
           be said to be “goods” merely “used” in the manufacture
           and what constitute goods used as “raw material” for
           the purpose.
19. We are afraid, in the infinite variety of ways in
           which these problems present themselves it is neither
           necessary nor wise to enunciate principles of any
           general validity intended to cover all cases. The matter
           must rest upon the facts of each case. Though in many
           cases it might be difficult to draw a line of demarcation,
           it is easy to discern on which side of the borderline a
           particular case falls.
20. Shri Ganguly’s insistence, however, serves to recall
           the pertinent observations of an eminent author on the
           point. It was said:
“A common form of argument used by counsel in
             legal cases is to suggest that if the court decides in
             favour of the opposing counsel’s arguments, it will
             become necessary to draw lines which may be very
             difficult or impossible to draw. “Where will you
             draw the line?” is, of course, a question which must
             be faced by a legislator who is actually proposing to
             lay down lines for all future cases, but it is not a
             question which needs in general to be faced by
             common law courts who proceed in slow stages,
             moving from case to case…”
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                           Page 52 of 59
The learned Author recalls Lord Lindley’s “robust
           answer” to the question — Where will you draw the
           line?
“Nothing is more common in life than to be unable to
             draw the line between two things. Who can draw
             the line between plants and animals? And yet, who
             has any difficulty in saying that an oak-tree is a
             plant and not an animal?”
           Again,        Lord      Coleridge         in Mayor       of
           Southport v. Morriss said:
“The Attorney General has asked where we are to
             draw the line. The answer is that it is not necessary
             to draw it at any precise point. It is enough for us to
             say that the present case is on the right side of any
             reasonable line that could be drawn.”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
59.   Whilst acknowledging that there are no general rules that can be
      universally applied, it is fundamental that any analysis must begin
      with the correct identification of the taxable event. From the rulings
      of this Court in
Builders Association
(supra), Gannon Dunkerley-
II (supra) and
Larsen and Toubro
(supra) respectively, it is clear
      that the taxable event with respect to the transfer of property in
      goods involved in works contracts is when the deemed sale occurs.
60.
In
Gannon Dunkerley-II
(supra), this Court clarified that the
      transfer of property in such goods takes place when the goods are
      incorporated in the works. The Court’s use of the word ‘incorporated’
      should not be mechanically interpreted to mean that a transfer of
      property occurs only when a physical or tangible good is passed on
      when executing a works contract. Rather, ‘incorporation’ is to be
      understood contextually, defined by the specific nature of “the
      works” contracted for.
61.   Considering it from the aforesaid perspective, it is evident that the
      Courts in
Pest Control
(supra), M.K. Velu (supra), Dynamic
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                           Page 53 of 59
Cleaning (supra) and Microtol Sterilization (supra) respectively,
      proceeded on the wrong footing. The emphasis of the courts on
      ‘consumption’ in the aforesaid cases is incorrect on the following
      grounds:
a. First, the courts in the said cases completely overlooked the
           taxable event as prescribed under
Article 366(29A)(b)
and the
           relevant statute. The focal point of analysis by the courts
           should have been not whether the goods have been consumed,
           but rather whether the transfer of property has occurred.
           However, the courts wrongly presumed that the transfer could
           not have occurred as the goods had already been consumed.
        b. Secondly, the courts in the said cases proceeded on the
           incorrect assumption that all “consumables” were deductible
           and exempt from the levy of tax. However, on reading the
           observations of this Court in
Gannon Dunkerley-II
(supra) and
           the relevant statutory provisions, it is amply clear that only
           those consumables were exempt from tax, the property in
           which was not transferred in the execution of the works
           contract. Thus, if the transfer of property has occurred, and
           thereafter the goods are consumed, it would still be liable to
           the levy of sales tax. The position is the same even under the
           Act, 1948.
62.   This Court in
Xerox Modicorp
(supra) and the Kerala High Court
      in
Enviro Chemicals
(supra) correctly identified the taxable event
      as the precise moment the contractor’s goods are incorporated into
      the ‘works’, i.e., when the toner is fitted into the machine or the
      chemical is introduced into the effluent water. The subsequent
      consumption of these items is irrelevant, as it does not negate the
      transfer of property that has already occurred. The cardinal
      principle, which must serve as the guiding light for any court or
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                      Page 54 of 59
tribunal adjudicating such disputes, is that the analysis must be
      anchored to a singular question: has transfer of property in goods
      involved in the execution of the works contract occurred?
63.
In
Enviro Chemicals
(supra), the Kerala High Court correctly noted
      that the items need not exist in any form in the resultant product.
      To insist that a transfer of property is contingent upon the good’s
      tangible presence in a final product is to impose a condition that
Article 366(29A)(b)
does not contemplate and, in fact, is textually
      contradictory. The statutory framework only requires that the goods
      be “involved in the execution of the works contract”. It does not
      mandate that the works contract must yield a physical end-product
      or that the transfer must be tangible. To impose such a limitation
      would not only lead to a gross misapplication of the law but would
      also defeat the legislative intent of the Forty-sixth Amendment and
      the dictum of this Court in various rulings. This Court allowed a
      broad interpretation of the term ‘works contract’ in order to enable
      the taxing transfer of property in goods in all genres of works
      contracts.
64.   Many works contracts, particularly those for services and
      transformations, do not result in a new end product or a tangible
      transfer of property. For example, a works contract for providing
      pest control or cleaning service (as was the case in
Pest Control
(supra) and Dynamic Cleaning (supra), respectively) would not
      lead to the creation of a new end product or a very tangible transfer
      of property in goods. However, the chemicals used are indeed being
      transferred, as without such transfer of goods, it would be
      impossible to make an area clean or pest-free.
Similarly, in M.K.
      Velu (supra) and Microtol Sterilization (supra), the works
      contracts therein could not have been executed successfully
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                       Page 55 of 59
without the transfer of property in the fireworks and ethylene oxide,
      respectively. The chemicals, fireworks, and ethylene oxide are the
      primary goods facilitating the works under the respective contracts.
      It is in this context that they may said to be incorporated in the
      ‘works’ of the respective contracts. Consequently, it is undeniable
      that the property in such goods is being transferred when the
      respective works contracts are executed. These goods differ from
      consumables such as water and electricity, which merely aid in
      executing works contracts and the property in them is not
      transferred before they are consumed.
65.   Determining whether a transfer of property in goods has occurred
      is undoubtedly more challenging when the good is consumed or the
      transfer is intangible, as opposed to when it is tangibly present in a
      final product. Thus, the courts and tribunals must be extra vigilant
      when faced with such scenarios and must scrutinize the specific
      facts and the nature of each works contract with great care to make
      a correct determination as to whether or not a said item has been
      incorporated in the ‘works’ of a contract.
66.   In the facts of the present case, the levy of sales tax under
Section
      3F
of the Act, 1948, is on the ink and the processing material used
      by the appellant in printing the lottery tickets. The appellant has,
      however, not provided an item-wise breakdown of such processing
      material. The same was also noted by the Assessing Authority in its
      orders dated 28.10.1999. If the appellant had provided an item-wise
      breakdown, it would have facilitated in determining whether there
      was a transfer of property with regard to each such item.
      Consequently, we proceed to determine the issue on the basis of the
      assumption the High Court seems to have drawn in its impugned
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                        Page 56 of 59
judgment, i.e., equating processing material with the chemical used
      for diluting the ink.
67.   Applying the principles laid down in the preceding paragraphs to
      the facts at hand, we have no doubt in our mind that there is a
      transfer of property in the ink and chemicals used in the printing
      of the lottery tickets. The works contract in this instance is for the
      printing of lottery tickets, and “the works” refers to the final,
      tangible printed ticket. The taxable event, or the “deemed sale”,
      occurs at the precise moment the ink is applied to the paper. This
      act constitutes “incorporation in the works”, as the ink and the
      chemicals (with which the ink is mixed) are involved in the
      execution of the work contract and become a part of the lottery
      ticket. In this process, there is a tangible transfer of the diluted ink,
      a composite good comprising both the ink and the processing
      chemicals.
68.   As rightly held by the Bombay High Court in
Matushree
(supra),
      the transfer of ink and chemicals in their chemically altered form
      constitutes a valid transfer of property. Therefore, since it is
      impossible to transfer the ink without also transferring the
      chemicals it is diluted with, it can be conclusively inferred that the
      property in both the ink and the chemicals has been transferred.
69.   Thus, in the facts of the present case, all conditions required to
      sustain a levy of tax under
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the Act, 1948, are
      fulfilled. Consequently, the appellant is liable to pay tax under
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the Act, 1948 on the ink and processing material.
E. CONCLUSION
70. In order to sustain a levy of tax under
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the Act,
      1948, three conditions must be fulfilled: (i) there must be a works
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                           Page 57 of 59
contract; (ii) the goods should have been involved in the
      execution of the works contract; and (iii) the property in those
      goods must be transferred to a third party either as goods or in
      some other form.
71. The appellant has admitted that the contract for printing lottery
      tickets is a works contract. Based on the judgments of this Court,
      it cannot be said otherwise as well. From the record, it is clear
      that the ink, chemical and other processing material were
      involved in the printing of the lottery tickets.
72.   Further, there is a transfer of property in the ink and chemicals
      used in the printing of the lottery tickets. The works contract in this
      instance is for the printing of lottery tickets, and “the works” refers
      to the final, tangible printed ticket. The taxable event, or the
      “deemed sale”, occurs at the precise moment the ink is applied to
      the paper. This act constitutes “incorporation in the works”, as the
      ink and the chemicals (with which the ink is mixed) are involved in
      the execution of the work contract and become a part of the lottery
      ticket. In this process, there is a tangible transfer of the diluted ink,
      a composite good comprising both the ink and the processing
      chemicals.
73.   Thus, in the facts of the present case all three conditions required
      to sustain a levy of tax under
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the Act, 1948, are
      fulfilled : (i) a works contract exists for printing of lottery tickets; (ii)
      ink and chemicals have been involved in the execution of the works
      contract; and (iii) the property in the ink and chemicals has been
      transferred in execution of the works contract. Consequently, the
      appellant is liable to pay tax under
Section 3F(1)(b)
of the Act, 1948
      on the ink and processing material.
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                              Page 58 of 59
74.    For the foregoing reasons, the appeals fail and are hereby
       dismissed.
75.    Before we close, we must clarify that we had heard in all four
       appeals. This judgment disposes of Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of
       2012 respectively. In so far as, the Civil Appeal Nos. 9189 & 8313
       of 2015 respectively are concerned, we order that they be de-tagged
       as we need to rehear them on a particular issue. Registry to notify
       these two appeals for rehearing on any final hearing day in the
       month of November 2025.
….………………………….…. J.
(J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                          ….………………………….…. J.
(K.V.VISWANATHAN)


New Delhi.
October 07, 2025.
Civil Appeal Nos. 703 & 705 of 2012                      Page 59 of 59