[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Umesh Yadav vs The State Of Bihar on 30 October, 2025
Author:
Rajesh Bindal
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
2025 INSC 1336
                                                                  NON-REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1072 OF 2018




            UMESH YADAV & ORS.                                      …Appellant (s)


                                                   VERSUS


            THE STATE OF BIHAR                                    …Respondent(s)


                                                  JUDGMENT
Rajesh Bindal, J.
1.              The present appeal arises from the judgment 1 of the

            High Court2 in Criminal Appeal (DB) No. 374 of 1993.
2.              The Trial Court3 convicted eight accused persons for

            offences punishable under
Sections 302
/
149
and
323
/
149
of the

            Indian Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced them to undergo

            Rigorous Imprisonment for life.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2025.11.20
16:28:07 IST
Reason:
1 Dated 14.12.2017
            2 High Court of Judicature at Patna
            3 Additional Sessions Judge I, Gaya
Page 1 of 6
3.        All eight accused persons challenged their conviction

and sentence by filing Criminal Appeal No.374 of 1993 before

the High Court. The appeal qua Genda Pandit, Kauleshwar

Pandit and Ramji Yadav abated as they died during the

pendency of the appeal. The High Court confirmed the

conviction and sentence imposed by the Trial Court and

dismissed the appeal vide the impugned order.
4.        Appellant Nos.1 and 2, namely Umesh Yadav and

Ganesh Yadav (both sons of Jitan Yadav), raised claim of

juvenility before this Court for the first time, arguing that they

were less than 18 years of age on the date of the incident

(August 30, 1988). As the claim of juvenility was not raised in

the courts below, this Court vide order dated 25.11.2019

directed the Trial Court to conduct an enquiry and submit a

report.   As far as Appellant No. 2/Ganesh Yadav is concerned,

the report suggests that there was no documentary evidence to

prove his date of birth. Ossification test was conducted. The

Medical Board submitted the Report dated 03.03.2020 on the

basis of which, the age of Ganesh Yadav appeared to be 19

years.
Page 2 of 6
5.            The issue as to how the age, as determined in

ossification test, is to be considered has been gone into by this

Court in
Jaya Mala v. Home Secretary, Government of

Jammu & Kashmir,4
in which it has been observed that when

school records or reliable certificates are unavailable or

suspected to be tampered with, courts may rely on medical

determination with a margin of error of 2 years on the lower or

higher side applied to it. Relevant para therefrom is extracted

below:
“9.        Detenu was arrested and detained on
              October 18, 1981. The report by the expert is
              dated May 3, 1982, that is nearly seven months
              after the date of detention. Growing in age day
              by day is an involuntary process and the
              anatomical changes in the structure of the body
              continuously occur. Even on normal calculation,
              if seven months are deducted from the
              approximate age opined by the expert, in
              October 1981 detenu was around 17 years of
              age, consequently the statement made in the
              petition turns out to be wholly true. However,
              it is notorious and one can take judicial
              notice that the margin of error in age
              ascertained by radiological examination is
              two years on either side. Undoubtedly,
              therefore, the detenu was a young school-going
              boy. It equally appears that there was some
              upheaval in the educational institutions. This
              young school-going boy may be enthusiastic
              about the students' rights and on two different
              dates he marginally crossed the bounds of law.
4 (1982) 2 SCC 538
Page 3 of 6
It passes comprehension to believe that he can
         be visited with drastic measure of preventive
         detention. One cannot treat young people, may
         be immature, may be even slightly misdirected,
         may be a little more enthusiastic, with a sledge
         hammer. In our opinion, in the facts and
         circumstances of this case the detention order
         was wholly unwarranted and deserved to be
         quashed.”
6.        Considering the reports submitted by the Additional

District and Sessions Judge-I, Gaya, and law
laid down by
this

Court in the aforesaid judgment, giving benefit of two years to

Appellant No.2/Ganesh Yadav from the age determined by the

ossification test, he can be said to be 17 years of age on the

date of commission of offence.     Hence, he can be given the

benefit of being juvenile. Maximum punishment which can be

awarded to a juvenile under
Section 18
of the Juvenile Justice

(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, is 3 years of

detention in a special home.     Ganesh Yadav is said to have

already undergone imprisonment of more than 8 years. Hence,

he deserves to be released immediately unless required in any

other case. Ordered accordingly.
7.        Insofar as Appellant No.1/Umesh Yadav is concerned,

it was claimed that he was elder brother of Appellant
Page 4 of 6
No.2/Ganesh Yadav.              There were lot of discrepancies in the

documents produced to prove his age. However, considering

the fact that he is admittedly elder brother of Ganesh Yadav,

whose age having been determined by ossification test as 19

years, the age of Umesh Yadav will be more that. Hence, he

cannot be given the benefit of being juvenile on the date of

commission of offence.
8.            As far as the merits of controversy is concerned,

learned counsel for the appellants did not challenge the

conviction.       However, he submitted that in the case in hand,

the incident took place more than three decades back. There

have been no complaints against the appellants during their

period of custody. The life sentence awarded to them may be

reduced to a fixed term. This Court can exercise such a power

in terms of law
laid down in
Shiva Kumar @ Shiva @

Shivamurthy v. State of Karnataka5
.
9.            Learned counsel for the respondent-State submitted

that the appellants do not deserve any leniency in the matter.
10.           After hearing learned counsel for the parties and

considering the submissions made by them, especially the fact
5 (2023) 9 SCC 817: 2023 INSC 306
Page 5 of 6
that the incident took place more than 35 years back and the

appellants     besides   Umesh   Yadav,      whose       age     was      not

ascertained, namely, Appellant No.3/Baleshwar Pandit and

Appellant No.4/Muneshwar Pandit are presently about 67 years

and 59 years respectively, in our opinion, the sentence

awarded to the three of them can be modified to a fixed term of

14 years of actual imprisonment.           It needs to be mentioned

here that the case of Appellant No.5/Jitan Yadav has already

been dismissed by this Court vide order dated 11.05.2018 for

non-compliance of pre-emptory order.
11.       The appeal is partly allowed to the extent mentioned

above. The impugned judgment of the High Court is modified

accordingly.
..……..........................J.
                                            (RAJESH BINDAL)


                                             ……..........................J
                                              (MANMOHAN)
New Delhi;
October 30, 2025.
Page 6 of 6