[Cites
38
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Epc Constructions India Limited vs M/S Matix Fertilizers And Chemicals ... on 28 October, 2025
2025 INSC 1259                                                      REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11077 OF 2025


            EPC Constructions India
            Limited Through Its
            Liquidator - Abhijit Guhathakurta                       …Appellant(s)

                                                 VERSUS

            M/s Matix Fertilizers And
            Chemicals Limited                                     …Respondent(s)


                                            JUDGMENT
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.              The present appeal calls in question the correctness of

            the judgment and order dated 09.04.2025 passed by the

            National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (for short the

            ‘NCLAT’) in Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 1424 of

            2023. The NCLAT dismissed the appeal of the appellant and

            confirmed the order dated 29.08.2023 passed by the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VARSHA MENDIRATTA
Date: 2025.10.28
17:26:18 IST
Reason:
Adjudicating Authority-National Company Law Tribunal (for
Page 1 of 42
short the ‘NCLT’), Division Bench, Court No.II, Kolkata. The

NCLAT had dismissed the application of the appellant filed

under Section 7 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016

(for short the ‘IBC’).
2.   Both the NCLT and the NCLAT held that the Cumulative

Redeemable Preference Shares (for short ‘CRPS’) held by the

appellant is in the nature of an investment and not a debt. It

further held that since payment against the CRPS is not due,

no liability can be said to arise.
3.   To appreciate the controversy in question, a brief

reference to the facts of the case, needs to be made.



BRIEF FACTS :-
OFFER AND ACCEPTANCE OF CRPS:-
4.   The appellant-EPC Constructions India Limited (for

short ‘EPCC’) was formerly known as Essar Projects India

Limited. It entered into an engineering and construction

contract with the respondent-M/s Matix Fertilizers and

Chemicals Limited (for short ‘Matix’) on 11.12.2009. The
Page 2 of 42
contract was for the establishment of a fertilizer complex for

Ammonia and Urea production at Panagarh Industrial Park,

District Burdwan, West Bengal. The project involved

designing, engineering, procurement, construction, erection

and installation. An On-shore Supply Contract was executed

on 29.07.2010 (for supply of Indian origin plant and

equipment) and an Off-shore Supply Contract was entered

on 20.08.2010 for supply of non-Indian origin plant and

equipment.
5.   According to the appellant, under the above mentioned

contracts, a sum of INR 572.72 crores (Five Hundred Seventy-

Two Crores and Seventy Two Lakhs only) became due and

payable by Matix to the appellant.         According to the

appellant, correspondence was exchanged between the

contracting parties to convert a portion of the receivables to

a subordinate debt, the terms of which were to be discussed.
6.   This resulted in a letter written by the respondent-Matix

on 27.07.2015 whereby Matix requested EPCC to convert the

outstanding amounts up to Rs. 400 crores into Non-
Page 3 of 42
Cumulative Redeemable Preference Shares (NCRPS). By a

letter of 30.07.2015, the board resolution passed by EPCC

dated 30.07.2015 was communicated to the respondent.

Under the board resolution, EPCC agreed to convert a

portion of the receivables into CRPS. The relevant part of the

resolution is extracted hereinbelow:-
“6. INVESTMENT IN CUMULATIVE REDEEMABLE
     PREFERENCE SHARES OF MATIX FERTILIZER AND
     CHEMICALS LIMITED

     ………… Matix has informed the Company that due to
     shifting of SCOD, cost of completion for the Project has
     increased and it requires additional funding of Rs 1,210
     Crores to complete the Project for which it has
     approached its lenders. However, due to this delay even
     further disbursement of existing credit facilities
     sanctioned has also been withheld by its lenders.
She further added that vide this letter, Matix had given
     the Company a proposal for conversion of its dues of Rs.
     400 Crores payable to the Company on account of the
     project work into Redeemable Preference Shares (RPS).
It was informed by Matix that its lenders have extended
     additional credit facilities provided Matix bring
     additional equity to such extent to achieve the Debt
     Equity Ratio (DER) of 2:1 and therefore by conversion of
     dues of the Company into RPS will facilitate Matix to
     show equity infusion and it can draw additional credit
     facilities which will enable it to complete the Project.

     Further Mr. Sawa clarified to the Board that at present,
     Matix does not have enough liquidity to repay the
     outstanding dues of the Company and even complete the
     balance part of the project. Realizing this, lenders have
     also sanctioned additional debt to Matix to complete the
Page 4 of 42
project. If Matix does not get additional funding from its
lenders, the project will not be completed which will
hamper the possibilities to recover Company's
outstanding amount from Matix. Therefore it is in the best
interest of the Company to extend support to Matix by
making investment in the RPS that will help Matix
drawdown additional debt for completion of the project
and also commence its operations. This in turn will help
Matix to raise fresh equity which will be used to redeem
the RPS as assured by Matix vide their letter dated July
27, 2015.
The Directors then discussed about the terms and
conditions of the proposal given by Matix. The Company
Secretary explained in detail the terms and conditions of
the RPS. She also informed the Board that if the proposal
is accepted by the Board of Directors, there will be no
outflow of funds from the Company and only the
outstanding receivables will be converted into RPS.

The Directors after further deliberation desired that RPS
should be cumulative and carry a dividend rate of 8%.

Taking into account the representation made by the
Company Secretary and the clarification given by
Mr. Sawa that infusion of funds (debt and equity as
mentioned earlier) will not only help Matix to
complete the project but also create value, without
which the prospects of recovery of Company's dues
looks dim, the Board approved the proposal of
Investment into RPS of Matix in one or more tranches
by conversion of existing dues of up to Rs. 400 Crores
with the following modification in the terms and
conditions of RPS:
1. RPS should be cumulative
2. RPS should carry 8% dividend.
Thereafter, the Board passed the following resolution
unanimously:-
Page 5 of 42
"RESOLVED THAT subject to such statutory
     approvals as may be required, if any and pursuant to
     the provisions of Section 179, 186 and any other
     applicable provisions, if any, of the
Companies Act,
     2013
read with rules made thereunder and subject
     such consents and approvals, if any, as may be
     required, the consent of the Board of Directors of the
     Company be and is hereby accorded to make
     investment up to Rs. 400 Crores into 8% Cumulative
     Redeemable Preference Shares of Rs. 10/- each of
     Matix Fertilizer and Chemicals Limited (Matix) in
     one or more tranches.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)
7.   On    26.08.2015,    by   letter   dated   26.08.2015,        the

respondent-Matix communicated to the appellant as under: -
“We refer to your e-mail dated July 31, 2015 wherein Essar
     Projects India Limited Board has approved and accepted
     for conversion of outstanding receivables from Matix
     Fertilisers And Chemicals Limited (Matix ) to EPIL towards
     work done under EPC Contract into 8% Cumulative
     Redeemable preference Shares (CRPS) of Matix The same
     was also approved by the Board of Matix in Its Board
     Meeting held on 14th August, 2015 and thereafter, by the
     Shareholders of Matix in its Extra Ordinary General
     Meeting held on 26" August, 2015.
Pursuant to the approval of shareholders Matix Board in its
     meeting held on 26th August, 2015 Matix has allotted
     25,00,00,000 8% Cumulative Redeemable Preference
     Shares of Rs 10/- each aggregating to Rs.250,00,00,000 to
     Essar Projects India Limited on the following terms and
     conditions.
Sr.    Particulars        Amount Rs.
      1     Total Value        Rs. 250 Crs (Rs. Two Hundred
            of CRPS            Fifty Crores)
Page 6 of 42
2    Face Value        Rs. 10 per Share
      3    Issue Price       At par (face value)
      4    Tranches          Can be issued in one or more
                             tranches
      5    Tenor and         Redeemable at par at the end
           Redemption        of 3 years.
                             However, Company at its sole
                             discretion, may redeem CRPS
                             at any time within 3 years from
                             the date of issue.
      6    Annual            8% in first year
           Dividend rate     8% in second year
           (Cumulative)      8% in third year
      7    Transferability   Can be transferred subject to
                             the approval of Board of the
                             Company
      8    Listing           Not to be listed
      9    Rights            These       CRPS      carry     a
                             preferential      rights    with
                             respect to-
                               a) Payment of dividend, and
                               b) Repayment in the case of
                                  a    winding       up     or
                                  repayment of capital, of
                                  the amount of the share
                                  capital     paid-up       or
                                  deemed to have been
                                  paid-up.
      10   Modification      Can be modified before
           of terms          redemption       with     mutual
                             discussions      and      written
                             consent of both the parties.
We request your confirmation by signing as EPILs
     acceptance to proceed with documentation and other
     necessary compliances.”

There is no dispute that the appellant accepted this letter and

in fact the CRPS came to be issued as proposed hereinabove.
Page 7 of 42
APPELLANT BROUGHT UNDER CIRP :-
8.    When    matters   stood   thus,    Corporate    Insolvency

Resolution Process (CIRP) under the IBC was initiated against

the   appellant    on   20.04.2018      and   one   Shri    Abhijit

Guhathakurta was appointed as an Interim Resolution

Professional and later confirmed as a Resolution Professional

(for short “RP”). According to the appellant, a letter was

written on 24.08.2018 by respondent Matix to the appellant

stating that the respondent has unilaterally adjusted the total

liability of CRPS amounting to INR 310 Crores against its

purported claim against EPCC. It further appears that Matix

filed a revised claim of INR 537.87 Crores before the RP of

the appellant-EPCC and the same was rejected. It is stated

that rejection was accepted by the respondent and it attained

finality.
DEMAND NOTICE BY THE APPELLANT – THROUGH
‘RP’ – ON MATIX :-
9.    At this stage, on 27.10.2018, the appellant through its RP

issued a demand notice to the respondent calling upon
Page 8 of 42
payment of INR 632.71 Crores (INR 310 Crores on account of

maturity of the CRPS and INR 322.71 crores on account of

outstanding receivables). On 07.12.2018, the respondent-

Matix, by its letter of 07.12.2018, replied to the demand

notice and disputed the demand. It also denied its liability.

The appellant obtained permission under
Section 33(5)
of the

IBC from the NCLT, Mumbai for permitting the liquidator

(same individual who was earlier the RP) to initiate legal

action for recovery against the respondent.


SECTION 7, IBC PROCEEDINGS – AGAINST MATIX:-
10. The appellant filed a
Section 7
petition against the

respondent in CP (IB) No. 536 of 2022 on account of failure to

pay the redemption amount of INR 310 Crores payable on

account of maturity of CRPS. The appellant further submits

that the financial statements of the respondent showed the

liability towards CRPS as “unsecured loan” and “other

financial liability”.   The respondent opposed the petition

under
Section 7
, IBC.
Page 9 of 42
DISMISSAL BY NCLT:-
11. The NCLT, by its order of 29.08.2023, dismissed the

Section 7-application of the appellant. The NCLT recorded

the following findings:-
a)
Section 55
of the Companies Act, 2013 is explicit that if
     the issuing company is not making profits which are
     available for dividend or has not raised any equity
     investments specifically for the purpose of redemption of
     preference shares, then the preference shares cannot be
     redeemed.
b)    The non-redemption of preference shares does not
     result in preference shareholders becoming creditors or the
     carrying value of preference shares and dividends
     becoming a debt.
c)    The Balance Sheet of 2018-19 to 2020-21 manifests
     losses incurred and the 4th proviso to
Section 123
of the
     Companies Act 2013 manifestly indicates that no dividend is
     payable out of losses and unless the CRPS becomes
     redeemable it cannot be termed as a “debt", much less a
     financial debt.
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE NCLAT:-
12. The appellant filed an appeal before the NCLAT. The

NCLAT, by its judgment of 09.04.2025, dismissed the appeal

and held as under: -
a)    Preference shares shall be redeemed only out of the
     profits of the company which would otherwise be available
     for dividend or out of the proceeds of a fresh issue of shares
     made for the purposes of such redemption.
Page 10 of 42
b)     Matix never declared dividend or earned profit to
    redeem the preferential shares. If the preferential shares
    allotted to the Appellant could not have been redeemed, no
    debt became due.
c)    The correspondence between the parties which
    ultimately resulted in approval of resolution by the Board of
    Directors of the Appellant on 30.07.2015 and allotment. of
    shares by letter dated 26.08.2015 are evidence of a contract
    between the parties for allotment of 25,00,00,000 8%
    Cumulative Redeemable Preference Shares of Rs.10/- each
    aggregating to Rs.250,00,00,000.
d)   When preferential shares were allotted to the
    Appellant, the shares were towards the capital of the
    Company and the earlier outstanding amount, which
    according to the Appellant was foundation of issuance of
    preferential shares shall come to an end.
CONTENTIONS OF PARTIES:-
13. We have heard Mr. Niranjan Reddy, learned Senior

Advocate for the appellant and Mr. Mukul Rohtagi and Mr.

Ritin Rai, learned Senior Advocates for the respondent. We

have perused the records.
CONTENTIONS OF THE APPELLANT:-
14. Mr. Niranjan Reddy, learned Senior Counsel, primarily

contended that the true nature of the transaction in question

must be assessed by unveiling the underlying intent,
Page 11 of 42
especially when the structure masked the borrowing

arrangement. According to the learned Senior Counsel, the

CRPS, in the present case, stricto sensu fulfilled all the

ingredients required to constitute a “financial debt”, having

the “commercial effect of borrowing”. According to the

learned Senior Counsel, the transaction in question entered

into by way of exchange of letters between the parties is a

transaction in terms of
Section 3(33)
of the IBC fulfilling the

ingredient of
Section 5(8)(f)
of the IBC. Learned Senior

Counsel submitted that Matix understood the “conversion of

receivables” as a “subordinate debt”; that the said proposal

was for commercial purpose, i.e., to maintain a Debt-to-

Equity ratio for further borrowings and commissioning the

fertilizer plant and Matix admittedly committed to repay the

aforesaid “Subordinate Debt” upon raising of equity at par

within three years, thereby fulfilling the ingredient of

“commercial     effect   of   borrowing”    with   repayment

obligations.
Page 12 of 42
15. According to the learned Senior Counsel, the CRPS

merely acted as a temporary tool for borrowing, providing

Matix “a pause point” under the arrangement entered by

way of exchange of emails. Learned Senior Counsel relied on

the judgment of the NCLAT in Sanjay D Kakade vs. HDFC

Ventures Trustee Company Ltd. and Ors. dated 24.11.2023

in Company Appeal (AT) (Insol.) No.481/2023, where

according to the counsel, the NCLAT delved deeper into the

intention of the parties and the underlying transaction to

decide the question of existence of financial debt.
Learned

Senior Counsel also relied on the judgments of this Court in
Global Credit Capital Ltd and Anr. v. Sach Marketing Pvt

Ltd and Anr.1, and Pioneer Urban Land
and
Infrastructure

Ltd. and Another v. Union of India and Others2
to contend

that an expansive interpretation of the phrase “commercial

effect of borrowing” ought to have been placed by the

NCLAT.
1
2024 SCC OnLine SC 649
2
(2019) 8 SCC 416
Page 13 of 42
CONTENTIONS OF THE RESPONDENT :-
16. Mr. Mukul Rohtagi and Mr. Ritin Rai, learned Senior

Advocates, vehemently countered the submissions of the

learned Senior Counsel for the appellant. They contended

that under
Section 3(37)
of the IBC words and expressions

used in the IBC but not defined in the Code but defined in the
Companies Act, 2013
shall have the meaning assigned to

them under the
Companies Act
.
17. They contended by referring to
Section 3(37)
of the IBC

read with
Sections 2(64)
,
2(55)
,
2(84)
,
43
,
47
and
55
of the

Companies Act, 2013 that preference shares do not constitute

debt and preference shareholders are not creditors of the

Company. In their submission, preference shares being part

of the share capital (and not debt capital), preference

shareholders do not have a right to initiate insolvency

proceedings against the company under
Section 7
IBC which

is a right available only with the financial creditors of the

company. They further contend that under
Section 5(8)(f)
of

the IBC, preference shares do not constitute a financial debt
Page 14 of 42
as defined. According to their submission, the contention of

the appellant that preference shareholders can become a

financial creditor runs contrary to the very fabric of the share

capital of the Company and would blur the line between

shareholders and creditor.
QUESTION FOR CONSIDERATION: -
18. In this factual background, the question that arises for

consideration is whether the NCLT and NCLAT were justified

in dismissing the application of the appellant under
Section 7
of the IBC, after holding that the appellant was not a financial

creditor?
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS: -
REDEEMABLE PREFERENCE SHAREHOLDER NOT A
CREDITOR :-
19. The admitted facts are that pursuant to the offer made

by Matix to convert the outstanding amount to RPS and

pursuant to the acceptance of EPCC by its Board Resolution

dated 30.07.2015 approving the proposal of investment in
Page 15 of 42
8% Cumulative Redeemable Preference Shares of Rs.10/-

each of “Matix” and pursuant to the receipt of the CRPS, the

appellant became a preference shareholder.
20. It is well settled in Company Law that preference shares

are part of the company’s share capital and the amounts paid

up on them are not loans.        Dividends are paid on the

preference shares when company earns a profit. This is for

the reason that if the dividends were paid without profits or

in excess of profits made, it would amount to an illegal return

of the capital. Amount paid up on preference shares not

being loans, they do not qualify as a debt.
21.
Section 3(37)
of the IBC provides that words and

expressions used but not defined in the Code but defined in

the
Companies Act, 2013
(18 of 2013), shall have the

meanings respectively assigned to them in the said Act.
Section 2(84)
of the Companies Act defines share as:- “Share”

means a share in the share capital of a company and includes

stock.
Page 16 of 42
22.
Section 43
of the Companies Act defines the kinds of

share capital as under:
“43. Kinds of share capital.—The share capital of a
    company limited by shares shall be of two kinds,
    namely:—
(a) equity share capital—
(i) with voting rights; or
(ii) with differential rights as to dividend, voting or
                otherwise in accordance with such rules as may be
                prescribed; and
(b) preference share capital:
Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall affect the
    rights of the preference shareholders who are entitled to
    participate in the proceeds of winding up before the
    commencement of this Act.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) “equity share capital”, with reference to any company
          limited by shares, means all share capital which is not
          preference share capital;
(ii) “preference share capital”, with reference to any
          company limited by shares, means that part of the issued
          share capital of the company which carries or would carry
          a preferential right with respect to—
(a) payment of dividend, either as a fixed amount or
                an amount calculated at a fixed rate, which may
                either be free of or subject to income-tax; and
(b) repayment, in the case of a winding up or
                repayment of capital, of the amount of the share
                capital paid-up or deemed to have been paid-up,
                whether or not, there is a preferential right to the
                payment of any fixed premium or premium on any
                fixed scale, specified in the memorandum or articles
                of the company;
Page 17 of 42
(iii) capital shall be deemed to be preference capital,
          notwithstanding that it is entitled to either or both of the
          following rights, namely:—
(a) that in respect of dividends, in addition to the
                 preferential rights to the amounts specified in sub-
clause (a) of clause (ii), it has a right to participate,
                 whether fully or to a limited extent, with capital not
                 entitled to the preferential right aforesaid;
(b) that in respect of capital, in addition to the
                 preferential right to the repayment, on a winding up,
                 of the amounts specified in sub-clause (b) of clause
(ii), it has a right to participate, whether fully or to a
                 limited extent, with capital not entitled to that
                 preferential right in any surplus which may remain
                 after the entire capital has been repaid.”
23. It will be noticed that preference share capital is a kind

of share capital.     Further, for the purpose of
Section 43
,

preference share capital (and consequently preference

shareholder) carry a preferential right with respect to the

payment of dividend and in the case of winding up or

repayment of capital, a preferential right on the repayment of

the amount of the share capital.
24.
Section 55
of the Companies Act, 2013 deals with issue

and redemption of preference shares and reads as under:-
55. Issue and redemption of preference shares.—(1) No
    company     limited by    shares    shall, after  the
Page 18 of 42
commencement of this Act, issue any preference shares
which are irredeemable.
(2) A company limited by shares may, if so
authorised by its articles, issue preference shares which
are liable to be redeemed within a period not exceeding
twenty years from the date of their issue subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed:
Provided that a company may issue preference
shares for a period exceeding twenty years for
infrastructure projects, subject to the redemption of such
percentage of shares as may be prescribed on an annual
basis at the option of such preferential shareholders:
Provided further that—
(a) no such shares shall be redeemed except out of
      the profits of the company which would otherwise
      be available for dividend or out of the proceeds of a
      fresh issue of shares made for the purposes of such
      redemption;
(b) no such shares shall be redeemed unless they
      are fully paid;
(c) where such shares are proposed to be redeemed
      out of the profits of the company, there shall, out of
      such profits, be transferred, a sum equal to the
      nominal amount of the shares to be redeemed, to a
      reserve, to be called the Capital Redemption
      Reserve Account, and the provisions of this Act
      relating to reduction of share capital of a company
      shall, except as provided in this section, apply as if
      the Capital Redemption Reserve Account were paid-
      up share capital of the company; and
(d) (i) in case of such class of companies, as may be
      prescribed and whose financial statement comply
      with the accounting standards prescribed for such
      class of companies under
section 133
, the premium,
      if any, payable on redemption shall be provided for
      out of the profits of the company, before the shares
      are redeemed:
Page 19 of 42
Provided also that premium, if any, payable on
     redemption of any preference shares issued on or
     before the commencement of this Act by any such
     company shall be provided for out of the profits of
     the company or out of the company’s securities
     premium account, before such shares are
     redeemed.
(ii) in a case not falling under sub-clause (i) above,
     the premium, if any, payable on redemption shall be
     provided for out of the profits of the company or out
     of the company’s securities premium account,
     before such shares are redeemed.
(3) Where a company is not in a position to redeem
any preference shares or to pay dividend, if any, on such
shares in accordance with the terms of issue (such shares
hereinafter referred to as unredeemed preference
shares), it may, with the consent of the holders of three-
fourths in value of such preference shares and with the
approval of the Tribunal on a petition made by it in this
behalf, issue further redeemable preference shares equal
to the amount due, including the dividend thereon, in
respect of the unredeemed preference shares, and on the
issue of such further redeemable preference shares, the
unredeemed preference shares shall be deemed to have
been redeemed:
Provided that the Tribunal shall, while giving
approval under this sub-section, order the redemption
forthwith of preference shares held by such persons who
have not consented to the issue of further redeemable
preference shares.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
declared that the issue of further redeemable preference
shares or the redemption of preference shares under this
section shall not be deemed to be an increase or, as the
Page 20 of 42
case may be, a reduction, in the share capital of the
    company.
(4) The capital redemption reserve account may,
    notwithstanding anything in this section, be applied by
    the company, in paying up unissued shares of the
    company to be issued to members of the company as fully
    paid bonus shares.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section (2),
    the    term    “infrastructure    projects”   means the
    infrastructure projects specified in Schedule VI”
Section 55
except sub-section (3) enforced w.e.f.
         1-4-2014
25.
Section 55
of the Companies Act stipulates that

preference shares shall be redeemed only out of the profits

of the company which would be otherwise available for

dividends or out the proceeds of the fresh issue of shares

made for the purpose of such redemption.
26. The following passage from “A Ramaiya’s Guide to the

Companies Act” (18th Edition, Volume 1 Page 879), pithily

explains the distinguishing features between a preference

shareholder and a creditor in the following words:-
“It must be remembered that a preference shareholder
     is only a shareholder and cannot as a matter of course
     claim to exercise the rights of a creditor. Preference
     shareholders are only shareholders and not in the
     position of creditors. They cannot sue for the money due
Page 21 of 42
on the shares undertaken to be redeemed, and cannot, as
            of right, claim a return of their share money except in a
            winding-up. In
Lalchand Surana v. Hyderabad Vanaspathy
            Ltd.
, (1990) 68 Com Cases 415 at 419 (AP), where a
            preference shareholder was denied redemption in spite of
            maturity, he was not allowed to file a creditor's petition for
            a winding-up order under
s. 433(e)
of the 1956 Act. An
            unredeemed preference shareholder does not become a
            creditor.”
                                                     (Emphasis supplied)
27. B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J. (as His Lordship then was) in

Lalchand Surana vs. M/s Hyderabad Vanaspathy Ltd.3 held

as under:-
“… …. … The only question is whether, in case of failure
            of the company to repay the amount due thereunder,
            such shareholders become “creditors”. It is in this
            context that proviso (a) to sub-section (1) of
section 80
becomes relevant. Sub-section (1) of
section 80
says that
            subject to the provisions of the said section, a company
            limited by shares may, if so, authorised by its articles,
            issue (i) preference shares which are to be redeemed, or
(ii) preference shares which are liable to be redeemed
            at the option of the company. Proviso (a), however, says
            that no such shares shall be redeemed except out of the
            profits of the company, which would otherwise be
            available for dividend, or out of the proceeds of a fresh
            issue of shares made for the purposes of the redemption.
This aspect, in my opinion, shows that where
            redeemable preference shares are issued but not
            honoured when they are ripe for redemption, the
            holder of those shares does not automatically assume
            the character of a “creditor”. The reason is that his
            shares can be redeemed only out of the profits of the
            company which would otherwise be available for
3
[1988 SCC OnLine AP 290]
Page 22 of 42
dividend, or by a fresh issue of shares. This is a
     limitation which is not applicable to the case of an
     ordinary creditor. In the face of this position in law,
     and in the absence of any authority on the subject, I
     hold that the holders of redeemable preference
     shares do not and cannot become creditors of the
     company in case their shares are not redeemed by
     the company at the appropriate time. They continue
     to be shareholders, no doubt subject to certain
     preferential rights mentioned in
section 85
. If they do
     not become the creditors of the company, they cannot
     apply for winding up of the company under
section
     433(e)
.”
                                             (Emphasis supplied)

CONCEPTUAL DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ‘DEBT’ AND
‘PREFERENCE SHARES’: -
28. Explaining the nuanced distinction between “debt” and

“share” particularly in the context of a “preference

shareholder”, Gower in his “Principles of Modern Company

Law” (Tenth Edition) at page 1071 has the following to say: -
“The line between the holder of a debt instrument and a
    share is particularly narrow if the contrast is made with a
    preference shareholder, who is a member of the
    company, but a member whose share rights may limit the
    shareholder’s dividend to a fixed percentage of the
    nominal value of the share and give that shareholder no
    right to participate in surplus assets in a winding-up, and
    perhaps only limited voting rights. The main difference
    between the two in such a case may then be that the
    dividend on a preference share is not payable unless
    profits are available for distribution, whereas the debt
    holder’s interest entitlement is not subject to this
Page 23 of 42
constraint; and that the debt holder will rank before
     the preference holder in a winding-up. Thus, the legal
     rules operate with a binary divide between debt and
     equity, but the accounting rules and general practice
     leads to the creation of securities whose classification in
     accordance with this divide is problematic.”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)

RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE IBC :-
29. This being the legal position, it is also time now to

examine the statutory provisions of the IBC to understand the

pre-requisites to maintain a petition under
Section 7
of the

IBC.
Section 7
speaks of initiation of Corporate Insolvency

Resolution Process by the financial creditor.
Section 5(7)
of

the IBC defines a financial creditor. It reads as under:-
“5(7) “financial creditor” means any person to whom a
      financial debt is owed and includes a person to whom such
      debt has been legally assigned or transferred to;”
30.
Section 5(8)
defines financial debt and it is extracted

hereunder: -
“5(8) “financial debt” means a debt along with interest, if
      any, which is disbursed against the consideration for the
      time value of money and includes—
(a) money borrowed against the payment of interest;
(b)any amount raised by acceptance under any
             acceptance credit facility or its de-materialised
             equivalent;
Page 24 of 42
(c) any amount raised pursuant to any note purchase
    facility or the issue of bonds, notes, debentures, loan
    stock or any similar instrument;
(d) the amount of any liability in respect of any lease or
    hire purchase contract which is deemed as a finance
    or capital lease under the Indian Accounting
    Standards or such other accounting standards as
    may be prescribed;
(e) receivables sold or discounted other than any
    receivables sold on non-recourse basis;
(f) any amount raised under any other transaction,
    including any forward sale or purchase agreement,
    having the commercial effect of a borrowing;
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-clause,—
(i) any amount raised from an allottee under a real
          estate project shall be deemed to be an amount
          having the commercial effect of a borrowing; and
(ii) the expressions, “allottee” and “real estate
          project” shall have the meanings respectively
          assigned to them in clauses (d) and (zn) of
section 2
of the Real Estate (Regulation and
          Development) Act, 2016 (16 of 2016);
(g)    any derivative transaction entered into in
    connection with protection against or benefit from
    fluctuation in any rate or price and for calculating
    the value of any derivative transaction, only the
    market value of such transaction shall be taken into
    account;
(h) any counter-indemnity obligation in respect of a
    guarantee, indemnity, bond, documentary letter of
    credit or any other instrument issued by a bank or
    financial institution;
(i) the amount of any liability in respect of any of the
    guarantee or indemnity for any of the items referred
    to in sub-clauses (a) to (h) of this clause;”
Page 25 of 42
31.
Section 3 (11)
defines debt as under: -
“3(11) “debt” means a liability or obligation in respect of a
      claim which is due from any person and includes a financial
      debt and operational debt;”
32.
Section 3(12)
defines default, which is a crucial

ingredient of
Section 7
of the IBC, as under: -
“3(12) “default” means non-payment of debt when whole
      or any part or instalment of the amount of debt has become
      due and payable and is not paid by the debtor or the
      corporate debtor, as the case may be;”
33.
Section 7(1)
and
7(5)
of the IBC read thus:-
“7.   Initiation of corporate insolvency resolution
      process by financial creditor.
(1) A financial creditor either by itself or jointly with other
      financial creditors, or any other person on behalf of the
      financial creditor, as may be notified by the Central
      Government, may file an application for initiating
      corporate insolvency resolution process against a
      corporate debtor before the Adjudicating Authority when
      a default has occurred:
xxx xxx

      Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, a
      default includes a default in respect of a financial debt
      owed not only to the applicant financial creditor but to any
      other financial creditor of the corporate debtor.
(5) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that—
(a) a default has occurred and the application under sub-
section (2) is complete, and there is no disciplinary
      proceedings pending against the proposed resolution
      professional, it may, by order, admit such application; or
Page 26 of 42
(b) default has not occurred or the application under sub-
section (2) is incomplete or any disciplinary proceeding is
     pending against the proposed resolution professional, it
     may, by order, reject such application:
Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before
     rejecting the application under clause (b) of sub-section
     (5), give a notice to the applicant to rectify the defect in his
     application within seven days of receipt of such notice from
     the Adjudicating Authority.”
34. It will be clear from a plain reading that to maintain a

proceeding under
Section 7
, an application has to be filed by

a financial creditor and the application has to be filed when a

default has occurred. It will be noticed from the above that

for a default “to kick in” there should be non-payment of

debt, when whole or any part of the debt has become due

and payable and is not paid. Admittedly, the CRPS had not

become due and payable since the respondent had not made

profits and did not have any reserve out of the profits made

in the past nor did it possess any proceeds from a fresh issue

of shares made for the purpose of redemption. In this

admitted scenario, the question of there being any default

under
Section 3(12)
of the IBC does not arise. Hence, the
Page 27 of 42
argument that the three years period mentioned in the CRPS

for redemption having expired, the shares were due for

redemption, does not carry the case of the appellant any

further.
35. Dealing with the importance of the occurrence of default

for the purpose of maintainability of a Section 7-application

under the IBC, this Court in
Innoventive Industries Limited

vs. ICICI Bank and Another4
, held as under:-
“28. When it comes to a financial creditor triggering the
            process,
Section 7
becomes relevant. Under the
            Explanation to
Section 7(1)
, a default is in respect of a
            financial debt owed to any financial creditor of the
            corporate debtor — it need not be a debt owed to the
            applicant financial creditor. Under
Section 7(2)
, an
            application is to be made under sub-section (1) in such
            form and manner as is prescribed, which takes us to the
            Insolvency and Bankruptcy (Application to Adjudicating
            Authority) Rules, 2016. Under Rule 4, the application is
            made by a financial creditor in Form 1 accompanied by
            documents and records required therein. Form 1 is a
            detailed form in 5 parts, which requires particulars of the
            applicant in Part I, particulars of the corporate debtor in
            Part II, particulars of the proposed interim resolution
            professional in Part III, particulars of the financial debt in
            Part IV and documents, records and evidence of default
            in Part V. Under Rule 4(3), the applicant is to dispatch a
            copy of the application filed with the adjudicating
            authority by registered post or speed post to the
            registered office of the corporate debtor. The speed,
            within which the adjudicating authority is to ascertain the
4
(2018) 1 SCC 407
Page 28 of 42
existence of a default from the records of the information
      utility or on the basis of evidence furnished by the
      financial creditor, is important. This it must do within 14
      days of the receipt of the application. It is at the stage of
Section 7(5)
, where the adjudicating authority is to be
      satisfied that a default has occurred, that the
      corporate debtor is entitled to point out that a default
      has not occurred in the sense that the “debt”, which
      may also include a disputed claim, is not due. A debt
      may not be due if it is not payable in law or in fact.
The moment the adjudicating authority is satisfied
      that a default has occurred, the application must be
      admitted unless it is incomplete, in which case it
      may give notice to the applicant to rectify the defect
      within 7 days of receipt of a notice from the
      adjudicating authority. Under sub-section (7), the
      adjudicating authority shall then communicate the
      order passed to the financial creditor and corporate
      debtor within 7 days of admission or rejection of such
      application, as the case may be.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
36. That the CRPS were at a stage when the redemption

period had expired would not lend greater weight to the

case of the appellant. They continue to be preference

shareholders and by being preference shareholders they do

not enjoy the status of the creditors of the company. Hence,

they do not fulfil the definition of a financial creditor for the

purpose of
Section 7
of the IBC.
Page 29 of 42
37. We are supported by the following holding of this Court

in
Radha Exports (India) Private Limited vs. K.P. Jayaram

and Another5
:-
”42. The definition of "financial debt" in
Section 5(8)
makes it clear that "financial debt" means a debt along
            with interest, if any, disbursed against the consideration
            for time value of money and would include money raised
            or borrowed against the payment of interest; amount
            raised by acceptance under any acceptance credit
            facility or its dematerialised equivalent, amount raised
            pursuant to any note purchase facility or the issue of
            bonds, notes, debentures, loan stock or any similar
            instrument; the amount of any liability in respect of any
            lease or hire purchase contract which is deemed as a
            finance or capital lease under the Indian accounting
            standards or such other accounting standards as may be
            prescribed; receivables sold or discounted other than
            any receivables sold on non-recourse basis or any
            amount raised under any other transaction, including any
            forward sale or purchase agreement, having the
            commercial effect of a borrowing. Explanation to
Section
            5(8)
which relates to real estate projects is of no
            relevance in the facts and circumstances of this case.
            The payment received for shares, duly issued to a
            third party at the request of the payee as evident from
            official records, cannot be a debt, not to speak of
            financial debt. Shares of a company are transferable
            subject to restrictions, if any, in its Articles of Association
            and attract dividend when the company makes profits.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
38. The contention of Mr. Niranjan Reddy that the Court has

to unveil the underlying intent especially when the outward

structure masked the borrowing arrangements is absolutely
5
(2020) 10 SCC 538
Page 30 of 42
without merit. As the board resolution dated 30.07.2015

clearly indicates, the appellant who before the issuance of

CRPS had some receivables due on account of the

construction contracts took a conscious call to accept the

CRPS. The Board resolution further indicates the following:-
“The company secretary explained in detail the terms and

conditions of the RPS”. She also informed the board that if the

proposal is accepted by the board of directors, there will be

no outflow of funds from the company and only the

outstanding receivables will be converted into RPS.          The

Board resolution also noticed that the lenders of Matix, the

respondent, have agreed to extend additional credit facilities

to Matix provided Matix brings in additional equity to such

extent as to achieve the debt equity ratio of 2:1 and

therefore, by conversion of dues of the company into RPS,

Matix will be able to show equity infusion and draw

additional credit facilities from the lenders. It is further

mentioned in the board resolution that if CRPS is not

accepted the prospects of recovery of the dues looked dim.
Page 31 of 42
On this basis CRPS came to be issued for a total value of INR

250 Crores.
39. In view of the issuance of CRPS, the earlier outstanding

amount stood extinguished and the nature of relationship of

the appellant with the respondent became that of a

preference shareholder. There is no question of there being

any underlying contrary intent as the only intent was to

convert the debt into preferential shareholding. The egg

having been scrambled, Mr. Reddy’s attempt to unscramble

it, must necessarily fail.
40. A           Division         Bench   of   the   Delhi   High    Court     in
Commissioner                    of   Income   Tax    vs.    Rathi   Graphics

Technologies Limited,6
dealing with the extinguishment of

the liability of interest in view of the conversion of the same

into equity held as under:-
“16. When pursuant to a settlement the creditor agrees
            to convert a portion of interest into shares, it must be
            treated as an extinguishment of liability to pay interest to
            that extent. In essence there will be no further
            outstanding interest to that extent. Consequently, the
            situation where an interest payable on a loan is
6
2015 SCC OnLine Del 14470
Page 32 of 42
converted into shares in the name of the lender/creditor
      is different from the situation envisaged in Explanation
      3C to
section 43B
of the Act, viz., conversion of interest
      into "a loan or borrowing". In the latter instance, the
      liability continues, although in a different form. However,
      where the interest or a part thereof is converted into
      equity shares, the said Interest amount for which the
      conversion is taking place is no longer a liability.”
41. There is no merit in the reliance placed on the judgment

of the NCLAT in Sanjay D Kakade (supra). As has been held

in the impugned order, the said case turned on the

interpretation of the share subscription and the shareholders

agreement and documentation available thereon.                  It was

held by the NCLAT that the said case was not a case

regarding allocation of shares by payment of money on the

basis of which a Section 7-application came to be filed. It

was further held that the said case was not a case of simple

allotment of shares.
NCLAT therein distinguished
Radha

Exports
(supra) with the above observations.                 We are

convinced on the perusal of the transaction between the

parties in the present case that the appellant as preference

shareholder could not have maintained an application under
Section 7
, IBC.
Page 33 of 42
42. Equally, the reliance placed on
Global Credit Capital

Ltd.
(supra) and
Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure Ltd.
(supra) by Mr. Niranjan Reddy, learned Senior Advocate, is

not apposite. Applying the real nature of the transaction, the

sole irresistible conclusion that is possible is that the

appellant being a preference shareholder, is not a creditor

and an application by it under
Section 7
was not

maintainable, as has been rightly held by the authorities

below.
ENTRIES      IN   BOOKS       OF    ACCOUNTS        –    NOT
DETERMINATIVE:
43. Mr. Niranjan Reddy, learned Senior Counsel, contended

that financial debt is an admitted liability in the books of

accounts of Matix. This was countered by the learned Senior

Counsels for Matix by contending that entries in account

books are not determinative of the true nature of the

transaction. Accounting Standards (AS 32) prescribe that a

preference share that provides for mandatory redemption by

the issuer for a fixed or determinable amount at a fixed or
Page 34 of 42
determinable future date, or gives the holder the right to

require the issuer to redeem the instrument at or after a

particular date for a fixed or determinable amount, is a

financial liability. However, the treatment in the accounts

due to the prescription of accounting standards will not be

determinative of the nature of relationship between the

parties as reflected in the documents executed by them.

Further the IBC has its own prerequisites which a party needs

to fulfil and unless those parameters are met, an application

under
Section 7
will not pass the initial threshold. Hence, by

resort to the treatment in the accounts this case cannot be

decided.
44. Emphasizing the significance of the true nature of the

transaction,           this   Court   in
State    Bank     of   India     vs.

Commissioner of Income Tax, Ernakulam7
held as under:-
“11. It was held by this Court in
Sutlej Cotton Mills Ltd.
              v. CIT
[(1978) 4 SCC 358 : 1979 SCC (Tax) 22 : (1979)
              116 ITR 1] that where profit or loss arose to an assessee
              on account of appreciation or depreciation in the value
              of foreign currency held by him, on conversion into
              another currency, such profit or loss would ordinarily
7
(1985) 4 SCC 585
Page 35 of 42
be a trading profit or loss if the foreign currency was
              held by the assessee on revenue account or as a trading
              asset or as part of circulating capital embarked in the
              business. But, if on the other hand, the foreign currency
              was held as a capital asset or as fixed capital, such
              profit or loss would be of a capital nature.
12. The important question to be considered is the
              true nature of the transaction and whether in fact it
              had resulted in profit or loss to the assessee. In that
              context it is well settled that the way in which
              entries are made by the assessee in its books of
              account is not determinative of the question whether
              the assessee has earned any profit or suffered any
              loss. The assessee might, by making entries which
              were not in conformity with the proper principles of
              accountancy, have concealed profit or showed loss and
              the entries made by him could not, therefore, be
              regarded as conclusive one way or the other.”
                                                       (Emphasis supplied)
45. Further, in
Union of India vs. Association of Unified

Telecom Service Providers of India and Others,8
the Court

held as under:-
“65. As per Clause 20.4, a licensee must make quarterly
            payment in the prescribed format as Annexure II
            showing the computation of revenue and licence fee
            payable. The format is part of the licence and is
            independent of accounting standards and is in tune with
            the definition of gross revenue, and is the basis for the
            calculation of licence fee. It is only for uniformity that the
            account has to be maintained as per accounting
            standards AS-9 which are prescribed from time to time.
            Once the licensee provides the details to the
            Government in format Annexure II along with accounts
8
(2020) 3 SCC 525
Page 36 of 42
certified by the auditor, the reconciliation has to take
place. The accounting standard AS-9 is relevant only for
whether the figure given by the licensee as to gross
revenue is maintained in proper manner once gross
revenue is ascertained, then after certain deductions,
adjusted gross revenue has to be worked out. The
accounting standard provided in AS-9 cannot override
the definition of gross revenue, which is the total
revenue for licence and the finding in
Union of India
v. Assn. of Unified Telecom Service Providers of India
,
(2011) 10 SCC 543 in this regard is final, binding and
operative. The accounting standard AS-9 makes it clear
that same is in the form of guidelines, it is not
comprehensive and does not supersede the practice of
accounting. It only lays down a system in which accounts
have to be maintained. Accounting standards make it
clear that it does not provide for a straitjacket formula for
accounting but merely provides for guidelines to
maintain the account books in systematic manner.
76. The definition of gross revenue is crystal clear in the
agreement. How the adjusted gross revenue to be
arrived at is also evident. It cannot be submitted that the
revenue has not been defined in the contract. Once the
gross revenue is defined, one cannot depart from it and
the very meaning is to be given to the revenue for the
agreement. Overall revenue, has to be taken into
account for determination of licence fees without set off,
as provided in the agreement. The same was defined to
simplify it to rule out the litigation, disputes and
accounting myriads. The submission raised that the term
revenue has to be interpreted as the consideration
payable in keeping with commercial and financial
parlance is what is intended to be avoided. Raising of
such submission is a futile attempt that has been made to
wriggle out of the definition of gross revenue, which has
been held to be binding in the previous judgment in
Union of India v. Assn. of Unified Telecom Service
Providers of India
, (2011) 10 SCC 543 . The submission
that the contract recognises the applicability of
accounting standards, in our opinion, it is only to
maintain books of accounts. To a certain extent, it
Page 37 of 42
cannot be disputed that to have clarity, uniformity
        and definitiveness; the accounting standards lay
        down guidelines with respect to financial terms.
        However, when the financial terms in the agreement
        are clear in the form of definition of gross revenue
        governed by Clause 19.1 of the agreement, the
        definition of Accounting Standard 9 cannot supersede
        it which is a general one.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)
46. Another important Section in the IBC to be noticed is
Section 5(8)
which prescribes that to be a financial debt

there needs to be disbursal against consideration for the

time value of money.
Section 5(8)(c)
does not talk of

preference shares while it talks of note purchase facility,

bonds, notes, debentures, loan stock, or any other similar

instrument to the categories mentioned thereunder. The

omission is significant. As demonstrated above, the paid up

money on shares being “share capital” they do not constitute

debt.
47.     As far as 5(8)(f) is concerned before we deal with the

term commercial effect of borrowing the opening clause of

5(8) cannot be lost sight of. It has to be first a debt and such

debt would be a financial debt if it is raised under any other
Page 38 of 42
transaction             including   any    forward    sale     or    purchase

agreement having the commercial effect of borrowing. As

already explained the paid up amounts towards shares do

not have the character of debt. The further argument that

redemption was due, is also not meritorious. As required

under
Section 55
of the Companies Act, 2013, the shares

could be redeemed only out of the profits or with any amount

kept apart for dividends which is not the situation in the

present case.
48. This               Court   in   Anuj   Jain,     Interim        Resolution

Professional for
Jaypee Infratech Limited vs. Axis Bank

Limited and Others9
, held as under:-
“46. Applying the aforementioned fundamental
            principles to the definition occurring in
Section 5(8)
of
            the Code, we have not an iota of doubt that for a debt to
            become ‘financial debt’ for the purpose of Part II of the
            Code, the basic elements are that it ought to be a
            disbursal against the consideration for time value of
            money. It may include any of the methods for raising
            money or incurring liability by the modes prescribed in
            sub-clauses (a) to (f) of
Section 5(8)
; it may also include
            any derivative transaction or counter-indemnity
            obligation as per sub-clauses (g) and (h) of
Section 5(8)
;
            and it may also be the amount of any liability in respect
            of any of the guarantee or indemnity for any of the items
9
(2020) 8 SCC 401
Page 39 of 42
referred to in sub-clauses (a) to (h). The requirement of
existence of a debt, which is disbursed against the
consideration for the time value of money, in our
view, remains an essential part even in respect of
any of the transactions/dealings stated in sub-
clauses (a) to (i) of
Section 5(8)
, even if it is not
necessarily stated therein. In any case, the definition,
by its very frame, cannot be read so expansive, rather
infinitely wide, that the root requirements of
‘disbursement’ against ‘the consideration for the time
value of money’ could be forsaken in the manner that any
transaction could stand alone to become a financial debt.
In other words, any of the transactions stated in the said
sub-clauses (a) to (i) of
Section 5(8)
would be falling
within the ambit of ‘financial debt’ only if it carries the
essential elements stated in the principal clause or at
least has the features which could be traced to such
essential elements in the principal clause. In yet other
words, the essential element of disbursal, and that too
against the consideration for time value of money, needs
to be found in the genesis of any debt before it may be
treated as ‘financial debt’ within the meaning of
Section
5(8)
of the Code. This debt may be of any nature but a
part of it is always required to be carrying, or
corresponding to, or at least having some traces of
disbursal against consideration for the time value of
money.
49. Expounding yet further, in our view, the peculiar
elements of these expressions “financial creditor” and
“financial debt”, as occurring in
Sections 5(7)
and
5(8)
,
when visualised and compared with the generic
expressions “creditor” and “debt” respectively, as
occurring in
Sections 3(10)
and
3(11)
of the Code, the
scheme of things envisaged by the Code becomes
clearer. The generic term “creditor” is defined to mean
any person to whom the debt is owed and then, it has
also been made clear that it includes a ‘financial
creditor’, a ‘secured creditor’, an ‘unsecured creditor’,
an ‘operational creditor’, and a ‘decree-holder’.
Similarly, a “debt” means a liability or obligation in
respect of a claim which is due from any person and this
Page 40 of 42
expression has also been given an extended meaning to
      include a ‘financial debt’ and an ‘operational debt’.”

                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
49. Further, in
Global Credit Capital Limited
(supra),

elucidating on the meaning of “financial debt” as defined in
Section 5(8)
, this Court held as under:-
“14. … … The definition incorporates the expression
      “means and includes”. The first part of the definition,
      which starts with the word “means”, provides that
      there has to be a debt along with interest, if any,
      which is disbursed against the consideration for the
      time value of money. The word “and” appears after
      the word “money”. Before the words “and includes”,
      the legislature has not incorporated a comma. After
      the word “includes”, the legislature has incorporated
      Categories (a) to (i) of financial debts. Hence, the
      cases covered by Categories (a) to (i) must satisfy the
      test
laid down by
the earlier part of clause (8). The
      test laid down therein is that there has to be a debt
      along with interest, if any, and it must be disbursed
      against the consideration for the time value of
      money.
23. Now, coming back to the definition of a financial debt
      under clause (8) of
Section 5
IBC, in the facts of the case,
      there is no doubt that there is a debt with interest @ 21%
      p.a. The provision made for interest payment shows that
      it represents consideration for the time value of money.
Now, we come to sub-clause (f) of clause (8) of
Section 5
IBC. The first condition of applicability of sub clause (f) is
      that the amount must be raised under any other
      transaction. Any other transaction means a transaction
      which is not covered by sub-clauses (a) to (e). Sub-
      clause (f) covers all those transactions not covered by
      any of these sub-clauses of clause (8) that satisfy the test
      in the first part of
Section 8
. The condition for the
Page 41 of 42
applicability of sub-clause (f) is that the transaction must
         have the commercial effect of borrowing. “Transaction”
         has been defined in clause (33) of
Section 3
IBC, which
         includes an agreement or arrangement in writing for the
         transfer of assets, funds, goods, etc. from or to the
         corporate debtor. In this case, there is an arrangement in
         writing for the transfer of funds to the corporate debtor.
         Therefore, the first condition incorporated in sub-clause
(f) is fulfilled.
(Emphasis supplied)
50. For all these reasons stated above, we find no merit in

this appeal. The appeal stands dismissed. No order as to

costs.
……….........................J.
                                                [J. B. PARDIWALA]



                                               ……….........................J.
                                              [K. V. VISWANATHAN]
    New Delhi;
28th October, 2025
Page 42 of 42