[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ritu Garg vs Board Of Governors Bog on 29 October, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1285
                                                                                     REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.11897/2025

                            RITU GARG & ORS.                                  APPELLANTS

                                                       VERSUS

                            BOARD OF GOVERNORS BOG & ORS.                     RESPONDENTS

                                                        WITH

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.11898/2025

                            POONAM JINDAL                                       APPELLANT

                                                       VERSUS

                            HANUMAN DEVIDAS CHALAK & ORS.                      RESPONDENTS


                                                   JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1.               These two appeals take exception to the common judgment and order

                         dated 31st May, 20241 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of

                         Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh2 while disposing of two writ petitions3.

                         While taking such exception, the appellants seek to discredit the portion

                         of the impugned order which adversely affects their interest.
2.               We propose to refer to the impugned order in some detail after
Signature Not Verified
completing the factual narration.
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant
Date: 2025.11.06
17:43:03 IST
1
impugned order
   Reason:
2
High Court
3
CWP No.15972 of 2023 (O&M) and CWP No.354 of 2024 (O&M)
3.    The facts, which are common to both the appeals, are these.
4.    The appellants are Assistant Professors employed by the National Institute

      of Technology, Kurukshetra4 since 2008 in different disciplines. They

      aspired for appointment on the immediate higher post of “Associate

      Professor”, a selection post. However, since the appellants did not qualify

      the eligibility criteria of having Academic Grade Pay of Rs.8,000/- for at

      least three years at the level of Assistant Professor in terms of the

      relevant recruitment rules, they were ineligible to even enter the zone of

      consideration for selection.
5.    At this stage, on 06th October, 2017, a letter was issued by the

      Department     of   Higher     Education,   Ministry   of   Human   Resource

      Development, Government of India5. It was sought to be conveyed that

      based on the recommendations of the Anomaly Committee, it had inter

      alia been decided to grant one-time relaxation to those Assistant

      Professors who did not have Academic Grade Pay of Rs.8,000/-. By an

      executive instruction, the recruitment rules were sought to be amended

      by waiving the requirement of Academic Grade Pay, referred to above.

      Thus, in terms of such letter, those Assistant Professors employed in the

      National Institutes of Technology6 across the country, who had put in

      more than six years of service after acquiring Ph.D. degrees at the level of
4
NIT, Kurukshetra
5
GoI
6
NITs
2
Assistant Professor could be considered for selection and consequent

         appointment on the post of Associate Professor.
6.       We are informed that there are in all 31 NITs across the country and the

         executive instruction contained in the said letter dated 06th October, 2017

         giving one-time relaxation was given effect for Assistant Professors in all

         the other NITs except the NIT, Kurukshetra and Dr. B.R. Ambedkar

         National    Institute   of   Technology,   Jalandhar7.   This   is   because   of

         intervening    litigation    which   prevented    the    one-time     relaxation

         contemplated thereby from being implemented, as noticed hereafter.
7.       An advertisement bearing no.3/18 dated 10th January, 2018 was issued

         by the NIT, Kurukshetra following the said letter dated 06th October,

         2017. In pursuance thereof, the appellants offered their candidature.
8.       It is the case of the appellants that they were selected and recommended

         for appointment on the post of “Associate Professor” by a resolution dated

         27th November, 2018 and were awaiting appointment as Associate

         Professors.
9.       Meanwhile, writ proceedings had been initiated before the High Court by a

         certain section of Assistant Professors, junior to the appellants as far as

         length of service is concerned. They did not succeed before a Single Judge

         of the High Court. Vide an order dated 17th September, 2018, the NIT,

         Kurukshetra was allowed to complete the selection process.
7
NIT, Jalandhar
3
10.   The order dated 17th September, 2018 was carried in an intra-court

      appeal. A Division Bench of the High Court by a judgment and order dated

      05th December, 2019 (while setting aside the judgment and order of the

      Single Judge) held that the letter dated 06th October, 2017 was contrary

      to the First Statutes of the NIT, Kurukshetra framed under the National

      Institutes of Technology Act, 2007 and hence no benefit of the instruction

      contained in such letter could enure to the benefit of any Assistant

      Professor employed in the NIT, Kurukshetra.
11.   The said judgment and order of the Division Bench of the High Court was

      challenged in a special leave petition8 before this Court. A coordinate

      Bench by its order dated 17th January, 2022 dismissed the special leave

      petition.
12.   The events that unfolded after dismissal of the special leave petition by

      this Court form the trigger for these appellate proceedings and have

      substantial relevance for a decision on these appeals.
13.   The Ministry of Education, Department of Higher Education, Technical

      Section-III (NITs Division), GoI moved a proposal before the Visitor (Her

      Excellency, the President of India) for amendment in the statutes of, inter

      alia, of the NIT, Kurukshetra as per decision of the Council of the National

      Institutes of Technology, Science, Education and Research. A summary

      was prepared for the Visitor by the relevant department, with the
8 SLP (C) Diary No.21233/2020
4
recommendation of the Hon’ble Education Minister. Relevant portions of

the summary note read as follows: -
“3.10 The one-time relaxation was only a one-time measure to
     address and remove the stagnation of existing faculty at a
     particular level without affecting the career prospects of other
     facilities joining NITs system. Once the recruitment drive with one-
     time relaxation is completed, it has nothing to do with the RRs
     notified on 24th July, 2017 for future recruitments. As such, it
     wasn’t felt appropriate to make these one-time relaxations part of
     the Statutes of NITs & IIEST, Shibpur especially considering the
     amended provisions under sub-statute (3) of Statute 23 of the
     Statutes of NITs and IIEST-Shibpur.
3.11 However, based on the facts, decisions of the Council of
     NITSER and directions of the Hon’ble High Court, it has become
     necessary to incorporate the clarifications vis-à-vis one-time
     relaxations under Schedule ‘E’ of the Statutes of NITs, IIEST-
Shibpur and NIT-Andhra Pradesh retrospectively by way of suitable
     amendments. The Council of NITSER in its 12th meeting has
     already approved to carry out necessary amendments and further
     authorized Ministry of Education to carry out necessary
     amendments.
3.12 In accordance with provisions under Section 26 (2) of the
     Act, the Board of Governors of all the 31 NITs and IIEST, Shibpur
     have conveyed the approval of their Board in response to our
     communication dated 27th October, 2020 for carrying out
     necessary amendments in the Statutes. Having received the
     consent of the respective Board of Governors as required under
     Section 26 (2) of the Act, the draft notifications for carrying out
     amendments in the Statutes of NITs, IIEST-Shibpur and NIT-
     Andhra Pradesh were referred to the Legislative Department of the
     Ministry of Law and Justice for vetting of three draft Notifications.
     3.17 Thus, the present proposal is moved to amend the Statutes of
     30 NITs (23.04.2009 & 24.07.2017), IIEST-Shibpur (24.03.2017 &
     24.07.2017) and NIT-Andhra Pradesh (02.08.2017) to effect
     following:-
(i)    ***
             (ii)   ***
             (iii) ***
             (iv) ***
             (v)    ***
             (vi) ***
             (vii) ***
             (viii) ***
(ix) Incorporation of one-time relaxations or measures
             conveyed on 06.10.2017 and 17.11.2017 for the then
             stagnated and eligible faculty of NITs & IIEST-Shibpur with
             provision that these one-time relaxations have no validity for
             future recruitments as recruitments of existing stagnated
5
and eligible faculties have already been made (except in
                  case of NIT-Kurukshetra because of the facts mentioned in
                  para 3.9 above) in accordance with the one-time relaxations
                  and these measures stand exhausted after the first round of
                  recruitments initiated after 06.10.2017 and 17.11.2017,
                  respectively.”
14.   The recommendation of the Hon’ble Education Minister, which followed,

      reads as under: -
“4.1 The Notifications containing amendments in the statutes of 30
             NITs, IIEST-Shibpur and NIT-Andhra Pradesh, respectively, as
             vetted by the Legislative Department of Ministry of Law and
             Justice, were placed before the Hon’ble Education Minister for
             referring same to the President’s Secretariat for soliciting kind
             approval/assent of the Hon’ble President of India in her
             capacity as the Visitor of NITs in accordance with provisions
             under Section 26(3) and 26(4) of the NITSER Act, 2007.
        4.2 Hon’ble Education Minister, also in his capacity as the
             Chairperson of the Council of NITSER, has recommended
             placing the amendments contained in the Notifications before
             the Hon’ble Visitor of NITs & IIEST-Shibpur for approval. The
             recommendations of the Hon’ble Education Minister are at
             Annexure-XVI.
4.3 The notifications for notifying the amendments in the Statutes
             of 30 NITs, IIEST-Shibpur and NIT-Andhra Pradesh are placed
             at    Annexure-XVII,    Annexure-XVIII   and     Annexure-XIX,
             respectively.”
15.   By a letter dated 04th May, 2023, the Secretariat of Her Excellency, the

      President of India informed the Ministry of Education as follows: -
“2.   The Hon’ble President of India, in her capacity as the Visitor of
               National Institute of Technology and Indian Institute of
               Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur is pleased to
               approve the proposal contained in para 4 of the summary
               note.”
16.   Upon the proposal for amendment being approved by the Visitor of the

      NITs, inter alia, the notification dated 14th June, 2023 containing the First
6
Statutes of the National Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Statutes,

      20239 was published in the official gazette on 30th June, 2023.
17.   Section 1(2) of the 2023 statutes ordained that they shall apply to the

      NIT, Kurukshetra and come into force on the date of its publication in the

      official gazette. Apart from other amendments in the First Statutes which

      were incorporated, special mention needs to be made to Statute 9 since it

      falls for our consideration.
18.   Statute 9 of the 2023 statutes reads as follows: -
“(9)    The one-time relaxation or measures for the then stagnated
                  and eligible faculty of the National Institute of Technology,
                  Kurukshetra shall be as per the relaxations issued with the
                  approval of the council vide communications dated the 6th
                  October, 2017 and 17th November, 2017:
Provided that one-time relaxation or measures contained in the
                  communications dated the 6th October, 2017 and 17th
                  November, 2017 shall have no validity and stand exhausted
                  after the first round of recruitments initiated after issuance of
                  those one-time relaxations or measures and shall not have any
                  validity for subsequent rounds of recruitment of the faculty in
                  the National Institute of Technology, Kurukshetra.”
                                                                   (emphasis ours)
19.   While the NIT, Kurukshetra was in the process of considering the

      appellants in terms of the recommendation dated 27th November, 2018, a

      second round of litigation came to be initiated before the High Court with

      institution of the writ petitions, from which these appeals arise.
20.   The Division Bench by the impugned order, while allowing the writ

      petitions, held that:
“26. ... the amendment has been brought into force from the date
             it was notified in the gazette as per Section 1(3). Thus, the


9 2023 Statutes
7
qualification for promotion and experience have been substituted
            with effect from the date of the gazette notification was issued and
            would apply prospectively. Thus, Section 5 Clause (d) and (f)
            making amendments in Schedule-E would have to be treated and
            considered prospectively.”

      Ultimately, the Division Bench held as follows:
“34. Applying the aforesaid law to the facts of the present case, it
            is apparent that the selection which were conducted under
            advertisement no. 3/2018 cannot be given approval by the new
            amendments made in the Statutes. Even the counsel for the
            respondent-institutes have stated that the amendments would be
            prospective, therefore, now they would be free to issue new
            advertisement in accordance with the amendments granting due
            relaxation in the Schedule for the purpose of selection for the post
            of Associate Professor and Professor.
35.    In other words, the authorities would be free to conduct
            afresh exercise by inviting applications of all eligible candidates in
            terms of the new amendments made vide notification dated
            30.06.2023 for the post of Associate Professor and Professor. All
            the persons who are eligible for applying, would be considered. The
            petitioners and the respondents would be, therefore, entitled to be
            considered accordingly as per their work experience and other
            educational qualifications.
36.    All the stake holders will also be entitled to be considered
            afresh for which now the respondent-Institute shall take steps,
            proceed and conclude the exercise within a period of four months
            from today. The advertisements issued by the respondent-institute
            would, accordingly, be modified/corrected and applied. The stay
            order passed by the Court dated 31.07.2023 stands vacated.”
21.   Notice was initially issued to the GoI on 29th November, 2024 and to the

      respondents 1 to 3 on 16th December, 2024. GoI was specifically directed

      to place on record by way of an affidavit the summary note and the

      recommendations of the Minister for this Court’s consideration.
22.   Pursuant to such order, the GoI filed an additional affidavit placing on

      record the requisite note and recommendation.
23.   Leave was granted on 15th September, 2025 and the appeals set down for

      hearing on 15th October, 2025.
8
24.     Certain applications for intervention came to be filed, which were allowed.
I.A. No.253789/2025 & I.A. D. No.226749/2025 are also allowed by

        permitting the applicants to intervene.
25.     We have heard learned senior counsel for the appellants, learned

        Additional Solicitor General for the GoI, as well as learned counsel for the

        NIT, Kurukshetra, the writ petitioners before the High Court and the

        intervenors.
26.     In the writ petitions before the High Court, challenge was laid to the

        amendments that were incorporated in the First Statutes through the

        2023 Statutes concerning Statute 9. It was the contention of the writ

        petitioners that “there was no occasion to issue the notification which has

        been done only to overturn the judgment of this Court upheld by the

        Supreme Court” which amounts to overreaching the process of the Courts

        and “the rule which was amended, has been given retrospective effect” to

        benefit “those who have been selected ... under the advertisement

        no.3/2018” which otherwise they were not entitled to.
27.     We must begin our analysis bearing in mind four important propositions of

        law.
28.     First, is the guidance provided by Hon’ble O. Chinappa Reddy, J. in RBI v.
Peerless General Finance & Investment Co. Ltd.10 on how a statute is

        to be read and understood. The relevant passage reads:
“33. Interpretation must depend on the text and the context. They
               are the bases of interpretation. One may well say if the text is the
10
(1987) 1 SCC 424
9
texture, context is what gives the colour. Neither can be ignored.
Both are important. That interpretation is best which makes the
            textual interpretation match the contextual. A statute is best
            interpreted when we know why it was enacted. With this
            knowledge, the statute must be read, first as a whole and then
            section by section, clause by clause, phrase by phrase and word by
            word. If a statute is looked at, in the context of its enactment, with
            the glasses of the statute-maker, provided by such context, its
            scheme, the sections, clauses, phrases and words may take colour
            and appear different than when the statute is looked at without the
            glasses provided by the context. With these glasses we must look
            at the Act as a whole and discover what each section, each clause,
            each phrase and each word is meant and designed to say as to fit
            into the scheme of the entire Act. No part of a statute and no word
            of a statute can be construed in isolation. Statutes have to be
            construed so that every word has a place and everything is in its
            place. ...”
29.   Three key concepts flow from the above passage. Holistic understanding

      is the first in terms whereof the statute has to be read as a whole instead

      of focusing on isolated parts. Secondly, the emphasis is on contextual

      understanding requiring the circumstances and objectives which triggered

      the statute’s enactment to be taken into account. Thirdly, the rule of

      purposive interpretation is stressed: the statute has to be interpreted in a

      manner that advances its intended purpose and objectives.
30.   Drawing guidance from the above, we are minded to hold that the most

      effective way to interpret the 2023 Statutes is to align its context with the

      purpose. To achieve this, it is crucial to understand the objective behind

      Statute 9 being introduced and read the 2023 Statutes as a cohesive

      whole.
31.   The second proposition is that according to the principles of statutory

      construction, a statute which is explanatory or clarificatory of the earlier
10
enactment is usually held to be retrospective. One may profitably refer to

        the decision in
S.S. Grewal v. State of Punjab11
in this context.
32.     The third proposition of law that is well-settled is that though the

        legislature has no power to sit over the judgment of a Court or usurp

        judicial power, but, subject to the competence to make law, it has the

        power to remove the basis which led to the Court’s decision.
In the

        decision of this Court in
State of Kerala v. Peoples Union
for Civil

        Liberties12, one finds the following instructive passage:
“68. Where a new Act is enacted removing the very basis on which
              the High Court made a preceding Act invalid, it matters not
              whether the same is not termed as a validating statute or not. In
              the present case, however, in our opinion, such a question does
              not arise as the 1975 Act was not declared to be invalid.
In
Bakhtawar Trust v. M.D. Narayan
[(2003) 5 SCC 298] this Court
              held: (SCC p. 312, para 26)

                        ‘26. … In order to validate an executive action or any
                        provision of a statute, it is not sufficient for the legislature to
                        declare that a judicial pronouncement given by a court of
                        law would not be binding, as the legislature does not possess
                        that power. A decision of a court of law has a binding effect
                        unless the very basis upon which it is given is so altered that
the said decision
would not have been given in the changed
                        circumstances.’


              The reason is not far to seek. The legislature cannot overrule a
              judgment but it can remove the basis on which the judgment has
              been rendered.”
33.     Finally, the proposition of law
laid down in
Union of India v. M.

        Bhaskar13
is that grant of notional promotion to a post with retrospective

        effect cannot mean gaining experience from that day, because to gain
11
1993 Supp (3) SCC 234
12 (2009) 8 SCC 46
13
(1996) 4 SCC 416
11
experience one has to work. Notional promotions are given to take care of

        some injustice but a person so promoted cannot gain experience from the

        date of notional promotion; it has to be from the date of actual

        promotion.
34.     The same view has been reiterated in a decision of this Court of recent

        origin in
Ravi Oraon v. The State of Jharkhand14
.
35.     Having noted the propositions of law having a vital effect on the decision

        to be rendered on these appeals, we now proceed with our analysis.
36.     In our considered opinion, the High Court correctly spurned the challenge

        to the validity of Statute 9; however, it erred in holding that owing to

        Statute 1(3) of the 2023 Statutes making it (the amended Statutes)

        operative from the date of its publication in the official gazette, a fresh

        exercise had to be conducted by inviting applications and granting

        opportunity to all eligible candidates in terms of the amended law. There

        cannot be any quarrel with what Statute 1(3) ordains; but having regard

        to the specific language employed in Statute 9, which has been

        highlighted above, it cannot be gainsaid that the same had the effect of

        clarifying/explaining that the recruitment drive initiated by the NIT,

        Kurukshetra immediately after issuance of the letter dated 6th October,

        2017, which granted a one-time relaxation for its stagnating Assistant

        Professors, stands validated with effect from 30th June, 2023. Further,

        what Statute 9, with effect from the date of publication of the 2023
14
2025 SCC OnLine SC 2192
12
Statutes in the official gazette, permitted was to enable the recruitment

drive initiated pursuant to the advertisement bearing no. 03/2018 to be

taken to its logical conclusion together with clear stipulations that

thereafter, i.e., after such recruitment drive is concluded, the benefit

conferred by Statute 9 would stand exhausted and such relaxation will not

have any validity for any subsequent recruitment drive. The whole

purpose of moving the proposal for amendments by the GoI was to give

effect to the idea expressed in the letter dated 6th October, 2017 for the

NIT, Kurukshetra which, for good reasons, had been interdicted by the

High Court in the first round of litigation, whereafter the situation was

sought to be remedied by having the First Statutes amended in a manner

known to law by introducing Statute 9 in the 2023 Statutes. Apart from

the settled propositions of law noticed above, it is equally well-known that

if a judgment of a Court holds a particular action of the executive to be

bad and illegal because such action suffers from certain procedural

defect(s),   the   legislature/executive,   as   the   case   may   be,   by   an

amendment in the law/rules, may cure the defect on which the judicial

order was premised and such curing would not amount to overreaching

the judgment of the Court. As would also be evident from the summary

note
referred to above
, the amendment incorporated in the First Statutes

by introducing Statute 9 was clarificatory in nature to extend benefits to

the Assistant Professors of the NIT, Kurukshetra retrospectively, at par

with the Assistant Professors of all the other NITs in the country, based on
13
the purpose which the instruction contained in the letter dated 6th

      October, 2017 sought to achieve. Such purpose, we reiterate, was

      intended to give a one-time relaxation through amendment of the

      relevant statutes in the wake of the previous judgment and order of the

      Division Bench of the High Court which had interdicted specifically on the

      ground   that    a   statute   was   sought    to     be   supplanted,   and    not

      supplemented, by an executive instruction: an exercise impermissible in

      law. Such a clarification/explanation given by Statute 9, for a limited

      purpose, was well-nigh permissible and had to be read as part of the First

      Statutes. The impugned order, therefore, nullified the purpose for which

      Statute 9 was introduced and proceeded to extend benefits even to those

      Assistant Professors who might not have been qualified even to

      participate in the process in terms of the advertisement bearing

      no.03/2018 and thereby placing unequals and equals at par.
37.   Having regard to the above, our interference is called for but to the

      limited extent as indicated hereafter.
38.   Bearing in mind the provisions contained in Statute 9 of the 2023

      Statutes, we direct that such of the appellants as well as the intervenors

      who might have qualified in the selection process pursuant to the

      recruitment drive initiated vide the advertisement bearing no. 03/2018

      and were recommended for appointment on the post of Associate

      Professor   on   27th November,       2018    shall   be   considered    for   such

      appointment by the Board of Governors of the NIT, Kurukshetra and upon
14
being found suitable, they will be offered notional appointment with effect

      from any date post 27th November, 2018, as the Board may decide on

      facts and in the circumstances. We leave the issue of the date of notional

      appointment for a decision by the Board owing to conflicting claims being

      raised before us with regard to such date.
39.   We make it clear that those appellants/intervenors who are ultimately

      appointed in terms of this order as Associate Professor shall, however, not

      be entitled to claim any arrear financial benefit as well as teaching

      experience       from   the    date   of   such   notional   appointment   for

      appointment/promotion to any higher post or other benefit. This is for the

      simple reason that such appointment did not result in actual experience

      being gained by them while working on the post of Associate Professor.
40.   Notwithstanding what we have observed above, the appellants shall be

      treated as Associate          Professors from the   dates of their   notional

      appointment for the purpose of continuity in services to receive terminal

      benefits.
41.   The Board of Governors of NIT, Kurukshetra is directed to take an

      appropriate decision in terms of this order within a period of a month from

      date.
42.   It is made abundantly clear that in terms of Statute 9 of the 2023

      Statutes, the one-time relaxation as conceived thereby would stand

      exhausted once consideration is made by the Board of Governors in terms

      of this order.
15
43.   The impugned order of the Division Bench of the High Court is modified to

      the aforesaid extent.
44.   The appeals stand disposed of on the aforesaid terms.
45.   Since we have confined our discussion to the grievances voiced by the

      Assistant Professors of the NIT, Kurukshetra and there being no appeal

      against the impugned order by any faculty member presently serving in

      the NIT, Jalandhar, this order shall have no effect insofar as such institute

      is concerned.
46.   Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
………………………………………J.
                                                      (DIPANKAR DATTA)



                                              …………………………………………J.
                                               (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)
      NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 29, 2025.
16