[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajendra Singh And Ors. Etc vs State Of Uttarakhand on 7 October, 2025
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
2025 INSC 1193                                                         REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NOs. 476-477 OF 2013


                      RAJENDRA SINGH AND ORS.                          …APPELLANT(S)


                                                  VERSUS

                      STATE OF UTTARANCHAL ETC.                     …RESPONDENT(S)


                                             JUDGMENT
PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.   All the three appellants, father, son and son-in-law are

                           accused in Session Trial No.215 of 2000 for the murder of

                           Pushpendra Singh, son of Diler Singh.
2.   They were acquitted by the Trial Court but have been

                           convicted under
Section 302
of Indian Penal Code (for short,

                           ‘
IPC
’) with life imprisonment and a fine of Rs.10,000/- each
Signature Not Verified
by the High Court vide the judgment and order dated
Digitally signed by
02.01.2013 passed in Government Appeal No.347 of 2007
geeta ahuja
Date: 2025.10.07
17:36:23 IST
Reason:
(
State of Uttaranchal vs. Rajendra Singh and Ors.
).
1
3.   All the three accused have challenged the aforesaid

     judgment and order of their conviction and sentence by

     means of this appeal.
4.   The prosecution story in brief is that on the morning of

     03.06.2000, the appellant no.1 – Rajendra Singh and his

     son appellant no.2 – Bhupender Singh started digging the

     field of Diler Singh, the father of the deceased, for laying

     down plinth. Due to the aforesaid action of the appellants,

     an altercation took place between them and Diler Singh.
5.   On the same day at about 1.30 p.m. when the deceased –

     Pushpendra Singh was sitting at the Jogither diversion

     (Tiraha), his father – Diler Singh who had gone to the flour

     mill of Kakka Singh, while returning accompanied by his

     brother-in-law - Papender Singh, saw the appellants coming

     on the motorcycle driven by the appellant no.3 – Ranjeet

     Singh at the said spot. They parked their vehicle and

     exhorted the deceased who started running followed by all

     the three accused persons armed with swords and carrying

     a kanta (a sharp edged weapon).
2
6.   The deceased ran for some time towards the northern fields

     raising an alarm. Witnessing the same, Diler Singh,

     Papender Singh and some other persons including Jwala

     Singh started running behind the accused persons to save

     the deceased. The deceased, attempting to save his life,

     entered into the house of one Mukhtyar Singh. The

     appellants also entered the said premises and inflicted

     blows with swords and Kanta upon the deceased who

     ultimately died on the spot. The father of the deceased Diler

     Singh (PW-1) on the same day lodged an FIR at 02.50 p.m.

     at Police Station, Nanak Matta under
Section 302
of IPC

     (
Section 103(1)
BNS). The panchnama was prepared,

     statement of the witnesses were recorded, site plan was also

     prepared and the dead body was sent for post-mortem,

     which was conducted the next day.
7.   The appellant nos.1 and 3 were arrested on 05.06.2000 and

     one sword and the Kanta, the alleged weapons of crime,

     were   recovered   as   per       the   disclosure   made   by   the

     appellants.
3
8.   The appellant no.2 was arrested on 07.06.2000 and the

     sword used by him in the commission of the offence was

     recovered based on his disclosure.
9.   Upon completion of investigation, the police submitted the

     chargesheet on 14.06.2000 charging all the three accused

     for an offence under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of the

     IPC.
10. We had heard Shri Rajul Bhargava, senior advocate and

     Shri Siddharth Agarwal, senior advocate along with Shri

     Vivek Singh, advocate-on-record from the side of the

     appellants and Shri Kuldeep Parihar, D.A.G and Ms.

     Anubha Dhulia, advocate for the State of Uttarakhand.
11. The primary submission on behalf of the appellants is that

     they have been falsely implicated. There is no reliable

     evidence to establish the identity of the appellants as the

     alleged assailants. There is no eyewitness to the incident,

     except the lady of the house into which the deceased had

     entered to save his life. There are large contradictions in the

     statements of the witnesses and that the discovery of the
4
weapons of crime is false and otherwise also has no

    relevance to establish the identity of the accused with that

    of the assailants.
12. The State counsel has stoutly opposed the submissions

    advanced from the side of the appellants and has submitted

    that all the three accused were seen by the witnesses

    chasing the deceased, who had entered the house of

    Mukhtyar Singh, and assaulted him with the swords and

    the kanta which fact was witnessed by the lady of the

    house, Amarjeet Kaur (PW-7). The clothes of PW-7 which

    had blood stains were sealed by the police and the FSL

    report confirmed the presence of blood on the clothes. On

    the disclosure of the appellants, the weapons of crime were

    recovered, and they admitted to having committed the crime

    with the same. The above evidence leaves no scope for

    doubt about the commission of the offence at the hands of

    the appellants. Therefore, the High Court rightly reversed

    the decision of acquittal recorded by the Trial Court, so as
5
to convict the appellants for the offence under
Section 302
of IPC and sentenced them to life imprisonment.
13. There is no dispute to the fact that on the morning of the

     fateful day, appellant nos.1 and 2 had a quarrel with the

     father of the deceased – Diler Singh, as they were stopped

     from digging the field for laying the plinth. The aforesaid

     altercation between the two groups may be a motive to

     attack and kill the son of Diler Singh, but that by itself

     would not be sufficient to rope in the appellants unless their

     involvement in the offence is established by cogent evidence.

     Therefore,   the   primary       issue   which   arises   for   our

     consideration is, whether the appellants are the real

     persons who chased the deceased and killed him. This has

     to be ascertained on the basis of the ocular evidence.
14. In this connection, the primary evidence is of the lady of the

     house Amarjeet Kaur (PW-7). The said witness, who is the

     wife of Mukhtyar Singh, the owner of the house, clearly

     deposed that the three accused persons killed the boy in

     the house. They entered carrying swords and other weapons
6
in their hands. She tried to refrain them from assaulting

     the boy, and in that process, her kurta received blood

     stains. The victim fell down on the dewan after sustaining

     injuries. Nobody inflicted any injury after the victim fell on

     the dewan. The victim’s father and other people came there

     within half an hour of the departure of the assailants. The

     police took her blood-stained kurta and even the bedsheet

     in their possession, which she identified as Exhibit-1 and

     Exhibit-2. She categorically stated that she did not know

     the name of the accused persons.
15. The aforesaid testimony of PW-7 clearly reflects that she had

     seen three unknown persons, assaulting the deceased with

     weapons like swords and that the deceased fell down on the

     dewan, whereafter the assailants left without inflicting

     further injuries upon him. The father of the deceased and

     other persons came there only after about half an hour. A

     careful reading of the testimony of PW-7, as a whole, would

     indicate that she did not know the names of the accused

     persons and thus, could not disclose their identity. She had
7
only seen three persons attacking and assaulting the boy

    but could not identify those persons.
16. No identification parade was carried out and PW-7 was not

    even asked to confirm whether the appellants were the

    accused persons. The police failed to get the appellants

    identified by her. Therefore, it is doubtful whether the

    persons who assaulted the deceased were actually the

    appellants.
17. The prosecution sought to establish the identity of the

    accused persons with the help of testimony of Diler Singh

    (PW-1) and Jwala Singh (PW-2).
18. A close look at the testimony of PW-1 would reveal that on

    03.06.2000 at about 1.30 p.m., on returning from the flour

    mill of Kakka Singh, he saw his deceased son sitting at

    Jogither diversion on a bench, when all the three appellants

    came on motorcycle carrying naked swords. They parked

    the   motorcycle   and    threatened/provoked    his   son,

    whereupon his son started running towards the fields. The

    appellants chased him with swords and kanta. His son kept
8
crying “Save Me, Save Me”. Thereupon, on hearing the

    scream, he and his brother-in-law - Papender Singh, ran

    after the accused persons to save the deceased. They were

    followed by Jwala Singh, Bachan Singh and Bhagat Singh.

    The deceased entered the house of Mukhtyar Singh to save

    himself. The appellants also went inside. He saw the

    appellants striking his son with weapons. His son fell on the

    dewan and died due to the injuries. The appellants,

    thereafter, fled from the scene.
19. In his cross-examination, he admitted that the Jogither

    diversion is about 1.5 kms. away from his house and that

    there are three to four shops at the diversion itself. The

    house of Mukhtyar Singh is also at a distance of 1.25 kms.

    At the time of the incident, people were working in the fields

    and they also saw the appellants chasing his son. He also

    stated that he chased the appellants for about 10-15

    minutes towards the house of Mukhtyar Singh and was

    about 40 to 50 steps behind them when his son entered the

    house of Mukhtyar Singh. The appellants attacked his son
9
with swords and Kanta even after he fell down on the

     dewan. They kept hitting him, mainly on the head, for

     about a minute. Amarjeet Kaur (PW-7) had tried to save his

     son and, in the process, her clothes got blood stains.

     Thereafter, he hugged his son due to which his clothes also

     got blood stains. He went to the police station in those very

     clothes, but the clothes were neither taken nor seized by the

     police.
20. If the testimony of PW-1 is seen in the light of the testimony

     of PW-7, there are striking contradictions in the statements

     of the two witnesses. The testimony of PW-7 is quite

     trustworthy and natural. She is an independent witness

     and therefore, it is safer to rely upon her statement. She has

     categorically stated that the father of the deceased and

     other persons had arrived at her house about half an hour

     after the incident or after the accused had left the place.

     The testimony of PW-7 is apparently quite trustworthy as

     there is no reason to disbelieve it. It is clear from her

     statement that PW-1 had reached the place of incident after
10
half an hour of the incident. He is, therefore, not actually an

    eyewitness who was present at the time when the

    appellants allegedly attacked the deceased. He had come

    there after about half an hour and as such cannot be an

    eyewitness to the incident of attack. Secondly, PW-1

    categorically stated that when his son fell down on the

    dewan, he hugged him and, in the process, his clothes were

    stained with blood. He never offered his blood-stained

    clothes to the police for investigation, nor did the police

    seized the same, despite the fact that he had gone to the

    police station wearing them. Rather, he stated that he

    washed them and wore them again. This is quite unnatural

    and an indicator to the fact that the PW-1 was not actually

    present when the incident of assault took place in the

    house of Mukhtyar Singh, and that the story of hugging the

    deceased is concocted.
21. It is also very unnatural for PW-1 to go to the Jogither

    diversion while returning from the flour mill of Kakka Singh

    as admittedly the said diversion is not on the way back to
11
his home. He is, therefore, a chance witness and probably

    may not have seen the appellants coming on the bike or

    even chasing the deceased. In these circumstances, PW-1

    cannot be treated as a trustworthy witness and his evidence

    cannot be relied upon to identify the appellants as the

    persons who have attacked and assaulted the deceased.
22. PW-2 - Jwala Singh also appears to be a chance witness. He

    was going to Jogither Diversion to purchase a soap but

    when he found the PW-1 chasing the appellants, he also ran

    behind him in order to help him and save the life of the

    deceased. He categorically stated that he was 60-70 steps

    behind PW-1. Naturally, his entry in the house of Mukhtyar

    Singh would have been only after PW-1, who had entered

    the house as per the ocular evidence of PW-7, about half an

    hour after the incident. In the above situation, PW-1 could

    not have been an actual eyewitness of the incident of

    assault or the person who would have seen the appellants

    well enough to recognize them as the real assailants.
12
Therefore, his evidence also could not have established the

     identity of the appellants.
23. Furthermore, no independent person of the area, the

     shopkeepers or the labourers working in the fields, who

     allegedly saw the appellants chasing the deceased, were

     called upon to enter the witness box to corroborate the

     evidence of PW-1 and PW-2.
24. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the ocular

     evidence of PW-7, PW-1 and PW-2, if read together, is not

     sufficient to identify the appellants as the persons who

     attacked and assaulted the deceased resulting in his death.

     It may be pertinent to mention here that even PW-4 - Kakka

     Singh, to whose flour mill PW-1 had allegedly gone and was

     said to be returning from there also did not support the

     statement of PW-1. He has nowhere stated that PW-1 had

     been to his flour mill, as alleged by him. Therefore, the

     presence of PW-1 at the scene of crime becomes doubtful.

     Once his presence is doubtful, the presence of PW-2 also
13
stands belied, because he categorically stated that he was

    following PW-1 and was 60-70 steps behind him.
25. The prosecution did not ask any of these witnesses to

    identify the accused persons.
26. This Court, in several decisions, while considering the

    evidentiary value of a chance witness, has held that the

    deposition of a chance witness whose presence at the place

    of incident is doubtful should be discarded, or at least be

    treated with great caution and close scrutiny. Such a

    chance witness must adequately explain his presence at the

    place of incident, which has not been satisfactorily done in

    the instant case.
27. Now, what remains before us is the recovery of the weapons

    of crime to establish the identity of the appellants as the

    persons involved in the crime. On the basis of the recovery

    of the said weapons, we have to determine if the said

    recoveries are good enough to connect the appellants with

    the crime.
14
28. Undoubtedly, the recovery of one of the swords was made

     from a garage, and the recovery of another sword and the

     Kanta was made from bushes in sugarcane field, which was

     an open space. The weapons were no doubt recovered

     allegedly on the pointing out of the appellants. However, no

     effort was made to match the blood on the said weapons

     with that of the deceased. The weapons were sent for

     forensic    examination   but        no   report      of   the   forensic

     laboratory was produced to establish that the weapons so

     recovered were smeared with the blood of the deceased to

     prove that they were actually used in the murder of the

     deceased.
29. We are afraid that the submission of the State counsel, that

     as the appellants themselves stated that they took the police

     to the place where they hid the weapons, by which they

     committed     the   offence        indicates   that    the   appellants

     admitted to have committed the offence with the above

     weapons, cannot be accepted. The statement of the

     appellants that the weapons recovered were the weapons of
15
crime cannot be read against them in view of
Sections 25
and
26
read with
Section 27
of the Indian Evidence Act,

    1872. Only that part of the statement which leads the police

    to the recovery of the weapons is admissible, and not the

    part which alleges that the weapons recovered were actually

    the weapons of crime.
30. The above three provisions of the
Evidence Act
are

    beneficial to bring home the point. They read as under:
“25. Confession to police officer not to be
         proved.––No confession made to a police
         officer, shall be proved as against a person
         accused of any offence.
26. Confession by accused while in custody
         of police not to be proved against him.––No
         confession made by any person whilst he is in
         the custody of a police officer, unless it be
         made in the immediate presence of a
         Magistrate, shall be proved as against such
         person.
Explanation.––In this section “Magistrate”
         does not include the head of a village
         discharging magisterial functions in the
         Presidency of Fort St. George or elsewhere,
         unless such headman is a Magistrate
         exercising the powers of a Magistrate under
16
the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1882 (10 of
         1882)
27. How much of information received from
         accused may be proved.––Provided that,
         when any fact is deposed to as discovered in
         consequence of information received from a
         person accused of any offence, in the custody
         of a police officer, so much of such
         information, whether it amounts to a
         confession or not, as relates distinctly to the
         fact thereby discovered, may be proved.”
31. A simple reading of all the three provisions conjointly

    reveals that the first two provisions are substantive,

    whereas
Section 27
is in the nature of an exception.
Sections 25
and
26
, at one hand, provide that no confession

    made to a police officer or to any person while in custody of

    the police, shall be admissible against a person accused of

    any offence, on the other hand,
Section 27
provides an

    exception to the above provisions. It states that so much of

    the information, received from an accused person in

    custody of the police, whether in the nature of confession or

    otherwise,   as   related   distinctly   to   the   fact   thereby

    discovered, may be admissible. This means that not all
17
information disclosed by a person in police custody is

          required to be proved as against the accused person; only

          that part which distinctly relates to the discovery of a fact is

          admissible and can be proved.
32.
In
Pulukuri Kottaya and Ors. vs. The King Emperor
1,

          the Privy Council while analysing the aforesaid three

          provisions of the
Evidence Act
, held that the fact of

          discovery, on information supplied by the accused is a

          relevant fact except in a case in which the possession or

          concealment of an object constitute the gist of the offence

          charged. Information supplied by a person in custody such

          as “I will produce a knife concealed in the roof of my house”,

          only leads to the discovery of the knife concealed in the

          house of the informant, but whether the knife is proved to

          have been used in the commission of an offence is another

          question. So if the above information is followed by the

          words, “with which I stabbed A”, those words would be

          inadmissible since they do not relate to the discovery of the

          knife from the house of the informant, but are rather
1 1947 MWN CR 45
18
independent in nature, amounting to confession of the

            crime which cannot be used against the person making it

            i.e. the accused, in view of prohibition contained under
Sections 25
and
26
of the Evidence Act.
33. The aforesaid decision has recently been followed with

            approval by the Division Bench of this Court in
Manjunath

            and Ors. vs. State of Karnataka
2 wherein it has been

            said that only “so much of the information” as relates

            distinctly to the fact thereby discovered is admissible, and

            the rest of the information stands excluded. In other words,

            the information leading to the recovery of the weapons of

            crime is admissible, but not the information that the crime

            was actually committed by the said weapons.
34. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the

            identity of the appellants as the persons involved in the

            offence has not been established either by any ocular

            evidence or from the recovery of the weapons of crime.




2 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1421
19
35. It is important to note that the order of acquittal passed by

     the Trial Court was not open to interference by the First

     Appellate Court until and unless the findings recorded by

     the Trial Court were per se perverse or erroneous. It is safer

     and more appropriate to rely upon the findings of the Trial

     Court which has seen the demeanor of the witnesses rather

     than to rely upon the findings of the First Appellate Court.

     In our opinion, the High Court erred in reversing the finding

     of the Trial Court without coming to the conclusion that the

     findings of the Trial Court were perverse.
36. Thus, in the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case,

     we are of the view that High Court manifestly erred in

     interfering with the findings of acquittal recorded by the

     Trial Court and reversing the judgment so as to convict the

     appellants. It is doubtful whether the offence has been

     committed   by   the   appellants.    The    conviction   of   the

     appellants is accordingly set aside. The appeals are allowed,

     and the appellants are acquitted of the alleged offence by

     granting them the benefit of doubt.
20
37. The appellants are on bail. Their bail bonds stand

    discharged.
.............……………………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)




                              .............……………………………….. J.
(PRASANNA B. VARALE)
NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 7, 2025.
21