[Cites
47
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sankar Padam Thapa vs Vijaykumar Dineshchandra Agarwal on 9 October, 2025
Author:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
1


2025 INSC 1210                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                     OF 2025
                            [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]

             SANKAR PADAM THAPA                                                    …APPELLANT

                                                    VERSUS

             VIJAYKUMAR DINESHCHANDRA AGARWAL                                   …RESPONDENT



                                              J U D G M E N T
AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH, J.
Leave granted.
2.             The question for consideration in the instant appeal is as to

             whether in the absence of a Trust being made an accused in a complaint

             under the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
(hereinafter referred to as

             the ‘
NI Act
’), when a Cheque has been issued on behalf of a Trust, the

             said complaint would be maintainable against the Chairman/a Trustee of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SAPNA BISHT
Date: 2025.10.09
the said Trust?
17:17:05 IST
   Reason:
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
2
THE IMPUGNED JUDGMENT:
3.     The instant appeal arises from the Final Judgment and Order

dated 21.11.2022 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Impugned Judgment’)

[2022 SCC OnLine Megh 624 | (2023) 1 GLT 344], passed by a learned

Single Judge of the High Court of Meghalaya, Shillong (hereinafter

referred to as the ‘High Court’) in Criminal Petition No.31/2019, wherein

the High Court quashed and set aside the proceedings in Criminal Case

No.44(S)/2019 pending before the Court of the learned Judicial

Magistrate, Shillong (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Trial Court’) and the

Summoning Order dated 11.02.2019 passed against the Respondent.
4.     The William Carey University (hereinafter referred to as the

‘University’), a recognized Private University, owned and sponsored by

the Agriculture Crafts Trades and Studies Group of Institutions

(hereinafter referred to as the ‘ACTS Group’), was facing a severe

financial crisis. The ACTS Group entered into a Memorandum of

Understanding with Orion Education Trust (hereinafter referred to as

‘Orion’) on 12.10.2017 to hand over the management and administration

of the University to Orion. The Respondent is the Chairman of Orion. As



CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
3
Chairman of Orion, the Respondent issued authorization letters to all

concerned, duly entrusting the Appellant with the task of liaisoning with

governmental authorities and to undertake such activities to facilitate the

effective transition of all administrative control of the University from the

hands of the ACTS Group to Orion.
5.     The Appellant alleged that pursuant to the above, upon such

transition being effected, the Respondent issued a Cheque dated

13.10.2018, bearing number 000013 for Rs.5,00,00,000/- (Rupees Five

Crores Only), drawn on Kotak Mahindra Bank, Vadodara Branch in his

favour for the services rendered by him under the signature of the

Respondent as authorized signatory of Orion. When presented by the

Appellant at his ICICI Bank Branch at Laitumkhrah, Shillong, East Khasi

Hills on 07.12.2018, the Cheque was dishonoured with the endorsement

‘insufficient funds’.
6.     Notice under
Section 138
of the NI Act was addressed by the

Appellant to the Respondent on 19.12.2018, which was received by the

Respondent on 27.12.2018. Response thereto was sent by the

Respondent vide Letter dated 28.12.2018. Subsequently, the Appellant

filed a complaint case No.44(S)/2019 before the Trial Court against the



CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
4
Respondent for offences under
Sections 138
and
142
of the NI Act as

well as under
Section 420
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. On receipt of

summons, as per the Trial Court’s Order dated 11.02.2019, the

Respondent entered appearance and challenged the complaint case on

the issue of maintainability for non-joinder of necessary parties.
7.     The     Respondent,         thereafter,     preferred       Criminal      Petition

No.31/2019 under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973

(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Code’) before the High Court seeking to

quash the complaint case and the proceedings before the Trial Court, on

the ground, inter alia, that Orion - a juristic entity and a necessary party

being a Trust - not having been added as a party, the complaint case

was non-maintainable, and consequently, no vicarious liability could be

placed on the Respondent.
8.     Allowing the Criminal Petition in the Respondent’s favour, the High

Court has, by way of the Impugned Judgment, quashed the complaint

case and the Summoning Order dated 11.02.2019 passed by the Trial

Court. Assailing the same, the present appeal has been preferred by the

Appellant.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
5
APPELLANT’S SUBMISSIONS:
9.     The arguments put forth by the learned counsel for the Appellant

were basically two-fold – (i) the ineligibility of a Trust to be sued, and; (ii)

no mandate to make specific averments with regard to the accused’s

responsibility in conducting the day-to-day business of the Trust. For the

first proposition, learned counsel placed reliance on the decision of this

Court in
Pratibha Pratisthan v Manager, Canara Bank
, (2017) 3 SCC

712, where, in the context of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘
Consumer Protection Act
’), it was held

that a Trust is not a person and therefore, could not be a consumer.
10.    Next, in support of his argument that a Trust is not capable of

being sued or suing in a court of law, learned counsel drew the attention

of this Court to the decision of the Kerala High Court in
K P Shibu v

State of Kerala
, 2019 SCC OnLine Ker 7585, holding that in the context

of the
NI Act
, it is the Trustees who can maintain and defend a suit to

protect the Trust property, and the Trust itself cannot sue or be sued in a

court of law, therefore, a Trust is not a juristic person or a legal entity, as

a juristic person has a legal existence of its own and hence is capable of

suing and being sued in a court of law. It was further held that a Trust

would not fall within the term ‘association of individuals’ as used in the NI

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
6
Act. The High Court held that since Trustees do not join together for a

common action to achieve some common benefit for themselves as

Trustees, a Trust cannot be said to be an ‘association of persons/body of

individuals’.
11.     Learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that a Trust, as

defined under the
Indian Trusts Act, 1882
(hereinafter referred to as the

‘
Trusts Act
’), is an obligation and not a legal entity. Learned counsel for

the Appellant placed reliance on the decision of the Kerala High Court in
K R Rajan v Cherian K Cherian
, 2019 SCC OnLine Ker 4699; the

decision of the Delhi High Court in Duli Chand v M/s M P T C

Charitable Trust, 1983 SCC OnLine Del 270; decisions by the Madras

High Court in V Chandrasekaran v Venkatanaicker Trust, 2016 SCC

OnLine Mad 33745 and Narayana Iyer v Anandammal Adheena Trust,

(2021) 3 CTC 776; decision of the Gujarat High Court in
Kansara

Abdulrehman         Sadruddin        v    Trustees       of   the     Maniar      Jamat

Ahmedabad
, AIR 1968 Guj 184 and; the decision by the Calcutta High

Court in
Vijay Sports Club v State of Bengal
, 2019 SCC OnLine Cal

2331.
12.     With regard to the second limb of his argument, learned counsel

submitted that in the case at hand, the Respondent, being the



CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
7
Chairman/Authorized Representative of Orion, had signed the cheque in

question and thus, it was prima facie evident that he was responsible for

the day-to-day business of the Trust. To support his contention, learned

counsel relied upon the decision of this Court in
SMS Pharmaceuticals

Ltd. v Neeta Bhalla
, (2005) 8 SCC 89 [3-Judge Bench], wherein it was

held that a position of a Managing Director would suggest responsibility

of the person holding the said position, in the day-to-day affairs of the

Company, which in the present case, urged learned counsel, is akin to

the position of the Chairman/Authorized Representative of the Trust viz.

Orion.
The relevant portion from
SMS Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
(supra) is

quoted below:
‘19. In view of the above discussion, our answers to the
       questions posed in the reference are as under:
(a)It is necessary to specifically aver in a complaint under
Section 141
that at the time the offence was
          committed, the person accused was in charge of, and
          responsible for the conduct of business of the
          company. This averment is an essential requirement of
Section 141
and has to be made in a complaint.
Without this averment being made in a complaint, the
          requirements of
Section 141
cannot be said to be
          satisfied.
(b)The answer to the question posed in sub-para (b) has
          to be in the negative. Merely being a director of a
          company is not sufficient to make the person liable
          under
Section 141
of the Act. A director in a company
          cannot be deemed to be in charge of and responsible
          to the company for the conduct of its business. The
          requirement of
Section 141
is that the person sought to
          be made liable should be in charge of and responsible
          for the conduct of the business of the company at the


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
8
relevant time. This has to be averred as a fact as there
           is no deemed liability of a director in such cases.
(c) The answer to Question (c) has to be in the affirmative.
           The question notes that the managing director or joint
           managing director would be admittedly in charge of the
           company and responsible to the company for the
           conduct of its business. When that is so, holders of
           such positions in a company become liable under
Section 141
of the Act. By virtue of the office they hold
           as managing director or joint managing director, these
           persons are in charge of and responsible for the
           conduct of business of the company. Therefore, they
           get covered under
Section 141
. So far as the signatory
           of a cheque which is dishonoured is concerned, he is
           clearly responsible for the incriminating act and will be
           covered under sub-section (2) of
Section 141
.’
                                                          (emphasis supplied)
13.    To further support his contentions, learned counsel for the

Appellant placed reliance on the decision of this Court in
K K Ahuja v V

K Vora
, (2009) 10 SCC 48;
Sunita Palita v Panchami Stone Quarry
,

(2022) 10 SCC 152;
D Purushotama Reddy v K Sateesh
, (2008) 8

SCC 505 and the decision of the Gauhati High Court in
Pranab Jyoti

Dutta v Chief Branch Manager, SBI
, 2023 SCC OnLine Gau 243. It

was urged that the appeal deserved to be allowed.



RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS:
14.    Au contraire, learned senior counsel for the Respondent submitted

that a Trust is a juristic person, capable of suing and being sued in a


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
9
court of law. He placed reliance on the decision of the High Court of

Kerala in
Prana Educational and Charitable Trust v State of Kerala
,

2023 SCC OnLine Ker 8449, where it was held that the expression

‘company’ used in sub-clause (a) of the Explanation to
Section 141
of the

NI Act includes ‘any body corporate’ or ‘other association of individuals’,

and the said term, by applying the principle of ejusdem generis would

include a club, a Trust (emphasised by learned senior counsel), and a

Hindu Undivided Family within the expression ‘company’ or ‘firm’. The

High
Court further held
that a Trust, either private or public/charitable is a

juristic person liable to prosecute or be prosecuted for the offence

punishable under
Section 138
of the NI Act.
In this regard, reliance was

also placed on the decisions of the Bombay High Court in
Dadasaheb

Rawal Co-op. Bank of Dondaicha Ltd. v Ramesh
s/o Jawrilal Jain,

2008 SCC OnLine Bom 794 and Mukund s/o Manohar Wazalwar v

Eknath s/o Bajirao Hatwar (Dead) through his L.R. Durwas Eknath

Hatwar, 2023 SCC OnLine Bom 3015 and the decision by the Orissa

High Court in
Bijaya Manjari Satpathy v State of Orissa
, 2022 SCC

OnLine Ori 4092.
Attention was also drawn to a decision of the High

Court of Madras in
Abraham Memorial Educational Trust v Suresh

Babu
, 2012 SCC OnLine Mad 2986, where that High Court held that a




CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
10
Trust is a juristic person which can sue or be sued for offence punishable

under the
NI Act
.
15.    Learned senior counsel supported the Impugned Judgment,

submitted that the appeal merited dismissal and advanced that the High

Court had not erred.
ANALYSIS, REASONING AND CONCLUSION:
16.    We have heard respective learned counsel for the parties and

perused the materials on record. The question for consideration, as

indicated in Paragraph 2 supra, is as to whether in the absence of a Trust

being made an accused in a complaint under the
NI Act
, when a cheque

has been issued on behalf of the Trust, the said complaint would be

maintainable against the Chairman/a Trustee of the said Trust?
17.    On the issue that it is not mandatory to make substantive

averments pertaining to the responsibility of the Respondent in the

conduct of the day-to-day business of the Trust, reliance was rightly

placed on the decision of a 3-Judge Bench of this Court in
SMS

Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
(supra) by learned counsel for the Appellant.




CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
11
18.    We need only reiterate the view espoused by this Court in
SMS

Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
(supra) and
K K Ahuja
(supra). As such, a person

designated as ‘Managing Director’ or ‘Joint Managing Director’, by virtue

of the office held, would be in charge of and responsible for the daily

conduct or business of the company, and thus, be covered under
Section

141
of the NI Act. Further, as far as the signatory of a cheque which is

dishonoured be concerned, he is responsible for the incriminating act and

will be covered under
Section 141
of the NI Act.
Support for the above

from
K K Ahuja
(supra) can be traced as under:
‘22.
Section 141
uses the words “was in charge
       of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of
       the business of the company”. (emphasis supplied) It is
       evident that a person who can be made vicariously liable
       under sub-section (1) of
Section 141
is a person who is
       responsible to the company for the conduct of the
       business of the company and in addition is also in charge
       of the business of the company. There may be many
       Directors and secretaries who are not in charge of the
       business of the company at all. The meaning of the words
       “person in charge of the business of the company” was
       considered by this Court in
Girdhari Lal Gupta v. D.H.
       Mehta
[(1971) 3 SCC 189: 1971 SCC (Cri) 279] followed
       in
State of Karnataka v. Pratap Chand
[(1981) 2 SCC 335:
1981 SCC (Cri) 453] and Katta Sujatha v. Fertilizers &
       Chemicals Travancore Ltd. [(2002) 7 SCC 655: 2003 SCC
       (Cri) 151] This Court held that the words refer to a person
       who is in overall control of the day-to-day business of the
       company. This Court pointed out that a person may be a
       Director and thus belongs to the group of persons making
       the policy followed by the company, but yet may not be in
       charge of the business of the company; that a person may
       be a manager who is in charge of the business but may
       not be in overall charge of the business; and that a person


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
12
may be an officer who may be in charge of only some part
       of the business.
xxx
27. The position under
Section 141
of the Act can be
       summarised thus:
(i) If the accused is the Managing Director or a Joint
       Managing Director, it is not necessary to make an
       averment in the complaint that he is in charge of, and is
       responsible to the company, for the conduct of the
       business of the company. It is sufficient if an averment is
       made that the accused was the Managing Director or
       Joint Managing Director at the relevant time. This is
       because the prefix “Managing” to the word “Director”
       makes it clear that they were in charge of and are
       responsible to the company, for the conduct of the
       business of the company.
(ii) In the case of a Director or an officer of the company
       who signed the cheque on behalf of the company, there is
       no need to make a specific averment that he was in
       charge of and was responsible to the company, for the
       conduct of the business of the company or make any
       specific allegation about consent, connivance or
       negligence. The very fact that the dishonoured cheque
       was signed by him on behalf of the company, would give
       rise to responsibility under sub-section (2) of
Section 141
.
(iii) In the case of a Director, secretary or manager [as
       defined in
Section 2(24)
of the Companies Act] or a
       person referred to in clauses (e) and (f) of
Section 5
of the
       Companies Act, an averment in the complaint that he was
       in charge of, and was responsible to the company, for the
       conduct of the business of the company is necessary to
       bring the case under
Section 141(1)
of the Act. No further
       averment would be necessary in the complaint, though
       some particulars will be desirable. They can also be made
       liable under
Section 141(2)
by making necessary
       averments relating to consent and connivance or
       negligence, in the complaint, to bring the matter under
       that sub-section.
(iv) Other officers of a company cannot be made liable
       under sub-section (1) of
Section 141
. Other officers of a
       company can be made liable only under sub-section (2) of
Section 141
, by averring in the complaint their position


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
13
and duties in the company and their role in regard to the
       issue and dishonour of the cheque, disclosing consent,
       connivance or negligence.’
                                                     (emphasis supplied)
19.    The position in law was further elucidated in
Sunita Palita
(supra),

where the following was observed:
‘36. The High Court also rightly held that the Managing
       Director or Joint Managing Director would admittedly be in
       charge of the company and responsible to the company
       for the conduct of its business by virtue of the office they
       hold as Managing Director or Joint Managing Director.
       These persons are in charge of and responsible for the
       conduct of the business of the company and they get
       covered under
Section 141
of the NI Act. A signatory of a
       cheque is clearly liable under
Sections 138
/
141
of the NI
       Act.’
                                                       (emphasis supplied)
20.    Further, in
S P Mani and Mohan Dairy v Dr Snehalatha

Elangovan
, (2023) 10 SCC 685, it was laid down that for an accused to

escape criminal liability, the accused would have to demonstrate that

he/she was not in charge or in control, as under:
‘58. Our final conclusions may be summarised as under:
       58.1. The primary responsibility of the complainant is to
       make specific averments in the complaint so as to make
       the accused vicariously liable. For fastening the criminal
       liability, there is no legal requirement for the complainant
       to show that the accused partner of the firm was aware
       about each and every transaction. On the other hand, the
       first proviso to sub-section (1) of
Section 141
of the Act
       clearly lays down that if the accused is able to prove to

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
14
the satisfaction of the Court that the offence was
       committed without his/her knowledge or he/she had
       exercised due diligence to prevent the commission of
       such offence, he/she will not be liable of punishment.
       58.2. The complainant is supposed to know only generally
       as to who were in charge of the affairs of the company or
       firm, as the case may be. The other administrative
       matters would be within the special knowledge of the
       company or the firm and those who are in charge of it. In
       such circumstances, the complainant is expected to
       allege that the persons named in the complaint are in
       charge of the affairs of the company/firm. It is only the
       Directors of the company or the partners of the firm, as
       the case may be, who have the special knowledge about
       the role they had played in the company or the partners in
       a firm to show before the Court that at the relevant point
       of time they were not in charge of the affairs of the
       company. Advertence to
Sections 138
and
Section 141
,
       respectively, of the
NI Act
shows that on the other
       elements of an offence under
Section 138
being satisfied,
       the burden is on the Board of Directors or the officers in
       charge of the affairs of the company/partners of a firm to
       show that they were not liable to be convicted. The
       existence of any special circumstance that makes them
       not liable is something that is peculiarly within their
       knowledge and it is for them to establish at the trial to
       show that at the relevant time they were not in charge of
       the affairs of the company or the firm.
58.3. Needless to say, the final judgment and order would
       depend on the evidence adduced. Criminal liability is
       attracted only on those, who at the time of commission of
       the offence, were in charge of and were responsible for
       the conduct of the business of the firm. But vicarious
       criminal liability can be inferred against the partners of a
       firm when it is specifically averred in the complaint about
       the status of the partners “qua” the firm. This would make
       them liable to face the prosecution but it does not lead to
       automatic conviction. Hence, they are not adversely
       prejudiced if they are eventually found to be not guilty, as
       a necessary consequence thereof would be acquittal.
       58.4. If any Director wants the process to be quashed by
       filing a petition under Section 482 of the Code on the


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
15
ground that only a bald averment is made in the complaint
       and that he/she is really not concerned with the issuance
       of the cheque, he/she must in order to persuade the High
       Court to quash the process either furnish some sterling
       incontrovertible material or acceptable circumstances to
       substantiate his/her contention. He/she must make out a
       case that making him/her stand the trial would be an
       abuse of process of Court.’
                                                      (emphasis supplied)
21.    On the issue of whether a Trust is capable of suing or being sued,

though in the context of the
Consumer Protection Act
, in
Pratibha

Pratisthan
(supra), it was observed that a Trust is not a ‘person’ and

‘therefore not a consumer’. The Court went on to hold that a Trust ‘cannot

be a complainant and cannot file a consumer dispute under the

provisions’ of the
Consumer Protection Act
, as it would not fall under the

definition of ‘person’ as per
Section 2(m)
of the Consumer Protection Act.
Referring to the said provision from the
Consumer Protection Act
, in
Pratibha Pratisthan
(supra), the Court opined:
‘4. A reading of the definition of the words “complaint”,
       “complainant” and “consumer” makes it clear that a trust
       cannot invoke the provisions of the Act in respect of any
       allegation on the basis of which a complaint could be
       made. To put this beyond any doubt, the word “person”
       has also been defined in the Act and
Section 2(1)(m)
thereof defines a “person” as follows:
“2. (1)(m) “person” includes—
(i) a firm whether registered or not;
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;
(iii) a cooperative society;
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
16
(iv) every other association of persons whether
            registered under the
Societies Registration Act,
            1860
(21 of 1860) or not;”
5. On a plain and simple reading of all the above
        provisions of the Act it is clear that a trust is not a
        person and therefore not a consumer. Consequently, it
        cannot be a complainant and cannot file a consumer
        dispute under the provisions of the Act.’
                                                     (emphasis supplied)
22.
Sections 3
and
13
of the Trusts Act read thus:
‘3. Interpretation-clause—“Trust”.—A “trust” is an
         obligation annexed to the ownership of property, and
         arising out of a confidence reposed in and accepted by
         the owner, or declared and accepted by him, for the
         benefit of another, or of another and the owner;
         the person who reposes or declares the confidence is
         called the “author of the trust”; the person who accepts
         the confidence is called the “trustee”; the person for
         whose benefit the confidence is accepted is called the
         “beneficiary”; the subject-matter of the trust is called
         “trust-property” or “trust money”; the “beneficial interest”
         or “interest” of the beneficiary is his right against the
         trustee as owner of the trust-property; and the
         instrument, if any, by which the trust is declared is called
         the “instrument of trust”;
a breach of any duty imposed on a trustee, as such, by
         any law for the time being in force, is called a “breach of
         trust”;
and in this Act, unless there be something repugnant in
         the subject or context, “registered” means registered
         under the law for the registration of documents for the
         time being in force; a person is said to have “notice” of a
         fact either when he actually knows that fact, or when,
         but for wilful abstention from inquiry or gross
         negligence, he would have known it, or when
         information of the fact is given to or obtained by his
         agent, under the circumstances mentioned in the
Indian
         Contract Act, 1872
, Section 229; and all expressions

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
17
used herein and defined in the
Indian Contract Act,
         1872
, shall be deemed to have the meanings
         respectively attributed to them by that Act.
         xxx
13. Trustee to protect title to trust-property.—A trustee is
         bound to maintain and defend all such suits, and
         (subject to the provisions of the instrument of trust) to
         take such other steps as, regard being had to the nature
         and amount or value of the trust-property, may be
         reasonably requisite for the preservation of the trust-
property and the assertion or protection of the title
         thereto.’
                                                         (emphasis supplied)
23.    To our mind, the above-extracted Sections of the Trusts Act would

also favour the view we are taking, as the obligation to ‘maintain and

defend’ suits is placed on the shoulders of a Trustee and not the Trust

itself. It is clear that only a Trustee has the obligation to file, maintain and

defend any suit on behalf of the Trust. Meaning thereby, that a Trust does

not have a separate legal existence of its own, making it incapable of

suing or being sued. A learned Single Judge of the Kerala High Court,

relying on
Pratibha Pratisthan
(supra), in
K P Shibu
(supra), noted:
‘16. Thus, it is clear from the above provisions that all the
       trustees are the owners of the property, but they are obliged
       to use the same in a particular manner. If a number of
       trustees exist, they are the joint owners of the property. The
       trustees are bound to maintain and defend all suits, for the
       preservation of the trust-property and the assertion or
       protection of the title thereto. Thus, it appears that the “Trust”
       is not capable of suing and being sued in a court of law,
       even though the trustees can maintain and defend suits for


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
18
the preservation and protection of the trust-property.
       Therefore, a “Trust” is not a juristic person or a legal entity,
       as the juristic person has a legal existence of its own and
       hence it is capable of suing and being sued in a court of law.
       Thus, it appears that a “Trust” is not like a body corporate,
       which has a legal existence of its own and therefore can
       appoint an agent. The above discussion would make it clear
       that a “Trust” is not a body corporate.’
                                                       (emphasis supplied)
24.    The same proposition has been reiterated by the Delhi High Court

in
Duli Chand
(supra), the Madras High Court in V Chandrasekaran

(supra) and Narayana Iyer (supra), the Gujarat High Court in
Kansara

Abdulrehman Sadruddin
(supra), the Calcutta High Court in
Vijay

Sports      Club
(supra)      and     the     Karnataka        High     Court     in

Chikkamuniyappa Memorial Trust v State, ILR 1997 Kar 2460.
25.    We find substance in the reasoning assigned by the High Courts of

Kerala, Delhi, Madras, Gujarat, Calcutta and Karnataka that a Trust is not

a ‘legal entity’ or ‘juristic person’. A Trust is also not like a corporation

which has a legal existence of its own and therefore can appoint an

agent. A Trust operates through its Trustees, who are legal entities. We

may gainfully refer to the decision of the Kerala High Court in
K R Rajan
(supra), where the said Court has rightly held:
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
19
‘7. The legal status of a trust, is thus well discernible. Trust
       not being a legal person, and
the Code of Civil Procedure
not providing any enabling provision for the Trust to sue or
       for being sued in its name, there is no merit in the contention
       that the Trust is to be arrayed as a co-nominee party. The
       arraying of the trust in its own name is otiose or redundant. It
       is the trustees who are to be impleaded to represent the
       trust. Therefore, the contention of the petitioner on the
       ground of non-joinder, also fails.’
                                                        (emphasis supplied)
26.    Ergo, it is clear that though a Trust may act or even be treated as

an entity for certain legal purposes and not all legal purposes, a Trust is

an obligation imposed on the ostensible owner of the property to use the

same for a particular object - for the benefit of a named beneficiary or

charity, and it is the Trustee(s) who are bound to maintain and defend all

suits and to take such other steps with regard to the nature, land or the

value of the Trust property, that may be reasonably required for the

preservation of the Trust property, and the assertion of protection of title

thereto, subject to the provisions of the instructions of Trust to take such

other steps.
27.    There exists no ambiguity about there being no legal requirement

for a Trust to be made a party in a proceeding before a Court of Law

since it is only a/the Trustee(s) who are liable and answerable for acts



CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
20
done or alleged to have been done for and on behalf of the said Trust.

From a perusal of Orion’s Deed of Trust, of which the Respondent is the

Chairman/Authorized Signatory, it emerges clearly that the relevant

clauses deal with the Trustee insofar as administering and holding the

funds and properties of the Trust are concerned. Which is to say that the

Trust (i.e., Orion) operates only through the Trustee(s) and that the

objects thereof were for charitable purposes. The Deed of Trust also

provides for permitting one or more Trustees to operate a bank account.

It becomes all the more apparent that it is the Trustees alone, through

whom the Trust funds/property(ies) are managed and dealt with. The

Trust itself is without any independent legal status.
28.    Though we have delved into the issue of whether a Trust can sue

or be sued on its own, we would make it amply clear (and as would also

become evident from what follows infra) on this point, that our view is

confined to examination of the subject in the context of the
NI Act
alone,

in praesenti. We were called upon to consider only as to whether without

making a Trust an accused, a complaint would be maintainable against a

Trustee in the eye of law under the
NI Act
.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
21
29.    Hence, the question posed is answered in the affirmative. When a

cause of action arises due to an alleged dishonour of cheque and a

complaint is initiated under the
NI Act
, the same is maintainable against

the Trustee who has signed the cheque, without the requirement to array

the Trust also as an accused.
30.    As far as the judgments pressed into service by the Respondent

be concerned, we have bestowed thoughtful consideration thereto. We

are unable to concur with the propositions they purport to propound.
31.
In
Prana Educational and Charitable Trust
(supra), a learned

Single Judge of the Kerala High Court held:
‘20. Analyzing the decision rendered by the Madras
         High Court, it could be gathered that after elaborately
         considering the relevant statutory provisions, the
         learned Single Judge held as above. The High Courts of
         Bombay and Gujarat interpreted the explanation
         appended to
Section 141
of the N.I. Act with reference
         to “inclusive of any body corporate” or “other association
         of individuals” and construed the above terms by
         applying the principle of ejusdem generis and held that
         the term “association of individuals” will include club,
         trust, Hindu Undivided Family Business.
21.
Coming to K.P. Shibu
's case (supra), it is discernible
         that
the said decision
is not so elaborative and the
         interpretation of the term “association of individuals” not
         done by applying the ratio of ejusdem generis. The
         principle of ejusdem generis intented for the
         construction of constitutional and statutory provisions
         means “of the same kind” and this doctrine provides that


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
22
the general words which follow the specified words will
         be restricts to the same class of the specified words.
While applying this principle, (1) the general words must
         follow the specific words and the specific words must
         necessarily constitute, a genus/class (2) the legislative
         intention of the statute to be born in mind for restricting
         the general word to the genus/class of the specified
         words if follows and (3) this principle has to be used by
         the Courts properly and apply where it is necessary and
         not use this principle where it is not necessary so as to
         defeat the purpose of the statute and to cause
         miscarriage of justice are the conditions to be satisfied.
         Thus, it appears that the High Courts of Madras,
         Bombay and Gujarat correctly interpreted the various
         provisions and the law emerges from the said
         judgments are as under: (i) The expression “company”
         used in sub-clause (a) of explanation appended to
Section 141
of the N.I. Act includes any body corporate
         or other “association of individuals” and the term
         “association of individuals” to be interpreted by applying
         the principle of ejusdem generis. To be construed so,
         the term “association of individuals” will include club,
         trust and Hindu undivided family business along with the
         expression “company” or “firm”. (ii) A Trust, either
         private or public/charitable or otherwise, is a juristic
         person who is liable for punishment for the offence
         punishable under
Section 138
of the Negotiable
         Instruments Act. (iii) A Trust, either private or
         public/charitable or otherwise, having either a single
         trustee or two or more trustees, is a company in terms
         of
Section 141
of the Negotiable Instruments Act. (iv)
         For the offence under
Section 138
of The Negotiable
         Instruments Act, committed by the Trust, every trustee,
         who was in-charge of the day-to-day affairs of the Trust
         shall also be liable for punishment besides the Trust.
22. Therefore, following the legal principles set forth
         above, it has to be held that the challenge raised by the
         accused on the ground that no prosecution under
Section 138
read with
Section 141
of the N.I. Act
         against the Trust would lie, cannot be sustained and the
         same stands repelled.’



CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
23
(emphasis supplied)
32.    We do not approve of the manner in which the learned Single

Judge in
Prana Educational and Charitable Trust
(supra) decided to

ignore binding precedent in
K P Shibu
(supra), which was a judgment

rendered by another learned Single Judge of the same Court, earlier in

point of time, merely by noting ‘it is discernible that
the said decision
is

not so elaborative and the interpretation of the term “association of

individuals” not done by applying the ratio of ejusdem generis.’ It was not

open to the learned Judge in
Prana Educational and Charitable Trust
(supra) to prefer the view expressed by other High Courts in preference

to the view of a Bench of the own High Court of equal strength expressed

previously.
At the most, recording his disagreement with the view in
K P

Shibu
(supra), the learned Judge in
Prana Educational and Charitable

Trust
(supra) ought to have referred the matter to the learned Chief

Justice of the High Court seeking constitution of a larger Bench.
The only

other way
Prana Educational and Charitable Trust
(supra) could have

gotten over
K P Shibu
(supra) despite being a co-equal Bench would

have been by undertaking an analysis via the principles of per incuriam

and/or sub-silentio, as undertaken by a 3-Judge Bench recently in
A Raja

v D Kumar
, 2025 SCC OnLine SC 1033. We say this illustratively. Not



CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
24
as a matter of routine can a later Bench of equal strength refuse to follow

an earlier decision of a Bench of equal strength.
The law hereon was

stated in
National Insurance Company Limited v Pranay Sethi
, (
2017)

16 SCC 680 and Union Territory of Ladakh v Jammu and Kashmir

National Conference
, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 1140.
Therefore, while not

disturbing
Prana Educational and Charitable Trust
(supra) inter-

parties, we declare the statement of law therein incorrect to the extent it

rules on the issue before us, on account of failure to adhere to binding

precedent.
33.
Dadasaheb Rawal Co-op. Bank of Dondaicha Ltd.
(supra) and
Abraham Memorial Educational Trust
(supra) were decided by the

Bombay and Madras High Courts respectively, prior to
Pratibha

Pratisthan
(supra) and need not detain us further.
Mukund (supra) was

decided by a learned Single Judge of the Bombay High Court, Bench at

Nagpur, where the learned Judge held:
‘10. The controversy in this case is required to be
         addressed in the backdrop of the above stated facts. At
         this stage, it would be necessary to consider the legal
         position. There are number of reported decisions,
         wherein it has been held that the phrase, “association of
         individuals” has to be read along with the word
         “company and firm” occurring in the explanation
         appended to
section 141
of the N.I. Act. It is also settled
         legal position that the expression, “association of
         individuals” is intended to cover the cases of societies,


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
25
trusts etc, who have a legal and juristic personality.
         Reference can be made to the decision in the cases
         of Shri Banwarilal L. Saini. (
supra), Bijaya Manjari
         Satpathy v. State of Orissa
, 2022
LiveLaw (Ori) 158,
         and Abraham Memorial Educational Trust v. C. Suresh
         Babu, Cri
. OP Nos. 12630 and 12661 of 2012 decided
         on 7-8-2012.
11. The primary question arisen in these cases was
         whether the Trust either public or private is a company
         covered in terms of
section 141
of the N.I. Act and as
         such a juristic person, liable for punishment for the
         offence punishable under
section 138
of the N.I. Act. It
         is to be noted that the specific question as above fell for
         consideration of the Madras High Court in the case
         of Abraham Memorial Educational Trust. (supra). The
         learned Single Judge of the Madras High Court, after
         considering the length and breadth of the subject in this
         erudite decision, has held that the Trust either public or
         private/charitable or otherwise is a juristic person and is
         liable for punishment for offence punishable under
section 138
of the N: I. Act. It is further held that a Trust
         either private or public/charitable or otherwise having
         either a single trustee or two or more trustees, is a
         company in terms of
section 141
of the N.I. Act. It is
         further held that for the offence under
section 138
of the
         N.I. Act, committed by the Trust, every trustee, who
         were the in-charge of the day-to-day affairs of the Trust
         shall also be liable for punishment besides the Trust.
         xxx
12. On going through the record and proceedings and
         also the dicta
laid down in
the above decisions, I am of
         the opinion that the Trustee is a juristic person. The
         Trust, being an association of persons, would be a
         company in terms of
section 141
of the N.I. Act. In this
         case, the cheque was issued by or on behalf of the
         Trust. The Trust is, therefore, the principal offender in
         this case. It is further pertinent to mention that by a legal
         fiction created under
section 141
of the N.I. Act, all the
         persons who are the Office bearers of the Trust being
         in-charge of the day-to-day affairs of the Trust, shall
         also be liable for punishment besides the Trust.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
26
13. In this background, it would be necessary to
         consider the settled position on the important point as to
         the effects and consequences of not arraigning the
         Trust as a principal accused or the effects and
         consequences of deletion of the name of Trust from the
         complaint during the pendency of the complaint.
In my
         view, this situation would be required to be addressed in
         the backdrop of the law
laid down in
the cases
         of
Aneeta Hada v. Godfather Travels and Tours Pvt.
         Ltd.
, (2012) 5 SCC 661: (2012) 4 Mah LJ (SC) 527:
(2012) 3 Mah LJ (Cri) (SC) 249, Himanshu v. B.
         Shivamurthy, (2019) 3 SCC 797: 2019 Mah LJ OnLine
         (Cri) (SC) 126 and Pawan Kumar Goel v. State of
         U.P., 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1598: (2023) 2 Mah LJ (SC)
         456: (2023) 2 Mah LJ (Cri) (SC) 1. The exposition of the
         law in these decisions clearly states that if a cheque is
         issued by the company or on behalf of the company,
         then the Company is the principal offender. It is further
         held that apart from the company being a principal
         offender, every person who at the time when the offence
         was committed was in-charge or was responsible to the
         company for the conduct of the business of the
         company, shall also be deemed to be guilty of offence
         and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
         punished. It is held that in the absence of company
         being the principal accused in the complaint, the
         prosecution against the remaining persons, being
         vicariously liable by deeming fiction, gets vitiated.’
                                                          (emphasis supplied)
34.    Clearly, Mukund (supra) principally proceeded on equating a Trust

with a ‘company’, which is a fallacy. If we trace our steps back to over a

century ago, in the locus classicus Salomon v A Salomon and Co. Ltd.,

[1897] AC 22, Lord Macnaghten of the House of Lords opined:
‘…


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
27
The company is at law a different person altogether
         from the subscribers to the memorandum; and, though it
         may be that after incorporation the business is precisely
         the same as it was before, and the same persons are
         managers, and the same hands receive the profits, the
         company is not in law the agent of the subscribers or
         trustee for them. Nor are the subscribers as members
         liable, in any shape or form, except to the extent and in
         the manner provided by the Act. That is, I think, the
         declared intention of the enactment. If the view of the
         learned judge were sound, it would follow that no
         common law partnership could register as a company
         limited by shares without remaining subject to unlimited
         liability.
…’
                                                       (emphasis supplied)
35.
In
Tata Engineering and Locomotive Co. Ltd. v State of Bihar
,

(1964) 34 COMP CAS 458, this Court, in a composition of 5 learned

Judges, commented:
‘…
         The true legal position in regard to the character of a
         corporation or a company which owes its incorporation
         to a statutory authority, is not in doubt or dispute. The
         Corporation in law is equal to a natural person and has
         a legal entity of its own. The entity of the Corporation is
         entirely separate from that of its shareholders; it bears
         its own name and has a seal of its own; its assets are
         separate and distinct from those of its members; it can
         sue and be sued exclusively for its own purpose; its
         creditors cannot obtain satisfaction from the assets of its
         members; the liability of the members or shareholders is
         limited to the capital invested by them; similarly, the
         creditors of the members have no right to the assets of
         the Corporation. This position has been well established
         ever since the decision in the case of Salomon v.
         Salomon and Co. was pronounced in 1897; and indeed,

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
28
it has always been the well-recognised principle of
         common law. However, in the course of time, the
         doctrine that the Corporation or a Company has a legal
         and separate entity of its own has been subjected to
         certain exceptions by the application of the fiction that
         the veil of the Corporation can be lifted and its face
         examined in substance. The doctrine of the lifting of the
         veil thus marks a change in the attitude that law had
         originally adopted towards the concept of the separate
         entity or personality of the Corporation. As a result of
         the impact of the complexity of economic factors,
         judicial decisions have sometimes recognised
         exceptions to the rule about the juristic personality of
         the corporation. It may be that in course of time these
         exceptions may grow in number and to meet the
         requirements of different economic problems, the theory
         about the personality of the corporation may be
         confined more and more.
…’
                                                     (emphasis supplied)
36.     Therefore, Mukund (supra) does not lay down the correct position

of law having wrongly assigned equivalence between a ‘company’ and a

Trust, besides running counter to our exposition qua
Sections 3
and
13
of

the Trusts Act. The legal status accorded to a ‘company’ cannot be

imported to a Trust, in the eyes of law, in the case at hand.
37.     Turning to the Orissa High Court’s verdict in
Bijaya Manjari

Satpathy
(supra), we find as under:
(a)The Orissa High Court relied on
Aparna A Shah v Sheth

        Developers Private Limited
, (2013) 8 SCC 71, which related to a


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
29
company and
Dilip Hariramani v Bank of Baroda
, 2022 SCC

        OnLine SC 579, which concerned a partnership firm – both of

        which cannot be equated with a Trust;
(b)The High Court also relied on
Pawan Kumar Goel v State of

        Uttar Pradesh
, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1598. However, this case

        also concerned a company but the purpose for which the High

        Court considered the same has no nexus with the question we

        have     answered.
Likewise,       National       Small       Industries

        Corporation Limited v Harmeet Singh Paintal
, (2010) 3 SCC

        330 concerned a company and the pleadings/averments which

        would be required to assign vicarious liability to the concerned

        accused.
(c) The Orissa High Court altogether omitted to consider the relevant

        provisions of the
Trusts Act
.
38.     The views expressed by the respective High Courts in
Prana

Educational and Charitable Trust
(supra);
Dadasaheb Rawal Co-op.

Bank of Dondaicha Ltd.
(supra);
Abraham Memorial Educational

Trust
(supra); Mukund (supra), and;
Bijaya Manjari Satpathy
(supra)

run counter to what we have held above. The same do not commend

themselves to us and are overruled in law, without disturbing their

effect(s) inter-parties.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
30
39.    The      Impugned        Judgment         accorded       reliance      to
SMS

Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
(supra) and Pawan Kumar Goel (supra) while

acceding to the Respondent’s prayer(s) before it. Again, Pawan Kumar

Goel (supra) was in the context of a company and the principles laid

down could not be made applicable straightaway to a Trust, moreso in

light of the reasoning by us hereinabove.
The extracts from
SMS

Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
(supra) cited in the Impugned Judgment are

distinguishable as they related to the averments necessary in a complaint

to invoke vicarious liability and not the factum of impleadment or lack

thereof, specifically, a Trust in a complaint. Concededly, neither party

urged submissions based on the
Trusts Act
before the High Court.
40.    Accordingly, for reasons aforesaid, taking a holistic view in the

entirety of the extant facts and circumstances as also the submissions

canvassed by the learned counsel for the parties, we find the Impugned

Judgment to be unsustainable. We have no hesitation in quashing and

setting aside the Impugned Judgment. Resultantly, the subject-

proceeding in Criminal Case No.44(S)/2019 stands restored to its original

file and number, to be proceeded with by the Court concerned in

accordance with law. As the matter traces its origin to the year 2019, we

expect the Court concerned to take steps with due expedition.

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
31
41.    The appeal stands allowed. This Judgment shall not affect any

other contentions of law and fact, which may be raised before the Trial

Court, at the appropriate stage.
THE PENDING REFERENCE AND ITS EFFECT IN LAW:
42.    We are conscious that
Pratibha Pratisthan
(supra) has been

doubted and referred to a Larger Bench vide Order dated 04.10.2019 in

Tara Bai Desai Charitable Opthalmic Trust Hospital v Supreme

Elevators India (P) Ltd., Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.18636/2019

[since reported as (2025) 3 SCC 80]. In fact, one of us (Ahsanuddin

Amanullah, J.) was nominated by Hon’ble the then Chief Justice of India

to be part of the 3-Judge Bench constituted to hear the afore-noted

reference. As the learned Judge presiding over that 3-Judge Bench has

since demitted office, it would entail nomination of a new coram.
However, till the reference is decided one way or the other, the law as

declared in
Pratibha Pratisthan
(supra) continues to hold the field as no

order has been passed in Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.18636/2019

requesting other Benches to await the outcome thereof.
There is no

doubt on this, given the clear dicta in
Union Territory of Ladakh
(supra)

[2-Judge Bench], which after surveying the law, held:
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
32
‘35. We are seeing before us judgments and orders by
         High Courts not deciding cases on the ground that the
         leading judgment of this Court on this subject is either
         referred to a larger Bench or a review petition relating
         thereto is pending. We have also come across
         examples of High Courts refusing deference to
         judgments of this Court on the score that a later
         Coordinate Bench has doubted its correctness. In this
         regard, we lay down the position in law. We make it
         absolutely clear that the High Courts will proceed to
         decide matters on the basis of the law as it stands. It is
         not open, unless specifically directed by this Court, to
         await an outcome of a reference or a review petition, as
         the case may be. It is also not open to a High Court to
         refuse to follow a judgment by stating that it has been
         doubted by a later Coordinate Bench.
In any case, when
         faced with conflicting judgments by Benches of equal
         strength of this Court, it is the earlier one which is to be
         followed by the High Courts, as held by a 5-Judge
         Bench         in
National Insurance          Company
         Limited v. Pranay Sethi
, (2017) 16 SCC 680 [See
         Paragraphs 27 and 28 in the report on this point.]. The
         High Courts, of course, will do so with careful regard to
         the facts and circumstances of the case before it.’
                                                         (emphasis supplied)
43.    We have noticed a judgment by a Coordinate Bench in
A P

Electrical Equipment Corporation v Tahsildar
, 2025 SCC OnLine SC

447 stating:
‘35. If two decisions of this Court appear inconsistent
         with each other, the High Courts are not to follow one
         and overlook the other, but should try to reconcile and
         respect them both and the only way to do so is to adopt
         the wise suggestion of Lord Halsbury given
         in Quinn v. Leathern, [1901] A.C. 495 and reiterated by
         the Privy Council in Punjab Cooperative Bank



CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
33
Ltd. v. Commr. of Income Tax, Lahore AIR 1940 PC
         230:
“…… every judgment must be read as applicable
            to the particular facts proved or assumed to be
            proved, since the generality of the expressions,
            which may be found there, are not intended to
            be expositions of the whole law, but governed or
            qualified by the particular facts of the case in
            which such expressions are to be found.”
         and follow that decision whose facts appear more in
         accord with those of the case at hand.’
                                                      (emphasis supplied)
44.    The decision rendered in
A P Electrical Equipment Corporation
(supra) does not whittle down the enunciation in
Union Territory of

Ladakh
(supra).
A 5-Judge Bench of this Court in
Pranay Sethi
(supra)

has laid down that an earlier decision of a co-equal Bench must be

followed by a later Bench of co-equal strength, which has been restated

in
Union Territory of Ladakh
(supra).
In any event,
Union Territory of

Ladakh
(supra) lays down that when following an earlier decision in the

face of a later conflicting decision by a co-equal Bench, the said exercise

is to be done ‘… with careful regard to the facts and circumstances of the

case…’
A P Electrical Equipment Corporation
(supra) expresses the

principle slightly differently by urging to ‘… follow that decision whose

facts appear more in accord with those of the case at hand.’

Undoubtedly, on the facts of a case, it is always open to a Court to follow

the most applicable precedent, as per its understanding.
Yet, the principle


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]
34
has long been settled that for questions of law, in the case of a conflict

between equal Bench-strength judgments, the earlier view alone should

be followed, as conclusively stated in
Pranay Sethi
(supra) and taken

note of in
Union Territory of Ladakh
(supra).
MISCELLANEOUS:
45.    The Registry may seek suitable orders from Hon’ble the Chief

Justice of India apropos constitution of an appropriate Bench to decide

the pending reference in Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.18636/2019.
We clarify that the instant appeal is disposed of and not tagged with the

reference.
..…………………..................…..J.
                                                   [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]




                                                 ..…………………..................…..J.
                                                   [PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA]
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER 09, 2025




CRIMINAL APPEAL NO._____ OF 2025 [@ SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL (CRIMINAL) NO.4459/2023]