[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Pride Foramer S.A vs Commissioner Of Income Tax on 17 October, 2025
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Surya Kant
2025 INSC 1247                                                                REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         Civil Appeal Nos. 4395-4397/2010



             Pride Foramer S.A.                                                 Appellant(s)

                                                             VERSUS


             Commissioner of Income Tax & Anr.                                Respondent(s)



                                                        JUDGMENT
Joymalya Bagchi, J.
1.             These appeals are directed against common judgment and order

                            dated 12.06.2009 passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand in

                            Income Tax Appeal Nos. 49 of 2005, 91 & 98 of 2006 (Assessment

                            Years 1997-98, 1996-97 and 1999-2000, respectively) whereby

                            the High Court set aside the orders passed by the ITAT 1 and

                            affirmed the orders passed by CIT (Appeals) whereby the CIT

                            (Appeals) had disallowed the deduction of business expenditure
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by      under
Section 37
of the Income Tax Act 19612, as well as carrying
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2025.10.17
15:19:21 IST
Reason:
1
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi.
2
Hereinafter, ‘the Act’.
Page 1 of 13
forward of unabsorbed depreciation under
Section 32(2)
of the Act

      for the Assessment Years 1996-1997, 1997-1998 and 1999-2000.


FACTS:
2.   Relevant facts for adjudication of the appeals are set out

     hereinunder:
a.   Appellant is a non-resident company incorporated in France

          and is engaged in oil drilling activities. In 1983, the appellant

          was awarded a 10-year contract for drilling operations in

          offshore Mumbai from 1983 till 1993.
b.   Thereafter, the appellant was awarded another drilling

          contract in October, 1998, which came to be formalised in

          January, 1999.
c.   In the interregnum i.e., during the relevant assessment years,

          though no drilling contract was awarded, the appellant carried

          on business correspondences with ONGC from its office at

          Dubai and headquarters at France and had also submitted a

          bid for oil exploration in 1996.
d.   During this period, appellant undertook various expenditures

          including administrative charges, audit fees etc. with the
Page 2 of 13
intention of carrying out its business activities as well as

                realising tax refunds from the Income Tax Department. 3


         e.     For the relevant assessment years, the appellant filed its

                return showing ‘NIL’ income. The only income credited was

                under the head ‘Income from Business’ on account of interest

                received         on    income        tax    refunds   amounting    to   Rs.
1,69,57,395/- for Assessment Year 1996-1997, Rs. 5,49,628/-
for Assessment Year 1997-1998 and Rs. 11,29,957/- for

                Assessment Year 1999-2000.
f.     Against this, business expenditures aggregating to Rs.
2,50,000/-, Rs. 5,55,152/- and Rs. 11,29,957/-, respectively,

                were claimed as deductions and appellant also claimed set-off

                against unabsorbed depreciation on furniture and fixtures

                brought forward from earlier years.
FINDINGS OF ASSESSING OFFICER AND CIT (APPEAL):
3.       The       Assessing          Officer4     disallowed    deduction   of   business

         expenditure as well as carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation on

         the ground that the appellant was not carrying on any business
3
Hereinafter, ‘Department’.
4
Hereinafter, ‘AO’.
Page 3 of 13
during the relevant assessment years. The findings of the AO were

     upheld by CIT (Appeals).
FINDINGS OF THE ITAT:
4.   ITAT, however, reversed the findings of the CIT (Appeals), holding a

     temporary lull in business for whatever reason cannot be termed

     as cessation of business. It proceeded to hold as follows:
“6.……. In the present case, undoubtedly,
              after 1992-93, the assessee did not have any
              business activity. However, there is enough
              evidence on record to suggest that the
              assessee had not completely gone out of
              business. Copies of correspondence dated
              1996 with ONGC show that the assessee was
              in constant touch with ONGC for supply of
              manpower in respect of expert key personnel
              for deep water drilling and a tender in this
              regard was in fact submitted in September
              1996. This proves that even after the
              completion of the earlier contract in 1993,
              the assessee was contemplating to bid for
              another contract. The efforts of the assessee
              finally culminated in a firm contract being
              awarded to it in 1998 which was formalized
              in 1999. A copy of the said contract is on
              record. As held by the Bombay High Court in
              the case of
Hindustan Chemical Works Ltd.
              V. CIT
in 124 ITR 561, there is a marked
              distinction between “lull in business” and
              “going out of business”. A temporary
              discontinuance of business may, in certain
              circumstances, give rise to an inference that
              a business is going through a lean period of
              transition and it could be revived if proper
              circumstances arise. In the present case, the
              period between 1993 and 1998 was of such
              temporary discontinuance only which can be
Page 4 of 13
termed as a “lull in business”. Thus, when
the intention of the assessee was never to go
completely out of business, it cannot be
concluded      that    the     assessee    had
discontinued its business. To our mind, it
makes no difference if the correspondence
was by the Dubai Office of the assessee or by
its office in France as was one of the
contentions of the ld. DR. In fact, in the
accounting year 1995-96, the assessee had
also paid consultancy Charges to follow up
the aforesaid ONGC bid. Further, the
receipts from this contract were offered for
taxation in assessment year 2000-03 as
reflected by the copy of the statement of total
income placed on record. Another factor
which weighed with the revenue authorities
to conclude that the assessee had
discontinued business in India, was the so
called admission by the assessee that it had
no permanent establishment in India. No
doubt, the authorized representative had
averred in the affidavit dated 22.1.01 that the
assessee did not establish nor had any
existing permanent establishment in India.
However, the revenue authorities have
considered this affidavit out of context. The
affidavit had to be sworn in context of the
assessee’s claim for concessional rate of tax
with regard to interest income. Since the
assessee had claimed concessional rate of
tax, the Assessing Officer inferred that there
was a permanent establishment in India. On
account of this wrong inference, the assessee
had to swear an affidavit denying the
existence of a permanent establishment in
India. However, taking this as the base, the
Assessing Officer and the CIT(A) concluded
that since there was no permanent
establishment in India, the assessee was out
of business. It is not well appreciated by the
authorities below that whether there is a
permanent establishment in India or not, has
to be determined as per the provisions of the
relevant DTAA. As per the DTAA, the
Page 5 of 13
assessee may not have a permanent
             establishment in India, but that does not
             necessarily lead to the conclusion that the
             assessee is not in business. The assessee can
             be in business, depending upon the facts and
             circumstances of the case de hors’ the
             permanent establishment which we do find
             in the present case. Thus, considering all the
             facts and circumstances of the case, we hold
             that the assessee was in business during the
             period relevant to the assessment year in
             question.”

                                        (emphasis supplied)
5.   In light of such finding that the appellant had not ceased to carry

     on business, the Tribunal though holding income on account of

     interest on tax refunds was chargeable under the head ‘Income

     from Other Sources’ and not ‘Income from Business’, allowed set

     off of the expenses on account of administrative charges, legal

     professional fees undertaken by the appellant as business

     expenses from ‘income from other sources’ under
Section 71
of the

     Act. For similar reason unabsorbed depreciation from previous

     years was allowed under
Section 32(2)
of the Act.


FINDINGS OF THE HIGH COURT:
6.   The Department challenged the ITAT orders in appeals arising out

     of Assessment Years 1996-1997 and 1999-2000 before the High

     Court. The High Court reversed the ITAT orders which were

     challenged before the Apex Court and remanded for fresh
Page 6 of 13
consideration5. Thereupon, the appeals arising out of all the

         Assessment Years 1996-1997, 1997-1998 and 1999-2000 were

         reheard analogously and disposed of by the impugned order.
7.       The High Court while agreeing with the proposition that mere lull

         in business does not mean the assessee had ceased to do business

         in India, reversed the finding of ITAT, holding as follows:
“..when the assessee has neither permanent
                       office, nor any other office in India, nor any
                       contract was in execution during the relevant
                       period, it cannot be said that they were in
                       business in India, as such, it cannot be said
                       that assessee was entitled to set off claimed
                       by it under
Section 71
of the Act.”

ISSUE:
8.       Having heard learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion

         that the moot issue which falls for our consideration is:
‘Whether, in the facts of the case, the appellant can be said to have
         been carrying on business during the relevant period, so as to avail
         deduction of business expenditure under
Section 37(1)
read with
Section 71
of the Act, and carry forward unabsorbed depreciation
         of previous years under
Section 32(2)
of the Act?’
5
Vide order dated 13.10.2008 in SLP(C) No. 4510 of 2008.
Page 7 of 13
ANALYSIS:
9.
Section 37(1)
, inter alia, provides any expenditure (not being an

     expenditure in the nature described in
Section 30
to
36
or in the

     nature of capital expenditure or personal expenses of the assessee)

     which is undertaken wholly and exclusively for the purpose of

     business and profession shall be allowed to be deducted in

     computing income chargeable under the head ‘Profits and Gains

     from Business and Profession’ and consequently, may be set off as

     loss against income under any other head subject to the conditions

     provided in
Section 71
of the Act.
10.
Section 32(2)
provides unabsorbed depreciation allowance of a

     previous year may be carried forward and set off against income of

     the following assessment years in the manner and subject to the

     conditions provided therein. The first proviso to the said sub-

     section further provided such depreciation allowance can be

     carried forward if the business or profession for which the

     depreciation allowance was originally computed, continued in the

     previous year relevant to the assessment year in question. It may

     be apposite to note that the said proviso has since been omitted by

     the
Finance Act, 2001
w.e.f. 1st April, 2002.
Page 8 of 13
11. It is evident that to avail the benefit of the aforesaid provisions, the

    appellant had to demonstrate that it was carrying on business in

    India during the relevant period. While the Tribunal was of the view

    mere failure to procure a business contract or maintain a

    permanent establishment in India was not a sine qua non to

    demonstrate the assessee’s intention to carry on business, the High

    Court held to the contrary and disallowed the claim of the

    appellant.
12. In the present case, the appellant, a non-resident company had

    been awarded 10 years’ drilling contract by ONGC in 1983. The

    contract continued till 1993. Thereafter, the appellant failed to

    procure another contract till October, 1998. But ample materials

    have been placed on record to show during the interregnum, the

    appellant had continuous business correspondences with ONGC

    with regard to hiring of manpower services in respect of expert key

    personnel for drilling in deep waters and had even unsuccessfully

    submitted a bid in 1996.
13. Whether failure to procure the drilling contract with ONGC was

    owing to the appellant’s disinterest to carry on business during

    relevant period and amounted to cessation of business or not must

    be construed from the appellant’s conduct. If such conduct, from

    the standpoint of a prudent businessman, evinces intention to
Page 9 of 13
carry on business, mere failure to obtain a business contract by

      itself would not be a determining factor to hold the appellant had

      ceased its business activities in India.6
14. The Tribunal rightly noted a business going through a lean period

      of transition which could be revived if proper circumstances arose,

      must be termed as lull in business and not a complete cessation of

      the business.
15. The word ‘business’ has a wide import and connotes some real,

      substantial and systemic or organised course of activity or activity

      with a set purpose.7 In
CIT v. Malayalam Plantations Ltd.8
this

      Court further underlined that the expression ‘for the purpose of

      business’ is wider in scope than the expression ‘for the purpose of

      earning profits’ and would encompass in its fold “many other acts

      incidental to the carrying on of a business”. The Bench observed as

      follows:
“The expression ‘for the purpose of business’
                    is wider in scope than the expression ‘for the
                    purpose of earning profits’. Its range is wide:
it may take in not only the day-to-day
                    running of a business but also the
                    rationalisation of its administration and
                    modernisation of its machinery; it may
                    include measures for preservation of
6
CIT v. Vikram Cotton Mills
, (1988) 169 ITR 597 (SC), para 15.
7
Narain Swadeshi Weaving Mills v. Commissioner
of excess Profits Tax (1954) 2 SCC 546.
8
(1964) 53 ITR 140 (SC).
Page 10 of 13
business and for protection of its assets and
             property from expropriation, coercive process
             or assertion of hostile title; it may also
             comprehend payment of statutory dues and
             taxes imposed as a pre-condition to
             commence or for carrying on a business; it
             may comprehend many other acts incidental
             to the carrying on of a business.”
                                       (emphasis supplied)
16. Continuous correspondences between the appellant and ONGC

    with regard to supply of manpower for oil drilling purposes and its

    unsuccessful bid in 1996 demonstrates various acts aimed at

    carrying on business in India which unfortunately did not fructify

    in procuring a contract.
17. In this factual backdrop, the High Court erred in holding that the

    appellant was not carrying on business as it had no subsisting

    contract with ONGC during the relevant period.
18. The other issue on which the High Court misdirected itself was to

    infer as the appellant did not have a permanent establishment and

    corresponded with ONGC from its foreign office, it cannot be said

    to carry on business in India. This view is wholly fallacious and

    contrary to the very scheme of the Act which does not require a

    non-resident company to have a permanent office within the

    country to be chargeable to tax on any income accruing in India.
Page 11 of 13
19. A combined reading of the charging provisions under
Section 4
and
Section 5(2)
of the Act read with
Section 9(1)(i)
makes it amply clear

    that a non-resident person shall be liable to pay tax on income

    which is deemed to accrue or arise in India. Under
Section 9(1)(i)
,

    income accruing or arising, directly or indirectly, through or from

    any business connection in India is deemed to accrue or arise in

    India and is accordingly chargeable to tax as business income

    under
Section 28
of the Act. None of these provisions make it

    mandatory for a non-resident assessee to have a permanent

    establishment in India to carry on business or have any business

    connection in India. The issue of ‘permanent establishment’ may

    be relevant for the purposes of availing the beneficial provisions of

    the Double Tax Avoidance Agreement (DTAA) between India and

    France which is not a relevant consideration for the purposes of

    this case.
20. In an era of globalisation whose life blood is trans-national trade

    and commerce, the High Court’s restrictive interpretation that a

    non-resident company making business communications with an

    Indian entity from its foreign office cannot be construed to be

    carrying on business in India is wholly anachronistic with India’s

    commitment to Sustainable Development Goal relating to ‘ease of

    doing business’ across national borders.
Page 12 of 13
CONCLUSION:
21. For the aforesaid reasons, we allow the appeals and set aside the

    judgment and order of the High Court. Orders passed by the ITAT

    are revived and Assessing Officer is directed to pass fresh

    Assessment Orders for the relevant Assessment Years in terms of

    the ITAT orders.
……………………………………………., J
                                             (MANOJ MISRA)




                                      …………………………………………, J
                                            (JOYMALYA BAGCHI)
New Delhi,
October 17, 2025
Page 13 of 13