[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Canara Bank vs K.L.Rajgarhia (D) Thru Lrs on 9 October, 2025
Author:
Aravind Kumar
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 1278
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2483 OF 2014


                             CANARA BANK                                           …...APPELLANT(S)

                                                               VERSUS

                             K.L. RAJGARHIA (D) THRU LRS.                          ….RESPONDENT(S)


                                                       JUDGMENT
Aravind Kumar, J.
1. The Appellant before this Court is the unsuccessful Plaintiff in a suit 1 for
                             Specific Performance, and the Respondent is the Defendant in the suit.
                             (The parties hereinafter are referred to by their respective ranks in the suit.)
                             The Single Judge2 of the Delhi High Court3 had decreed the suit filed by
                             the Plaintiff against the Defendant, directing the Defendant to execute a
                             Registered Sale Deed in favor of the Plaintiff, based on the Agreement to
                             Sell4 dated 27.12.1984. This judgment and decree of the Trial Court was
                             challenged in RFA (OS) No. 47 of 2009 by the Defendant before the
                             Division Bench of the High Court which came to be allowed by the
                             impugned order dated 08.05.2012 and dismissed the Plaintiff’s suit with
                             respect to specific performance. However, directed the refund of the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
RADHA SHARMA
1
12:11:52 IST
   Reason:
Suit No. 1669 of 1989, hereinafter referred to as the Suit.
   Date: 2025.11.01
2
Hereinafter referred to as the Trial Court.
3
Hereinafter referred to as the High Court.
4
Hereinafter referred to as the Agreement.
1
consideration already paid by the Plaintiff. This order of the Division
          Bench of the High Court is now assailed before this Court in the present
          appeal by the plaintiff.
BRIEF FACTS:
2. The plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement to sell dated:
27.12.1984, wherein the defendant agreed that he would sell the property
          bearing Plot No. 9, Block B, East of Kailash5 for a sum of Rs. 32,07,500.
According to the Agreement the Defendant was responsible for
          construction of 8 (eight) flats on the schedule property in following terms:
SCHELDULE - I:
(A) 2(Two) Flats of approximately 1000 sq.ft. in Ground floor.
1 (one) flat of approximately 1000 sq.ft. in Mezzanine floor.
                        2 (Two) Flats of approximately 1000 sq.ft. in first floor.
                        2 (Two) Flats of approximately 1000 sq.ft. in Second floor.
                        1 (One) Flat of approximately 1000 sq.ft. in Third / Barsati
                        floor.
(B) Basement of approximately 1950 sq.ft. The actual covered
                        area will be determined after the construction is completed in
                        all respects and the flats are ready for occupation legally".
3. Disputes arose between the parties regarding the Registration of the
          agreement and therefore the Plaintiff filed a Suit for Specific Performance,
          contending the following:
3.1. In December 1984, the plaintiff entered into an agreement with the
            defendant for purchase of residential flats to be constructed on a plot in
            East of Kailash, Delhi, at a total consideration of ₹32,07,500/-, of which
            about 90% (₹28,86,750/-) was paid by the plaintiff. The defendant was
            obligated to complete construction within 18 months, with an additional
            six-month grace period, obtain all necessary statutory approvals, and
            hand over possession of the flats. The agreement also provided for
5
Hereinafter referred to as the Schedule Property.
2
payment of damages at Rs. 1,000/- per day for delays and allowed the
       plaintiff to complete unfinished work at the defendant’s cost if necessary.
3.2. The defendant failed to complete the construction or hand over
       possession despite repeated requests, allegedly abandoning the project.
       The plaintiff contends that the defendant’s claimed difficulties with their
       contractor are irrelevant, as construction and delivery were solely the
       defendant’s responsibility. The Plaintiff contends that the mere monetary
       compensation is inadequate given the purpose of the flats for officers and
       public interest.
4. On service of summons, the Defendant appeared before the Court and filed
   his Written Statement contending the following:
4.1.    The Agreement to Sell (27.12.1984) was not a genuine sale but a cover
        for a loan transaction executed under the assurance of the plaintiff
        bank’s officers, with an understanding that advances would be repaid
        with 18% interest. The defendant contended the agreement was
        obtained under undue influence and coercion, as he was in urgent need
        of funds, indebted to the bank, and had no real freedom to negotiate
        terms.
4.2.    The agreement imposed unfair conditions such as low consideration
        rates below market value, liability for all levies/charges on defendant,
        cancellation rights and penalties favouring the bank and exclusive rights
        over future construction.          Specific performance would cause
        disproportionate hardship to the defendant who needed the premises for
        his family and sons, whereas the plaintiff (a bank) would suffer no real
        loss and could be adequately compensated by repayment amount paid
        with interest.
3
5. The Trial Court framed nine issues for its consideration, and evidence was
   recorded in relation to these issues. The matter was then posted for final
   arguments. At that stage, the Defendant submitted that he was abandoning
   all his claims, including those relating to the agreement being a loan
   transaction and the aspects of undue influence and coercion, and thereafter
   contended as follows:
5.1. That no sanctioned building plan was actually annexed to the agreement
     despite being referred to therein, and only a photocopy of a sanctioned
     plan was later handed over without being duly filed or proved by either
     party. The agreement was not for the sale of land but for the construction
     of residential flats, as shown in Schedule I, which mentioned eight
     proposed units to be built on the 300 sq. yard plot. Under the applicable
     master plan, only 2.5 residential units were permissible on a 300 sq. yard
     plot at the time, and even under the current plan, a maximum of five
     dwelling units would be allowed, whereas the sanctioned plan permitted
     only 2.5 units.
5.2. The agreement, however, envisaged construction of far more units i.e.
     two flats on each of the ground, first, and second floors, one on the
     mezzanine, and one on the terrace, totalling 8 to 10 flats which contrary
     to the sanctioned plan and building bye-laws, which made the proposed
     construction non-compoundable. It was therefore argued that the contract
     was illegal, being contrary to the master plan, sanctioned plan, and
     building regulations, and hence void and not specifically enforceable and
     furthermore, even refund of the advance consideration could not be
     claimed, as the agreement was void ab initio and not merely discovered
     to be void later under
Section 65
of the Contract Act.
6. After noting the new plea raised by the Defendant, the Plaintiff filed an
   application contending that, in the event the Trial Court accepts the
4
Defendant’s new plea, the Plaintiff is willing to take the property “as is,” in
          accordance with
Section 12
of the Specific Relief Act.6
7. The Trial Court after considering the evidence available on record decreed
          the suit filed by the Plaintiff and directed the Defendant to execute a
          registered sale deed in favour of the Plaintiff. The trial court while
          decreeing the Suit held that:
7.1. Just because there is a clause which says that the Plaintiff is entitled to
             refund in case if the defendant breaches the agreement, it cannot be a
             ground to delete his right to file suit for specific performance. The
             defendant’s plea that the plaintiff obstructed completion of the
             agreement cannot be accepted, as the plaintiff’s architect was only
             supervising construction, not hindering it. Since the plaintiff had paid
             90% of the consideration and even offered to finish the remaining 10%
             work under Clause 10, its readiness and willingness to perform were
             conclusively proved.
7.2. Regarding the new plea the Trial Court held that the new plea raised by
             the defendant for the first time during arguments was malafide and an
             attempt to take advantage of their own wrong. It further held that even if
             the agreement for sale of eight flats was void for being contrary to
             building regulations or the master plan, the agreement could still be
             enforced to the extent permitted under
Section 12
, with respect to a lesser
             number of flats. The Court clarified that neither the object nor the
             purpose of the agreement was illegal, since the defendant had never
             raised the defence of inability to perform until the final hearing, the
             plaintiff’s prompt election under
Section 12(3)
was valid. A meaningful
             reading of the agreement revealed that it merely referred to a proposal
6
Hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’
5
for eight flats, while the operative terms indicated that the consideration
     was to be paid based on the covered area constructed, with no specific
     reference to eight flats, showing that the transaction was essentially for
     property and land rights rather than a fixed number of flats.
8. The defendant filed a Regular First Appeal (OS) No. 47 of 2009 challenging
   the judgment and decree of the Trial Court before the Division Bench of
   the High Court. The Division Bench by the impugned judgment allowed
   the Regular First Appeal filed by the Defendant, and dismissed the suit filed
   by the Plaintiff with respect to the seeking relief of specific performance,
   however ordered for the refund of the consideration which the plaintiff had
   filed to the Defendant i.e. Rs. 28,86,750 with interest at the rate of 18% per
   annum, compounded quarterly, for the period from April 8, 1986, to August
   31, 1988. Thereafter, from September 1, 1988, until the date of actual
   payment, the said sum shall carry interest at the rate of 12% per annum,
   simple interest. Setting aside the judgment and decree of the Trial Court the
   Division Bench held that:
8.1.At the time the agreement was executed, it was inherently incapable of
    performance because only two residential units (one each on the ground
    and first floors) with a small barsati of 300 sq. ft. were permissible on the
    plot, and construction of eight flats as agreed was legally impermissible.
    Additionally, the basement could be used only for storage, not for
    residential purposes. Whether the arrangement was to be treated as a loan
    or as a failed sale transaction, any recompense to the plaintiff would have
    to be governed strictly by Clause 5 of the agreement, which provided that
    in the event the defendant was unable to transfer title, the amounts paid
    would be treated as a loan repayable with interest and this interpretation
    also clarified that the only issue given up earlier was the plea of undue
    influence or coercion.
6
8.2.The Court emphasized that the plaintiff being a public sector bank was
       expected to act lawfully and transparently, and should not have entered
       into an agreement whose object was in contravention of building laws or
       was designed to circumvent legal restrictions. The agreement clearly
       referred to the construction of eight dwelling units, which constituted the
       object of the contract and was patently in violation of the governing master
       plan and building bye-laws, making the agreement unlawful on its face.
       Since the bank was aware of the legal prohibitions and the agreement itself
       contained a clause treating the advance payment as a loan in case of
       breach, the application of
Section 12
of the Specific Relief Act was held
       to be erroneous, as the plaintiff could not compel the defendant to perform
       an act expressly prohibited by law.
8.3.It is this judgment that the Plaintiff is challenging in this Appeal.
9. Ms. Raakhi Sahijwal, Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the
  Appellant-Plaintiff has vehemently contended:
9.1.     That Division Bench erred in law by setting aside the judgment of the
         Single Judge without examining the reasoning of the trial court in
         proper perspective. The Single Judge, had carefully considered the
         agreement for construction of two flats per floor, which allegedly
         violated the Building Bye-Laws, and, relying on judicial precedents and
Section 12
of the Specific Relief Act, and yet had granted specific
         performance in favor of the plaintiff. The Division Bench, without
         addressing these findings or establishing any perversity or legal error,
         substituted its own conclusions, disregarding the detailed analysis of
         the Single Judge, and incorrectly assumed that the trial court ignored
         the legality of the agreement;
7
9.2.   She further contends that agreement dated 27.12.1984 cannot be
       deemed void-ab-initio merely because it proposed construction
       exceeding the permissible number of dwelling units under the Building
       Bye-Laws. The Single Judge correctly recognized that the construction
       could be modified to comply with the law, including merging of flats or
       making other adjustments, and that the enforceable portion of the
       contract could be executed using the Blue Pencil Rule. The plaintiff had
       also expressly waived claims to performance of the non-compliant
       portions of the contract and had agreed to accept the property as-is,
       undertaking to ensure compliance with the law, thus rendering the claim
       of illegality untenable;
9.3.   It is further argued that, the Division Bench had erroneously entertained
       a plea of illegality which was never raised in the written statement, nor
       framed as an issue, nor supported by evidence, but raised only at the
       time of oral arguments. The Defendant, who initially proposed
       construction exceeding legal limits, cannot now claim the agreement as
       void to avoid his obligations. The Division Bench’s decision
       overlooked the substance of the contract and gave undue weight to the
       respondent’s inconsistent conduct, which included prolonging the
       litigation, raising false pleas, and taking contradictory positions
       regarding the legality of construction;
9.4.   The judgment of Division Bench is inequitable, unjust, and prejudicial,
       causing significant hardship to plaintiff. The petitioner, a public
       institution that fulfilled its contractual obligations in good faith, has
       been denied the relief of specific performance despite compliance with
Section 12
of the Specific Relief Act and willingness to accept
       modifications necessary to conform to law. In sum, the judgment of
       Division Bench disregards established legal principles, the detailed
8
findings of the Single Judge, and the equitable rights vested with the
       appellant-plaintiff, leading to an outcome of a finding which is both
       legally and factually unsustainable.
10.On the other hand, Sri. T.K. Ganju, Learned Counsel appearing for the
  Defendant contends:
10.1. That defendant is the lawful owner of the property No. B-9, East of
       Kailash, New Delhi, under a perpetual lease deed dated 19.08.1974.
       Due to financial constraints, the defendant could not complete
       construction within the stipulated time prescribed under the lease and
       had sought extensions from the Delhi Development Authority. To
       finance the construction, the defendant approached the Plaintiff, a
       regular banker, for advances secured through equitable mortgage, with
       the understanding that if the construction or sale could not be
       completed, the amounts received would be treated as a loan repayable
       with interest.
10.2. The agreement dated 27.12.1984 contemplated construction of eight
       dwelling units and a basement totalling 9,950 sq. ft., which exceeded
       permissible limits under the Building Bye-Laws, 1983, and the
       sanctioned plan which was well within the knowledge of plaintiff. All
       amounts received from the Plaintiff were invested in construction,
       leaving the defendant with no profit and when it became apparent that
       the construction could not comply with legal requirements, the
       defendant repeatedly offered to refund the amounts borrowed from
       plaintiff with interest, but Plaintiff refused and instead filed a suit for
       specific performance. The terms of the agreement were contrary to the
       Master Plan, sanctioned plan, and Building Bye-Laws, making the
       agreement void-ab-initio and incapable of specific performance;
9
10.3. The defendant further submits that neither
Section 12
of the Specific
          Relief Act nor the Blue Pencil Rule applies, as the agreement was
          illegal, void from inception and could not be partially enforced. The
          agreement linked both the land and the flats inseparably, making any
          attempt to enforce it equivalent to rewriting the contract, which the
          court cannot do. Enforcing the agreement would contravene public
          policy and settled principles of law under the
Indian Contract Act, 1872
,
          as a contract with an unlawful object is void. The defendant emphasizes
          that the Plaintiff’s suit for specific performance is therefore untenable,
          and the Division Bench was correct in observing that the Single Judge
          had ignored the illegality of the agreement;
10.4. The property has remained vacant and in a dilapidated condition since
          1989, and the defendant has not earned any profit from it. The
          agreement, being in violation of building regulations and statutory
          plans, could not be enforced, and the only lawful course was to treat the
          amounts advanced as repayable loans as agreed between the parties. It
          is further contended that granting specific performance under these
          circumstances would be contrary to law, equity, and public policy, and
          the Plaintiff’s claims are thus entirely without merit.
11.We have heard the learned counsels appearing on behalf of the parties and
   perused the material on record. The scrutiny of the same, gives rise to the
   following points for our consideration:
i.      Whether the construction and delivery of the eight flats specified in
            Schedule–I formed an essential condition of the agreement, the
            absence of which would render the agreement incapable of
            subsistence?
ii.     Whether the agreement in its current form unenforceable as it is in
            violation of the Building laws?
10
iii.   Whether the course adopted by the Trial Court in modifying or
            interpreting the agreement to render it workable in its present form
            was legally justified?
iv.    Whether the Division Bench of the High Court erred in setting aside
            the judgment and decree of the Single Judge/Trail Court?
RE: POINT NO.1
12. Before proceeding to answer the above point, it is vital to consider the terms
    of the agreement to determine whether it is enforceable without the
    construction of the eight flats, and whether such construction constitutes an
    essential element of the agreement. This question must be considered first,
    as the Plaintiff, by filing an application under
Section 12
of the Act, has taken
    the plea that in the event the Court accepts the Defendant’s new contention
    i.e. the agreement is unenforceable and invalid, they are willing to take the
    property “as is.”
13. Before proceeding to answer the issue regarding construction of flats being
    the essential element of the agreement, it is important for us to reproduce few
    recitals of the agreement, which are relevant and have bearing on the point
    to be determined:
“1. The purchaser will pay a total sum of Rs.32,07,500/- (Thirty two
            lakhs seven thousand five hundred only) to the vendor as
            consideration for the flat set out in Schedule-I together with the lease
            hold rights over the said land at the rate of Rs.340/- per sq.ft. of
            covered area of the flat and Rs.250/- per sq.ft. of the covered area in
            basement which is more specifically described in Schedule II and in
            the instalments set out in Schedule III hereto. The said total
            consideration has been arrived at by taking into consideration the
            approximate area of each flat mentioned in Schedule I. This
            consideration is however subject to variation which will finally be
            determined after the completion of the construction in all respects and
            the actual area is measured. The total consideration payable is on the
            actual covered area ascertain on actual measurement. The vendor
            acknowledges that he has already received a sum of Rs. 10 lakhs (Rs.
            Ten lakhs only) as part of the above consideration. The purchaser,
            however, is at liberty to stop further payments in accordance with the
11
Schedule III, if the vendor has committed any breach of his
    undertakings.
1. It is agreed that according to the present plan, the ground floor, first
    floor and second floor will each contain two flats of approximate
    covered area of 1000 sq.ft. and mezzanine floor and the third floor of
    Barsati floor will each contain one flat of 1000 sq.ft. In addition, there
    will be a basement of an approximately covered area of 1950 sq.ft. If,
    however, the vendor constructs additional two flats, the vendor shall
    sell the same only to the purchaser at the same rates and subject to the
    same conditions and specifications as applicable to the other flats as
    set out in this agreement, provided however, the Vendor shall not
    construct even if it is permissible to do so in excess of flats and
    basement. The agreed broad specifications of the building and flats
    are set out in Schedule IV hereto.
2. It is agreed that on the plot of land in question, no other structure or
    building will be erected, the intention being that no one else other than
    the purchaser will have any right, title or interest to any part of the plot
    or any structure thereon.
…….
5. It shall be the duty of the vendor to obtain all the necessary permissions
     from the Delhi Development Authority or other government authorities
     for transferring and conveying all the rights, title and interest in respect
     of the land and the flats to the purchaser. If for whatever reason, the
     vendor is not able to convey and transfer the right, title and interest
     as mentioned herein above to the purchaser, the entire amount paid
     by the purchaser to the vendor shall be treated as a loan advanced by
     the purchaser to the Vendor and will be repayable on demand with
     interest at 18% per annum compounded quarterly from the date on
     which the flats are to be handed over under this agreement. It is
     specifically agreed that all expenses, charges in connection with
     transfer including the payment of any statutory dues or amount by way
     of unearned increase in the value of the plot to the Delhi Development
     Authority or any other authority shall be borne by the vendor.
6. It is specifically understood that the purchaser is interested in
     purchasing the flats to be constructed thereon along with the rights
     concerning the plot of land and not the rights over the land alone and
     therefore the construction of the flat within the period and subject to
     the specification set out herein is the essential term of this agreement.
The Vendor therefore shall not sell or lease or otherwise transfer the
     flats to any other person.
7. It is agreed that the vendor will construct the flats and complete the
     same in all respects and hand over possession of the same within a
     period of 18 months from the date of this agreement.
PROVIDED however, the vendor is given a grace period of six
     months by the purchaser in writing from the above stipulated date of
     completion and handing over possession and subject to this, the time
     is the essence of this contract.
PROVIDED further that if it becomes impossible for the Vendor to
     complete the construction within the period mentioned above, on
     account of or by reason of war, act of State, natural calamities and such
12
other events which the vendor could not prevent or which were not
           within the control of the vendor, the time for completion of the
           construction shall be extended by a period equivalent approximately to
           the duration of the event specified above.
…….
11. Immediately after the construction of the flats are complete to its
           satisfaction, the purchaser may at its discretion occupy the flats
           without any specific permission by the Vendor to so occupy the flats.”
                                                             (emphasis supplied)


   On perusal of the above clauses, particularly the highlighted portions, it
   becomes evident that the construction of eight flats, as mentioned in
   Schedule–I, along with two additional flats (making a total of ten flats), was
   not merely an essential part of the agreement but its very object and intent
   with which parties entered the contract. Without the construction of these
   number flats, the agreement to sell does not, and cannot, subsist. This
   position becomes clear from Clause 6 of the agreement, which states: “It is
   specifically understood that the purchaser is interested in purchasing the
   flats to be constructed thereon along with the rights concerning the plot of
   land and not the rights over the land alone, and therefore, the construction
   of the flats within the period and subject to the specifications set out
   herein is an essential term of this agreement.”. This clause explicitly
   stipulates that the construction and handing over of the number of flats
   constitute an essential term of the agreement and it was so agreed. In
   conclusion, the construction and delivery of the eight flats formed the core
   and essential terms of the agreement, without which the agreement itself
   could not subsist.
RE-POINT– II:
14. Having concluded that the agreement cannot subsist without the
   construction and delivery of the eight flats, we shall now proceed to
   examine point-II.
13
15.The position of law regarding the “enforceability of the agreement which is
        against the law” is well settled.
Section 23
of the Contract Act specially
        says “The consideration or object of an agreement is lawful unless it is
        forbidden by law, or is fraudulent, or involves injury to a person or
        property, or is opposed to public policy.”
16.This Court in the case of Narayanamma and Anr v. Govindappa and Ors7
        addressed the issue whether an agreement to sell land executed during a
        non-alienation period under the
Karnataka Land Reforms Act
was
        enforceable wherein the plaintiff had sought for specific performance of the
        agreement, but the trial court had dismissed the suit as void in the teeth of
        statutory prohibitions, a decision reversed by the appellate court. However,
        this Court upheld the trial court’s judgment of dismissal, holding that
        agreements contravening law cannot be enforced, as enforcing them
        would be in conflict with public interest. The Court emphasized the
        doctrine of illegality and the principles ex turpi causa non oritur actio
        and ex dolo malo non oritur actio, reinforcing that courts will not assist
        in enforcing illegal agreements even if both parties are ad idem on
        illegality. The case highlights that adherence to statutory provisions and
        public interest being paramount in suits for specific performance. While
        dismissing the Suit, this Court concluded as follows:
“26. However, the ticklish question that arises in such a situation is
                  "the decision of this Court would weigh in side of which party"? As
                  held by Hidayatullah. J. in Kedar Nath Motant³, the question that
                  would arise for consideration is as to whether the plaintiff can rest
                  his claim without relying upon the illegal transaction or as to
                  whether the plaintiff can rest his claim on something else without
                  relying on the illegal transaction. Undisputedly, in the present case,
                  the claim of the plaintiff is entirely based upon the agreement to
                  sell dated 15-5-1990, which is clearly hit by Section 61 of the
                  Reforms Act. There is no other foundation for the claim of the
                  plaintiff except the one based on the agreement to sell, which is hit
                  by
Section 61
of the Act. In such a case, as observed by Taylor, in
                  his "Law of Evidence" which has been approved by
7
(2019) 19 SCC 42.
14
Gajendragadkar, J. in Immani Appa Rao, although illegality is not
              pleaded by the defendant nor sought to be relied upon him by way
              of defence, yet the Court itself, upon the illegality appearing upon
              the evidence, will take notice of it, and will dismiss the action ex
              turpi causa non oritur actio le. no polluted hand shall touch the
              pure fountain of justice. Equally, as observed in Story's Equity
              Jurisprudence, which again is approved in Immani Appa Rao, where
              the parties are concerned with illegal agreements or other
              transactions, courts of equity following the rule of law as to
              participators in a common crime will not interpose to grant any
              relief, acting upon the maxim in pari delicto potior cest conditio
              defendentis et possidentis.
27. It could thus be seen that, the trial Judge upon finding that the
              agreement of sale was hit by Section 61 of the Reforms Act, had
              rightly dismissed the suit of the plaintiff”

                                                                   (emphasis supplied)
17.Now turning our attention to the facts of the instant case, it can be noticed
   that both the Trial Court and the Division Bench have unequivocally
   concluded that the agreement, in its present form, is unenforceable as it
   contravenes the applicable building laws. The Division Bench observed as
   follows:
“9. In the year 1984, the Master Plan for Delhi then in force,
              along with the applicable Building Bye-Laws, 1983, permitted
              construction on a plot admeasuring 300 sq. yds. of a basement
              equal in area to the ground floor, a ground floor and a first floor
              of the same area, and a barsati floor with one-fourth of the
              covered area of the ground floor. Thus, when the agreement was
              entered into, it was incapable of being performed, inasmuch as
              only two residential units—one on the ground floor and one on
              the first floor—could be constructed, with a barsati floor of 309
              sq. ft.”

    The Trial Court also reached a similar finding, holding that the agreement,
    in its present form, was unenforceable as the construction of eight flats
    was impermissible under the building regulations but yet decreed the suit.
18.Accordingly, this answer’s point II in the affirmative, that the agreement in
   its current form is unenforceable.
15
RE – POINT III
19.Having held that the agreement, in its present form, is unenforceable and
    that the construction of eight flats is an essential part thereof, we now
    proceed to examine the third point by raising two sub-points. The first is
    whether, in a suit for specific performance, the Court can sever the invalid
    portion of an agreement from its valid portion? If first issue is answered
    affirmatively, the second is whether, in exercising such severance, the Court
    can render the agreement workable by removing an essential part. These
    questions arise in the present case as the appellants have contended that the
    Trial Court’s judgment and decree was valid. The Trial Court applied
Section 12
of the Specific Relief Act, directing transfer of the ‘rights over
    the land’ to the Plaintiff, subject to compliance with the Building
    Regulations limiting construction to three flats.
20. Sub-point No.III(1): It is a well-settled principle of law that while
     adjudicating suits, or when examining the validity of agreements or
     contracts, the Courts generally have the power to sever the invalid portion
     of an agreement from its valid portion and give effect to the latter. There
     is no bar on the application of the doctrine of severability in suits for
     specific performance. However, this power must be exercised with great
     caution and only in exceptional cases.
21.Sub-point No.III(2): After the Trial Court concludes that it must resort to
    the exercise of severing the invalid portion of an agreement, the second sub-
    issue that arises—whether the Court can render the agreement workable by
    removing an essential part of it. The answer to this question is obvious, the
    Court cannot remove the essential part of an agreement or the very object
    for which it was executed. We further caution that, while exercising such
    power, the Courts must refrain from re-writing or re-constructing the
    agreement between the parties to make it work, which is the law laid down
16
by this Court in the case of
Mayawanti v. Kaushalya Devi8
which held as
        follows:
“8. In a case of specific performance, it is settled law, and
                   indeed it cannot be doubted, that the jurisdiction to order
                   specific performance of a contract is based on the existence of
                   a valid and enforceable contract. The Law of Contract is based
                   on the ideal of freedom of contract and it provides the limiting
                   principles within which the parties are free to make their own
                   contracts. Where a valid and enforceable contract has not been
                   made, the court will not make a contract for them. Specific
                   performance will not be ordered if the contract itself suffers
                   from some defect which makes the contract invalid or
                   unenforceable. The discretion of the court will be there even
                   though the contract is otherwise valid and enforceable and it can
                   pass a decree of specific performance even before there has been
                   any breach of the contract. It is, therefore, necessary first to see
                   whether there has been a valid and enforceable contract and
                   then to see the nature and obligation arising out of it. The
                   contract being the foundation of the obligation the order of
                   specific performance is to enforce that obligation.”
22.It is trite law that the power of the Court to sever the invalid portion of an
        agreement from its valid portion must be exercised sparingly and only in
        exceptional circumstances. While doing so, the Court cannot, under the guise
        of severance, redraft or reconstitute the fine tunes of the contract by
        removing its essential terms or altering its fundamental object which the
        parties had arrived at by way of their consensus ad idem, as such the exercise
        would amount to creating a new agreement between the parties, which is
        impermissible in law.
23.Having discussed the settled proposition of law, it is apposite to apply the
        same to the facts of the present case. The Trial Court in the present case, after
        taking the effort for separation of the invalid part from the valid part of the
        agreement held as follows:
“66. The next question which arises is as to the relief to be
                   granted to the plaintiff. The agreement in the present case
                   expressly provided for the plaintiff entering in possession and
                   completing the works. The plaintiff has also claimed the specific
8
(1990) 3 SCC 1.
17
performance of that clause of the agreement. The specific
             performance of that clause cannot be' denied to the plaintiff. The
             plaintiff, of course, by stepping into the shoes of the defendant
             in the matter of raising construction shall not be entitled to raise
             any illegal / unauthorized construction even if that was the
             agreement. The plaintiff can raise only construction in
             accordance with law. The plaintiff has given its assent therefore.
             The, defendant who has been found in default can be directed to
             perform specifically so much of his part of the contract as he can
             perform, i.e. by putting the plaintiff into possession of the
             property and by transferring / selling / conveying the property to
             the plaintiff as agreed. The defendant would, of course, have a
             choice whether to first have the leasehold rights in the property
             converted into freehold in his own name or to pay the unearned
             increase and transfer the leasehold rights in the land to the
             plaintiff.”
24.We have already held, while deciding the first point for consideration, that
   the construction and handing over of eight flats constituted an essential part
   of the agreement, without which the agreement could not have subsisted and
   while deciding the second point, we have concluded that the agreement for
   construction of eight flats was contrary to law and therefore unenforceable.
   Taking clue from the conclusion arrived at by us under the first and second
   sub-issues, it follows that the Trial Court was not justified in reworking the
   agreement to make it enforceable by removing its essential object—namely,
   the construction of eight flats on the subject land. In effect, the Trial Court
   re-wrote the agreement by reducing the number of flats to be constructed
   from eight to three, in conformity with the Building Regulations, which it
   could not have done since the very essence of the agreement was the
   construction of eight flats.
25.Thus, we conclude that the course adopted by the Trial Court in modifying
   or interpreting the agreement to render it workable in its present form was
   not legally justified and as such the appellate court has rightly reversed the
   findings of trial court and rejected the prayer for specific performance.
18
RE- POINT – IV
26.Having decided the foregoing issues, we hold that the Division Bench rightly
    allowed the appeal filed by the Defendant and rightly dismissed the suit
    instituted by the Plaintiff.
27.Before parting with the matter, we consider it appropriate to reiterate the
    observations made by the Division Bench, which are reproduced below:
“27. Suffice would it be to state that the respondent is a public
               sector bank and it is not expected from the State or its
               instrumentalities to enter into camouflage agreements and
               especially where the object of the agreement would result in law
               being violated.”
28. In the light of aforesaid discussion, we are of the considered view that the
  appeal must fail and accordingly, the appeal is dismissed. The Judgement and
  decree passed by the High Court of Delhi, in RFA (OS) No. 47 of 2009 dated
  08.05.2012 stands affirmed. Parties to bear their respective costs. Pending
  Application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
.……………………………., J.
[ARAVIND KUMAR]



                                                      ……………………………., J.
[VIPUL M. PANCHOLI]


    New Delhi;
October 9, 2025.
19