[Cites
35
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Om Pal vs State Of U.P. (Now State Of Uttarakhand) on 28 October, 2025
Author:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
,
Sanjay Karol
2025 INSC 1262



                                                                              REPORTABLE


                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1624 OF 2011

          OM PAL & ORS                                                   …APPELLANT(S)

                                                    VERSUS

          STATE OF U.P
          (NOW STATE OF UTTARAKHAND)                                     …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                     WITH

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.1613-1614 OF 2011


                                               JUDGMENT
PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA, J.
1.             The present set of Appeals is directed against the common judgment and

          order dated 29.11.2010 whereby the High Court dismissed the criminal appeals

          filed by the appellants against their conviction under Section 302 read with
Sections 149
and
307
of the Indian Penal Code, 18601.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NISHA KHULBEY
Date: 2025.10.28
17:59:05 IST
Reason:
1 “
IPC
”
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                        Page 1 of 25
2.        In the present set of Appeals, Criminal Appeal No.1624 of 2011 is filed by

appellants – Om Pal, Narendra and Ranvir; Criminal Appeal No.1613 of 2011 is

filed by Dharamvir; and Criminal Appeal No.1614 of 2011 was filed by Inchha

Ram, who has passed away during the pendency of the present Appeals.

Therefore, Criminal Appeal No.1614 of 2011 preferred by Inchha Ram stands

abated and the same is, accordingly, dismissed as such.


A. FACTUAL MATRIX
3.        In the present case, two sets of First Information Reports2 were lodged with

regard to the same incident which took place on 19.05.1988.


THE FIRST FIR
4.        FIR No.65 dated 20.05.1988 was lodged under
Sections 147
,
148
,
149
,
323
,
324
and
307
of the IPC from the side of the appellants stating that one

Molhar along with his brother Kantu and his sons, Narendra, Om Pal, Inchha,

Ranvir and Pardeep were cutting sugar cane and at the same time, Dile Ram,

Ved Pal, Bengal Singh, Sher Singh entered the field of the appellants along with

lathis, tabals and axes and started attacking the appellants. There was a fight

that ensued and, in the process, Kantu, Narendra, lnchha received several

injuries.
THE SECOND FIR
5.        FIR No. 65A/1988 under
Sections 147
,
148
,
149
,
307
,
323
,
324
and
506
of the IPC was lodged by the opposite/complainant side on 23.05.1988 that


2 “FIR”
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                        Page 2 of 25
Molhar and Dharamvir Singh damaged their boundary of the field on 19.05.1988

and, thereafter, the appellants started beating Dile Ram with lathis, tabals, axes,

phawara due to which Dile Ram, Braham Singh and Bangal Singh received

serious injuries, both were taken to hospital where Dile Ram succumbed to the

injuries on 24.5.1988 and Braham Singh expired on 31.5.1988.
6.     Taking into account the two sets of FIR, FIR No.65 gave rise to Session

Trial No.57 of 1992 and FIR No. 65A emanated into Session Trial No.56 of 1992.
7.     In Session Trial No.56 of 1992, out of which the present Appeals have

arisen, all the seven accused persons were found guilty of the offences

punishable under
Section 302
read with
Section 149
IPC, and
Section 307
read

with
Section 149
IPC. Each of them were sentenced to imprisonment for life and

a fine of ₹10,000/- under
Section 302
/
149
IPC, rigorous imprisonment for 10

years and a fine of ₹10,000/- under
Section 307
/
149
IPC. Additionally, the

accused persons were individually sentenced to the following:
Appellant                  Offence               Sentence
              Molhar
Section 147
IPC           R.I. for 2 years
              Kantu
Section 147
IPC           R.I. for 2 years
              Om Pal
Section 147
IPC           R.I. for 2 years
            Narendra
Section 147
IPC           R.I. for 2 years
              Ranvir
Section 147
IPC           R.I. for 2 years
           Inchha Ram
Section 148
IPC           R.I. for 2 years
            Dharamvir
Section 148
IPC           R.I. for 2 years
8.     On the other hand, in Sessions Trial No.57 of 1992, which emanated from

FIR No. 65A lodged by the appellants, all the accused persons were acquitted.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                      Page 3 of 25
9.      Aggrieved by the judgment in Session Trial No.56 of 1992 convicting the

appellants, three separate appeals were preferred — Criminal Appeal No.1516 of

2001 by Molhar and Dharamvir, Criminal Appeal No.921 of 2001 by Kantu and

Criminal Appeal No.922 of 2001 by Om Pal, Narendra, Inchha Ram and Ranvir

before the Allahabad High Court.
10.     Aggrieved by the judgment in Session Trial No.57 of 1992, Criminal

Revision No.321 of 2001 was filed by Molhar Singh before the Allahabad High

Court.
11.     All the three criminal appeals and the criminal revision were transferred

to the High Court of Uttarakhand under
Section 35
of the Uttar Pradesh

Reorganization Act, 2000 after the formation of the State of Uttarakhand.
12.     The High Court of Uttarakhand vide its common impugned judgment and

order dated 29.11.2010 after reappreciating the entire evidence of the

prosecution, dismissed all the criminal appeals and the criminal revision filed by

appellants.     Thus, the High Court vide impugned judgment affirmed the

conviction and sentence awarded by the Trial Court in Sessions Trial No.56 of

1992.
13.     The appellants are now before us assailing the judgment passed by the

High Court which affirmed their conviction.
B. SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
14.     Learned counsel for the appellants submit that the present case is not of

a premeditated murder but a result of a free fight that ensued between the two
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                     Page 4 of 25
groups.     As the injuries were sustained on both sides, the possibility of the

appellants exercising their self-defense cannot be ruled out. Also, the fact that

none of the witnesses could attribute specific role to any particular accused,

thus, it indicates that it was a case of free fight.
15.    Additionally, it was the side of the appellants that lodged the first FIR. It

was also argued that the cross-FIR from the side of the complainant was in fact

lodged after three days of the incident by the son of the deceased Dile Ram and

not by the injured eyewitness.
16.    Learned counsel for the appellants have also questioned the testimonies

of the eyewitnesses.      In a nutshell, it was argued that the conviction of the

appellants under
Section 302
/
149
of the IPC is totally misconceived and, if at all

they are liable, they can be liable only under Section 304 Part II of the
IPC
as

their case falls under fourth exception to
Section 300
IPC.
17.    To bolster their submissions, the appellants have relied on the decisions

of this Court in
Puran vs. State of Rajasthan3
,
Pappu vs. State of M.P.4
,
Kailash vs. State of M.P.5
,
Vadla Chandraiah vs. State of A.P.6
and
Sandhya Jadhav (Smt.) vs. State of Maharashtra7
.
18.    Per contra, the respondent-State has argued that the appellants had the

motive for killing Dile Ram since the consolidation proceedings were pending




3 (1976) 1 SCC 28
4 (2006) 7 SCC 391
5 (2006) 11 SCC 420
6 (2006) 13 SCC 587
7 (2006) 4 SCC 653
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                      Page 5 of 25
between the parties, but in the consolidation proceedings, the field was given to

Dile Ram, which enraged the appellants.
19.    It was also argued that it was the appellants who were the aggressors.

They are the ones who attacked on the complainant side. PW-2 (Bangal Singh)

(injured eyewitness) in his testimony had stated that the appellants’ lathi

contained an arc shaped iron blade. Hence, it cannot be stated that the injuries

on the person of accused are not explained.
20.    The State has argued that the fourth exception to
Section 300
of the IPC

is not attracted in the present case considering that it was a shared motive on

the part of the appellants to cause death on the complainant side. Additionally,

on the issue of delay in lodging the FIR by the complainant, the State argues that

the Trial Court has rejected this contention as the delay was well explained by

the complainant side. Thus, the present Appeals need no interference and the

conviction against the appellants be upheld in toto.
21.     To bolster its submissions, the State relied on the decisions of this Court

in Pulicherla Nagaraju alias
Nagaraja Reddy vs. State of A.P.8
and Abdul

Sayeed vs. State of Madya Pradesh9.
22.    The rival submissions now fall for our analysis.


C. ANALYSIS
23.    Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and having

gone through the material on record, the only question that falls for our


8 (2006) 11 SCC 444
9 (2010) 10 SCC 259
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                      Page 6 of 25
consideration is whether the High Court committed an error in passing the

impugned judgment and order?
24.    As the appellants before us seek for interference with the concurrent

findings by two Courts below, this Court generally should be slow in interfering

with the concurrent findings.
In
Mekala Sivaiah vs. State of Andhra

Pradesh10
, this Court observed as follows:
“15. It is well settled by judicial pronouncement that
Article 136
is worded in wide terms and powers conferred
            under the said Article are not hedged by any technical
            hurdles. This overriding and exceptional power is,
            however, to be exercised sparingly and only in furtherance
            of cause of justice. Thus, when the judgment under appeal
            has resulted in grave miscarriage of justice by some
            misapprehension or misreading of evidence or by ignoring
            material evidence then this Court is not only empowered
            but is well expected to interfere to promote the cause of
            justice.
16. It is not the practice of this Court to reappreciate the
            evidence for the purpose of examining whether the findings
            of fact concurrently arrived at by the trial court and the
            High Court are correct or not. It is only in rare and
            exceptional cases where there is some manifest illegality or
            grave and serious miscarriage of justice on account of
            misreading or ignoring material evidence that this Court
            would interfere with such finding of fact.”

                                                  (Emphasis supplied)
25.    The scope of this Court for interference under
Article 136
of the

Constitution of India was further explained in Shahaja alias
Shahajan Ismail

Mohd. Shaikh vs. State of Maharashtra11
“23.
Again, in
Balak Ram v. State of U.P.
[(1975) 3 SCC
            219:1974 SCC (Cri) 837], this Court also held that the
            powers of the Supreme Court under
Article 136
of the

10 (2022) 8 SCC 253
11 (2023) 12 SCC 558
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                       Page 7 of 25
Constitution are wide but in criminal appeals this Court
           does not interfere with the concurrent findings of fact
           save      in     exceptional     circumstances.
In
Arunachalam v. P.S.R. Sadhanantham
[(1979) 2 SCC
           297:1979 SCC (Cri) 454], this Court, while agreeing with
           the views expressed on the aforesaid mentioned decisions
           of this Court, has thus stated : (SCC p. 300, para 4)
                 “4. … The power is plenary in the sense
                 that there are no words in
Article 136
itself
                 qualifying that power. But, the very nature
                 of the power has led the court to set limits
                 to itself within which to exercise such
                 power. It is now the well-established
                 practice of this Court to permit the
                 invocation of the power under
Article 136
only in very exceptional circumstances, as
                 when a question of law of general public
                 importance arises or a decision shocks the
                 conscience of the court. But, within the
                 restrictions imposed by itself, this Court
                 has the undoubted power to interfere even
                 with findings of fact, making no distinction
                 between judgments of acquittal and
                 conviction, if the High Court, in arriving at
                 those findings, has acted “perversely or
                 otherwise improperly”.”
                                        (emphasis supplied)”
24.
In
Nain Singh v. State of U.P.
[(1991) 2 SCC 432:
1991 SCC (Cri) 421] , in which all the aforesaid decisions
           as referred to hereinabove were considered and after
           considering the aforesaid decisions on the question of
           exercise of power under
Article 136
of the Constitution
           and after agreeing with the views expressed in the
           aforesaid decisions, the Court finally laid down the
           principle that the evidence adduced by the prosecution
           in that decision fell short of the test of reliability and
           acceptability and, therefore, was highly unsafe to act
           upon it. In
State of U.P. v. Babul Nath
[(1994) 6 SCC 29:
1994 SCC (Cri) 1585], this Court, while considering the
           scope of
Article 136
as to when this Court is entitled to
           upset the findings of fact, observed as follows : (SCC p.
           33, para 5)
                “5. At the very outset we may mention that
                in an appeal under
Article 136
of the
                Constitution this Court does not normally
                reappraise the evidence by itself and go
                into the question of credibility of the
                witnesses and the assessment of the
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                    Page 8 of 25
evidence by the High Court is accepted by
                 the Supreme Court as final unless, of
                 course, the appreciation of evidence and
                 finding is vitiated by any error of law of
                 procedure or found contrary to the
                 principles of natural justice, errors of
                 record and misreading of the evidence, or
                 where the conclusions of the High Court
                 are      manifestly      perverse     and
                 unsupportable from the evidence on
                 record.”
25. From the aforesaid decisions of this Court on the
           exercise of power of the Supreme Court under
Article 136
of the Constitution, the following principles emerge:
25.1. The powers of this Court under
Article 136
of the
           Constitution are very wide but in criminal appeals this
           Court does not interfere with the concurrent findings of
           fact save in exceptional circumstances.
25.2. It is open to this Court to interfere with the findings
           of fact recorded by the High Court if the High Court
           has acted perversely or otherwise improperly.
25.3. It is open to this Court to invoke the power under
Article 136
only in very exceptional circumstances as and
           when a question of law of general public importance
           arises or a decision shocks the conscience of the Court.
25.4. When      the    evidence     adduced     by    the
           prosecution falls short of the test of reliability and
           acceptability and as such it is highly unsafe to act upon
           it.
25.5. Where the appreciation of evidence and finding is
           vitiated by any error of law of procedure or found contrary
           to the principles of natural justice, errors of record and
           misreading of the evidence, or where the conclusions of
           the High Court are manifestly perverse and
           unsupportable from the evidence on record.”
26.    The parties in the present matter are close relatives of each other as they

happen to be the descendants of a common ancestor. There was a long-standing

dispute between the rival parties due to the pending land boundary dispute. On
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                       Page 9 of 25
the day of the incident, an altercation took place between both the groups as the

appellants had broken the mendh (ridge) between the farmlands of the appellants

and the complainant side. Both the sides inflicted injuries on each other, leading

to the death of Dile Ram and Braham Singh.
27.     To prove the guilt of the appellants, the prosecution examined PW-1 (Tejpal

Singh) (complainant and son of deceased Dile Ram), PW-2 (Bangal Singh)

(injured and eyewitness), PW-3 (Mahendra Singh) (eyewitness), PW-4 (Mohan Lal

@ Som) (another eyewitness), PW-5 (Dr. R.K. Singhal) (who conducted

postmortem examination on the dead body of Braham Singh), PW-6 (Constable

Jeet Singh) (who registered the case and prepared chik report of both the cross

cases), PW-7 (Dr. Harish Chandra Dua) (who recorded injuries of the accused

and injured), PW-8 (Sub-Inspector D.C. Yadav) (who started the investigation),

PW-9 (Inspector P.C. Pant) (who completed the investigation), and PW-10 (Dr.

P.S. Chahal) (who conducted postmortem examination on dead body of Dile

Ram).
28.     In their statement under
Section 313
of the Code of Criminal Procedure,

1973, appellant-Om pal admitted the on-going animosity with the complainant

side and he had accordingly stated that Bangal Singh and others had committed

assaults upon him and in order to carve-out a cross-case against him, they had

nominated appellant-Om Pal, as being an accused, in this matter. Appellant-
Narendra too tendered identical statement.       Appellant-Dharamvir had stated

that since he happens to be a witness in the cross-case pertaining to the present

matter, therefore, he had been nominated as an accused. Both the Courts below
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                     Page 10 of 25
while holding the appellants guilty heavily relied on the testimonies of PW-1

(Tejpal Singh) (complainant and son of deceased Dile Ram), PW-2 (Bangal Singh)

(injured and eyewitness), PW-3 (Mahendra Singh) (eyewitness) and PW-4 (Mohan

Lal @ Som) (eyewitness).
29.    The Trial Court in its judgement while convicting the appellants held that

from the evidence of PW-2, PW-3 and PW-4, it is clear that the appellants had

initiated the said occurrence and they had been the aggressor. Further, nature

of the injuries as well as the evidence available on record itself proved that the

injuries had been knowingly and intentionally inflicted with due, proper and

sufficient motive and object, while the blades of spades, phawads had been used,

from their sharp contours in order to inflict fatal injuries on the head of both the

deceased persons resulting in their death.
30.    The High Court in the impugned judgment too held that the appellants

were the aggressors. It was further held that the complainant side used lathis to

defend themselves only after the assault was initiated from the side of the

appellants who used sharp weapons. Additionally, PW-3 and PW-4, who were

the eyewitnesses, have corroborated the prosecution’s case as narrated by PW-

2, an injured eyewitness.
31.    Since injuries were sustained from both the sides, at the outset, it will be

appropriate to mention the injuries that were found on Dile Ram, Braham Singh

and Bangal Singh, and appellants - Om Pal, Narendra and Inchha Ram by PW-

7 (Dr. Harish Chandra Dua) who prepared the injury report.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                     Page 11 of 25
Dile Ram (deceased) received the injuries in nature of
i)     Incised wound 13 ½ cm X 2 cm X bone deep over parietal region left

              side extending upto right temporal region. Transversely placed.

              Margins clear cut, edges well defined, bleeding present.

Braham Singh (deceased) received the following injuries
i)     Incised wound 13 cm X 2 cm X bone deep over left parietal region of

              skull extending upto left temporal region 9 cm above left ear. Margins

              clear cut, edges well defined. Oozing of blood present.        Patient

              conscious.
ii)    Lacerated wound 3 ½ cm X ½ cm X scalp deep over left parietal

              region of skull 3 ½ cm behind injury No. (i).
iii)   Lacerated wound 2 ½ cm X ½ cm X bone deep over left parietal region

              of skull 3 cm behind injury No.(ii)
iv)    Lacerated wound 4 cm X ½ cm X scalp deep over right parietal-
temporal region of skull 9 cm above right ear.
v)     Lacerated wound 3 ½ cm X ½ cm X muscle deep over back of left

              forearm 7 cm below left elbow joint.
vi)    Lacerated wound 2 cm X ½ cm X muscle deep over back of left elbow

              joint.
Bangal Singh (PW-2) received following injuries
i)     "Lacerated wound 3 ½ cm X ½ cm X scalp deep over left parietal

              region of skull 9 cm above medial ends of eyebrow.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                      Page 12 of 25
ii)    Lacerated wound 2 cm X ½ cm X muscle deep in front and middle of

              right index finger with traumatic swelling 3 cm X 2 cm. Advised X-ray.
iii)   Abrasion ½ cm X ½ cm over back of middle of index finger with

              traumatic swelling 2 cm X 1 cm extending upto root. Advised X-ray.
iv)    Linear abrasion 6 cm in length over outer aspect of right upper arm 4

              cm below the left shoulder.
v)     Abrasion 2 cm X 1 cm over back of left forearm, below left elbow joint.
vi)    Lacerated wound 3 cm X ½ cm X skin deep over outer aspect of left

              arm 14 cm above left elbow joint.
32.    From the side of the appellants, Narendra received injuries in the nature

of:
i)     Lacerated wound 3 ½ cm X ½ cm X scalp deep over right parietal

              region of skull. Oozing of blood present. Advised X-ray.
ii)     Incised wound 20 cm X 4/10 cm X muscle deep over posterio aspect

              of index finger of right hand. Margins clear cut, edges well defined.
Bleeding present.
iii)   Incised wound 1 cm X 2/10 cm X skin deep just below injury No. (ii).
Margins clear cut, edges well defined.
Om Pal received the following injuries:
i)     Abraded contusion 11 cm X 2 ½ cm over upper surface of left

              shoulder.
ii)    Abrasion in an area 3 cm X 2 cm in front of the lateral part of supra

              clavicular region left.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                      Page 13 of 25
iii)    Contusion 6 cm X 3 cm over lateral aspect left shoulder.
iv)     Traumatic swelling 5 cm X 4 cm over medial aspect of left foot.
Inchha Ram received the following injuries:
i)      Lacerated wound 7 cm X 1 cm X bone deep over left parietal region 6

               cm above left ear. Margins of the wound are irregular and contused.
ii)     Lacerated wound 1 ½ cm X ½ cm X scalp deep over right occipital

               region of the skull. 3 ½ cm behind injury No. (i).
iii)    Lacerated wound 3 ½ cm X ½ cm X scalp deep right side of parietal

               region 12 cm above top of the right ear.
iv)     Lacerated wound 1 ½ cm X ½ cm X scalp deep over right parietal

               region of skull. 8 cm above top of right ear.
v)      Traumatic swelling in an area 18 cm X 8 cm over back of right forearm

               in upper half of the arm. Advised X-ray.
vi)     Contusion 9 cm X 2 ½ cm over posterio lateral aspect of right shoulder

               and adjoining part of right arm.
vii)    Contusion 3 ½ cm X 2 cm over back right side of scapula region, 14

               cm below right shoulder.
viii)   Contusion 6 cm X 2 cm over back of left arm 10 cm above left elbow

               joint.
ix)     Abrasion 12 cm X 1 cm over posterio medial aspect of left forearm just

               below elbow joint.
x)      Lacerated wound 3 ½ cm X ½ cm X skin deep over back of thigh just

               below the gluteal region.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                       Page 14 of 25
OCULAR EVIDENCE
33.     The present case before us is not the one based on circumstantial

evidence, but is based on ocular evidence. Time and again this Court has held

that ocular evidence is the best evidence unless there are reasons to doubt it.

This Court in Shahaja alias
Shahajan Ismail Mohd. Shaikh
(supra) held

thus:
“30. To put it simply, in assessing the value of the evidence
           of the eyewitnesses, two principal considerations are
           whether, in the circumstances of the case, it is possible to
           believe their presence at the scene of occurrence or in such
           situations as would make it possible for them to witness
           the facts deposed to by them and secondly, whether there
           is anything inherently improbable or unreliable in their
           evidence. In respect of both these considerations, the
           circumstances either elicited from those witnesses
           themselves or established by other evidence tending to
           improbabilise their presence or to discredit the veracity of
           their statements, will have a bearing upon the value which
           a court would attach to their evidence. Although in cases
           where the plea of the accused is a mere denial, yet the
           evidence of the prosecution witnesses has to be examined
           on its own merits, where the accused raise a definite plea
           or puts forward a positive case which is inconsistent with
           that of the prosecution, the nature of such plea or case
           and the probabilities in respect of it will also have to be
           taken into account while assessing the value of the
           prosecution evidence.
31. There is nothing palpable or glaring in the evidence of
           the two eyewitnesses on the basis of which we can take the
           view that they are not true or reliable eyewitnesses. Few
           contradictions in the form of omissions here or there is not
           sufficient to discard the entire evidence of the
           eyewitnesses.”
                                                (Emphasis supplied)
34.     Coming to the testimony of PW-2 (Bangal Singh), an injured eyewitness.

He stated that on the day of the incident his grandfather Dile Ram and uncle

Braham Singh were working in the sugarcane field when at about 11:00 A.M.,
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                       Page 15 of 25
Molhar and Dharamvir damaged the mendh (ridge) of the field to which Dile Ram

objected to, and Molhar and Dharamvir started hurling abuses. Thereafter,

Molhar and Dharamvir called other accused Kantu, Inchha Ram, Narendra, Om

Pal, Pehlu (since deceased) and Ranvir. He had further stated that Dharamvir

and Inchha Ram were armed with spades, while the other accused were armed

with lathis. It is further stated that both the deceased persons and PW-2 were

assaulted with dangerous weapons. The witness further stated that at the time

of incident PW-3 and PW-4 also arrived at the spot.
35.    It is settled that the testimony of an injured eyewitness is accorded a

special status in law. As being a stamped witness, his presence cannot be

doubted. The testimony of an injured eyewitness has its own relevancy as he has

sustained injuries at the time and place of occurrence and this lends support to

his testimony that he was present during the occurrence. Thus, the testimony of

the injured eyewitness should be generally given due importance unless there

are glaring contradictions.
36.    While dealing with the importance of the injured eyewitness testimony,

this Court in
Jarnail Singh & Ors. vs. State of Punjab12
held as under
“28. Darshan Singh (PW 4) was an injured witness. He had
            been examined by the doctor. His testimony could not be
            brushed aside lightly. He had given full details of the
            incident as he was present at the time when the assailants
            reached      the      tubewell.
In
Shivalingappa
            Kallayanappa v. State of Karnataka
[1994 Supp (3) SCC
            235 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1694] this Court has held that the
            deposition of the injured witness should be relied upon
            unless there are strong grounds for rejection of his
            evidence on the basis of major contradictions and
            discrepancies, for the reason that his presence on the

12 (2009) 9 SCC 719
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                     Page 16 of 25
scene stands established in case it is proved that he
           suffered the injury during the said incident.
29.
In
State of U.P. v. Kishan Chand
[(2004) 7 SCC 629 :
2004 SCC (Cri) 2021] a similar view has been reiterated
           observing that the testimony of a stamped witness has its
           own relevance and efficacy. The fact that the witness
           sustained injuries at the time and place of occurrence,
           lends support to his testimony that he was present during
           the occurrence.
In case the injured witness is subjected to
           lengthy cross-examination and nothing can be elicited to
           discard his testimony, it should be relied upon
           (vide
Krishan v. State of Haryana
[(2006) 12 SCC 459 :
           (2007) 2 SCC (Cri) 214] ). Thus, we are of the considered
           opinion that evidence of Darshan Singh (PW 4) has rightly
           been relied upon by the courts below.”

                                                 (Emphasis supplied)
37.    In Abdul Sayeed (supra), this Court explained that injury to the witness

is an inbuilt guarantee of his presence at the scene of the crime and because the

witness will not want to let his actual assailant go unpunished merely to falsely

implicate a third party for the commission of the offence. Thus, deposition by the

injured eyewitness should be relied upon unless there are strong grounds for

rejection of his evidence on the basis of major contradictions and discrepancies

therein.
38.    In the present case before us, it is clear from the record that the defence

had not at all challenged the version of PW-2, but on the contrary, the defence

had admitted his presence at the spot of the said occurrence.
39.    Keeping in view the principle that an injured eyewitness enjoys a

presumption of truth and the fact that the same is supported by the medical

evidence, testimony of PW-2 does not suffer from any infirmity and has to be

considered while fixing the guilt of the appellants.
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                     Page 17 of 25
40.    With respect to the testimonies of PW-3 and PW-4 who were the

eyewitnesses, it has been revealed that they were taking their respective bullock-

carts loaded with sugarcanes towards the Northern direction on the chak-road,

in order to get the same weighed. While at the time of the incident, both of them

had been in the vicinity of the spot of occurrence and they had accordingly

arrived there upon hearing hue and cry and commotion being raised. PW-4 had

also narrated that he had seen the mendh (ridge) which stood demolished and

cut-off and the middle portion thereof had since been missing from the spot of

its existence.
41.    While examining these eyewitnesses, the defence had not at all been

successful in eliciting any contradiction in their respective evidence on the basis

of which their evidence may be according1y discarded and thrown out in this

matter. Thus, there is nothing palpable or glaring in the evidence of the two

eyewitnesses on the basis of which we can be of the view that they are not true

or reliable eyewitnesses.
MOTIVE
42.    Motive although is a relevant factor in all criminal cases, it, however, is

not a sine qua non for establishing the guilt of the accused persons. Motive even

in a case which rests on an eyewitness account, lends strength to the

prosecution’s case and fortify the Court in its ultimate conclusion. Thus, the fact

of motive has to be seen in the light of the other cogent evidence available.
In
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                     Page 18 of 25
the case of
Sheo Shankar Singh vs. State of Jharkhand & Anr.13
, this Court

observed as under:
“15. The legal position regarding proof of motive as an
            essential requirement for bringing home the guilt of the
            accused is fairly well settled by a long line of decisions of
            this Court. These decisions have made a clear distinction
            between cases where the prosecution relies upon
            circumstantial evidence on the one hand and those where
            it relies upon the testimony of eyewitnesses on the other.
            In the former category of cases proof of motive is given the
            importance it deserves, for proof of a motive itself
            constitutes a link in the chain of circumstances upon
            which the prosecution may rely. Proof of motive, however,
            recedes into the background in cases where the
            prosecution relies upon an eyewitness account of the
            occurrence. That is because if the court upon a proper
            appraisal of the deposition of the eyewitnesses comes to
            the conclusion that the version given by them is credible,
            absence of evidence to prove the motive is rendered
            inconsequential.
Conversely, even if the prosecution
            succeeds in establishing a strong motive for the
            commission of the offence, but the evidence of the
            eyewitnesses is found unreliable or unworthy of credit,
            existence of a motive does not by itself provide a safe basis
            for convicting the accused. That does not, however, mean
            that proof of motive even in a case which rests on an
            eyewitness account does not lend strength to the
            prosecution case or fortify the court in its ultimate
            conclusion. Proof of motive in such a situation certainly
            helps the prosecution and supports the eyewitnesses.
            See
Shivaji Genu Mohite v. State of Maharashtra
[(1973) 3
            SCC 219 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 214] , Hari Shanker v. State of
            U.P. [(1996) 9 SCC 40 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 913] and State of
            U.P. v. Kishanpal [(2008) 16 SCC 73 : (2010) 4 SCC (Cri)
            182].”
43.    In the present case, the question is what actually drove the appellants to

commit this double murder after forming an unlawful assembly. According to

the prosecution, Dile Ram had asked Molhar and Dharamvir to desist from

mendh (ridge) of his field, whereupon Molhar hurled abuses and then called upon



13 (2011) 3 SCC 654
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                        Page 19 of 25
the other appellants on the spot and committed assaults upon the complainant

party with lathis, spades, phawadas, which they had already carried with

themselves. Also, the fact of a prior enmity on account of the boundary dispute

clearly establishes the motive for the commission of the offence.


PRESENT CASE DOES NOT FALL UNDER THE FOURTH EXCEPTION TO
SECTION 300 OF THE
IPC
44.    Now let us come to the contentions raised by the appellants. One of the

main arguments from the side of the appellants was that since it was a case of

free fight where injuries were received on the side of the appellants as well and

considering there was no premeditation from their side, the case would fall under

the fourth exception to
Section 300
of the IPC. We, however, are not convinced

with this argument in view of the law laid down by this Court in Pulicherla

Nagaraju alias
Nagaraja Reddy
(supra) wherein it was held:
“29. Therefore, the court should proceed to decide the
           pivotal question of intention, with care and caution, as
           that will decide whether the case falls under Section 302
           or 304 Part I or 304 Part II. Many petty or insignificant
           matters — plucking of a fruit, straying of cattle, quarrel of
           children, utterance of a rude word or even an objectionable
           glance, may lead to altercations and group clashes
           culminating in deaths. Usual motives like revenge, greed,
           jealousy or suspicion may be totally absent in such cases.
           There may be no intention. There may be no
           premeditation. In fact, there may not even be criminality.
           At the other end of the spectrum, there may be cases of
           murder where the accused attempts to avoid the penalty
           for murder by attempting to put forth a case that there was
           no intention to cause death. It is for the courts to ensure
           that the cases of murder punishable under Section 302,
           are not converted into offences punishable under Section
           304 Part I/II, or cases of culpable homicide not amounting
           to murder, are treated as murder punishable under
           Section 302. The intention to cause death can be gathered
           generally from a combination of a few or several of the
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                       Page 20 of 25
following, among other, circumstances: (i) nature of the
           weapon used; (ii) whether the weapon was carried by the
           accused or was picked up from the spot; (iii) whether the
           blow is aimed at a vital part of the body; (iv) the amount of
           force employed in causing injury; (v) whether the act was
           in the course of sudden quarrel or sudden fight or free for
           all fight; (vi) whether the incident occurs by chance or
           whether there was any premeditation; (vii) whether there
           was any prior enmity or whether the deceased was a
           stranger; (viii) whether there was any grave and sudden
           provocation, and if so, the cause for such provocation; (ix)
           whether it was in the heat of passion; (x) whether the
           person inflicting the injury has taken undue advantage or
           has acted in a cruel and unusual manner; (xi) whether the
           accused dealt a single blow or several blows. The above list
           of circumstances is, of course, not exhaustive and there
           may be several other special circumstances with reference
           to individual cases which may throw light on the question
           of intention. Be that as it may.”
                                                   (Emphasis supplied)
45.    From the medical evidence on record, it stands established that the death

of both the deceased persons was the result of ante-mortem injuries. The nature

and extent of these injuries, coupled with the surrounding circumstances, leave

no doubt that they were intentionally inflicted. The use of the sharp edges of

spades, phawadas to deliver fatal blows on the heads of the deceased

demonstrates that the assailants acted with a clear motive and object of

permanently eliminating them, thereby committing their murder. Thus, the

circumstances to bring the case under the fourth exception to
Section 300
of the

IPC do not exist.
DELAY IN FILING OF FIR IS NOT FATAL TO THE CASE OF THE
PROSECUTION
46.    The issue of delay in the filing of the FIR from the side of the complainant

came up during the hearing. It was argued that the cross FIR was lodged on

23.05.1988 which is after three days of the incident. Thus, according to them,
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                       Page 21 of 25
the second FIR was merely an afterthought of the first FIR which was lodged by

the appellants. This contention has been dealt by both the Courts below holding

that the delay was well explained by PW-1, who is the son of deceased Dile Ram.

It is a settled position that delay in filing of the FIR cannot be considered to be

fatal to the case of the prosecution when there is direct evidence and when the

delay in filing the FIR is well explained. This Court in the case of
State of H.P.

vs. Gian Chand
14 observed that:
“12. Delay in lodging the FIR cannot be used as a
            ritualistic formula for doubting the prosecution case and
            discarding the same solely on the ground of delay in
            lodging the first information report. Delay has the effect of
            putting the court on its guard to search if any explanation
            has been offered for the delay, and if offered, whether it is
            satisfactory or not. If the prosecution fails to satisfactorily
            explain the delay and there is a possibility of
            embellishment in the prosecution version on account of
            such delay, the delay would be fatal to the prosecution.
            However, if the delay is explained to the satisfaction of the
            court, the delay cannot by itself be a ground for
            disbelieving and discarding the entire prosecution….”

                                                    (Emphasis supplied)
47.    Furthermore, in the case of
Raghbir Singh vs. State of Haryana15
, this

Court observed thus:
“11. With regard to the delay in filing the FIR, both the
            courts have found that there was no delay in filing the FIR.
            The trial court found that the rushing of the victim to the
            hospital to save his life instead of first going to the police
            station was a satisfactory explanation for the delay in
            making the complaint. The view was affirmed by the High
            Court and we find no reason to interfere with the same.”

                                                    (Emphasis supplied)



14 (2001) 6 SCC 71
15 (2000) 9 SCC 88
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                          Page 22 of 25
48.    In the present case, we will have to consider whether there was a probable

explanation from the side of PW-1 for the delay in the lodging of the FIR. From

the statement of PW-1, it is clear that on his coming back from Muzaffarnagar,

he took his injured father (Dile Ram), injured uncle (Braham Singh), and nephew

to the hospital in Chandigarh and after he came back from Chandigarh on

23.05.1988, he lodged the FIR. The present explanation, according to us, is

probable and natural considering the facts and circumstances of the case.
NON- RECOVERY OF THE WEAPONS IS NOT FATAL TO THE CASE OF THE
PROSECUTION
49.     Another contention raised by the appellants was that the weapons used

during the incident were never recovered from the site. However, this Court has

many a times reiterated that non-recovery of the weapons cannot be considered

fatal to the case of the prosecution if there is consistent medical and ocular

evidence. This Court in the case
State of Rajasthan vs. Arjun Singh & Ors.16
held as under:
“18. As rightly pointed out by the learned Additional
            Advocate General appearing for the State that mere non-
            recovery of pistol or cartridge does not detract the case of
            the prosecution where clinching and direct evidence is
            acceptable. Likewise, absence of evidence regarding
            recovery of used pellets, bloodstained clothes, etc. cannot
            be taken or construed as no such occurrence had taken
            place. As a matter of fact, we have already pointed out that
            the gunshot injuries tallied with medical evidence. It is also
            seen that Raghuraj Singh and Himmat Raj Singh, who had
            died, received 8 and 7 gunshot wounds respectively while
            Raj Singh (PW 2) also received 8 gunshots scattered in
            front of left thigh. All these injuries have been noted by the
            doctor (PW 1) in his reports, Exts. P-1 to P-4.”

                                                    (Emphasis supplied)


16 (2011) 9 SCC 115
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                         Page 23 of 25
50.    Also in
Nankaunoo vs. State of Uttar Pradesh17
, this Court held that

where in light of unimpeachable oral evidence is corroborated by the medical

evidence, non-recovery of murder weapon does not materially affect the case of

the prosecution. Any omission on the part of the investigating officer cannot go

against the prosecution’s case. Story of the prosecution is to be examined dehors

such omission by the investigating agency. Otherwise, it would shake the

confidence of the people not merely in the law enforcing agency but also in the

administration of justice.
D. CONCLUSION
51.    From the above discussion, there remains no doubt in our minds that the

present appellants in furtherance of their common intention formed an unlawful

assembly. Inncha and Dharamvir stood armed with sharp edged deadly weapons

committed the murder of Braham Singh and Dile Ram, while in order to achieve

their common intention, they had also inflicted such injuries on the physical

person of Bangal Singh knowing fully well that had Bangal Singh died on account

of the said injuries they ought to have been held guilty of causing his murder in

this matter.
52.    Consequently, the Appeals, being sans merit, stand dismissed. As we have

dismissed the Appeals, the appellants shall surrender to custody forthwith and

it will be the duty of the Trial Court to see that they are taken into custody. The

bail bonds stand cancelled accordingly.
17 (2016) 3 SCC 317
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                    Page 24 of 25
53.    We shall further clarify that nothing mentioned above shall preclude the

appellants from making an application for remission in accordance with law and

the applicable policy of the State Government. In the event, such an application

is preferred, the same shall be considered by the competent authority on its own

merits, strictly in terms of the available policy of the State Government.
………………………………………J.
                                                (SANJAY KAROL)


                                                ………………………………………J.
                                                (PRASHANT KUMAR MISHRA)



NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 28, 2025
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1624 OF 2011 ETC.                                    Page 25 of 25