[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kotresh @ Kotrappa vs The State Of Karnataka on 17 October, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1250                                                                 REPORTABLE


                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.         OF 2025
                            [ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRIMINAL) NO. 16833 OF 2024]




            KOTRESH @ KOTRAPPA                                             … APPELLANT



                                                       VS.



            STATE OF KARNATAKA AND ANR.                                  … RESPONDENTS




                                                 JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
1.           Leave granted.
2.           The appellant was tried for the murder of one ‘S’. The relevant

                            Sessions Court, for reasons assigned in the judgment dated 18th
Signature Not Verified   January, 2020 convicted the appellant for culpable homicide not
Digitally signed by
rashmi dhyani pant
Date: 2025.10.17
16:48:10 IST
Reason:
amounting to murder under Section 304 Part-II,
Indian Penal Code
,
           18601 and by an order dated 21st January, 2020 sentenced him to 10

           (ten) years rigorous imprisonment.
3.     Such conviction and sentence were carried by the appellant in an

           appeal under
Section 374 (2)
, Code of Criminal Procedure, 19732

           before the High Court of Karnataka, Dharwad Bench. By its judgment

           and order dated 8th February, 2024, the High Court maintained the

           conviction of the appellant, however, reduced the sentence to 8

           (eight) years rigorous imprisonment.
4.     Despite being partially successful before the High Court, the appellant

           remained dissatisfied and has laid a challenge to the judgment and

           order dated 8th February, 2024.
5.     A limited notice, confined to the sentence, was issued on 4th March,

           2025 by a coordinate Bench of this Court. Upon service of notice,

           respondent no. 1-State entered appearance through its counsel.

           Respondent no. 2 – the complainant, however, informed this Court of

           his inability to engage a counsel and sought legal aid.
6.     Having considered the prayer of the respondent no. 2 – the

           complainant, this Court by an order dated 9th September, 2025

           appointed Mr. Ashok Gaur, learned senior counsel and Ms. Shakshi

           Singh, learned counsel as amici curiae.
1
IPC
2
CrPC
2
7.    The prosecution case in a nutshell is this. The first cousin of the

         appellant3 had allegedly been raped by S’s elder brother4. C had given

         birth to a child too. While V was in custody and facing trial for the

         offence under
Section 376
, IPC, the family members of the appellant

         including the father of C insisted that marriage between C and V be

         solemnised. The parties tried to find out a solution a day prior to the

         incident of crime which, however, proved abortive.
8.   On the following day, the family members of C including the appellant

         again stormed the residence of V. An altercation led to a scuffle. S, a

         completely innocent person, intervened to bring about peace. It was,

         at this stage, that the appellant rushed to a nearby house, picked up

         an axe and struck a blow on the neck of S. Unfortunately, S

         succumbed to the injury inflicted on him by the appellant.
9.   Circumstances leading to the death of S were duly proved before the

         sessions court. The outcome of the trial as well as the appeal have

         been noted above and hence are not repeated.
10.      Appearing in support of the appeal, Mr. Rahul Kaushik, learned senior

         counsel submits that the appellant, who was barely 20 years old on

         the date of the incident of crime, could not control his senses because

         the family members of V were not agreeable to his marriage with C

         and without any premeditation struck the fatal blow on S leading to

         his unfortunate death. He further submits that the appellant, behind
3
hereafter ‘C’
4
hereafter ‘V’
3
bars for two and a half years, has suffered enough for the involuntary

        act and may be let off with a reduced sentence. According to him,

        this is a peculiar case where the sentence of 8 (eight) years rigorous

        imprisonment imposed by the High Court deserves to be altered to

        the period of sentence already served.
11.     Referring to a coordinate Bench decision of this Court in Deo Nath

        Rai v. State of Bihar5, Mr. Kaushik submits that for a similar offence

        punishable under
Section 304
Part-II,
IPC
, 5 (five) years rigorous

        imprisonment was imposed by this Court. He urges that even if this

        Court were not inclined to let off the appellant with the period of

        sentence already undergone, suitable reduction may be ordered

        having regard to the facts and circumstances where the appellant lost

        control of his senses.
12.     Mr. Kaushik, accordingly, prayed that the appeal be allowed by

        ordering suitable reduction in the term of sentence.
13.     Prayer of the appellant has, however, been vehemently opposed by

        Mr. Gaur. According to him, it is not entirely correct to contend that

        the incident of altercation and scuffle was a one-off incident.

        Referring to the evidence on record, he submits that even a day prior

        to the incident of crime the family members of C including her father

        (the complainant – respondent no. 2) had been attacked.
5
(2018) 13 SCC 87
4
14.     Mr. Gaur next submits that although Mr. Kaushik has stressed on the

        age of the appellant, this Court may not overlook that S was also in

        the prime of his life when he was struck the fatal blow by the

        appellant. S was all of 23 years old and the appellant took away S’s

        life by brutally killing him. He sought to emphasise that the sessions

        court ought to have convicted the appellant for murder under
Section

        302
, IPC, and not under
Section 304
Part-II thereof, having regard to

        the overwhelming evidence on record that the appellant had both

        intention and knowledge.
15.     On the question of intention, referring to the decision of another

        coordinate Bench of this Court in
Pulicherla Nagaraju v. State of

        A.P.6, Mr. Gaur
invites our attention to paragraph 29 thereof reading

        as follows:
“29. Therefore, the court should proceed to decide the pivotal
               question of intention, with care and caution, as that will decide
               whether the case falls under
Section 302
or 304 Part I or 304 Part II.
               Many petty or insignificant matters — plucking of a fruit, straying of
               cattle, quarrel of children, utterance of a rude word or even an
               objectionable glance, may lead to altercations and group clashes
               culminating in deaths. Usual motives like revenge, greed, jealousy or
               suspicion may be totally absent in such cases. There may be no
               intention. There may be no premeditation. In fact, there may not
               even be criminality. At the other end of the spectrum, there may be
               cases of murder where the accused attempts to avoid the penalty for
               murder by attempting to put forth a case that there was no intention
               to cause death. It is for the courts to ensure that the cases of murder
               punishable under
Section 302
, are not converted into offences
               punishable under
Section 304
Part I/II, or cases of culpable homicide
               not amounting to murder, are treated as murder punishable under
Section 302
. The intention to cause death can be gathered generally
               from a combination of a few or several of the following, among other,
               circumstances: (i) nature of the weapon used; (ii) whether the
               weapon was carried by the accused or was picked up from the spot;
(iii) whether the blow is aimed at a vital part of the body; (iv) the
6
(2006) 11 SCC 444
5
amount of force employed in causing injury; (v) whether the act was
            in the course of sudden quarrel or sudden fight or free for all fight;
(vi) whether the incident occurs by chance or whether there was any
            premeditation; (vii) whether there was any prior enmity or whether
            the deceased was a stranger; (viii) whether there was any grave and
            sudden provocation, and if so, the cause for such provocation; (ix)
            whether it was in the heat of passion; (x) whether the person
            inflicting the injury has taken undue advantage or has acted in a cruel
            and unusual manner; (xi) whether the accused dealt a single blow or
            several blows. The above list of circumstances is, of course, not
            exhaustive and there may be several other special circumstances
            with reference to individual cases which may throw light on the
            question of intention. Be that as it may.”
16.   It is the contention of Mr. Gaur that it was a premeditated act of the

      appellant. Referring to the evidence of PW-4, an injured eye-witness,

      he pointed out that the appellant and the co-accused were beating

      others when S sought to intervene. Having queried as to why PW-4

      was being beaten, it was said that they were waiting for S; thereafter

      the appellant went to the house of one Tamanna, brought the axe

      and hacked S to death. Unless it was pre-planned, Mr. Gaur submits,

      the appellant would not have known where the axe (being the weapon

      of offence) was kept. Next, he points out from the evidence of PW-4

      (the uncle of V) that the accused had agreed to keep C and her child

      with them, provided a share of the property were given to them. From

      the evidence of PW-8 (PW-4’ son), it is pointed out that there were

      demands from the side of some of the accused (A-8 and A-9) that C

      should be given a share of the property, if she were not accepted in

      the family. These circumstances, seen together, would give a clear

      idea that it is far from the truth that the appellant in the heat of the

      moment inflicted the fatal blow. He also submits that although one
6
single blow was inflicted by the appellant on the neck of S, it was

        sufficient to cause death and did cause the death of the appellant. S,

        according to him, tried to intervene to ensure that there was no loss

        of life or limb of anyone engaged in the altercation and scuffle but

        unfortunately ended giving up his life without in any manner being

        responsible for what had happened in the past.
17.     It is further contended by Mr. Gaur that nothing precludes the

        appellant from seeking premature release under the remission policy

        of the State. As and when the appellant acquires eligibility, he

        submits, the appellant may apply and if he is entitled in law for a

        premature release, the respondent no.2 – the complainant can have

        no grievance in this behalf.
18.     While winding up his arguments, Mr. Gaur cited the decision of one

        other coordinate Bench of this Court in
Raj Bala v. State of

        Haryana7
. This decision was placed for driving home the point that

        no court should reduce the term of sentence based on fancy or notion

        and that a balance, bearing in mind proportionality, must be struck

        in the interest of the victim too by ordering such term sentence which

        would meet the demands of the case. According to him, the High

        Court upon proper application of mind has reduced the term sentence

        to 8 (eight) years and, therefore, no further interference is

        warranted.
7
(2016) 1 SCC 463
7
19.   Mr. Gaur, thus, prayed for dismissal of the appeal.
20.   Learned counsel appearing for the respondent no. 1-State adopts the

      submissions of Mr. Gaur. He further drew our attention to the

      evidence of a couple of witnesses to demonstrate that the family

      members of the appellant were all armed with axes while they

      confronted the family of V.
21.   We have heard the parties and considered the evidence on record

      with the care and attention the same deserves.
22.   No doubt, the appellant had a reason to bear a grudge against V

      because he had allegedly raped C which finally resulted in C delivering

      a baby. The appellant, being a close relative of C and faced with the

      situation in which C was placed, may not have been unjustified in

      nurturing a grievance and securing justice for her, with the father of

      C. Suffice to note, C was also very young and having given birth to a

      child, the appellant might have felt as a dutiful brother to take care

      of her interest. Having said that, we cannot keep aside the role of S

      in the entire incident. An open fight had followed the scuffle during

      which the two opposing factions were giving blows and hits to each

      other. S happened to be the younger brother of V. There is no

      allegation levelled by any witness that S was part of the altercation

      and the subsequence scuffle leading to fight; in fact, there is evidence

      on record that S had intervened in course of the fight and was

      attempting to bring about peace between the two factions. An

      innocent person was done to death by the appellant without there
8
being any provocation. The sessions court did not convict the

      appellant for murder since, according to it, Exception 1 to
Section

      300
, IPC was attracted. In our considered opinion, the appellant

      might have been deprived of the power of self-control by reason of

      the alleged act of rape committed by V on C. But there was no such

      sudden provocation at the place of occurrence which necessitated him

      to act in the manner he did and cause the death of S. Indeed, as

      observed above, neither S was instrumental in provoking the

      appellant nor was the blow struck on S’s neck by the appellant by

      mistake or accident. Once we have concluded that there was no

      provocation, Exception 1 was certainly not applicable. Be that as it

      may, neither the respondent no. 1-State nor the respondent no. 2 –

      the complainant appealed against the judgment of conviction

      recorded by the sessions court. We, therefore, do not see reason to

      dilate on this aspect any further but would bear this in mind while

      considering the prayer of Mr. Kaushik for reduction in the term

      sentence imposed by the High Court.
23.   Mr. Gaur’s submission that S was an intervenor who attempted to

      bring about peace and was himself a young man of 23 years cannot

      be brushed aside. If other family members had not agreed to the

      proposal to have the marriage of C solemnised with V, no fault could

      at least be attributed to an innocent person like S who had to suffer

      homicidal death caused by the appellant. Viewed through the prism

      of
Section 304
Part-II,
IPC
, the appellant did have the knowledge that
9
his act of striking S with the axe on his neck is likely to cause such

        bodily injury as is likely to cause death. While the sessions court was

        justified in ordering imprisonment of the appellant for 10 (ten) years,

        the High Court has been indulgent towards the appellant and granted

        relief to him by reducing the term sentence by 8 (eight) years.
24.
In
Raj Bala
(supra), this Court upon a survey of precedents on the

        point of sentence, had the occasion to observe as follows:
“16. A court, while imposing sentence, has a duty to respond to the
               collective cry of the society. The legislature in its wisdom has
               conferred discretion on the court but the duty of the court in such a
               situation becomes more difficult and complex. It has to exercise the
               discretion on reasonable and rational parameters. The discretion
               cannot be allowed to yield to fancy or notion. A Judge has to keep in
               mind the paramount concept of rule of law and the conscience of the
               collective and balance it with the principle of proportionality but when
               the discretion is exercised in a capricious manner, it tantamounts to
               relinquishment of duty and reckless abandonment of responsibility.
               One cannot remain a total alien to the demand of the socio-cultural
               milieu regard being had to the command of law and also brush aside
               the agony of the victim or the survivors of the victim. Society waits
               with patience to see that justice is done. There is a hope on the part
               of the society and when the criminal culpability is established and the
               discretion is irrationally exercised by the court, the said hope is
               shattered and the patience is wrecked. It is the duty of the court not
               to exercise the discretion in such a manner as a consequence of
               which the expectation inherent in patience, which is the ‘finest part
               of fortitude’ is destroyed. A Judge should never feel that the
               individuals who constitute the society as a whole is imperceptible to
               the exercise of discretion. He should always bear in mind that
               erroneous and fallacious exercise of discretion is perceived by a
               visible collective.”
25.     One of the precedents, as reaffirmed in
Raj Bala
(supra), is
Shailesh

        Jasvantbhai v. State of Gujarat8
, where Arijit Pasayat, J., speaking
8
(2006) 2 SCC 359
10
for a two-judge Bench, articulated the parameters governing the

determination of an appropriate sentence in the following words:
“7. The law regulates social interests, arbitrates conflicting claims
     and demands. Security of persons and property of the people is an
     essential function of the State. It could be achieved through
     instrumentality of criminal law. Undoubtedly, there is a cross-cultural
     conflict where living law must find answer to the new challenges and
     the courts are required to mould the sentencing system to meet the
     challenges. The contagion of lawlessness would undermine social
     order and lay it in ruins. Protection of society and stamping out
     criminal proclivity must be the object of law which must be achieved
     by imposing appropriate sentence. Therefore, law as a cornerstone
     of the edifice of “order” should meet the challenges confronting the
     society. Friedman in his Law in Changing Society stated that: “State
     of criminal law continues to be—as it should be—a decisive reflection
     of social consciousness of society.” Therefore, in operating the
     sentencing system, law should adopt the corrective machinery or
     deterrence based on factual matrix. By deft modulation, sentencing
     process be stern where it should be, and tempered with mercy where
     it warrants to be. The facts and given circumstances in each case,
     the nature of the crime, the manner in which it was planned and
     committed, the motive for commission of the crime, the conduct of
     the accused, the nature of weapons used and all other attending
     circumstances are relevant facts which would enter into the area of
     consideration.
8. Therefore, undue sympathy to impose inadequate sentence would
     do more harm to the justice system to undermine the public
     confidence in the efficacy of law, and society could not long endure
     under such serious threats. It is, therefore, the duty of every court
     to award proper sentence having regard to the nature of the offence
     and the manner in which it was executed or committed, etc. This
     position was illuminatingly stated by this Court in Sevaka Perumal v.
State of T.N. [(1991) 3 SCC 471 : 1991 SCC (Cri) 724]
9. Criminal law adheres in general to the principle of proportionality
     in prescribing liability according to the culpability of each kind of
     criminal conduct. It ordinarily allows some significant discretion to
     the Judge in arriving at a sentence in each case, presumably to
     permit sentences that reflect more subtle considerations of culpability
     that are raised by the special facts of each case. Judges in essence
     affirm that punishment ought always to fit the crime; yet in practice
     sentences are determined largely by other considerations.
     Sometimes it is the correctional needs of the perpetrator that are
     offered to justify a sentence. Sometimes the desirability of keeping
     him out of circulation, and sometimes even the tragic results of his
     crime. Inevitably these considerations cause a departure from just
     deserts as the basis of punishment and create cases of apparent
     injustice that are serious and widespread.
11
10. Proportion between crime and punishment is a goal respected in
            principle, and in spite of errant notions, it remains a strong influence
            in the determination of sentences. The practice of punishing all
            serious crimes with equal severity is now unknown in civilised
            societies, but such a radical departure from the principle of
            proportionality has disappeared from the law only in recent times.
            Even now for a single grave infraction, drastic sentences are imposed.
            Anything less than a penalty of greatest severity for any serious
            crime is thought then to be a measure of toleration that is
            unwarranted and unwise. But in fact, quite apart from those
            considerations that make punishment unjustifiable when it is out of
            proportion to the crime, uniformly disproportionate punishment has
            some very undesirable practical consequences.”
                                                                    (emphasis ours)
26.   The decision in Deo Nath Rai (supra) has also been perused. In that

      case, on facts and circumstances, this Court held that though the high

      court was justified in altering conviction of the accused to
Section 304
Part-II,
IPC
, it was not justified in imposing lesser sentence

      particularly on the accused P who gave a sword blow on the right

      shoulder of deceased M. The decision turns on its own facts and no

      law is discernible which would impel us to take a view different from

      that we propose to take hereinbelow.
27.   We have taken into account that the appellant was about 20 years of

      age at the time of the incident and that there may have been some

      exasperation in his mind. Nevertheless, the courts are obligated to

      adopt a balanced and principled approach in matters of sentencing.

      Undue leniency can cause public confidence in the justice system to

      plummet, while excessive severity may lead to injustice.
28.   Guided by the aforesaid decisions and after having considered the

      factual matrix, we are of the considered opinion that the sentence
12
imposed by the High Court does not call for any interference and that

      the appellant is not entitled to any relief.
29.   The appeal is liable to be and is, accordingly, dismissed.
30.   Needless to observe, the appellant shall be entitled to seek premature

      release in terms of the remission policy of the State of Karnataka,

      provided he acquires eligibility thereunder.
31.   We record our sincere appreciation for the able assistance rendered

      to us by the amici curiae.
………………………………….……J.
                                                (DIPANKAR DATTA)




                                           …………………….…………………J.
                                           (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)
NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 17, 2025.
13