[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Alok Kumar Ghosh vs The New India Assurance Company Ltd on 9 October, 2025
REPORTABLE
2025 INSC 1239                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     Civil Appeal No(s).       10482 /2017


         ALOK KUMAR GHOSH                                                         Appellant

                                                      VERSUS

         THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LTD & ANR.                          Respondent(s)


                                                   O R D E R
1.   Heard learned counsel for the parties.
2.   The present appeal arises from an order of

                              the High Court at Calcutta1 dated 09.04.2015

                              whereby the appeal of the first respondent

                              (insurer - the insurance company) was allowed

                              in part and the order of the Commissioner,

                              Workmen’s     Compensation        (1st      Court),     West

                              Bengal2 dated 04.03.2011, in Claim Case No.

                              12/2006,     was    modified     to   the    extent     that

                              direction      to     the      insurer       (the      first

                              respondent) to pay the compensation to the

                              workman      (the      second         respondent)        was

                              substituted with a direction to the appellant
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN ARORA
(insured - employer) to pay the compensation
   Date: 2025.10.16
   11:18:56 IST
   Reason:
and   seek    reimbursement       from      the     insurer.
1
High Court
2
Commissioner
               However, while doing so,              the order of the

               Commissioner      awarding        compensation        of    Rs.
2,58,336 with statutory interest of 12% per

               annum to the workman was affirmed.
3.     Record reflects that the second respondent,

               employed as driver of the appellant, made a

               claim, under the Workmen’s Compensation Act,

               19233 (now known as Employee’s
Compensation

               Act,    1923
),    against      the    appellant      and    the

               first      respondent         for     compensation,          by

               alleging, inter alia, that claimant suffered

               a disabling injury by accident arising out of

               and in the course of employment. Based on the

               pleadings of the parties, Commissioner framed

               multiple      issues    for    consideration.         One    of

               them, namely, issue no.4, being as to whether

               insurance        company       is     liable         to     pay

               compensation.      The     said      issue    was     decided

               against    the    insurance     company       upon    finding

               that    the      risk    was        covered    under        the

               certificate of insurance issued by the first

               respondent to the appellant.
4.     Against the order of the Commissioner, the
3
1923 Act
     insurance      company           (the     first         respondent

     herein) filed an appeal before the High Court

     on a technical ground that the award should

     have   been    against          the     employer       (i.e.,   the

     appellant      herein)           with         liberty     to     the

     employer      to        seek    reimbursement           from     the

     insurer under the contract of insurance.
5.   High Court accepted the aforesaid plea and,

     accordingly,            modified        the     order     of    the

     Commissioner in terms supra.
6.   Aggrieved by the order of the High Court, the

     employer is in appeal before us.
7.   The submission on behalf of the appellant is

     that there is no dispute regarding the claim

     being covered by the contract of insurance.

     Further,      there        is      no     dispute        regarding

     appellant’s right of reimbursement; and there

     is no challenge to the amount of compensation

     awarded.      In    such       circumstances,           there    was

     absolutely         no    justification           for    the     High

     Court to modify the award in the aforesaid

     terms. Additionally, it has been argued that

     the High Court erroneously brushed aside the

     decision of this Court in
Mahendra Rai vs.
     United India Insurance Company Ltd. & Anr
.
(Civil    Appeal       No.6697   of    2014,        decided     on

     July 23, 2014), where a similar plea raised

     on     behalf     of    the   insurance           company       was

     rejected.
8.   Per contra, the learned counsel for the first

     respondent (insurance company) supported the

     decision    of    the     High   Court       by     submitting,

     inter     alia,        that   the     1923        Act     imposes

     liability on the employer; and there is no

     provision therein for compulsory insurance or

     fastening liability on the insurer to satisfy

     judgment and awards against persons insured,

     as is there in
Section 149
of Motor Vehicles

     Act,     1988.    Hence,      rights     of       insured       and

     insurer     are    governed      by    the        contract       of

     insurance, which is to indemnify the insured,

     and    therefore,       the   claimant       would       have    no

     right to directly claim compensation from the

     insurer. As a result, the appropriate course

     for the Commissioner is to award compensation

     against     the    employer      only,        who       may   seek

     reimbursement from the insurer in terms of

     the contract of insurance.
In support of his
                submissions, decisions of this Court in
New

                India        Assurance       Co.     Ltd.        v.    Harshadbhai

                Amrutbhai Modhiya & Anr4
;
P. J. Narayan v.

                Union        of   India5
;      and
Gottumukkala              Appala

                Narasimha         Raju       and     others           v.    National

                Insurance Co. Ltd.6
have been cited.
It has

                also       been      argued     that     the          decision      in
Mahendra Rai
(supra) is per incuriam as it

                overlooked the statutory scheme of the 1923

                Act    as     well    as     earlier    decisions           of    this

                Court interpreting the statutory provisions.
9.        We have considered the rival submissions and

                have perused the record. In our view, the

                short         question        that      arises             for     our

                consideration is:
Whether in a proceeding initiated under

                       the    1923     Act    for    compensation            payable

                       under the said Act, insurer could be made

                       a     party    respondent?           If    yes,       whether

                       compensation can be awarded against it if

                       otherwise admissible under the contract

                       of insurance?
4
(2006) 5 SCC 192
5
(2006) 5 SCC 200
6
(2007) 13 SCC 446
10.   The aforesaid issue is no longer res integra

      as     it   stands    answered      by   this     Court   in
Gottumukkala Appala Narasimha Raju
(supra).
The question that fell for consideration in
Gottumukkala        Appala    Narasimha      Raju
(supra)

      was whether there could be no award against

      the insurer in a proceeding under the 1923

      Act. There a claim under the 1923 Act was

      made against the tactor owner on death of a

      tractor driver by impleading the insurer with

      whom        the     tractor        was    insured.        The

      Commissioner awarded compensation holding the

      owner       and   insurer     jointly     and     severally

      liable. An appeal was preferred before the

      High Court which held that no award could be

      passed        against        the    insurer         by    the

      Commissioner. On appeal to this Court, though

      this Court did not disturb the decision upon

      finding that the deceased was the husband of

      the     tractor      owner    and    there      existed   no

      employer      and    employee      relationship      between

      them, it was held:
“21. Thus, if the vehicle is covered by
             an insurance, the insurer may be made a
             party and it may be liable to indemnify
           the owner, but the situation in this case
           is entirely different, as would appear
           from the discussions made hereinafter.”
11.
Section   19
of    the   1923     Act,    which   was

      considered     in    the      aforesaid      decision,

      provides as follows:
Section 19
. Reference to Commissioners.-
(1) If any question arises in any
           proceedings under this Act as to the
           liability   of    any   person    to   pay
           compensation including any question as to
           whether a person injured is or is not an
           employee or as to the amount or duration
           of compensation (including any question
           as   to   the   nature    or   extent   of
           disablement), the question shall, in
           default of agreement, be settled by a
           Commissioner.
(2)    No   civil    court   shall    have
           jurisdiction to settle, decide or deal
           with any question which is by or under
           this Act required to be settled, decided
           or dealt with by a Commissioner or to
           enforce any liability incurred under this
           Act.
12.   By   relying   on
Section   19
,   in
Gottumukkala

      Appala Narasimha Raju
(supra), it was held:
“26. Our attention has been drawn to some
           decisions of the High Courts which have
           taken different views in regard to the
           liability of the insurer to be joined as
           a party in a proceeding under the 1923
           Act. It is not necessary for us to go
           into the correctness or otherwise of the
           said decisions, as in our opinion, there
           does not exist any bar in the 1923 Act in
           this behalf.
Section 19
of the 1923 Act
           specifically provides that any question
           in regard to the liability of a person
           who is required to indemnify the employer
             must be determined in the proceeding
             under the said Act and not by way of a
             separate suit. Thus, a question of this
             nature should be gone into the proceeding
             under the 1923 Act.”
                                   (Emphasis supplied)
13.   In our view, the aforesaid decision settles

      the issue. Otherwise also,
Section 19
of the

      1923     Act    is      clear.     It     enables       the

      Commissioner to determine as to who would be

      liable to pay the compensation and, therefore,

      it can determine the liability of an insurer.

      This we say so, because the 1923 Act is a

      social welfare legislation. The object of the

      Act is not merely to provide compensation but

      also    to   provide    a   speedy      and    efficacious

      remedy to a workman/ employee, or his or her

      dependent, to realize compensation for injury,

      or death, suffered by accident arising out of

      and in the course of his or her employment.

      No doubt,
Section 3
of the 1923 Act fixes

      liability to pay compensation on an employer

      but where the liability of an employer                   is

      covered by a contract of insurance, exclusion

      of     the   insurer    from      being       jointly   and

      severally      liable       for    payment        of    the
      compensation awarded would have deleterious

      effect    on    the    very    purpose      which    the

      legislation seeks to achieve and would render

      the remedy illusory. This we say so, because

      if we hold that the insurer would be liable

      only to reimburse the employer, in the event

      employer fails to make payment for any reason

      whatsoever,     including     financial     incapacity,

      question of reimbursement would not arise and

      the   workman    /employee,        for   whose   benefit

      legislation has been made, would be left high

      and      dry.    In     our        view,     therefore,

      notwithstanding absence of a provision such

      as
Section 149
of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 in

      the 1923 Act, by virtue of power to determine

      liability under
Section 19
, the Commissioner

      would have power to make the insurer jointly

      and severally liable with the employer to pay

      compensation    if    the   same    falls   within   the

      scope of the contract of insurance.
14.   A similar issue arose before this Court in
Mahendra Rai
(supra). There, on behalf of the

      insurance company, a similar plea was raised,

      which was rejected while observing as under:
“The learned Counsel for the Insurance
            Company submitted that the Commissioner
            has no jurisdiction under the Act to
            direct the Insurance Company to pay the
            compensation; it is the owner who is
            liable to pay. However, such submission
            cannot be accepted in view of the fact
            that the vehicle is insured with the
            insurance company and that without giving
            any reason the High Court held that the
            Insurance Company at the first instance
            had no liability to meet the award of
            compensation     and      doubted     the
            maintainability of the order passed by
            the Commissioner. We are of the view that
            after such observations already made the
            remand of the case will be futile. In
            fact, we find no error in the order
            passed by the Commissioner under the
            Workmen’s
Compensation Act, 1923
.”
15.   Now, we shall consider the decisions cited by

      the learned counsel for the first respondent.
In
Harshadbhai Amrutbhai Modhiya
(supra), the

      issue was whether interest is payable by an

      insurer   while     indemnifying     the    insured   for

      the   amount   of    compensation    awarded      against

      him under the 1923 Act. In that context, it

      was    held    by    this   Court    that    under    the

      provisions of the 1923 Act the insurer is not

      statutorily liable as is the case under the
Motor Vehicles Act
. However, where a contract

      of insurance is entered into by and between

      the   employer      and   the   insurer,    the   insurer
      would be liable to indemnify the employer. It

      was also held that as there is no statutory

      liability on the insurer, it is open to the

      Insurance Company to refuse to insure.
16.   In the instant case, there is no dispute that

      the insurer has undertaken the liability to

      indemnify      the   insured    (i.e.,      the    employer)

      and has not contracted out of his liability.

      In     such    circumstances,       in   our      view,     the

      aforesaid decision is of no help to the first

      respondent.
17.
In
J.P. Narayan
(supra), this Court dismissed

      a    writ     petition    seeking    a     direction       upon

      Insurance Companies to delete the clause in

      the Insurance Policy which provided that in

      cases of compensation under the 1923 Act, the

      Insurance Company will not be liable to pay

      interest. While dismissing the writ petition,

      this Court held that in absence of statutory

      liability, it is a matter of contract between

      the Insurance Company and the insured and,

      therefore, it is always open to the Insurance

      Company to refuse to insure. In our view,

      this    decision     is   of   no   help    to    the     first
      respondent as no plea has been set up that

      the insurer is not liable to reimburse the

      interest amount payable under the claim. In

      fact,     the   first     respondent        has      not    even

      brought     the    insurance         policy     on     record.

      Besides    that,    there      is    no   finding      of   the

      Commissioner       or    the   High       Court      that    the

      insurance contract excluded liability to pay

      interest.
18.   In view of the discussion above, in our view,

      there was no justification for the High Court

      to modify the order of the Commissioner and

      shift     liability       on        the    employer         (the

      appellant)      alone.     Rather,        the     appropriate

      course would have been to make the employer

      and the insurer jointly and severally liable.

      However, as we are informed that the amount

      awarded by the Commissioner has already been

      deposited by the insurance company (the first

      respondent) in terms of the award, we do not

      deem it necessary to modify the award passed

      by the Commissioner. Consequently, the appeal

      is entitled to be allowed and the award of

      the Commissioner restored.
19.   Before parting, we must express our anguish

      at    the    practice       of    Insurance           Companies

      unnecessarily        filing       appeals        by     raising

      technical pleas more so when they do not deny

      their ultimate liability under the contract

      of    insurance.      As        the     first      respondent

      unnecessarily filed an appeal before the High

      Court and for this reason compensation could

      not   be    timely    released         in   favour      of   the

      second respondent, we deem it appropriate to

      compensate the second respondent with costs

      of    Rs.50,000      to    be     paid      by    the    first

      respondent. In our view, the High Court also

      adopted     a    hyper      technical         approach       and

      overlooked the provisions of
Section 19
of

      the 1923 Act while modifying the award passed

      by the Commissioner to the disadvantage of

      the employee (i.e., the claimant) when there

      was no dispute regarding the liability of the

      insurance       company     under       the      contract     of

      insurance.
20.   We,   accordingly,        allow       the   appeal     and   set

      aside the order passed by the High Court and

      restore the award of the Commissioner with a
      direction that the amount deposited by the

      insurance company shall be released in favour

      of   the     workman   (the     second    respondent)         in

      terms of the award passed by the Commissioner.

      If     the    amount     so     deposited      has       earned

      interest, the interest accrued thereon shall

      also    be    released    in    favour    of     the     second

      respondent along with the principal within a

      period of one month from the date this order

      is     produced    before       the     court/     authority

      concerned. Costs of Rs.50,000 shall also be

      paid by the first respondent to the second

      respondent      within    the    same    period.       If    the

      compensation amount has not been deposited or

      some amount remains to be deposited, the same

      shall be recovered in terms of Commissioner’s

      award.
21.   Pending      applications,       if     any,     shall      also

      stand disposed of.
………………………………………………………………………….J
                                                 [MANOJ MISRA]


                             ……………………………………………………………………………..J
                                [NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH]
      New Delhi
      October 09, 2025
ITEM NO.124                COURT NO.15                 SECTION XVI

                S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                        RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Civil Appeal   No(s).   10482/2017

ALOK KUMAR GHOSH                                      Appellant(s)

                                  VERSUS

THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LTD    & ANR.         Respondent(s)

Date : 09-10-2025 This appeal was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJ MISRA
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH

For Appellant(s) :
Mr. Anand, Adv.
Mr. Abhijit Sengupta, AOR
                     Mr. Muddam Thirupathi Reddy, Adv.
                     Mr. Paras Chauhan, Adv.
Mr. N.maylsamy, Adv.
Mr. Deepak Bahl, Adv.
For Respondent(s) : Ms. Sakshi Mittal, AOR
                    Mr S L Gupta, Adv.
Mr Asutosh Sharma, Adv.
Mr Swathana Bhaarath, Adv.
                    Ms Gunjan Sharma, Adv.
Ms Neeta, Adv.
Mr Sanjeev Kumar, Adv.
Ms. Rajeshri Nivuratirao Reddy, AOR
                     Ms. Shivani Jain, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R
1.   The civil appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order which
is placed on the file.
2.   Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
(CHETAN ARORA)                                     (CHETNA BALOONI)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                           COURT MASTER (NSH)