[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Novenco Building And Industry A/S vs Xero Energy Engineering Solutions ... on 27 October, 2025
2025 INSC 1256
                                                                           REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.          OF 2025
                                  (@ OUT OF S.L.P. (C) NO. 2753 OF 2025)


             NOVENCO BUILDING AND INDUSTRY A/S                   …APPELLANT

                                                 VERSUS

             XERO ENERGY ENGINEERING
             SOLUTIONS PRIVATE LTD. & ANR.                       …RESPONDENTS




                                               JUDGMENT
ALOK ARADHE, J.
Leave granted.
2.             The appeal calls for determination of the expression

             ‘contemplates any urgent interim relief’ in
Section 12A
of the

             Commercial Courts Act, 2015 (hereinafter, referred to as ‘the Act’)
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Deepak Guglani
Date: 2025.10.27
15:15:48 IST
Reason:
1
in its application to an action for infringement of intellectual

property rights.
3.   This     appeal   is   directed   against   the   judgment   dated

13.11.2024 in Commercial Appeal No. 1 of 2024 passed by

Division Bench of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh, by which

it has dismissed the appeal of the appellant and has affirmed the

order dated 28.08.2024 in Commercial Suit No. 13 of 2024 by a

learned Single Judge, rejecting the plaint of the appellant for

non-compliance with
Section 12A
of the Act.
FACTUAL MATRIX:-
4.   Facts giving rise to filing of this appeal can be summarised

as under :-
The appellant is a Danish company incorporated under the

laws of Denmark. The appellant is engaged in manufacture of

highly efficient industrial fans, marketed under the Brand

‘Novenco ZerAx’. According to the appellant, the said brand was

developed after an investment of approximately 3.66 million

euros between 2007 and 2015. The appellant secured several
2
patents and design registrations to secure its innovation in India

and abroad.
5.   A dealership agreement was executed on 01.09.2017

between the appellant and respondent No.1, Xero Energy

Engineering Solutions Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad (hereinafter, referred

to as ‘Xero Energy’), for marketing and sale of Novenco ZerAx

fans across India. According to the appellant, Xero Energy’s

Director, in violation of distribution agreement, incorporated

respondent No.2, Aeronaut Fans Industry Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter,

referred to as ‘Aeronaut Fans’), for manufacture and sale of

identical fans under deceptively similar name and appearance.
The appellant discovered sometime in July, 2022 that Xero

Energy started marketing competing products.
6.   The appellant sent multiple communications to Xero Energy

on 22.08.2022, 30.08.2022 and 14.10.2022 seeking clarification.

However, no explanation was offered by Xero Energy. The

appellant on 14.10.2022 terminated the dealership. Thereafter, it

sent a cease-and-desist notice dated 23.12.2022 to Aeronaut

Fans, who sent replies dated 01.02.2023 and 03.03.2023 to the

notice. Aeronaut Fans filed a petition under
Section 148A
CPC
3
before the Madras High Court and an email was sent on

15.05.2023 by counsel of Aeronaut Fans.
7.   The technical expert of the appellant on 06.12.2023

inspected the fans installed by Aeronaut Fans at Cavendish

Industries and Hero Moto Corp, Uttarakhand, and submitted his

affidavit on 06.02.2024 confirming the infringement by Aeronaut

Fans. The appellant thereafter obtained patent and design

certificates in March-May, 2024.
8.   The appellant on 04.06.2024 filed a commercial suit,

namely, COMS No. 13 of 2024, before the High Court alleging

infringement of its patent and design by the respondent. The

appellant along with the plaint also filed an application under

Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 seeking an ad interim injunction,

and an application under
Section 151
of the CPC seeking

exemption from pre-institution mediation as mandated under
Section 12A
of the Act.
9.   The respondents filed an application under
Order VII Rule

10 of the CPC
for return of the plaint and an application under

Order VII Rule 11 for rejection of the plaint, inter alia, on the

ground that no urgency was involved in the matter and non-
4
compliance with
Section 12A
of the Act was fatal to the suit. The

respondents also filed a reply to the application seeking

injunction.
VIEWS OF HIGH COURT:-
10. The learned Single Judge of the High Court passed two

separate orders on 28.08.2024. By the first order, the learned

Single Judge rejected the plea for return of plaint. However, by

the second order, the learned Single Judge held that (i) there was

a delay of six months between the inspection of fans installed by

Aeronaut Fans, in December 2023 and the filing of the suit in

June, 2024, (ii) the plea of the appellant about urgency was not

substantiated as the appellant had issued cease-and-desist

notice as early as December 2022 and had adequate time to

approach for mediation, (iii) pre-institution mediation under
Section 12A
of the Act is mandatory, unless urgent interim relief

is sought bonafide, (iv) in the absence of genuine urgency, the

plaint was liable to be rejected under
Order VII Rule 11 of CPC
.
The learned Single Judge, therefore, allowed the application

under
Order VII Rule 11 of CPC
and rejected the plaint.
5
11. The appellant preferred an appeal. A Division Bench of the

High Court, by an order dated 13.11.2024, agreed with the

reasons assigned by the learned Single Judge. The Division

Bench, inter alia, held that delay between inspection of fans and

filing of the commercial suit exhibits patent lack of urgency and

exemption from requirement of compliance of the mandate

contained in
Section 12A
of the Act cannot be claimed merely

because interim reliefs were sought.     It was further held that

mere continuous infringement of intellectual property rights

could not override the statutory mediation requirements. The

Division Bench, however, clarified that the order of rejection of

the plaint would not bar the appellant in case it chooses to

comply with
Section 12A
of the Act and subject to the outcome of

the mediation proceeding and if the cause of action still survives,

it may institute a suit. Accordingly, the Division Bench dismissed

the appeal. In the aforesaid factual background, this appeal

arises for our consideration.
12. A Bench of this Court, by an order dated 07.02.2025, while

entertaining the Special Leave Petition, directed the appellant to

move a letter before the mediation centre attached to High Court
6
of Himachal Pradesh, seeking appointment of a mediator and the

respondents were directed to participate. It is stated before us

that, on 23.06.2025 the mediation between the parties has failed.

SUBMISSIONS:-
13. Learned senior counsel for the appellant submitted that the

learned Single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court

erred in not applying the correct test in deciding whether the

appellant would be entitled to an interim injunction based on

urgency involved in the facts of the case. It is further submitted

that it ought to have been appreciated that the urgent interim

relief was not sought to bypass the statutory mandate of pre-

litigation mediation. It is also submitted that the plaint along

with the documents have to be read together to find out whether

any urgent interim relief is correctly sought. It is contended that

mere delay in filing the suit for infringement and injunction

against continuing violation of intellectual property rights by

itself is not a ground to decline the injunction against an

infringer.
In support of the aforesaid submissions, reliance has

been placed on the decisions of this Court in
Midas Hygiene
7
Industries Private Ltd. & Anr. v. Sudhir Bhatia & Ors.1
and
Yamini Manohar v. T.K.D. Keerthi2
.
14. On the other hand, learned senior Counsel for the

respondents, while inviting the attention of this Court to the

order dated 07.02.2025 passed in this appeal submitted that, it

appears that the issue, which according to the court arises for

consideration is whether the plaint, which did not contemplate

urgent relief, should be rejected or be kept in abeyance. It is

submitted that the learned Single Judge as well as the Division

Bench have rightly found that the plaint does not make out any

need for urgent relief. It is submitted that, in the plaint there is

not a single word on the urgency. It is contended that the

appellant had issued a cease-and-desist notice on 23.12.2022

and thereafter had filed the suit after a delay of one and half

years, in June, 2024. It is pointed out that the suit was filed after

four months of the submission of expert opinion. Therefore, there

was no urgency to deviate from the mandatory statutory

requirement under
Section 12A
of the Act. It is urged that mere
1
(2004) 3 SCC 90
2
(2024) 5 SCC 815
8
filing of an application for interim relief does not ipso-facto

indicate urgency and there is no material on record to suggest

that appellant’s patent is being violated.       It is, therefore,

submitted that the appeal is liable to be dismissed.

STATUORY PROVISION :-
15. Before dealing with the rival submissions canvassed on

either side, we must take note of relevant statutory provision.
The

Act
has been enacted, inter alia, with an object for early

resolution of commercial disputes so as to create a positive image

amongst the investors about our strong and responsive legal

system and to facilitate ease of doing business.
The Act
was

amended in the year 2018 by Act No. 28 of 2018. By the

aforesaid amending Act, Section 12A was also incorporated with

an object to provide for compulsory mediation before initiation of

a suit where no urgent interim relief is contemplated.
16.
Section 12A
of the Act reads as under :-
“12A. Pre-Institution Mediation and
           Settlement — (1) A suit, which does not
           contemplate any urgent interim relief
           under this Act, shall not be instituted
           unless the plaintiff exhausts the remedy of
           pre-institution mediation in accordance
9
with such manner and procedure as may
be prescribed by rules made by the Central
Government.
(2) The Central Government may, by
notification, authorise the Authorities
constituted under the
Legal Services
Authorities Act, 1987
(39 of 1987), for the
purposes of pre-institution mediation.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the
Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987
,
the Authority authorised by the Central
Government under sub-section (2) shall
complete the process of mediation within a
period of three months from the date of
application made by the plaintiff under
sub-section (1):
Provided that the period of mediation
  may be extended for a further period of
  two months with the consent of the
  parties:
Provided further that, the period
  during which the parties remained
  occupied with the pre-institution
  mediation, such period shall not be
  computed for the purpose of limitation
  under the
Limitation Act, 1963
(36 of
  1963).
(4) If the parties to the commercial dispute
arrive at a settlement, the same shall be
reduced into writing and shall be signed by
the parties to the dispute and the
mediator.
(5) The settlement arrived at under this
section shall have the same status and
effect as if it is an arbitral award on agreed
10
terms under sub-section (4) of
section 30
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
                      1996 (26 of 1996).]”

         Thus, the aim and object of Section 12A is to ensure that,

before a commercial dispute is filed before the court, the

alternative means of resolution of the dispute are adopted, so

that only the most trying cases come before the courts.
PRECEDENT:-
17. The scope and ambit of
Section 12A
of the Act which makes

pre-institution mediation mandatory for commercial disputes,

except where the suit ‘contemplates any urgent interim reliefs’,

has been considered in three recent decisions of this Court.
In
Patil Automation Pvt. Ltd. v. Rakheja Engineers Pvt. Ltd.3
, a

two-Judge Bench of this Court dealt with a case where a suit for

recovery of money was filed without adherence to
Section 12A
of

the Act. It was held that
Section 12A
of the Act is mandatory and

any suit instituted in violation of the mandate contained in
Section 12A
of the Act must be visited with rejection of the plaint.
3
(2022) 10 SCC 1
11
18.
In
Yamini Manohar
(supra), another two-Judge Bench of

this Court laid down the criteria to judge whether the plaint

contains a prayer for urgent interim relief, by taking into account

the subject matter of the suit, the cause of action and the prayer

for interim relief. It was further held that the facts and

circumstances of the case have to be considered holistically from

the standpoint of the plaintiff and the prayer for urgent interim

relief should not be a disguise or mask to wriggle out of and get

over
Section 12A
of the Act. The scope and ambit of the words

‘contemplate any urgent interim relief’ in
Section12A
of the Act,

with reference to the suit, were also considered and it was held

that the plaint, documents, and facts should show and indicate

the need for urgent interim relief. It was further held that this is

the precise and limited exercise that the Commercial Courts will

undertake.
19.
In
DHANBAD FUELS (P) LTD. v. UOI4, another
two-Judge

Bench of this Court held that the test under Section 12A is not

whether the prayer for urgent interim relief actually comes to be

allowed or not, but whether on examination of the nature and the
4
( 2025) SCC Online SC 1129
12
subject-matter of the suit and the cause of action, the prayer for

urgent interim relief by the plaintiff could be said to be

contemplable when the matter is seen from the standpoint of the

plaintiff. It has been further held that the interim relief must not

merely be an unfounded excuse by the plaintiff to bypass the

mandatory requirement of
Section 12A
of the Act.
20. The legal test distilled from the aforesaid decisions for the

purposes of rejection of the plaint and for adjudication of interim

relief can be culled out as follows:
(i) Section 12A mandatorily requires pre-institution mediation

      for commercial suits, non-compliance of which would

      ordinarily render the plaint institutionally defective.
(ii) A plaintiff can be exempted from the requirement of Section

     12A only when the plaint and the documents attached with

     it clearly show a real need for urgent interim intervention. A

     wholesome reading of the plaint and the material annexed to

     the plaint ought to disclose the need for urgent relief.
(iii) The court must look at the plaint, pleadings and supporting

    documents to decide whether urgent interim relief is
13
genuinely contemplated. The court may also look for

    immediacy of the peril, irreparable harm, risk of losing

    rights/assets, statutory timelines, perishable subject-matter,

    or where delay would render eventual relief ineffective.
(iv) A proforma or anticipatory prayer for urgent relief used as a

    device to skip mediation will be ignored and the court can

    require the parties to comply with
Section 12A
of the Act.
(v) The court is not concerned with the merits of the urgent

    relief, but if the relief sought seems to be plausibly urgent

    from the standpoint of the plaintiff the court can dispense

    with the requirement under
Section 12A
of the Act.
ANALYSIS
21. Thus, the question whether a suit ‘contemplates any urgent

interim relief’   needs to be examined on the touchstone of the

aforementioned criteria. The issue which arises for consideration

in this appeal is whether a suit alleging continuing infringement

of patent and design rights, accompanied by a prayer for interim

injunction, can be said to contemplate urgent relief within the
14
meaning of
Section 12A
of the Act, notwithstanding certain delay

in its institution.
22. The subject matter of the present action is continuing

infringement of intellectual property. Each act of manufacture,

sale, or offer for sale of the infringing product constitutes a fresh

wrong and recurring cause of action. It is well settled in law that

mere     delay   in   bringing   an   action    does   not   legalise   an

infringement and the same cannot defeat the right of the

proprietor to seek injunctive relief against the dishonest user5.

The appellant has pleaded that Xero Energy, its former

distributor, has dishonestly appropriated its proprietary designs

and patents to manufacture and market identical fans under

deceptively      similar   name.      The      accompanying      material

demonstrates that such infringing activity is continuing and

causing immediate and irreparable harm to the appellant’s

business reputation, goodwill and proprietary rights.
23.     From the standpoint of the appellant, each day of

continuing infringement aggravates injury to its intellectual

property and erodes its market standing. The urgency, therefore,
5
Midas Hygiene Industries Private Ltd. & Anr.
(supra)
15
is inherent in the nature of the wrong and does not lie in the age

of the cause but in the persistence of the peril. The court cannot

be unmindful of the fact that intellectual property disputes are

not confined to the private realm. When imitation masquerades

as innovation, it sows confusion among consumers, taints the

market place and diminishes faith in the sanctity of the trade.

The public interest, therefore, becomes the moral axis upon

which the urgency turns. Therefore, the public interest element,

need to prevent confusion in the market and to protect

consumers from deception further imparts a colour of immediacy

to the reliefs sought.
24. The     appellant’s   prayer   for   injunction   cannot    be

characterised as mere camouflage to evade mediation. It is a real

grievance founded on the continuing nature of infringement and

irreparable prejudice likely to be caused by the delay. The court

must look beyond time lag and evaluate the substance of the plea

for interim protection. The insistence of pre-institution mediation

in a situation of ongoing infringement, in effect, would render the

plaintiff remediless allowing the infringer to continue to profit
16
under the protection of procedural formality.
Section 12A
of the

Act was not intended to achieve such kind of anomalous result.
25. The learned Single Judge as well as the Division Bench of

the High Court erred in construing       the test for urgent relief

enumerated in
Section 12A
of the Act, in as much as the courts

have proceeded to examine the entitlement of the appellant to

urgent relief based on the merits of the case rather than looking

at the urgency as is evident from the plaint and the documents

annexed thereto from the standpoint of the plaintiff. The High

Court has proceeded on the premise that lapse of time between

the appellant’s discovery of infringement and filing of suit

negated the element of urgency. Such an approach, in our

considered view, is contrary to the principles
laid down by
the

decisions of this Court. The High Court has also failed to take

into account that the present action is one of the continuous

infringement of intellectual property.
CONCLUSION
26. For the reasons stated above, we hold that (i) In actions

alleging continuing infringement of intellectual property rights,

urgency must be assessed in the context of the ongoing injury
17
and the public interest in preventing deception, (ii) Mere delay in

institution of a suit by itself, does not negate urgency when the

infringement is continuing.
27. For the aforementioned reasons, the impugned judgment

dated 28.08.2024 of the learned Single Judge in Commercial Suit

No. 13 of 2024 and the judgment dated 13.11.2024 of the

Division Bench of the High Court in Commercial Appeal No.1 of

2024 are quashed and set aside. The Commercial Suit No. 13 of

2024 is restored to the file of the High Court to be proceeded with

on merits in accordance with law.
28. The appeal is allowed.
……………….……………J.
                                         [SANJAY KUMAR]



                                         .…….…………………….J.
                                         [ALOK ARADHE]

NEW DELHI,
OCTOBER 27, 2025.
18