[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Jemaben vs The State Of Gujarat on 29 October, 2025
Author:
Prashant Kumar Mishra
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Prashant Kumar Mishra
2025 INSC 1268

                                                                          REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1934 OF 2017

            JEMABEN                                                    …APPELLANT(S)

                                                          Versus

            THE STATE OF GUJARAT                                     …RESPONDENT(S)



                                                        JUDGMENT
VIPUL M. PANCHOLI, J.
1. The present appeal has been directed against the final order

                            dated 21.07.2016 passed by the High Court of Gujarat at

                            Ahmedabad in Criminal Appeal No. 539 of 2006, by which

                            the High Court has allowed the appeal filed by the State of

                            Gujarat qua the present appellant/accused, and thereby,

                            partly set aside the judgment dated 19.11.2005 rendered by

                            the Additional Sessions Judge and Presiding Officer, 6 th Fast
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Track Court, Banaskantha, at Deesa in Sessions Case
   KANCHAN CHOUHAN
   Date: 2025.10.29
   17:23:51 IST
   Reason:
Criminal Appeal No. 1934 OF 2017                             Page 1 of
11
Number 40 of 2005. Thus, the High Court convicted the

   appellant/accused for committing the offence punishable

   under
Section 302
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860

   (hereinafter referred to as “the
IPC
”) and sentenced with

   imprisonment for life and a fine of ₹ 10,000/-, and in

   default to further undergo simple imprisonment of one

   month.
2. The brief facts of the present case are as under:-
(i)  It is the case of the prosecution                that     the

           appellant/accused and the co-accused, Bherabhai

           Revaji Majirana, entered into criminal conspiracy in

           order to kill Leelaben and Ganesh, her son, and to

           execute the said conspiracy, on the date of the

           incident, i.e. the intervening night of 29.11.2004 and

           30.11.2004, when Leelaben and her son were sleeping

           in their hut, the appellant/accused poured kerosene

           upon Leelaben and set her ablaze. As a result,

           Leelaben received severe burn injuries and she was

           taken to the Civil Hospital, Palanpur. On 04.12.2004,

           Leelaben succumbed to the injuries, and her son

           received burn injuries to the extent of 10 to 12%.
Criminal Appeal No. 1934 OF 2017                            Page 2 of
11
(ii)    On 05.12.2004, the complaint was filed by PW-1,
Geetaben (sister of Leelaben). On the basis of the

           complaint, the investigating officer carried out the

           investigation            and     during       the     course      of    the

           investigation, the statement of the witnesses were

           recorded, the evidence was collected and thereafter the

           chargesheet             was    filed   against      both    the   accused

           persons.         The      charges      were    framed       for   offences

           punishable under
Sections 302
,
307
,
436
,
34
,
120 (b)
of the IPC and
Section 135
of the Bombay Police

           Act,1951.
(iii)   The Trial Court acquitted both the accused persons,

           mainly on the ground that there are discrepancies in

           three      dying        declarations      given     by     Leelaben,    the

           deceased.
(iv)    The State of Gujarat challenged the order of acquittal

           by filing a Criminal Appeal before the High Court. The

           High Court vide the impugned order allowed the appeal

           qua the appellant/accused and thereby, set aside the

           order of acquittal passed by the concerned trial court.

           The High Court convicted the appellant/accused for



Criminal Appeal No. 1934 OF 2017                                             Page 3 of
11
committing the offence punishable under
Section 302
of the IPC.
3. Against the impugned order passed by the High Court, the

   appellant/accused has preferred the present appeal.
4. Learned Counsel appearing for the appellant/accused

   mainly contended that the case of the prosecution rests

   primarily on the dying declaration given by the deceased.

   However, there are major discrepancies in the story put

   forward        by     the       prosecution.   In   fact,   version    of    the

   complainant (PW-1), Kalubhai Lakhuji (PW-4, husband of

   Leelaben), as well as other documentary evidence contain

   major         discrepancies,           inconsistencies      and       material

   contradictions. Thus, the trial court has rightly acquitted

   the appellant/accused, despite which, the High Court has,

   substantially relied upon the deposition given by Dr.

   Shivrambhai Nagarbhai Patel, (PW-3, Incharge Medical

   Officer) as well as relied upon the Yadi given by the said

   Doctor to the Police, which mentioned the history given by

   the deceased before the said witness, and thereby recorded

   the order of conviction of the appellant/accused. Learned

   Counsel submitted that the High Court has committed grave



Criminal Appeal No. 1934 OF 2017                                          Page 4 of
11
error while relying upon the Medical Certificates of Leelaben

   and Ganesh (Exhibit 20 and 21, respectively).
5. It is further submitted that because there are major

   discrepancies in the three dying declarations given by the

   deceased,            the        trial      court      has      acquitted      the

   appellant/accused               by      giving    benefit of doubt to         the

   appellant/accused. Therefore, even if there are two views

   possible on the basis of the evidence led by the prosecution

   before the trial court, when the trial court has taken the one

   possible view, the High Court ought not to have interfered

   with the said view taken by the trial court. Learned Counsel

   for     the     appellant/accused,               therefore,   urged   that    the

   impugned order passed by the High Court be set aside and

   thereby, the appellant/accused be acquitted.
6. Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-

   state has vehemently opposed the present appeal. Learned

   Counsel for the State mainly submitted that, in the case of

   multiple dying declarations, each dying declaration will have

   to be considered independently on its own merit as to its

   evidentiary value and one cannot be rejected because of the

   contents of the other. It is submitted that in the present



Criminal Appeal No. 1934 OF 2017                                           Page 5 of
11
case, even though the dying declaration has not been

   recorded by the Executive Magistrate, it is clear from the

   medical certificate issued by PW-3, that the statement of the

   deceased, recorded first in point of time, reveals that the

   deceased was burnt by the appellant/accused, who was the

   aunt-in-law of the deceased, by pouring kerosene from the

   tin and setting the deceased on fire. On the very same day,

   the deceased described the motive behind the incident that

   the appellant/accused was compelling the deceased to go

   with        one,        Mania   Dabhawala,   with   whom     the

   appellant/accused was acquainted and refusal by the

   deceased thereto, resulted into the incident in question. It is

   further submitted that from the postmortem report (Exhibit
25), and severe burn injuries sustained by the deceased

   almost all over the body and the manner in which the burn

   injuries were caused, would reveal that it was not the case

   of an accidental death.
7. Learned Counsel for the respondent-State further referred to

   the panchnama (Exhibit 12) and submitted that one empty

   kerosene container having smell of kerosene was found at

   the place of incident. Similarly, soil having smell of kerosene

Criminal Appeal No. 1934 OF 2017                          Page 6 of
11
was also collected from the place of incident. At this stage, it

   is further submitted that even PW-3 deposed that the whole

   body and clothing of the deceased was having the smell of

   kerosene and she sustained 100% burn injuries.
8. Learned Counsel for the respondent-State, lastly, contended

   that the son of the deceased was sleeping beside the

   deceased. However, from the Medical Certificate issued by

   PW-3, it is revealed that the said boy, aged about 4 years,

   sustained 10-12% burn injuries. Learned Counsel for the

   respondent-State,               therefore,   contended   that   from    the

   aforesaid evidence led by the prosecution, it can be said that

   the dying declaration given by the deceased before the

   independent witness, i.e. PW-3, is rightly relied upon by the

   High Court. It is further submitted that there was only one

   possible view on the basis of the aforesaid evidence which

   was required to be taken by the trial court, and therefore,

   when the trial court has not properly appreciated the

   aforesaid important aspects/evidence in the present matter,

   the High Court has rightly set aside the order of acquittal

   passed by the trial court qua the appellant/accused.

   Learned Counsel, therefore, urged that no interference is

Criminal Appeal No. 1934 OF 2017                                     Page 7 of
11
required in the impugned order of the High Court and the

      present appeal is liable to be dismissed.
9.    We have considered the submissions canvassed by the

     learned counsel for the parties. We have also perused the

   entire record and the evidence led by the prosecution.
10. It emerged from the record that when the deceased was

     brought to the hospital, she narrated the incident before the

     Doctor (PW-3) wherein she specifically stated that “my aunt-

     in-law, Jemaben poured kerosene on me and set ablaze.”

     Further, when she was asked again by the doctor, she

     disclosed that “my aunt-in-law asked me to go with Mania

     Dabhawala, I refused for the same and, therefore, she burnt

     me alive”. It is pertinent to note that the aforesaid

     documentary evidence was duly proved as per the testimony

     of PW-3. Similarly, the Yadi given by the Doctor to Police

     Station, Palanpur city, further suggests that deceased

     specifically narrated that the appellant/accused, her aunt-in-

     law, set her ablaze. It is also specifically stated by the Doctor

     in the said Yadi that the patient was conscious and she was

     in a position to speak. Therefore, the said police officer was

     asked to make arrangements for           recording   the dying



 Criminal Appeal No. 1934 OF 2017                             Page 8 of
11
declaration of the deceased. At this stage, it is also relevant to

   observe that the Medical Certificate of the deceased also

   states that the “whole body and clothing having kerosene

   smelling burns about 100%”.
11. From the panchnama, it                 further   transpires    that

   investigating agency found “one empty container having

   kerosene smell” from the place of incident. Similarly, the soil

   of the surface of the hut (the place of incident) was having

   smell of kerosene. Thus, the aforesaid document also

   corroborates the version given by the deceased before the

   independent witness, i.e.        PW-3, the Doctor. At this stage, it

   is also relevant to observe that PW-3 deposed before the court

   that the son of the deceased, aged about 4 years, was

   brought before him by the relatives of the deceased and when

   inquired they told that the said boy sustained burn injuries

   along with his mother. It is further stated by the said witness

   that the said boy sustained 10-12% burn injuries on his

   lower legs and feet. Thus, from the aforesaid evidence led by

   the prosecution, it is revealed that the dying declaration

   given by the deceased before the Doctor is supported by other

   evidence led by the prosecution.
Criminal Appeal No. 1934 OF 2017                              Page 9 of
11
12. On perusal, it is clear that the deceased sustained 100%

    burn injuries and from the whole body and the clothes of the

    deceased, the smell of kerosene was found. However, the 4

    years old son of the deceased was sleeping beside the

    deceased and he sustained only 10-12% burn injuries. Thus,

    the theory of accidental fire at the place of incident put

    forward by the appellant/accused cannot be believed.
13. We are of the view that merely because there are minor

    discrepancies in the version given by the prosecution witness

    with regard to the dying declaration and with regard to the

    manner of occurrence of the incident, the first dying

    declaration given by the deceased before the independent

    witness, i.e PW-3, cannot be ignored. The first dying

    declaration is supported by the independent documentary

    evidence, and therefore, the High Court has rightly placed

    reliance upon the decision rendered by this Court in the case

    of
Nallam         Veera       Stayanandam   &   Ors.   v.   Public

    Prosecutor, High
Court of A.P., (2004) 10 SCC 769, and

    thereby, rightly set aside the order of acquittal rendered by

    the trial court qua the appellant/accused.
Criminal Appeal No. 1934 OF 2017                                 Page 10 of
11
14. We are also of the view that on the basis of the aforesaid

    evidence as discussed hereinabove, only one view was

    possible, despite which, the trial court had acquitted the

    appellant/accused. Thus, the High Court has rightly set

    aside the order of the trial court.
15. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the

    present case set out in the detailed analysis above, we are of

    the view that no interference is required in the impugned

    judgment passed by the High Court in Criminal Appeal

    Number 539 of 2006. Accordingly, the present appeal stands

    dismissed.
.......……….…………………….J.
                                                 [RAJESH BINDAL]




                                     ...….....………………………….J.
                                               [VIPUL M. PANCHOLI]
NEW DELHI,
OCTOBER 29, 2025.
Criminal Appeal No. 1934 OF 2017                         Page 11 of
11