[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vinishma Technologies Pvt. Ltd vs State Of Chhattisgarh on 6 October, 2025
2025 INSC 1182                                                              REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.           OF 2025
                                       (@ SLP (C) No. 24075 of 2025)

                   VINISHMA TECHNOLOGIES PVT. LTD.                    … APPELLANT
                                               Versus
                   STATE OF CHHATTISGARH & ANR.                       … RESPONDENTS

                                                     WITH

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.           OF 2025
                                       (@ SLP (C) No. 26192 of 2025)

                                                     AND

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.           OF 2025
                                       (@ SLP (C) No. 23611 of 2025)


                                               JUDGMENT
ALOK ARADHE, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. These appeals take exception to orders dated 11.08.2025

                             and 12.08.2025 passed in three Writ Petitions preferred by

                             the appellant. The High Court of Chhattisgarh by the said
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Deepak Guglani
Date: 2025.10.06
orders, has repelled the challenge to the impugned tender
   15:35:51 IST
   Reason:
condition   contained   in   three   tender   notices   dated
1
21.07.2025 which were issued for supply of Sports Kits to

      the students of Government Primary School, Government

      Upper Primary Schools and Government High and Higher

      Secondary Schools in the State of Chhattisgarh.
3. The facts giving rise to filing of these appeals which lie in a

      narrow compass, are as under:
(I)     FACTS
4. The appellant is a Company registered under the
Companies Act, 2013
and claims to have experience of

      supplying Sports Kits to various Departments of the States

      of Bihar, Karnataka, Gujarat and Government of NCT

      Delhi. The respondent No. 1 is State of Chhattisgarh

      whereas respondent No. 2 is State Project Director,

      Samagra   Shiksha Chhattisgarh State Project Office,

      Department      of   School   Education,   Government    of

      Chhattisgarh.
5. The Integrated Child Development Service (ICDS) Scheme

      is a Scheme for providing for supplementary nutrition,

      immunization and pre-school education to the children,

      launched in the year 1975, is a popular flagship program

      of the Central Government. The said Scheme provides for
2
the integrated package of services, for the holistic

  development of the child and is a centrally sponsored

  scheme implemented by State Governments and the Union

  Territories.   The   Scheme    is   largely   funded   by   the

  Government of India.
6. The Samagra Shiksha Chhattisgarh State Project Office,

  Department of School Education, Chhattisgarh published

  three tender notices (hereinafter to be referred to as

  “impugned      tender   notices”)   on   21.07.2025    through

  Government-e-Market Place Portal for supply of Sports Kits

  to the students of Primary School, Upper Primary Schools

  and High and Higher Secondary Schools run by the State

  Government in the State of Chhattisgarh. The Sports Kits

  were to be supplied to 5540 cluster resource centres

  situated across all 33 districts in the State. The tender

  value of the contract was Rs.15.24 crores, Rs.13.08 crores

  and Rs.11.49 crores.
7. Section III(A) of the impugned tender notices prescribe

  qualification criteria with additional terms and conditions.

  The appellant was aggrieved by additional terms and

  conditions namely, condition Nos. 1, 4, 11 and 13, which
3
rendered the appellant ineligible for participation in the

  impugned tender process. It, therefore, submitted a

  representation on 29.07.2025 to the State Project Director,

  Samagra    Shiksha,    School    Education     Department,

  Chhattisgarh. The aforesaid representation failed to evoke

  any response. The appellant thereupon filed three writ

  petitions, namely, Writ Petition (C) No. 4266 of 2025, Writ

  Petition (C) No. 4263 of 2025 and Writ Petition (C) No. 4274

  of 2025, before the High Court in which validity of the

  aforesaid impugned tender conditions was challenged.
8. During the pendency of the writ petition by way of

  corrigendum dated 07.08.2025 condition Nos. 1, 11, and

  13 were deleted. The Division Bench of the High Court by a

  common order dated 11.08.2025 passed in Civil Writ

  Petition (C) No. 4266 of 2025, Writ Petition (C) No. 4263 of

  2025 and by an order dated 12.08.2025 passed in Writ

  Petition (C) No. 4274 of 2025, inter alia    held that the

  impugned eligibility condition namely, condition No. 4 with

  regard to past performance is of similar nature and

  purpose, as, the condition in
Association of Registration
4
Plates v. Union of India and Ors1
. It was further held that

          respondents have demonstrated that the impugned tender

          condition is not unique to the State of Chhattisgarh but is

          prevalent in other States such as Gujarat, Assam, Delhi,

          Orissa and Jharkhand. It was further found by the High

          Court that a contract containing a similar condition, was

          awarded to the appellant in the State of Jharkhand. The

          High Court repelled the challenge to impugned tender

          condition    on    the   ground     of    discrimination    and

          unreasonableness.
9. It was further held by the Division Bench that State is

          entitled to prescribe the condition in the impugned tender

          notices, to ensure that selection of the most capable and

          reliable bidder takes place, to execute the public project of

          significant scale, sensitivity and public importance. It was

          also held that impugned tender condition is neither

          violative of
Article 14
nor
Article 19 (1)(g)
of the Constitution

          of India and relates to legitimate object of ensuring

          technical    competence,    financial    strength,   operational

          capacity as well as long term reliability of successful bidder.
1
(2005) 1 SCC 679
5
Accordingly, the writ petitions preferred by the appellant

  were dismissed. In the aforesaid factual background, these

  appeals arise for our consideration.
(II) SUBMISSIONS OF APPELLANT
10. Learned Senior Counsel for the appellant submitted that

  High Court has failed to appreciate that decision of this

  Court in
Association of Registration Plates
(supra) has

  no application to the obtaining factual matrix of the case

  and therefore, erred in placing reliance on
the said decision
while deciding the writ petitions. It is further submitted

  that the impugned tender condition which prescribes that

  bidders must have supplied Sports Kits worth at least

  Rs.6.00 crores (cumulative) to State Government agencies

  of Chhattisgarh in last 3 financial years is violative of
Articles 14
and
19(1) (g)
of the Constitution of India, as it

  excludes competent suppliers from outside the State and

  discourages wider participation and fosters cartelisation. It

  is urged that the impugned tender condition excludes the

  appellant from participating in the impugned tender. It is

  therefore urged that the impugned common orders are
6
liable to be quashed and set aside and the impugned tender

  condition is liable to be struck down.
(III)   SUBMISSIONS OF RESPONDENT
11. On    the   other   hand,   learned    Senior   Counsel   for

  respondent No. 2 submitted that the tendering authority is

  well within its power to frame the impugned tender

  condition. It is further submitted that in view of

  geographic/social conditions of State of Chhattisgarh, the

  impugned tender condition is incorporated to safeguard

  timely delivery, ensure quality compliance and prevent

  supply chain disruptions. It is also submitted that

  impugned condition is prevalent in other States as well. It

  is pointed out that on 21.08.2025, financial bids have

  already been opened and the successful bidders have been

  identified. It is urged that in case this Court interferes with

  the impugned tender process, the consequent re-tendering

  would consume a considerable time and substantial

  portion of academic year would stand forfeited.
12. Learned Senior counsel for respondent No. 1 has adopted

  the submissions made on behalf of respondent No. 2 and

  has submitted that the impugned tender condition has
7
been incorporated with an object to ensure that successful

  bidder has the knowledge of the topography of the State of

  Chhattisgarh which is a Naxal affected State, so that Sports

  Kits could be timely delivered to the children of Government

  Schools in the State.
(IV)   ANALYSIS
13. We have considered the rival submissions and have

  perused the record. For the facility of reference the

  impugned tender condition is extracted below :
“(4) Past Performance Restriction :
Bidders must have supplied sports
            goods      worth        at     least
            Rs.6.00 crores (cumulative) to State
            Government agencies of Chhattisgarh
            in the last three financial years
            (2021-22, 2022-23, 2023-24 or 2022-
            23, 2023-24, 2024-25).”
14. The solitary question which arises for consideration in

  the instant appeals is whether the aforesaid impugned

  tender condition meets the test of reasonableness and

  fairness and or whether the same constitutes an arbitrary

  criteria which excludes the other eligible bidders from

  participation thereby violating, the mandate contained in
Articles 14
and
19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India.
8
15. Before proceeding further, it is apposite to briefly advert

          to contours of judicial review with regard to tender

          conditions which are well delineated. A three Judge Bench

          of this Court in
Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International

          Airport Authority of India & Ors.2
, held that discretion of

          the Government in granting the largesse, is not unlimited

          and the Government cannot give or withhold largesse in its

          arbitrary discretion or at its sweet will. It has further been

          held that Government cannot without adequate reason

          exclude any person from dealing with it or take away

          largesse arbitrarily. It also held that activities of the

          Government have a public element and therefore there

          should be fairness and equality. It is well settled in law that

          Government must have free hand in setting the terms of the

          tender and the Court cannot strike down the terms of the

          tender prescribed by the Authority merely because it feels

          some other terms in the tender would have been fairer,

          wiser or more logical3.
It is equally well settled legal

          proposition that in the matter of formulating conditions of
2
(1979) 3 SCC 489;
AIR 1979 SC 1628
3
Directorate of Education & Ors. v. EDUCOMP Datamatics Ltd. & Ors.
(2004) 4 SCC 19
9
tender document unless the action of tendering authority

        is found to be arbitrary and malicious the Court would not

        interfere4. It is also well settled in law that a Court cannot

        sit over judgment on what should be the eligibility criteria

        in the tender notice unless the same is arbitrary,

        discriminatory or actuated by mala fides.5
16. The principle of non-discrimination is embodied in
Article

        14
of the Constitution of India.
Article 14
has to be read in

        conjunction with Rights conferred by other Articles like
Article 21
of the Constitution of India.
Article 21
of the

        Constitution of India refers to Right to Life which includes

        ‘opportunity’ as well. The doctrine of level playing field is an

        important concept while construing
Article 19 (1) (g)
of the

        Constitution of India.
Article 19(1) (g)
confers Fundamental

        Right to carry out business to a company, it is entitled to

        invoke the doctrine of level playing field which is however,

        subject to public interest. The doctrine of level playing field
4
Global Energy Ltd. & Anr. v. Adani Exports Ltd. & Ors.
(
2005) 4 SCC 435 - Shimni Utsch India Pvt. Ltd.
& Anr. v. West Bengal Transport Infrastructure Development Corporation Ltd. & Ors
(2010) 6 SCC 303.
5
Icomm Tele Ltd vs. Punjab State Water Supply and Sewerage Board & Anr.
(2019) 4 SCC 401;
Uflex
Ltd. V. Government of Tamil Nadu & Ors.
(2022) 1 SCC 165
10
provides the space within which equally placed competitors

          are allowed to bid so as to subserve larger public interest. 6
17. In the backdrop of well settled legal principles, we advert

          to the fact of the case in hand. The present tender is for

          supply of Sports Kits to the students of Primary School,

          Upper Primary School and High and Higher Secondary

          School run by the State Government in the State of

          Chhattisgarh. The eligibility criteria mentioned in the

          impugned tender notices must have rational nexus with the

          object sought to be achieved i.e., supply of good quality

          Sports Kits to students of the school, at the best price. The

          eligibility criteria in impugned notices therefore, should be

          framed in a manner which encourages wider participation

          and secures the best prize for the State, which in turn

          safeguards the public exchequer.
18. This Court in BHARAT FORGE supra has enunciated the

          doctrine level playing field and has stated that the same

          finds expression in
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution. The

          doctrine of level playing field requires that all equally

          placed competitors must be given an equal opportunity to
6
UOI & Ors. Bharat Forge Ltd. & ANR. (2022) 17 SCC 188.
11
participate in trade and commerce. It is designed to prevent

  the State from skewing the market in favour of few by

  erecting artificial barriers. In the instant case, the

  impugned tender condition has the effect of excluding

  bidders who though otherwise financially sound and

  technically competent, have no experience of supply of

  sports goods to the State Government agencies of

  Chhattisgarh in past three years. The State by linking the

  eligibility criteria with past local supplies has created an

  artificial barrier, against the suppliers who had no past

  dealing with the State of Chhattisgarh. The impugned

  condition curtails the fundamental rights of the bidders,

  who have been ineligible to participate in the tenders.
19. The object of public procurement is to secure quality

  goods and services for the benefit of public exchequer. The

  said object can be achieved by requiring the bidders to

  demonstrate financial capacity, technical experience, and

  past performance in contracts of similar nature, regardless

  of place of performance of the contract. To confine the

  eligibility to participate in the tender, within one State is
12
not only irrational but is also disproportionate to the goal

  of ensuring effective delivery of Sports Kits.
20. Such a restriction, therefore, cannot be justified as

  reasonable    within     the   meaning    of     19(6)   of   the

  Constitution of India. The State while it enjoys the freedom

  to prescribe the conditions in the tender, cannot exercise

  that power in a manner that infringes upon constitutional

  guarantees, by closing the market to outsiders without just

  cause. The doctrine of level playing field requires that gates

  of competition be opened to all who are equally placed. The

  impugned tender condition excludes the competent and

  experienced suppliers, who may have executed contracts of

  far greater magnitude in other States or for the Central

  Government departments, from participating in the tender

  and has the impact of promoting cartelisation. The

  impugned condition operates as a closed door to outsiders

  and restricts the wider participation of bidders and restricts

  competition. The impugned tender condition, therefore, is

  violative of
Article 14
and also offends
Article 19(1)(g)
of the

  Constitution of India.
13
21. The justification advanced by the State that Chhattisgarh

  being a Maoist affected area and only those with past

  experience of supply in the State to State Government

  agencies of Chhattisgarh can be relied upon, is untenable

  for several reasons. Firstly, the tender in question is not for

  security sensitive equipment but is for supply of Sports Kits

  which does not involve, any special risk or security

  repercussions.    Secondly,     only     some    districts   of

  Chhattisgarh are affected by Maoist activities, and it is

  incorrect to treat the entire State, as uniformly affected by

  Naxalites, for exclusion of   other eligible bidders. Thirdly,

  a successful bidder, who may not be conversant with the

  topography can engage a local supply chain to supply the

  Sports Kits.
22. In the light of aforesaid discussion this Court finds that

  impugned tender condition is arbitrary, unreasonable and

  is discriminatory. The same does not have any rational

  nexus to the object of ensuring effective supply of Sports

  Kits to the children in State. It offends the mandate of
Article 14
and freedom of trade guaranteed by
Article

  19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India.
14
(V) CONCLUSION
23. In the result, the impugned orders dated 11.08.2025 and

  12.08.2025 passed in Writ Petition (C) No. 4266 of 2025,

  Writ Petition (C) No. 4263 of 2025 and Writ Petition (C) No.

  4274 of 2025 respectively by the High Court as well as

  impugned tender notices dated 21.07.2025 issued by

  Department    of   School    Education,   Government      of

  Chhattisgarh for supply of Sports Kits to students of

  Government Primary, Upper Primary, High and Higher

  Secondary Schools are quashed and set aside. Needless to

  state that respondents are at liberty to issue fresh notices

  inviting tenders. Accordingly, the appeals are allowed.
……………….……………J.
                                    [SANJAY KUMAR]



                                    ..….……………………….J.
                                    [ALOK ARADHE]


NEW DELHI,
OCTOBER 6, 2025.
15