[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
K. Kirubakaran vs State Of Tamil Nadu on 28 October, 2025
Author:
Dipankar Datta
Bench:
Dipankar Datta
2025 INSC 1272                                                                      NON-REPORTABLE


                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                          CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 679 OF 2024


             K. KIRUBAKARAN                                                            … APPELLANT

                                                               VS.

             STATE OF TAMIL NADU                                                    … RESPONDENT




                                                       JUDGMENT
DIPANKAR DATTA, J.
The final cause of law is the welfare of society.
~ Benjamin N. Cardozo, Former Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of United
                                                              States.
1.                 Appellant was convicted for offences punishable under
section 366
of

                         the Indian Penal Code, 1872 and section 6 of the Protection of Children

                         from    Sexual     Offences    Act,   20121    and    sentenced     to   rigorous

                         imprisonment for 5 years and 10 years, respectively, with fine.

                         Aggrieved by such conviction and sentence, the appellant preferred an

                         appeal before the High Court of Judicature at Madras. It was dismissed
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NITIN TALREJA
Date: 2025.10.30
16:51:56 IST
vide the impugned judgment and order dated 13th September, 2021.
Reason:
1
POCSO Act
2.        During the pendency of the appeal before the High Court, marriage

          between the appellant and the victim of crime was solemnized in May

          2021. By an order dated 6th February 2024, this Court had directed the

          Tamil Nadu State Legal Services Authority2 to ascertain the well-being

          of the appellant’s wife. Pursuant thereto, the Member Secretary of the

          TNSLSA interacted with the appellant’s wife and has submitted a report

          revealing that after marriage the appellant and his wife have been

          blessed with a male child, who is less than one year old, and also that

          they are leading a happy married life.
3.        Wife of the appellant has filed an affidavit before this Court stating that

          she is dependent upon the appellant and wishes to lead a happy, normal,

          and peaceful life with him and the child born in their wedlock.
4.        During the course of hearing, a prayer was made on behalf of the

          appellant to invoke the powers of this Court under
Article 142
of the

          Constitution of India for quashing the conviction and sentence in order

          to avoid disruption of the matrimonial harmony between the parties. We

          considered it appropriate to first hear the complainant, being the father

          of the victim. He has appeared before us today through the virtual mode.

          Answering our query, he has stated in Tamil (conveyed to us by Mr.

          Krishnamoorthy, learned senior counsel for the State) that he has no

          objection to the criminal proceedings being brought to an end.
2
TNSLSA
2
5.   The only question which remains to be decided is whether the

     proceedings should be quashed in the present case, considering that the

     appellant is convicted of a heinous offence.
6.   We are conscious of the fact that a crime is not merely a wrong against

     an individual but against society as a whole. When an offence is

     committed, it wounds the collective conscience of the society and

     therefore the society, acting through its elected lawmakers, determines

     what would be the punishment for such an offence and how an offender

     should be dealt with, to deter its recurrence. The criminal law is, thus, a

     manifestation of the sovereign will of the society. However, the

     administration of such law is not divorced from the practical realities.

     Rendering justice demands a nuanced approach. This Court tailors its

     decisions to the specifics of each case: with firmness and severity

     wherever necessary and it is merciful when warranted. It is also in the

     best interest of society to bring a dispute to an end, wherever possible.

     We draw inspiration from Cardozo, J. to hold that the law aims to ensure

     not just punishment of the guilty, but also harmony and restoration of

     the social order.
7.   With such perspective in mind, we need to proceed to balance the

     competing interests of justice, deterrence, and rehabilitation.
8.   The founding fathers of the Constitution conferred this Court with the

     extraordinary power to do “complete justice” in proper cases. This

     constitutional power stands apart from all other powers and is intended
3
to avoid situations of injustice being caused by the rigid application of

      law.
9.   Per the law made by the legislature, the appellant having been found

      guilty of a heinous offence, the proceedings in the present case on the

      basis of a compromise between the appellant and his wife cannot be

      quashed. But ignoring the cry of the appellant’s wife for compassion and

      empathy will not, in our opinion, serve the ends of justice. Even the most

      serious offenders of law do receive justice moderated by compassion

      from the courts, albeit in appropriate cases. Given the peculiar facts and

      circumstances here, a balanced approach combining practicality and

      empathy is necessary. The appellant and the victim are not only legally

      married, they are also in their family way. While considering the offence

      committed by the appellant punishable under the
POCSO Act
, we have

      discerned that the crime was not the result of lust but love. The victim

      of crime herself has expressed her desire to live a peaceful and stable

      family life with the appellant, upon whom she is dependent, without the

      appellant carrying the indelible mark on his forehead of being an

      offender. Continuation of the criminal proceedings and the appellant’s

      incarceration would only disrupt this familial unit and cause irreparable

      harm to the victim, the infant child, and the fabric of society itself.
10.   We are, thus, persuaded to hold that this is a case where the law must

      yield to the cause of justice.
11.   Accordingly, resting on the foregoing considerations, the developments

      subsequent to the trial, and in the interest of rendering complete justice,
4
we deem it appropriate to invoke our powers under
Article 142
of the

        Constitution of India to quash the criminal proceedings against the

        appellant including the conviction and sentence. Ordered accordingly.
12.     Also, bearing in mind the interests of the appellant’s wife and child, we

        deem it appropriate to subject the appellant to the specific condition of

        not deserting his wife and child and also to maintain them for the rest

        of their life with dignity. If, in future, there be any default on the

        appellant’s part and the same is brought to the notice of this Court by

        his wife or their child or the complainant, the consequences may not be

        too palatable for the appellant.
13.     We make the interim order granting benefit to the appellant of

        exemption from surrendering absolute and discharge him from the bail

        bonds.
14.     The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.
15.     Needless to observe, this order is rendered in the unique circumstances

        that have unfolded before us and shall not be treated as a precedent for

        any other case.
………..…………………J.
                                                         (DIPANKAR DATTA)



                                                ……………………..………………J.
                                               (AUGUSTINE GEORGE MASIH)


      NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 28, 2025.
5