[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Khurana Brothers vs Anand Bardhan Principal Secretary on 14 October, 2025
REPORTABLE

2025 INSC 1240
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             INHERENT JURISDICTION


                                       CONTEMPT PETITION (C) No. 27/2025
                                                      in
                                               C.A. No. 76/2023


             M/S KHURANA BROTHERS                                            Petitioner(s)

                                                      VERSUS

             ANAND BARDHAN PRINCIPAL SECRETARY & ANR.                        Respondent(s)


                                                     O R D E R
1. Heard learned Counsel for the parties.
2. This      contempt     petition     alleges      willful

                            disobedience        of   this    Court’s    order      dated

                            04.01.2023 passed in Civil Appeal No. 76/2023.
3. A perusal of the record would reveal that

                            Civil Appeal No.76 of 2023 was filed against an

                            order of a Division Bench of the High Court of

                            Judicature     at    Allahabad     passed   in    an   intra

                            court appeal against an order of Single Judge

                            of   the    High    Court.   Though   the   intra      court
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHETAN ARORA
Date: 2025.10.16
appeal was dismissed, certain observations were
   11:34:06 IST
   Reason:
there which, according to the petitioner, made

                            petitioner’s position worse than what it was
after the order of Single Judge. Therefore, the

same     was    challenged       before    this     Court     by

seeking       leave    to    appeal.    Though    this     Court

granted leave to appeal, the learned counsel

for     the    appellant      instead     of   pressing      the

appeal on merits made a statement that he may

be permitted to withdraw the intra court appeal

that was filed before the Division Bench of the

High Court so that his position as obtaining

under the order of the Single Judge of the High

Court is restored. This prayer was accepted by

this Court vide order dated 04.01.2023, and the

appeal was disposed of by observing that the

intra     court       appeal     preferred        before     the

Division Bench of the High Court shall stand

withdrawn       and    parties    shall    work    out     their

respective rights in terms of the order of the

learned Single Judge of the High Court.
4. Now,        this    contempt        petition     is     filed

alleging       that   the    contemnor    respondents       have

not complied the order of the Single Judge of

the    High    Court    as    restored    by     this    Court’s

order dated 04.01.2023.
5. On the last date, when this matter was taken

up,   we   had   passed    an   order    requesting    the

counsel for the petitioner to address the Court

as    to   why   this     contempt   petition     be   not

disposed of by giving liberty to the petitioner

to    initiate   such     proceedings,    if     required,

before the High Court as the order of which

violation is alleged is of the Single Judge of

the High Court consequent to the withdrawal of

the intra-court appeal.
6. In response to the last order, the learned

counsel for the petitioner submits that as the

order of this Court dated 4.1.2023 was passed

after grant of leave, the doctrine of merger

would apply and, therefore, the contempt would

lie before this Court.
7. The      aforesaid       submission     may     appear

attractive but in the facts of the present case

is not acceptable. Reason being the doctrine of

merger is not a doctrine of rigid and universal

application and it cannot be said that wherever

there are two orders, one by inferior court or

tribunal and the other by superior court or
tribunal,          passed    in       an    appeal        or    revision,

there     is       fusion        or     merger       of     two     orders

irrespective          of    the        subject       matter       of     the

appellate or revisional order and the scope of

appeal        or     revision              contemplated           by     the

particular          statute.
In
State      of      Madras       v.

Madurai Mills
co. Ltd., 1966 SCC OnLine SC 140

(equivalent to AIR 1967 SC 681), a three-Judge

Bench of this Court held that application of

the doctrine of merger depends on the nature of

the appellate or revisional order in each case

and     the    scope        of     the      statutory          provisions

conferring           the         appellate           or        revisional

jurisdiction.
8. In the case on hand, this Court had allowed

the   petitioner           to     withdraw       the        intra      court

appeal in which the order under challenge in

appeal    before       this           Court    was     passed.         As    a

result,       once    the        appeal       before      the     Division

Bench of the High Court stood withdrawn so did

all orders passed therein. Once that is the

position, by fiction of law the parties would

stand         relegated to the stage at which they
     were on the date of filing of the intra court

     appeal. In such circumstances, the order of the

     learned Single Judge of the High Court would

     operate from the date of this Court’s order as

     if it had never been challenged.
9.     In our view, therefore, contempt, if any,

     would     lie     before         the     High     Court.       We,

     accordingly, deem it appropriate to dispose of

     this contempt petition by giving liberty to the

     petitioner      to    initiate         contempt       proceedings

     before   the    High      Court    if     the   order     of   the

     Single    Judge      of    the     High       Court    has     been

     violated, as is alleged.
10. Contempt         petition           and     all      pending

     application shall stand disposed of.                         It is

     made    clear   that      we     have    not    expressed       any

     opinion on the merits of the matter before us.
…………………………………………………………..….J
                                                          [MANOJ MISRA]



                                            …………………………………………………………..….J
                                                         [UJJAL BHUYAN]

New Delhi
October 14, 2025