[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kimberley Club Pvt. Ltd vs Krishi Utpadan Mandi Parishad on 31 October, 2025
Author:
Surya Kant
Bench:
Surya Kant
2025 INSC 1276                                                                        REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.____________/2025
                                             (@ SLP (C) No. 20557/2021)

             KIMBERLEY CLUB PVT. LTD.                                          APPELLANT(S)


                                                         VERSUS


             KRISHI UTPADAN MANDI PARISHAD & ORS.                              RESPONDENT(S)




                                                    JUDGMENT
Joymalya Bagchi, J.
1.          Leave granted.
2.          Appellant is aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 07.09.2021

                            whereby the Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court, Lucknow

                            Bench refused to set aside the decision of 1st respondent-Krishi

                            Utpadan Mandi Parishad1 rejecting appellant’s technical bid on the

                            ground that the ‘haisiyat praman patra’ submitted by it had not been

                            issued by District Magistrate.
3.          Dispute arose from a tender floated by 1st respondent-Mandi Parishad

                            to let out a banquet hall/terrace lawn for 10 years to the highest bidder.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
The notice inviting tender2 prescribed a two-stage bidding process
   Date: 2025.10.31
   14:27:50 IST
   Reason:
1 Hereinafter referred to as “1st respondent-Mandi Parishad”
             2 Hereinafter referred to as “NIT”
Page 1 of 7
comprising a technical bid and a financial bid. The technical bids were

     to be evaluated first and only bidders meeting the eligibility criteria

     would qualify for the second stage, where the financial bids were to be

     evaluated and tender awarded to the highest bidder. One of the

     conditions, namely Clause 18 in the NIT stated that bidder must submit

     a ‘haisiyat praman patra’ of minimum ₹10 crores with the technical bid.
4.   Appellant as well as 5th respondent (successful bidder) submitted their

     respective bids. Appellant’s technical bid was disqualified for the reason

     that the ‘haisiyat praman patra’ was issued by a private architect and

     not a District Magistrate. Claiming itself to be the highest bidder and

     that technical bid had been unlawfully rejected, appellant approached

     High Court by way of a writ petition.
5.   High Court dismissed the writ petition holding that valuation certificate

     submitted by appellant having been issued by a private architect could

     not be treated as a ‘haisiyat praman patra’, i.e., solvency certificate

     which is always issued by the office of District Magistrate.
6.   Appellant challenged the decision before this Court by way of Special

     Leave Petition. This Court on 17.12.2021 while issuing notice, directed

     as follows:-
“……………In case the successful tenderer has not started the
           execution of the tender, no further work be done in pursuance
           to the tender and in case it has so started, it would be subject
           to the final orders to be passed by this Court ”
7.   We have heard learned counsel for parties and perused the records.
8.   The issue which falls for consideration is whether appellant, while

     submitting a valuation certificate issued by a professional architect
Page 2 of 7
cum private valuer attached to the Income Tax Department, had

         complied with Clause 18 of NIT which required it to submit a ‘haisiyat

         praman patra’ of minimum ₹10 crores.
9.   Appellant has strenuously argued that nothing in the NIT necessitated

         that ‘haisiyat praman patra’ be issued by a District Magistrate.           It

         contended ‘haisiyat praman patra’ submitted by the appellant was by

         an experienced valuer who was empanelled with the Income Tax

         Department and there was no justification to reject such certificate. It

         was also argued that the valuation certificate assessed the value of the

         asset at around ₹99 crores, of which appellant was 76.09 %

         shareholder, whereas as per clause 18 the bidder was to furnish a

         ‘haisiyat praman patra’ of minimum ₹10 crores only.
10.      In rebuttal, the 1st respondent-Mandi Parishad referred to Uttar

         Pradesh government notification dated 29.10.20183 laying down the

         procedure for issuance of ‘haisiyat praman patra’ by District Magistrate.

         It was contended that Clause 18 required submission of such ‘haisiyat

         praman patra’ and not valuation certificate issued by a private valuer.

         All bidders apart from appellant had submitted ‘haisiyat praman patra’

         issued by District Magistrate. It was also contended that valuation

         certificate does not disclose appellant’s net worth as it fails to indicate

         whether the asset so valued was free from encumbrances.
11.      In tender matters, the court exercising judicial review does not sit in

         appeal   over   the   decision   of   a    tendering   authority   regarding



3 Notification No. C.M.-648/One-9-2018-7(M)/18, hereinafter referred to as “government
notification”
Page 3 of 7
disqualification of bid. Only in cases where such decision is dehors the

       terms of the NIT or is patently arbitrary would the Court exercise powers

       of judicial review and set aside such a decision.4
12.    Having scanned the NIT, we are of the considered view that neither

       Clause 18 nor any other condition specifies that the ‘haisiyat praman

       patra’ submitted by a prospective bidder must be issued only by a

       District Magistrate in terms of the government notification.
13.    It is trite that the terms of an NIT must be clear and unambiguous.5 If

       1st respondent-Mandi Parishad intended that ‘haisiyat praman patra’

       must be issued by District Magistrate alone, it ought to have specified

       so in the NIT conditions.
14.    We are also unimpressed by 1st respondent-Mandi Parishad’s

       submission that such condition was implied and followed by other

       bidders, as nothing is placed on record to show that the government

       notification was applicable to all tenders floated by 1st respondent-

       Mandi Parishad. It may not be out of place to bear in mind that the 1st

       respondent-Mandi Parishad is not a government department to which

       the notification is per se applicable but is a body constituted under a

       statute, namely Uttar Pradesh Krishi Utpadan Mandi Adhiniyam, 1964.
15.    Given the situation, it was incumbent on 1st respondent-Mandi

       Parishad to indicate in the tender conditions that the ‘haisiyat praman

       patra’ was to be obtained from a District Magistrate as per the

       procedure laid down in such government notification.
Having failed to


4
Tata Cellular v. Union of India
, (1994) 6 SCC 651 [Para 94]
5 Maha Mineral Mining & Benefication Pvt. Ltd. v. Madhya Pradesh Power Generating Co. Ltd.

& Anr., (2025) SCC Online SC 1942 [Para 19]
Page 4 of 7
do so, the 1st respondent-Mandi Parishad could not have rejected the

       certificate submitted by appellant on the ground that it was not issued

       by a District Magistrate. That apart, appellant’s certificate has been

       issued by an experienced valuer registered with the Income Tax

       Department who is otherwise competent to issue such certificate.
16.    A new objection has been raised in paragraph 6 of the counter affidavit

       filed by 1st respondent-Mandi Parishad to justify the rejection of the

       certificate submitted by the appellant. It is averred since the certificate

       does not disclose encumbrances, if any, on the asset, it cannot be

       termed as a ‘haisiyat praman patra’ indicating net worth of the bidder.

       This objection has been taken for the first time in the judicial

       proceeding and was not a ground for rejection of the technical bid as

       would be evident from paragraph 8 of the counter affidavit which

       unequivocally states as follows:-
“The Petitioner’s tender had been rejected on the ground that
              they had not submitted required certificate issued by a District
              Magistrate”
17.    As per Oxford Hindi – English dictionary, the English translation of the

       word ‘haisiyat’ is “capacity, ability, means or resources”.6 No doubt from

       such perspective, the ‘haisiyat praman patra’ would be understood as

       net worth of the bidder. However, the valuation certificate had not been

       turned down by 1st respondent-Mandi Parishad on such score. It was

       rejected on the ground that it had not been issued by a District

       Magistrate as per the government notification whose applicability to the




6 Oxford Hindi – English Dictionary, 38th impression – June 2010, Oxford University Press
Page 5 of 7
subject tender had not been spelt out in the NIT. Given these

       circumstances, we are loathe to permit the 1st respondent-Mandi

       Parishad to justify the rejection of appellant’s technical bid on such

       additional ground belatedly taken in the counter affidavit. There is no

       cavil that an order of rejection must be sustained on grounds stated

       therein and additional grounds cannot be subsequently pressed into

       service to justify such rejection.7 On the other hand, the valuation

       certificate shows the worth of the appellant’s share in the asset far

       exceeds ₹10 crores as required under Clause 18 of the NIT. In such a

       situation, if the 1st respondent-Mandi Parishad doubted that the asset

       was encumbered it ought to have sought clarification from the appellant

       on such score before rejecting the bid.
18.    For the aforementioned reasons, we are of the opinion that rejection of

       appellant’s technical bid on ground that appellant’s certificate was not

       issued by District Magistrate is dehors the terms of the NIT and is liable

       to be quashed.
19.    Impugned order of the High Court is set aside. The matter is remanded

       to 1st respondent-Mandi Parishad to reconsider the technical bid of the

       appellant and if it is satisfied that the net worth of the asset (free of

       encumbrances, if any) disclosed in the valuation certificate submitted

       by appellant meets the requirement of Clause 18 of the NIT, it shall

       accept the technical bid and after due negotiations between appellant

       and the 5th respondent (successful bidder), decide whether remainder



7
Mohinder Singh Gill & Anr. v. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi & Ors.
, (1978)

1 SCC 405 [Para 8]
Page 6 of 7
of contract be awarded to the appellant or in the event 5th respondent

      matches the financial bid or enhanced offer of the appellant, permit the

      5th respondent to continue the contract for the remaining period.
20.   With these directions, the appeal is disposed of.
…………………………………………., J
                                                          (SURYA KANT)



                                                …………………………………………, J
                                                      (JOYMALYA BAGCHI)

NEW DELHI,

OCTOBER 31, 2025.
Page 7 of 7