[Cites
3
, Cited by
3
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Venkayala Janaiah vs Board Of Revenue (Andhra) And Anr. on 27 August, 1954
Equivalent citations: AIR1955AP23, AIR 1955 ANDHRA 23
Author:
Chief Justice
Bench:
Chief Justice
ORDER
(1) This is a petition for issuing a writ of  certiorari  to quash the order of  the Board of  Revenue (Andhra) now situated in the City of Madras.
(2) The petitioner was appointed Village Munsiff of the village of  Regulagadda in the year 1948. One Venkayala  Koteswara  Rao  filed a suit before the Deputy Collector, Narasaraopet, for setting aside that order and for appointing him instead.  That suit was dismissed.
His appeal to the District Collector was also dismissed. When he preferred a Second Appeal to the Board of  Revenue,  the Board allowed the appeal and directed that Koteswara Rao should be registered as minor Headman of  Regulagadda.
The present writ is filed for quashing the order of the Board of  Revenue on the ground that it has exceeded its jurisdiction in passing the said order. The office took the objection that a writ cannot be issued by this Court, as the Board of  Revenue  (Andhra) is situated beyond the territorial jurisdiction of this Court.
In --
'Election Commission v.  Saka  Vendata Rao',   (A
),  the Supreme Court laid down the limits of  the jurisdiction of  the High Court under
Art. 226
, Constitution of  India, At  pp. 212-213 of  the report, Patanjali Sastri  C. J.  observed as follows :
"But wide as were the powers thus conferred a two-fold limitation was placed upon their exercise. In the first place, the power is to be exercised "throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisdiction" that is to say, the Writ issued by the Court cannot run beyond the territories subject to its jurisdiction.  Secondly, the person or authority to whom the High Court is empowered to issue writs must be "within those territories" which clearly implies that they must be "amenable to its jurisdiction either by resident or location within those territories."
(3-4)  In the present case, the Board of  Revenue (Andhra) is not within the territorial jurisdiction of this Court, for, it is now in the City of  Madras and is functioning only from that place. As the Board of  Revenue (Andhra) is not within the Andhra State, over which this Court has jurisdiction, it is obvious that no writ under
Art. 226
can be issued to it.  The legal position may lead to many anomalies.  The Andhra High Court may issue a writ against Tribunals  subordinate to the Revenue Board, whereas the Madras High Court  may issue writs against the Revenue Board. There may be conflicts in orders and jurisdiction.
(5)  Further, the situation of the Revenue Board  at Madras will lead to the anomaly of one of  the institutions of  the Andhra State being subject to the superintendence of the High Court of another State, for under
Art. 227
of  the Constitution  
 
  "Every High Court shall have superintendence over all Courts and Tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it exercises jurisection."
(6) It is for the Andhra Government to consider whether it is advisable to avoid this anomaly by shifting the Board of  Revenue as early as possible to a place within the territorial jurisdiction of  this Court.  The petitioner's remedy, if any, is to file a writ in the Madras High Court.
(7) The petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.