[Cites
18
, Cited by
3
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Muragani Ramalingam vs Kondapalli Gurumurthy Reddy on 16 December, 1954
Equivalent citations: AIR1955AP85, AIR 1955 ANDHRA 85
ORDER
(1) This petition raises an important question as to the power of  the High Court under  Arts. 227 and 228, Constitution of India to transfer an application filed under the Madras Buildings (Lease and  Rent Control)  Act from the file of the Rent Controller to the High Court.
(2)  The second respondent before the Rent Controller is the petitioner is this petition. The respondent in the present petition filed B. A. P. No. 3 of 1953 on the file of Rent Controller, Gudivada,  under  S. 4, Madras Buildings  (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1949, on 11.2.1953 for the fixation of  fair rent. On 24.3.1953, the petitioner herein filed his counter. The petition was enquired into. The respondent's counsel concluded his  arguments on 27.10.1954.  On that day, the respondent (Petitioner herein) filed an application under O. 27-A,  Civil P. C. before the House Rent Controller. That petition is pending.  On 29.10.1954 the present petition has been filed in this Court.
(3)  It is alleged by the petitioner that the respondent's petition is not maintainable, that S. 4,  Madras Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act,  1949, violates the fundamental  rights of  every citizen guaranteed under
Art. 19
of the Constitution, that the said section places restrictions that are not reasonable and are not justified in public interest ;  that the Madras Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act and in particular S. 4 of  the said Act is ultra virew the powers of  the Legislature.  It is further submitted that on the formation of  the Andhra State, the Madras Buildings (Lease and Rent Control Act has ceased to be in force in the Andhra State and the Rent Controller has no jurisdiction to proceed with a petition under S. 4. It is, therefore, prayed that the High Court may withdraw the proceedings in B. A. P.  No. 3 of  1953 on the file of  the Rent Controller,  Gudivada  to the file of  the High Court.
(4)  The respondent filed a counter, wherein it is alleged that he has  been declared to be a tenant entitled to the benefit of the
Rent Control Act
, not merely by the Subordinate Judge's Court but also by the High Court of  Madras in C. M. A. Nos. 87 and 88 of  1953 ;  that the application for the withdrawal of  the proceedings is belated, that the question touching the constitutional validity of  the Madras Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act have not been raised so far before the House Rent Controller ; that such questions are foreign to the scope of  these proceedings and that this petition has been filed mala fide with the motive of  putting of  the determination of  the fair rent.
(5)  The relevant articles of  the Constitution of  India may be extracted :
"227 (1) :  Every High Court shall have superintendence over all courts and tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which  it exercises jurisdiction.
(2) Without prejudice to the generally of the foregoing provision, the High Court may -
(a) call for returns from such courts :
(b) make and issue general rules and prescribe forms for regulating the practice and proceedings of such courts;  and
(c) prescribe forms in which books, entries and accounts shall be kept by the Officers of  any such courts.
(3) The High Court may also settle tables of fees to be allowed to the Sheriff and all clerks and  Officers of  such courts and to attorneys,  advocates and pleaders practising therein :
Provided that any rules made, forms prescribed or tables settled under  Cl. (2) or  Cl. (3) shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of  any law for the time being in force and shall require the previous approval of the Governor.
(4) Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to confer on a High Court powers of superintendence over any court or tribunal constituted by or under any law relating to the Armed Forces.
228 :  If  the High Court is satisfied that a case pending in a court subordinate to it involves a substantial question of  law as to the interpretation  of this Constitution, the determination of  which is necessary for the disposal of the case, it shall withdraw the case and may -
(a) either dispose of the case itself ; or
(b) determine the said question of  law and return the case to the court from which the case has been so withdrawn, together with a copy of its judgment on such question and the said court shall on receipt thereof proceed to dispose of the case in conformity with such judgment."
(6)
Article 228
makes it obligatory on the High Court to withdraw from the subordinate courts all cases which involve a substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution. The object of the article is to make the High Court the sole interpreter of the Constitution in the State and to deny the subordinate Courts a right to interpret the Constitution. One of the essential conditions for the application of
Art. 228
is that a case must be pending in a court subordinate  to the High Court. The learned counsel for the petitioner has conceded before me that the House Rent Controller is not a court in view of the decisions of  the Supreme Court in --
'Waryam  Singh  v.  Amarnath',   (A
),  wherein their Lordships of  the Supreme Court have laid down that the Rent Controller and the District Judge exercising jurisdiction under the
East Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act
are not courts.  But he contended that the power of transfer is implicit in the power of superintendence given to the High Court over all courts and Tribunals throughout the territories in relation to which it exercise jurisdiction.
He relied upon two decisions of the Hyderabad High Court : -- 'Mohamed Abdul Raoof  v.  State of  Hyderabad',  AIR 1951 Hyd 50 (FB) (B) and -- 'Mohammed  Baquar  v.  State of Hyderabad',  AIR  1951 Hyd 82  (C). In  -- 'Mohamed Abdul Raoof  v.  State of  Hyderabad (B)' the High Court had to deal with applications for transfer by the accused, who were being prosecuted with 10 others in the Court of the Special Tribunal   No.  IV,  Hyderabad,   for  offences of  criminal conspiracy, promoting class hatred, robbery,  'dacoity etc.  The applications were filed under S. 495, Hyderabad
Criminal Procedure Code
corresponding to  S. 526 of  the Indian
Criminal Procedure Code
. But some of  the applicants had also invoked the provisions of  Arts. 226 and 227,  Constitution of  India in support of their appoications for transfer.  The Full Bench of the Hyderabad  High Court held that
Art. 227
of  the Constitution is applicable to the Court of  the Special Tribunal and the powers of  superintendence conferred on the High Court are sufficiently wide to include the principles laid down in  S. 494,  Hyderabad
Criminal  Procedure Code
and to empower them to deal with the transfer applications. In that view, they held that it was unnecessary to give any finding as to the applicability of  S. 494 or of
Art. 226
of the Constitution.
(7)  In -- 'Mohamed Baquar  v.  State of  Hyderabad (C)',  a Bench of the Hyderabad  High Court was dealing with an application for transfer of  a case before the Special Judge at Warrangal constituted under the Special Judges Regulation. On behalf of the State of  Hyderabad an objection was raised that the High Court had no jurisdiction to transfer cases triable by the Special Judges to another Court. Mohamad Ahmed Ansari and Srinivasachari  JJ. took the view that the word "Superintendence" used in
Art. 227
of the Constitution cannot be confined to mere matters of adminstrative control but confers judicial powers also on the High Court. The learned Judges pointed out that the mention of  the word "Tribunal" in the said articles goes to show that the Constitutent Assembly intended to confer on the High Courts powers of  Superintendence, not only  over Tribunals or courts as are subject to its appellate jurisdiction, but also on those whose decisions are not subject to appeal before the High Courts.
They said :
"If  we were to place a narrow interpretation  on the word 'superintendence' as covering matters of administration only, it would follow that the High Court will have adminstrative control over these tribunals, but not judicial, and that appears to us to be hardly the intention of the framers of the Constitution.  We are, therefore, of  opinion that the word 'superintendence" used in
Art. 227
in the Indian Constitution is wide enough to cover matters of  Judicial nature also, and it this High Court thinks as proper to exercise its power of revision or transfer that can be done notwithstanding the restrictive provisions contained in the laws passed by the State for the jurisdiction conferred on this court by the
Constitution  Act
cannot be controlled by State Legislature".
(8)  'In Re:  Tirupuliswamy  Naidu',   (D),  Satyanarayana  Rao  J.  and  Rajagopalan  J., held that the jurisdiction vested in the High Court under
Art. 227
of  the Constitution is a revisional jurisdiction and hence no Letters Patent Appeal is competent from an order passed by a Judge of the High Court in exercise of such a jurisdiction. The question as to whether the High Court has power to direct a transfer under
Art. 227
did not fall for consideration in this decision.
(9)  'In Re :  Annamalai  Mudaliar',   (E),  Ramaswamy J., held that all agencies whether courts or not, performing the duty of deciding disputed questions of  right between parties on behalf of and under the sanction of  the State and in accordance with State-made laws are placed under the adminstrative and judicial control of the High Court and that the High Court has got revisional jurisdiction under
Art. 227
by way of superintendence over the judicial work of a duty constituted tribunal, like the Deputy Registrar under the
Co-operative Societies Act
. He further held that the word 'superintendence' includes power to guide and to direct subordinate courts and tribunals to carry out orders of  the High Court.
(10) 'In re :  Gangalakurthi  Pattisan',   (F), Rajamnnar C. J., and  Venkatarama Iyer  J., had to consider the scope and effect of
Art. 227
, Constitution of  India, The learned Judges considered the provisions of  S. 15 of the Charater Act of  1861 and
S. 107
,  Government of India Act, 1915 and
Sec. 224
,  Government of  India Act, 1935,  in relation to
Art. 227
of the Constitution.  But in these two decisions there was no need for the learned Judges of  the Madras High Court to consider as to whether the High Court has power under
Art. 227
to transfer a petition which is pending on the file of a tribunal  to the High Court.
Section 107
, Government of  India Act, 1915 is almost a reproduction of
S. 15
of the Charter Act of 1861.
Section 224
,  Government of India Act, 1935 provided for the superintendence of  the High Court over all courts for the time being subject to its appellate jurisdiction.
Section 225
provides for transfer of certain cases for trial to the High Court.
That section ran thus :
"225 (1). If on an application made in accordance with the provisions of  this section a High Court is satisfied that a case pending in an inferior court being a case which the High Court has power to transfer to itself for trial, involves or is likely to involve the question of  the validity of any Dominion or
Provincial Act
, it shall exercise that power".
Article 227
of the Constitution corresponds to
S. 224
, Government of India Act 1935 with certain changes and
Art. 228
of the Constitution corresponds to
S. 225
, Government of  India Act 1935 with  certain changes.  Order 27-A, Civil  P. C., which has been inserted by
S. 2
,  Code of  Civil Procedure (Amendment Act) Act 23 of 1942 (as subsequently adopted and amended) provides for notice to the Advocate General where, in any suit, it appears to the Court that any such question as is referred to in Cl. of
Art. 132
read with
Art. 147
of the Constitution is involved.
Rule 2 of Order 27-A also provides that the court may at any stage of the proceedings order that the Central Government of a State Government shall be added as a defendant in any suit involving any such question as is referred to in Cl. 1 of
Art. 132
read with
Art. 147
of the Constitution.
(11)
Articles 227
and
228
occur in juxtaposition indicating thereby that they are not intended to serve the same purpose.
Article 228
of the Constitution expressly confers power on the High Court to transfer a case pending in a court subordinate to it, which involves a substantial question of  law as to the interpretation of the Constitution, while
Art. 227
provides that every High Court will have power of  superintendence over all courts and tribunals in relation to which it exercise jurisdiction.
Article 227
cannot comprehend a power which is specifically embodied in
Art. 228.
When an application for transfer is made,  it must come only under
Art. 228
, and that article makes no mention of  Tribunals, though Tribunals are specifically referred to in
Art. 227.
If the framers of the Constitution intended to confer upon the High Court a power to transfer a matter pending before a Tribunal involving a substantial question of  law as to the interprestation of  the Constitution, nothing  could have been more easy than to add the words "or Tribunal" in
Art. 228.
In the two decisions of the Hyderabad High Court referred to above, this point has not been considered.  The power of superintendence  conferred by
Art. 227
, it is no doubt true, is both judicial and adminsitrative. But, I have it difficult to hold that it comprehends a power to withdraw to thefile to the High Court, a case pending before a Statutory tribunal.
(12) In the above view, I do not think this  application can be granted.  It is, therefore, dismissed.
(13) Petition dismissed.