[Cites
17
, Cited by
202
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of M.P. & Anr vs Ram Krishna Balothia & Anr on 6 February, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1995 AIR 1198, 1995 SCC (3) 221, AIR 1995 SUPREME COURT 1198, 1996 (11) SCC 772, 1995 AIR SCW 1267, 1995 AIR SCW 1160, 1995 (2) JT 310, 1995 (1) ALL CJ 346, 1995 SCC (CRI) 439, 1995 CRILR(SC&MP) 191
Author:
B.P.  Jeevan Reddy
Bench:
B.P.  Jeevan Reddy
PETITIONER:
STATE OF M.P. & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RAM KRISHNA BALOTHIA & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/02/1995

BENCH:
MANOHAR SUJATA V. (J)
BENCH:
MANOHAR SUJATA V. (J)
JEEVAN REDDY, B.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1995 AIR 1198		  1995 SCC  (3) 221
 JT 1995 (2)   310	  1995 SCALE  (1)658


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
1.   Special leave granted
2.	These appeal by special have been filed by the State
of Madhya Pradesh and another against the judgment and order
dated 25.3.1994 of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh which is
the  common  judgment governing all these appeals.   In	 the
petitions  which were filed by the respondents here,  before
the  High Court of Madhya Pradesh under
Article 226
of	 the
Constitution,	 the   respondents   had   challenged	 the
constitutional	 validity  of  certain	provisions  of	 the
Scheduled   Castes  and	 Scheduled  Tribes  (Prevention	  of
Atrocities)  Act,  1989
.  The High Court,  while  negativing
this  challenge	 in respect of some of the sections  of	 the
said  Act has however, held that
Section 18
of the said	 Act
is unconstitutional since it violates
Articles 14
and
21
of
the  Constitution  of India- The present appeals  have	been
filed  by  the	State of Madhya	 Pradesh  to  challenge	 the
finding	 of  the  Madhya Pradesh High  Court,in	 respect  of
section 18
of the said Act.
3.
Section 18
of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of
313
Atrocities) Act, 1989 is as follows:-
"Section	438  of	 the Code not  to  apply  to
	      persons committing an offence under the  Act:-
Nothing in Section 438 of the Code shall apply
	      in  relation to any case involving the  arrest
	      of  any  person  on an  accusation  of  having
	      committed an offence under this Act."
4.
Section 438
of the Code of Criminal Procedure  provides
for  grant  of	bail to	 persons  apprehending	arrest.	  It
provides,  inter  alia, that when any person has  reason  to
apprehend that he may be arrested on an accusation of having
committed  a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the	High
Court or to a Court of Sessions for a direction that in	 the
even of such arrest, he shall be released on bail.  We	have
to  consider  whether a denial of this right  to  apply	 for
anticipatory bail in respect of offences committed under the
Scheduled   Castes  and	 Scheduled  Tribes  (Prevention	  of
Atrocities)  Act, 1
989, can be considered as  violative  of
Articles 14
and
21
of the Constitution.
5.
The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes	 (Prevention
of Atrocities) Act, 1989
(hereinafter  referred to  as	'the
said  Act')  was enacted in order to prevent the co  ion  of
atrocities against members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes	and to provide for special courts for the  trial  of
offence under the said Act as also to provide for the relief
and rehabilitation of victims of such offences.	  "Atrocity"
has been defined under
Section 2
of the said Act to mean  an
offence	  punishable  under
Section  3(1)
.
Section	3(1)
provides as follows:-
"Punishments for offences of atrocities :-
(1)  whoever,  not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or  a
Scheduled Tribe-
(i)   forces a member of a Scheduled  Caste or
	      a Scheduled Tribe to drink or cat any inedible
	      or obnoxious substance:
(ii)acts	with intent to cause injury,  insult
	      or  annoyance  to any member  of	a  Scheduled
	      Caste or a Scheduled Tribe by dumping  excreta
	      waste matter, carcasses or any other obnoxious
	      substance in his premises or neighbourhood;
(iii)forcibly, removes clothes from the person
	      of  a  member  of	 a  Scheduled  Caste  or   a
	      Scheduled	 Tribe or parades him naked or	with
	      painted  face or body or commits	any  similar
	      act which is derogatory to human dignity;
(iv)wrongfully occupies or cultivates any land
	      owned  by, or allotted to, or notified by	 any
	      competent	    authority to be allotted  to,  a
	      member  of  a Scheduled Caste or	a  Scheduled
	      Tribe  or	 gets  the  land  allotted  to	 him
	      transferred;
(v)   wrongfully	dispossesses a member  of  a
	      Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe from	 his
	      land  or	premises  or  interferes  with	 the
	      enjoyment of his rights over any land premises
	      or water.
(vi)  Comples or entices a member of_    Scheduled
	      Caste  or a Scheduled  Tribe to do 'begar'  or
	      other  similar  forms of	forced	  or  bonded
	      labour  other than any compulsory service	 for
	      public purposes imposed by Government
(vii) forces  or	intimidates a  member  of  a
	      Scheduled	  Caste or a Scheduled
314
Tribe  not to vote or to vote to a  particular
	      candidate	 or to vote in a manner	 other	then
	      that provide by law;
(viii)	 institutes   false,  malicious	  or
	      vexatious	 suit  or criminal  or	other  legal
	      proceedings   against a member of a  Scheduled
	      Caste or a Scheduled Tribe;
(ix)  gives any false or frivolous information
	      to any public servant and thereby causes	such
	      public servant to use his lawful power to	 the
	      injury or annoyance of a member of a Scheduled
	      Caste or a Scheduled Tribe;
(x)   intentionally  insults  or	 intimidates
	      with  intent  to	humiliate  a  member  of   a
	      Scheduled	 Caste or a Scheduled Tribe  in	 any
	      place within public view;
(xi)  assaults  or  uses force  to  any  woman
	      belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a  Scheduled
	      Tribe  with intent to dishonor or outrage	 her
	      modesty;
(xii) I  being in a position to  dominate	 the
	      will of a woman belonging to a Scheduled Caste
	      or a Scheduled Tribe and uses that position to
	      exploit  her sexually to which she  would	 not
	      have otherwise agreed.
(xiii)	 corrupts or fouls the water of	 any
	      spring,	reservoir   or	any   other   source
	      ordinarily  used by members of  the  Scheduled
	      Castes or the Scheduled Tribes so as to render
	      it  less fit for the purpose for which  it  is
	      ordinarily used
(xiv) denies a member of a Scheduled Caste  or
	      a	  Scheduled  Tribe   customary	  right	  of
	      passage  to  a  place  of	 public	 resort	  or
	      obstructs such
	       member  so  as to prevent him from  using  or
	      having  access to a place of public resort  to
	      which  other members of public or any  section
	      thereof have a right to use or access to;
(xv)  forces or causes a member of a Scheduled
	      Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to leave his house,
	      village or other place of residence;
shall  be punishable with imprisonment  for  a
	      term  which shall not be less than six  months
	      but  which may extend to five years  and	with
	      fine".
Section 438
of the Code of Criminal Procedure does not apply
to any case involving arrest of any person accused of having
committed any of the above offences.
6.   It is undoubtedly true that
Section 438
of the Code  of
Criminal  Procedure,  which is available to  an	 accused  in
respect	 of offences under the Penal Code, is not  available
in respect of offences under the said Act.  But can this  be
considered  as violative of
Article 14?
The  offences	enu-
merated under the said Act fall into a separate and  special
class.
Article 17
of the Constitution expressly deals	with
abolition  of "Untouchability" and forbids its	practice  in
any  form.   It	 also  provides	 that  enforcement  of	 any
disability  arising  out  of "Untouchability"  shall  be  an
offence	 punishable  in accordancewith law.   The  offences,
therefore, which are enumerated under
Section 3(1)
arise out
of the practice of "Untouchability".  It is in this  context
that  certain special provisions have been made in the	said
Act, including the impugned provision under
Section 18
which
-is before us.	The exclusion of
Section 438
of the Code  of
Criminal  Procedure  in connection with offences  under	 the
said  Act has to be viewed in the context of the  prevailing
social conditions which give
315
rise	 to    such    offences,    and	   the	   apprehen-
Scheduled Castes persons eat inedible sub-
sion  that  perpetrators of such atrocities  are  likely  to
threaten  and  intimidate  their  victims  and	prevent	  or
obstruct them in the prosecution of these offenders, if	 the
offenders  are	allowed to avail of anticipatory  bail.	  In
this connection we may refer to the Statement of Objects and
Reasons	 accompanying  the Scheduled  Castes  and  Scheduled
Tribes	(Prevention of Atrocities) Bill, 1989, when  it	 was
introduced  in	Parliament.  It sets out  the  circumstances
surrounding the enactment of the said Act and points to	 the
evil  which the statute sought to remedy.  In the  Statement
of Objects and Reasons it is stated:-
Despite	various	 measures  to  improve	 the
	      socioeconomic  conditions	 of  the   Scheduled
	      Castes  and the Scheduled Tribes, they  remain
	      vulnerable.   They are denied number of  civil
	      rights.	 They  are  subjected	to   various
	      offences,	   indignities,	  humliations	 and
	      harassment.   They  have,	 in  several  brutal
	      incidents,  been	deprived of their  life	 and
	      property.	   Serious  crimes   are   committed
	      against  them for various	 historical,  social
	      and economic reasons.
2............... When they assert their rights
	      and resist practices of untouchability against
	      than  or	demand statutory  minimum  wages  or
	      refuse to do any bonded and forced labour, the
	      vested  interests	 try to cow  them  down	 and
	      terronse them.  When the Scheduled Castes	 and
	      the  Scheduled  Tribes try to  preserve  their
	      self-respect  or honour of their	women,	they
	      become  irritants	 for the  dominant  and	 the
	      mighty.	Occupation and cultivation  of	even
	      the government allotted land by the  Scheduled
	      Castes  and Scheduled Tribes is  resented	 and
	      more  often  these people	 become	 victims  of
	      attacks  by  the vested interests.   Of  late,
	      there  has been an increase in the  disturbing
	      trend of commission of certain atrocities like
	      making   the  Scheduled  Castes  persons	 eat
	      inedible	sub-stances like human excreta.	 and
	      attacks  on  and	mass  killings	of  helpless
	      Scheduled Castes and Schedules Tribes and rape
	      of women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and
	      the  Schedules  Tribes....................   A
	      special legislation to check and deter  crimes
	      against them committed by non-Schedules Castes
	      and nonSchedules Tribes has, therefore, become
	      necessary.
The   above  statement	graphically  describes	the   social
conditions  which  motivated the said  legislation.   It  is
pointed	 out in the above Statement of Objects	and  Reasons
that  when  members of the Schedules  Castes  and  Schedules
Tribes assert their rights and demand statutory	 protection,
vested	interests try to cow them down and  terrorise  them.
In  these  circumstances, if anticipatory bail is  not	made
available to persons who commit such offences, such a denial
cannot be considered as unreasonable or violative of
Article
14
,  as these offences form a distinct class  by  themselves
and cannot be compared with other offences.
7.	We  have next to examine whether
Section 18
of	 the
said  Act  violates,  in  any  manner,
Article	 21
of	 the
Constitution which protects the life and personal liberty of
every  person  in this country.
Article  21
enshrines	 the
right to live with human dignity, a precious right to  which
every  human-being  is	entitled those who  have  been,	 for
centuries, denied this right, more so.	We find it difficult
to  accept  the contention that
Section 438
of the  Code  of
Criminal  Procedure is an integral part of
Article  21.
In
the  first place, there was no provision similar to  Section
438 in the old
Criminal Procedure Code
.	 The Law  Commission
in its 41st Report recommended introduction of provision for
grant of
316
anticipatory ball.  It observed:-
"We   agree  that	 this  would  be  a   useful
	      advantage.   Though we must add that it is  in
	      every exceptional cases that such power should
	      be exercised".
In  the	 light	of  this  recommendation,  Section  438	 was
incorporated, for the first time, in the
Criminal  Procedure
Code
of 1973.  Looking to the cautious recommendation of the
Law  Commission,  the power to grant  anticipatory  bail  is
conferred  only	 on a Court of Sessions or the	High  Court.
Also,  anticipatory  bail cannot be granted as a  matter  of
right.	 It is essentially a statutory right conferred	long
after the coming into force of the Constitution.  It  cannot
be  considered as an essential ingredient of
Article  21
of
the  Constitution.   And its non-application  to  a  certain
special	 category  of  offences	 cannot	 be  considered	  as
violative of
Article 21.
8.
Section   20(7)
of  the  Terrorists   and	  Disruptive
Activities  (Prevention)  Act, 1987 came  for  consideration
before	this  Court in the case of kartar Singh	 v.State  of
Punjab	(JT  1994  (2)	SC  423).
Section  20(7)
of	 the
Terrorists and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act,	1987
also  provides	that nothing in
Section 438
of the  Code  of
Criminal  Procedure  shall  apply in relation  to  any	case
involving  arrest of any person of an accusation  of  having
committed  an offence punishable under this Act or any	rule
made  thereunder.  The language of
Section 20(7)
is  almost
identical  with the language of
Section 18
of the  said	 Act
which  we are considering.  It was argued before this  Court
in Kartar Singh's Case (supra) that the right of an  accused
to avail of anticipatory bail is an integral part of
Article
21
of the Constitution and its removal from the
Terrorists
and  Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987
would  be
violative of
Article 21.
This Court referred to the history
of  introduction  of  Section 438 in the
Code	of  Criminal
Procedure
(paragraph 355) and said that there was  no	such
provision in the old
Criminal Procedure Code
and it was	 in-
troduced  for  the first time in the present Code  of  1973.
This  Court also pointed out that Section 438 is omitted  in
the  State  of	U.P. by
Section 9
of the  Code	of  Criminal
Procedure  (UP	Amendment)  Act,  1976,	 with  effect	form
28.11.1975.  In	 the  State of West  Bengal,  a	 proviso  is
inserted  to Section 438 (1) with effect from 24.11.1988  to
the  effect  that  no  final  order  shall  be	made  on  an
application  filed by the accused praying  for	anticipatory
bail  in  relation  to an  offence  punishable	with  death,
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not less
than  seven  days' notice to present its case.	 OA  similar
provision is also introduced by the State of Orissa.   Where
a  person  accused of a non-bailable offence  is  likely  to
abscond	 or otherwise misuse this liberty while on bail,  he
will   have  no	 justification	to  claim  the	benefit	  of
anticipatory   bail.	In  the	 case  of   terrorists	 and
disruptists, there was every likelihood of their  absconding
and misusing their liberty if released on anticipatory	bail
and, therefore, there was nothing wrong in not extending the
benefit of Section 438 to them.	 This Court concluded:-
"further at the risk of repetition we may	 add
	      that  Section  438 'contains a  new  provision
	      incorporated  in the present Code	 creating  a
	      new  right.  If that new right is taken  away,
	      can it be said that the removal of Section 438
	      is violative of
Article 21........
Its  answer  was  in the negative.
Section  20(7)
of	 the
Terrorists and Disruptive
317
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 was upheld.
9.   Of	 course, the offences enumerated under	the  present
case are very different from those under the
Terrorists	 and
Disruptive  Activities	(Prevention)  Act,  1987
.   However,
looking	 to  the  historical  background  relating  to	 the
practice of "Untouchability" and the social attitudes  which
lead  to the commission of such offences  against  Scheduled
Castes	and Scheduled Tribes, there is justification for  an
apprehension  that  if the benefit of anticipatory  bail  is
made  available	 to  the persons who  are  alleged  to	have
committed such offences, there is every likelihood of  their
misusing  their	 liberty  while	 on  anticipatory  bail	  to
terrorise   their   victims   and  to	prevent	  a   proper
investigation.	 It is in this context that
Section  18
has
been incorporated in the said Act.  It cannot be  considered
as in any manner violative of
Article 21.
10.It  was  submitted before us that while  Section  438  is
available  for graver offences under the Penal Code,  it  is
not available for even "minor offences" under the said	Act.
This grievance also cannot be justified.  The offences which
are  enumerated under
Section 3
are offences which,  to	 say
the  least,  denigrate	members	 of  Scheduled	Castes	 and
Schedules  Tribes in the eyes of society, and  prevent	them
from  leading  a  life of dignity  and	self-respect.	Such
offences are committed to humiliate and subjugate members of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes with a view to keeping
them in a state of secrvitude.	These offences constitute  a
separate  class and cannot be compared with  offences  under
the Penal Code.
11.  A	similar view of
Section 18
of the said Act has	been
taken  by the Full Bench of the Rajasthan High Court in	 the
Case  of  Jai  Singh and Anr. v. Union of  India
(AIR	1993
Rajasthan 117) and we respectfully agree with its findings.
12.  In the premises,
Section 18
of the said Act  cannot  be
considered  as	violative  of
Articles 14
and
21
of	 the
Constitution.
13.   The   appeals  are  accordingly	allowed.    In	 the
circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
318