[Cites
15
, Cited by
112
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Shyamsunder Trivedi And Ors on 9 May, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1995 AIR SCW 2793, 1995 (4) SCC 262, (1996) SC CR R 167, 1995 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 548, (1995) 2 CRICJ 219, (1995) 3 ALLCRILR 722, 1995 CRILR(SC&MP) 548, (1995) JAB LJ 517, (1995) MAD LJ(CRI) 656, (1995) 2 SCJ 451, (1995) 3 CURCRIR 36, (1995) 32 ALLCRIC 550, (1996) 1 CHANDCRIC 117, (1996) 1 GUJ LH 9, 1995 SCC (CRI) 715, (1995) 4 JT 445 (SC), 1995 (2) KLT SN 72 (SC)
Author:
M.K. Mukherjee
Bench:
M.K. Mukherjee
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  217 of 1993

PETITIONER:
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH

RESPONDENT:
SHYAMSUNDER TRIVEDI AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 09/05/1995

BENCH:
DR. A.S, ANAND & M.K. MUKHERJEE

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

1995 (1) Suppl. SCR 44

The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

DR. ANAND, J. On the fateful night, intervening 13th and 14th October,
1981, the uncivilised method of interrogation of a suspect took its toll
and a fatal blow was inflicted on human dignity when custodial violence
claimed yet another victim - Nathu Banjara. But for the vigilance of some
members of the Bar of Rampura and the loud protestations of some of the
residents of the village the crime could have gone unnoticed and
unpunished.
According to the prosecution case on 13th October, 1981 respondent No. 4
Rajaram, Head Constable and respondent No, 5, Ganniuddin, Constable brought
one Nathu Banjara of village Dhabala Deval to police station Rampura for
interrogation as a suspect in a murder case. At the police station
respondent No. 1 Shyam Sunder Trivedi, Sub-Inspector; respondent No. 3 Ram
Naresh Shukla, Head Constable alongwith respondent Nos. 4 and 5 gave
beating to Nathu Banjara and tortured him with the intention of extracting
a confession of guilt from him in connection with the murder of one harijan
women of village Singharia Piparia. As a result of the extensive injuries
caused to Nathu, he died in police custody at the police station Rampura.
At about 2.00 p.m. on 14.10.1981, the dead body of the deceased Nathu was
removed in a jeep, belonging to the fisheries department Rampura to the
hospital for post-mortem examination with the ultimate object of cremating
the deceased, as an 'unclaimed body', for which respondent No. 1 had
already initiated some steps. Some residents of the village including some
members of the Bar of Rampura who had come to know about the torture of
Nathu at the police station, kept a watch over the police station and on
noticing the removal of the dead body of Nathu in the jeep, they followed
the jeep and reached the hospital. The dead body was removed to the
mortuary. The members of the Bar and others requested Dr. Naraindas Neema
PW22 not to perform the autopsy till the arrival of higher authorities,
Naib Tehsildar Rathore PW10 who arrived at the hospital in the meanwhile
got the mortuary locked and sealed at the insistence of the protestors. On
telephonic information given to the District Magistrate about the protests
at the hospital and the gathering of a large crowd, the Superintendent of
Police and the Additional District Magistrate PW20 reached the hospital in
the evening. A written report Ex.P/1 signed by some of the residents of
Rampura was given to the District Magistrate who ordered the holding of a
magisterial enquiry into the matter. Shri Bhat PW20, the Additional
District Magistrate was appointed as the Enquiry Officer. He commenced an
enquiry immediately and prepared the panchnama Ex.P/22 of the dead body and
sent it for post-mortem examination vide requisition memo Ex.P/6, which was
also signed by respondent No. 1 Shyamsunder Trivedi. The post-mortem
examination was conducted by Dr. Mehta PW7. The Doctor in the post-mortem
report, Ex.P-7, noticed the following multiple injuries on the deceased:
1, Irregular reddish blue contusion of 3 cm x 2 cm on the Rt. lower eye lid
Zygomatic area of Rt. side of face.
2. There are two contusions of reddish blue in (torn) oblique arid parallel
form outer to inner border of middle of left scapula upper 8 cm x 4 cm,
lower 6 cm x w cm.
3.  There are multiple reddish blue contusions imposed on each other in all
directions in the area of 5 to 8 cm on lower aspect of back of left side of
chest,
4.  There are multiple reddish blue contusions imposed on each other of
variable shape, size and direction in the area of 7 cm x 10 cm area of
middle of Rt. scapula to lower part of back of Rt. side of chest,
5.  Oblique reddish blue contusion from lower part of chest to lumber on
Rt. side vertical 10 x 2 cm.
6.  Two cross reddish blue contusions of 4 cm x 2 cm size in the left
lumber area on the back.
7. There are four reddish blue contusions of variable length from 4 to 6 cm
x 2 cm size on outer aspect of left shoulder and middle and outer of left
upper arm, imposed on each other.
8. There are two oblique contusions of reddish blue colour from 3 to 4 cm x
2 cm on the outer upper aspect of Rt. upper arm.
9. Redish blue two parallel contusions oblique on outer aspect of Rt, elbow
2 cm x 2 cm each,
10. Two oblique reddish blue contusions with swelling and body crepitus on
dorsum of Rt. hand 3 to 4 cm x 2 cm.
11. Oblique reddish blue contusion 4 cm x 2 cm on the dorsum of left hand.
12.  Multiple reddish blue contusions of variable sizes, direction, shape
in the area of 10 cm x 12 cm on the back and outer aspect of left gluteal
area super imposed on each other.
13.  Transversely placed reddish blue contusions two in number parallel 5
cm x 2 cm each on back and middle of left eye.
14. Multiple reddish blue contusions on the right gluteal area in variable
directions, sizes and shapes imposed on each other in area of 8 cm x 10 cm
on the back and outer aspect of Rt. gluteal area.
The doctor opined that the cause of death was shock as a result of the
extensive external injuries and that the death had taken place within 24
hours preceding the post-mortem examination, Shri Bhat, PW20, the Enquiry
Officer during the course of inquiry examined some witnesses and seized
various documents. After conclusion of the enquiry he submitted his report,
Ex. P/28 on 15.10.1981. The Enquiry Officer, PW20, found that during the
night intervening 13th and 14th October, 1981, deceased Nathu Banjara died
in police custody at Rampura police station due to extensive beating given
to him and held respondent No. 1 Shyarnsunder Trivedi, SI and respondent
No. 2 Rajaram to be directly responsible for causing those injuries. The
report was sent to the Circle Inspector Narayangarh where on its basis,
case FIR, Ex. P/31 was registered by Circle Inspector G,S. Tomar PW 21 on
15.10.1981. During the investigation of the case, letter Ex.P/9 written by
S.I. Shyarnsunder Trivedi respondent No, 1 to the Administrator Municipal
Committee asking hint to make necessary arrangements for the cremation of a
dead body of an unknown person was also seized from Naib Tehsildar Rathore,
PW10. Further investigation was later on carried out by CID Inspector G.S,
Rai, PW 23, who seized some more incriminating documents and examined some
of the witnesses. At the conclusion of the investigation, the respondents
were arrested and a challan was filed against them. The respondents were
committed to stand their trial before the Additional Sessions Judge.
Whereas 8.1. Shyamsunder Trivedi, respondent No. 1 was charged with
offences under
Section 302
/
149
,
147
,
201
,
342
and
218
IPC; Rajaram
respondent No. 2 was charged with offences under
Section 147
,
302
/
149
,
201
and
342
IPC; respondent No. 3 Ramnaresh Shukla, respondent No. 4 Ram Partap
and respondent No. 5 Ganniuddin were charged with offences under
Section
147
,
302
/
149
and
201
IPC. Respondent nos. 6 & 7 Ramesh Chander and
Goverdhan were charged with offences under
Section 201
IPC only. After
trial of the case, the First Additional Sessions Judge, Mandsaur acquitted
all the respondents of all the charges vide his order dated 14,5.1983. The
State of Madhya Pradesh went up in appeal against the order of acquittal
dated 14.5.1983 to the High Court of Madhya Pradesh, vide its judgment
dated 21.1.1987, the High Court maintained the acquittal of respondent nos.
2 to 7 but set aside the acquittal of respondent No. 1 Shyamsunder Trivedi
for offences punishable under
Sections 218
,
201
and
342
IPC and sentenced
him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 2 years on each of the two counts
under
Sections 218
and
201
IPC and six months rigorous imprisonment for the
offence under
Section 342
IPC. The sentences were, however, directed to run
concurrently. His acquittal for the offence under
Section 302
/
149
and
147
IPC was, however, maintained. Shyamsunder Trivedi, respondent No. 1 filed a
special leave petition challenging his conviction and sentence but the same
was dismissed. A review petition filed by him also failed. This appeal by
special leave has been filed by the State of Madhya Pradesh questioning the
acquittal of respondent No. 1 for the offences under
Sections 302
/
149
IPC
and 147
IPC
and of respondents 2 to 7 for the offences with which they were
charged.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
That Nathu deceased was brought from his village Dhabala Deval to Rampura
police station by Head Constable Rajaram and Constable Ganniuddin on
13.10.1981 in the evening for interrogation as a suspect in a murder case
has not been disputed either in the courts below or before us. From the
evidence of Dr. Mehta, PW7 who conducted the post-mortem on the dead body
of Nathu it is established that the death of Nathu was homicidal and not
natural and was as a result of extensive external injuries received by the
deceased. While the prosecution case was that Nathu died while in police
custody on account of torture and excessive beating given to him at the
police station, the defence set up by the respondents and particularly
respondent no. 1, Shyamsunder Trivedi, at the trial was that Nathu had been
released from police custody at about 10.30 p.m., after interrogation on
13.10.1981 itself vide entry Ex. P/22A in the Roznamcha and that at about
7.00 a.m. on 14,10.1981, a death report Ex. P/9 was recorded at the police
station, Rampura at the instance of Ramesh respondent No. 6, to the effect
that he had found "one unknown person" near a tree by the side of the tank
riggling with pain in his chest and that as soon as respondent No. 6
reached near him, the said person died, The further case set up by Trivedi,
respondent No, 1, was that after making a Roznamacha entry at 7.00 a.m,
about his departure from the police station he (respondent No. 1
Shyamsunder Trivedi) and Constable Rajaram respondent proceeded to the spot
where the dead body was stated to be lying for conducting investigation
under
Section 174
Cr.P.C. He summoned Ramesh Chander and Goverdhan
respondents to the spot and in their presence prepared a panchnama Ex.P/27
of the dead body recording the opinion therein to the effect that no
definite cause of death was known. The panchnama was signed by Respondents
Ramesh Chander and Goverdhan Lal. Requisition for post-mortem examination
Ex.P/6 was made by Trivedi respondent No. 1, in which again it was stated
that the cause of death was not known. It was also stated in it that
respondent No, 1 had examined the body of the deceased, after removing the
clothes of the deceased, but had not found any injury marks on the body.
The return entry Ex.P/20 was made in the roznamcha giving the time of
return of respondent No. 1 and others at the police station at 12.20 p.m.
After preparing the panchnama, Ex.P/27 respondent No. 1 addressed a letter
Ex. P/9 to the Administrator, Municipal Council, Rampura, on 14.10.81,
requesting him to make immediate arrangements for the cremation of "a
lavaris" person. The Administrator in turn directed the CMO to take
immediate action and the CMO endorsed the communication to the Accountant
directing him to grant Rs. 150 towards expenses for cremation. However,
before the respondents could succeed in cremating the body, the events took
a different turn as already noticed by us while narrating the prosecution
case.
The High Court after appreciating of the ocular evidence and the other
material on the record rightly observed:
"....... and there remains no doubt, on a proper appreciation of evidence
of these witnesses that the dead body of the deceased Nathu was taken out
from the Police Station Rampura on 14.10.1981. The necessary inference
which follows is that the deceased Nathu Banjara died in police custody in
Rampura Police Station and further that the deceased Nathu Banjara remained
at the police station right from the time he was brought there b the
evening on 13.10.1981 under custody till the time his dead body came out
from the Police Station. The case set up by the defence on the basis of a
Roznamcha (Ex. P/22-A) prepared at the Police Station is that the deceased
Nathu had been released from Police custody after interrogation at 10.30
p.m. The deceased Nathu had admittedly been brought to Rampura Police
Station in police custody by bus from his village, a distance of 100 Kms.
or so and it would be normally expected that the police would arrange the
facility of return to his distant village by bus which is not the case
here. At any rate it is difficult in the circumstances to believe that
after having been brought in police custody from a distance of 100 Kms,. he
was let off that very night and left to his fate at Rampura. The Roznamcha
(Ex. P/22- A), in our opinion, sets up a story which is intrinsically not
reliable in the circumstances. This document appears to have been prepared
to conceal the truth that the deceased Nathu died in police custody".
We are in complete agreement with the High Court in so far as the above
findings are concerned. We agree with the High Court that Nathu Banjara
died in police custody as a result of extensive beating given to him and
that the respondents had created false clues and fabricated false evidence
to conceal the truth that Nathu had died in police custody. We are of the
opinion that Trivedi SI recorded Panchnama Ex. P/27 of the dead body, an
intrinsically false document, with a view to screen the offence. The
Panchnama which records that Trivedi respondent No. 1 had examined the dead
body of the deceased after removing the clothes and found no injuries on
the body, is totally belied by the post-mortem report Ex. p/7, which shows
that there were multiple injuries on different parts of the body of the
deceased. Further, the attempt of Trivedi to cremate the dead body in hot
haste by addressing a letter Ex. P/9 to the Administrator, Municipal
Council, Rampura also unmistakably points towards his guilt. It is
significant to note that Trivedi, who prepared the Panchnama Ex. P/27
allegedly after seeing the dead body near the tank described the deceased
as a "lavaris", although admittedly the deceased had been brought by the
police from his village for the purpose of interrogation and had been
interrogated at the police station by SI Trivedi and others. It is not
imaginable that SI Trivedi and others, particularly Rajaram Head Con-stable
and Constable Ganniuddin would not have known the identity of the deceased.
We are of the opinion that the death report Ex. P/21 and the Panchnama Ex.
P/27 are false documents and were prepared by SI Trivedi with a view to
screen the offence.
The High Court while dealing with the case of Trivedi, SI and finding him
guilty of certain offences convicted him thus:
The accused Trivedi Sub-Inspector is, therefore found guilty being a public
servant framing incorrect writing and record with intent to save persons
responsible for beating the deceased Nathu Banjara and causing his death in
the Police Station, Rampura and is also found guilty of giving false
information to screen offenders from legal punishment. As such, he is
convicted of the offences punishable under
sections 218
and
201
of the
Indian Penal Code. He is sentenced to two years' rigorous imprisonment for
each of the two offences. The sentences shall, however, run concurrently."
The acquittal of Trivedi, SI for offences under
Section 147
and
302
/
149
IPC
was however, maintained by the High Court.
The High Court upheld the acquittal of respondents 6 & 7 Ramesh Chander and
Goverdhan Lal for offences under
Section 201
IPC on the ground that the
incriminating material against them was not put to them during their
examination under
Section 313
Cr. P.C. and no opportunity had been given to
them to tender and explanation in that behalf.
The High Court acquitted the remaining accused namely, Ram Pratap, Ram
Naresh Shukla, Raja Ram and Ganniuddin respondent No. 2 to 5 observing:
As regards the remaining four accused-respondents No. 2 to 5 viz,,
Rampratap, Ramnaresh Shukla, Rajaram and Ganniuddin no evidence what-so-
ever has been adduced by the prosecution to show that they were the persons
responsible for causing injuries to the deceased. Even the facts as to at
what time the deceased was given beating in the police station and who were
the police persons on duty at the police station at the time when beating
was given to the deceased Nathu Banjara, have, not been proved by the
prosecution. Consequently, in the absence of evidence against the accused
persons as to their presence or participation at the time injuries were
caused to the deceased Nathu, it is not possible to find the said four
accused guilty of causing injuries to the deceased Nathu Banjara. As
regards the charge aforesaid four accused respondents, there is no definite
evidence to show that the deceased Nathu Banjara was detained in the Police
Station, Rampura, during the night intervening 13th and 14th October, 1981
by these respondents or at their instance. The only evidence is that the
accused-respondents Rajaram and Ganniuddin to the Police Station for
interrogation. It was the responsibility of the Station House Officer to
release the deceased after interrogation which was not done and for which
the Head Constable or constables in the absence of any positive evidence
against them, cannot be held responsible."
We are in agreement with the High Court that since the incriminating
material appearing in the prosecution evidence against respondent No. 6 &
7, who were charged for an offence under
Section 201
IPC only was not put
to them in their statements recorded under
Section 313
Cr.P.C. and no
opportunity was afforded to them to explain those circumstances, they had
been seriously prejudiced and no conviction could therefore, be recorded
against them for the offence under
Section 210
IPC. Their acquittal, in the
peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, therefore does not call for
any interference by us and upholding their acquittal, we dismiss the appeal
against them.
We are, however, not impressed with the approach of the High Court in
dealing with the case of the other respondents as well as with the
acquittal of Trivedi Respondent no. 1 for the offences under
Section 147
and
302
/
149
IPC. Having recorded a clear and conclusive Finding, and on a
proper appreciation of the evidence, that the deceased Nathu Banjara had
remained in custody at the police station right from the time he was
brought there in the evening on 13.10.1981 by constables Rajaram Respondent
No. 4 and Ganniuddin Respondent No. 5 till the time his dead body was
removed from the police station on the next day and that the respondent No.
1 and others had with a view to conceal the truth created false evidence
and fabricated false clues, the High Court could not have acquitted SI
Trivedi respondent, whose presence at the police station was amply
established by the prosecution evidence, of the offence of causing multiple
external injuries to the deceased which ultimately resulted in the death of
Nathu. Similarly, the materials on the record established not only the
presence of respondents 3, 4, and 5 at the police station during the period
Nathu had remained in custody but also their participation in the removal
of the dead body to the hospital with a view to screen the offence.
PW1 Subhash Chandra, Advocate, PW 4 Radheshyam, advocate, PW 8 Ram Chandra
Karel, Advocate and PW18 Virendra Singh Nahha, advocate amongst others
deposed at the trial that they had seen the body of the deceased being
taken out of the police station and put in a jeep which had arrived at the
police station Rampura and that the jeep proceeded towards the Civil
hospital. From the testimony of these witnesses it clearly emerges that
news that Nathu had died in police custody at Rampura police station had
already leaked out and the witnesses and some others were keeping a watch
at the police station to see as to how the police would try to dispose of
the dead body. These witnesses further deposed that they saw a dead body
wrapped in a blanket being brought out from the police station and being
placed in a jeep belonging to the fisheries department at about 2.00 p.m.
on 14,10,81 Ram Chandra Karel, PW8 who was the Secretary of the Rampura Bar
Association at the relevant time clearly deposed that while the dead body
was being put inside the jeep the face of the deceased had got uncovered
and had become visible and that since he had heard about the death of
Nathu, he saw the face of the deceased whom he identified as Nathu Banjara.
According to Advocate Subhash Chandra PW1,3 persons including Rajaram Head
Constable had put the dead body inside the jeep after bringing it out from
the police station. He had also seen Trivedi Sub-Inspector respondent No. 1
talking to the driver of the Jeep Prabhulal, PW3 and that at that time
besides Respondent No. 1. Rajaram Mishra and Shukla respondents were also
present there. His testimony has been corroborated by PW4 who named Ram
Pratap, Rajaram and Shukla respondents as the persons who had brought out
the dead body from the police station and put it in the jeep. PW4 further
deposed that after coming to the court he had even telephoned the police
station and asked Trivedi Sub-Inspector whether one Banjara had died in the
police station and Trivedi had told him that he would meet him in the court
and let him know the details. Advocate Ram Chandra Karel, PW8 corroborated
the testimony of PW1 and PW4 and deposed that he had himself seen Rajaram
and Shukla respondents alongwith one other constable bringing the dead
body, wrapped in a blanket, from police station and putting it in the jeep,
while Trivedi SI. Respondent No. 1 was standing there. He went on to add
that respondents Rajaram and Shukla also sat in the jeep, which left for
the hospital with the dead body. This witness had also telephoned to
Trivedi, Sub-Inspector at about 11.00 a.m. to confirm about the death of
Nathu inside the police station but Sub-Inspector Trivedi denied the
incident. PW1, PW4, PW8 and PW18 as already noticed had followed the jeep
and went to the hospital. According to PW8 when he reached the hospital, he
saw the jeep standing there and Rajaram Head Constable was also standing
near the jeep. PW8 Ram Chandra Karel met Dr. Neema PW and at that time
Respondent Shukla was present with Dr. Neema. PW8 deposed that he told Dr.
Neema that since the deceased had died as a result of beating given to him
at the police station in police custody, the post-mortem of the dead body
be not undertaken and that the doctor should await for the higher
officials. PW3 Prabhulal, driver of the jeep, turned hostile at the trial
but his evidence lends sufficient corroboration to the statements of PW1,
PW4, PW8 and PW18 with regard to the removal of the dead body of the
deceased from the police station to the hospital for post-mortem
examination. The testimony of PW1, PW4, PW8 and PW18 who are independent
persons and respectable members of the Bar at Rampura and who were
subjected to searching and lengthy cross-examination has remained
unshattered and has established beyond any reasonable doubt that the dead
body of deceased Nathu was taken out from the police station Rampura and
transported in the jeep of the fisheries department for post-mortem to the
hospital and respondents Rajaram, Shukla and Trivedi SI definitely took
part in the removal of the dead body. The evidence of these witnesses
particularly PW4 and PW8 has impressed us. Their evidence is consistent and
cogent and these witnesses had no reason to falsely implicate any of the"
respondents. These witnesses truthfully disclosed what they had seen. We
find these witnesses to be witnesses of truth.
Indeed, there is no evidence to show that after Ganiuddin, respondent No.
5, who along with Rajaram respondent No. 4 had brought the deceased to the
police station for interrogation, had at any time left the police station
on the fateful night. In the face of the unimpeachable evidence of PW4 and
PW8, we fail to understand how the learned Judges of the High Court could
opine that there was no definite evidence to show the complicity of Ram
Naresh Shukla respondent No. 3, Rajaram and Ganniuddin respondents 4 and 5
respectively in the crime alongwith SI Trivedi, respondent No. 1. The
observations of the High Court that the presence and participation of these
respondents in the crime is doubtful are not borne out from the evidence on
the record and appear to be an unrealistic over simplification of the tell
tale circumstances established by the prosecution. The following pieces of
circumstantial evidence apart from the other evidence on record, viz.; (i)
that the deceased had been brought alive to the police station and was last
seen alive there on 13.10.81 : (ii) that the dead body of the deceased was
taken out of the police station on 14.10,81 at about 2 p.m. for being
removed to the hospital; (iii) that the deceased had died as a result of
the receipt of extensive injuries while he was at the police station; (iv)
that SI Trivedi respondent no. 1, Ram Naresh Shukla, Respondent No. 3, Raja
Ram, respondent No, 4 and Ganiuddin respondent No. 5 were present at the
police station and had all joined hands to dispose of the dead body of
Nathu - Banjara; (v) that SI Trivedi, respondent No, 1 created false
evidence and fabricate false clues in the shape of documentary evidence
with a view to screen the offence and for that matter, the offender (vi) SI
Trivedi respondent in connivance with some of his subordinates, respondents
herein had taken steps to cremate the dead body in hot haste describing the
deceased as a lavaris'; (vii) Rajaram and Ganniuddin respondents had
brought the deceased to the police station form his village, and (viii)
that police record did not show that either Rajaram or Ganniuddin had left
the police station, till the dead body was removed to the hospital in the
jeep, unerringly point towards the guilt of the deceased and the
established circumstances coupled with the direct evidence of PW1, 3, 4, 8
and 18. are consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the
respondents and are inconsistent with their innocence. So far as respondent
No. 2, Ram Partap Mishra is concerned, however, no clinching or
satisfactory evidence is available on the record to establish his presence
at the police station when Nathu deceased was being subjected to extensive
beating or of his participation in the commission of the crime. The High
Court erroneously overlooked the ground realities that rarely in cases of
police torture or custodial death, direct ocular evidence of the complicity
of the police personnel would be available, when it observed that 'direct'
evidence about the complicity of these respondents was not available.
Generally speaking, it would be police officials alone who can only explain
the circumstances in which a person in their custody had died. Bound as
they are by the ties of brotherhood, it is not unknown that the police
personnel prefer to remain silent and more often than not even pervert the
truth to save their colleagues, and the present case is an apt
illustration, as to how one after the other police witnesses feigned
ignorance about the whole matter.
From our independent analysis of the materials on the record, we are
satisfied that respondents 1 and 3 to 5 were definitely present at the
police station and were directly or indirectly involved in the torture of
Nathu Banjara and his subsequent death while the police custody as also in
making attempts to screen the offence to enable the guilty to escape
punishment. The trial court and the High Court, if we may say so with
respect, exhibited a total lack of sensitively and a 'could not careless'
attitude in appreciating the evidence on the record and thereby condoning
the barbarous third degree methods which are still being used, at some
police stations, despite being illegal. The exaggerated adherence to and
insistence upon the establishment of proof beyond every reasonable doubt,
by the prosecution, ignoring the ground realities, the fact situations and
the peculiar circumstances of a given case, as in the present case, often
results in miscarriage of justice and makes the justice delivery system a
suspect. In the ultimate analysis the society suffers and a criminal gets
encouraged. Tortures in police custody, which of late are on the increase,
receive encouragement by this type of an unrealistic approach of the Courts
because it reinforces the belief in the mind of the police that no harm
would come to them, if an odd prisoner dies in the lock-up, because there
would hardly be any evidence available to the prosecution to directly
implicate them with the torture. The Courts, must not loose sight of the
fact that death in police custody is perhaps one of the worst kind of crime
in a civilised society, governed by the rule of law and poses a serious
threat to an orderly civilised society. Torture in flouts the basic rights
of the citizens recognised by the Indian Constitution and is an affront to
human dignity. Police excesses and the mal-treatment of detainees/under
trial prisoners or suspects tarnishes the image of any civilised nation and
encourages the men in 'Khaki' to consider themselves to be above the law
and sometimes even to become law unto themselves. Unless stern measures are
taken to check the malady, the foundations of the criminal justice delivery
system would be shaken and the civilization itself would risk the
consequence of heading towards perishing. The courts must, therefore, deal
with such cases in a realistic manner and with the sensitivity which they
deserve otherwise the common man may loose faith in the judiciary itself,
which will be a sad day.
In its 4th Report of June, 1980, The National Police Commission noticed the
prevalence of custodial torture etc. and observed that nothing is so
dehumanising as the conduct of police in practising torture of any kind on
a person in their custody. The commission noticed with regret that the
police image in the estimation of the public has badly suffered on account
of the prevalence of this practice in varying degrees over the past several
years and noted with concern the inclination of even some of the
supervisory ranks in the police hierarchy to countenance this practice in a
bid to achieve quick results by short-cut methods. Though
Sections 330
and
331
of the Indian Penal Code make punishable those persons who cause hurt
for the purpose of extorting the confession, by making the offence
punishable with sentence upto 10 years of imprisonment, but the
convictions, as experience shows us, have been very few because the
atrocities within the precincts of the police station are often left
without any ocular or other direct evidence to prove who the offenders are.
Disturbed by this situation, the Law Commission in its 113th Report
recommended amendments to the
Indian Evidence Act
so as to provide that in
the prosecution of a police officer for an alleged offence of having caused
bodily injuries to a person while in police custody, if there is evidence
that the injury was caused during the period when the person was in the
police custody, the Court may presume that the injury was caused by the
police officer having the custody of that person during that period unless,
the police officer proves to the contrary. The onus to prove the contrary
must be discharged by the concerned police official. The recommendation,
however, we notice with concern, appears to have gone un-noticed and the
crime of custodial torture etc. flourishes unabated. Keeping in view the
dehumanising aspect of the crime, the flagrant violation of the fundamental
rights of the victim of the crime and the growing rise in the crimes of
this type, where only a few come to light and others don't, we hope that
the Government and legislature would give serious thought to the
recommendation of the Law Commission (supra) and bring about appropriate
changes in the law not only to curb the custodial crime but also to see
that the custodial crime does not go unpunished. The Courts are also
required to have a change in their outlook and attitude, particularly in
cases involving custodial crimes and they should exhibit more sensitivity
and adopt a realistic rather than a narrow technical approach, while
dealing with the cases of custodial crime so that as far as possible within
their powers, the guilty should not escape so that the victim of the crime
has the satisfaction that ultimately the Majesty of Law has prevailed.
From the evidence available on the record both documentary and oral, we are
satisfied that Respondents 1 and 3 to 5 had participated in causing
injuries to Nathu Banjara while in police custody, directly or indirectly,
and even if it is not possible to say that they intended to cause the death
of Nathu, and they can certainly be clothed with the knowledge that the
injuries which a were being caused to the deceased at the police station
were likely to cause his death though probably without any intention to
cause his death or even to cause such bodily injuries to him as were likely
to cause death. Their offence would, thus, squarely fall under Section 304
Part-II/34
IPC
. Respondents 3 to 5 are also guilty of the offences under
Sections 201
and
342
IPC and holding them so guilty, we convict them for
the said offences.
The question, however, which now arises is about the appropriate sentence
that is required to be imposed upon the respondents.
Since the occurrence took place 14 years ago, the respondents have gone
through the ordeal of a protracted trial and the appeals in the High Court
and in this Court. The learned counsel for the State-appellant has very
fairly submitted that though an adequate and exemplary sentence of
imprisonment would have been normally called for the crime committed by
them the respondents. may because of the lapse of time be sentenced to some
imprisonment but they be also sentenced to pay a substantial amount of
fine, which if realised may go to the heirs of the deceased. Learned
counsel for the respondents has also urged that sending the respondents to
the prison at this distant point of time would cause great hardship to them
and might make them hardened criminals. We have given our anxious
consideration to the submissions made by learned counsel for the parties on
the question of sentence. We are conscious that a precious human life has
been lost at the hands of those who are expected to protect the life and
liberty of the citizens of this country. We are also conscious of the fact
that the crime is a dehumanising one and is an affront to the human
dignity. The long lapse of period is indeed a consideration which may weigh
in favour of the respondents for not being awarded a long sentence of
imprisonment but then the interests of the victim of the crime have also be
kept in view. Keeping in view the consideration of the human factor
involved and particularly the interests of the heirs of Nathu deceased to
whom mere imprisonment of the respondents at this belated stage may not
offer much solace, We have to strike a balance between these disparate
considerations and keeping in view the fact that the respondent No. 1 has
already undergone a sentence of two years rigorous imprisonment consequent
upon his conviction for the various offences by the High Court as noticed
earlier we pass the following order :
Respondent No, 1 Shyamsunder Trivedi is convicted under section 304 Part
II/34
IPC
and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for two years and
to pay a fine of Rs. 50,000 (Rupees fifty thousand only) and, in default of
payment of fine to undergo further rigorous imprisonment for two years. The
substantive sentence of 2 years R.I. under
Section 304-II
/
34
IPC is in
addition to the sentence which was imposed upon him by the High Court.
Respondent Nos. 3, 4 and 5 namely, Ram Naresh Shukla, Head constable and
Rajaram Mishra, Head Constable and Ganniuddin con-stables are convicted
under sections 304 part II/34, 201 and 342
IPC
and sentenced to suffer
rigorous imprisonment for one year each and to pay a fine of Rs, 20,000
(twenty thousand only) each, and in default of payment of fine to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for one year more for the offence under section 304-
II/149
IPC
, No separate sentence is, however, passed against them for the
other convictions.
We, further direct that the entire amount of fine on realisation from
respondents 1, 3 to 5 shall be paid to the heirs of the deceased, Nathu
Banjara, by way of compensation. The Trial Court shall ensure, in case the
fine is deposited by the accused respondents, that the payment of the same
is made to the heirs of deceased, Nathu Banjara, and the Court shall take
all such precautions as are necessary to see that the money is not allowed
to fall into wrong hands and is utilised for the benefit of the members of
the family of the deceased, Nathu Banjara, and if found practical by
deposit in a Nationalised Bank or post office on such terms as the Trial
Court may in consultation with the heirs of the deceased consider fit and
proper.
The appeal, therefore, succeeds and is allowed in so far as respondents 1,
3, 4 and 5 are concerned. The appeal against the acquittal of respondent
No, 2 is, however, dismissed. While the bail bond of respondent No. 2 is
discharged, the bail bonds of respondent nos. 1, 3, 4 and 5 are cancelled.
They shall be taken into custody to undergo the sentence imposed by us in
the preceding paragraphs.
Appeal allowed.