[Cites
28
, Cited by
39
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of M.P vs Mahalaxmi Fabric Mills Limited & Ors on 1 February, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1995 AIR 2213, 1995 SCC SUPL. (1) 642, AIR 1995 SUPREME COURT 2213, 1995 AIR SCW 1606, 1995 AIR SCW 1621, 1995 SCC (SUPP) 1 642, (1994) 3 BANKLJ 64, (1995) 1 GUJ LH 1026, (1995) 1 GUJ LR 705, (1995) 2 APLJ 77, (1995) 2 SCR 470 (SC), (1995) 1 SCR 756 (SC), 1995 (2) SCR 470, (1995) 2 JT 644 (SC), (1995) 3 JT 93 (SC), (1995) JAB LJ 310
Author:
S.B Majmudar
Bench:
S.B Majmudar
,
Kuldip Singh
,
B.L Hansaria
PETITIONER:
STATE OF M.P.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MAHALAXMI FABRIC MILLS LIMITED & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT01/02/1995

BENCH:
MAJMUDAR S.B. (J)
BENCH:
MAJMUDAR S.B. (J)
KULDIP SINGH (J)
HANSARIA B.L. (J)

CITATION:
 1995 AIR 2213		  1995 SCC  Supl.  (1) 642
 JT 1995 (3)	93	  1995 SCALE  (1)758


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
MAJMUDAR, J.:
1. Leave granted in both the petitions.
98
2.Two  main  questions are involved in these  four  appeals,
namely,	 whether
Section  9(3)
of the	Mines  and  Minerals
(Regulation & Development) Act. 1957, (hereinafter  referred
to  as	'the  Act')  is ultra  vires  the  Constitution	 and
secondly  whether Notification dated 1st August 1991  issued
by  the Central Government under
Section 9(3)
of the Act  is
ultra vires, illegal and inoperative in law.  On these	com-
mon  questions	we  have  heard	 learned  counsel  for	 the
contesting  parties and are, therefore, disposing  of  these
appeals by this common judgment.
3.A few relevant facts leading to these cases may be  stated
at  the outset.	 Appellants in C.A. Nos. 275/94	 and  276/94
being  State of M.P. and Union of India	 respectively,	were
respondents   before,	the   High   Court   Special   Civil
Miscellaneous Petition No. 10/93.  The respondents in  these
appeals	 were  the  original writ petitioners  in  the	High
Court.	 These respondents are purchasers of coal form	Coal
India Ltd. which was respondent No.3 in writ petition.	 The
writ petitioners complained that the Notification dated	 1st
August,	 1991 issued by the Union of India fixing new  rates
of  royalty  on various varieties of coal  was	illegal	 and
inoperative  in law on various grounds, that  before  1.8.91
royalty	 was  payable at the rate of Rs.6.50  per  ton	vide
earlier Notification but the same was sought to be increased
to  Rs.	 120/- per ton by the new Notification.	  Since	 the
said Notification was issued under
Section 9(3)
of the	Act,
it  was submitted that the said provision confers  unguided,
unchannelized  and arbitrary discretion to the Central	Gov-
ernment	 to  increase  the rates of royalty  to	 any  higher
amount and as no guidelines were provided for effecting	 the
said increases either under this Section or elsewhere in the
Act,  the  Section  itself  is	an  instance  of   excessive
delegation  of essential legislative power and hence it	 was
void.
That royalty on various varieties of coal was  fixed
in  the	 year 1981 vide earlier Notification issued  by	 the
Central	 Government under
Section 9(3)
.	 Proviso to
Section
9(3)
permits revision of the rates of royalty	once  during
every three years.  In the year 1982, several coal producing
States	imposed coal development cess and started  receiving
revenue	 for  effecting development of their  mining  areas,
till  they  were challenged by consumers of coal  by  filing
several writ petitions in the High Courts.  The	 controversy
ultimately came to be decided by this Court in
Orissa Cement
Limited v. State of Orissa
(AIR 1991 SC 1674), whereby	such
cess was held to be invalid and beyond the legislative	com-
petence of the State Government.  It appears that soon after
the  aforesaid invalidation of the cess the  coal  producing
States	were  faced with problem of  refunding	the  amounts
obtained by them that far.  They, therefore, approached	 the
central Government for help in the matter.  In pursuance  to
the  said approach, the Parliament passed an Act  validating
the  cess  paid by the coal consumers upto the date  of	 the
judgment by issuing an ordinance styled as 'The Cess & Other
Taxes  of Minerals Validation Ordinance, 1992.	We  are	 not
concerned with the said Ordinance and the subsequent Act  in
the  present proceedings.  It appears that since  the  State
Government  had	 suffered financial losses  because  of	 the
invalidation  of the cess, they also approached the  Central
Government  for	 help  in  the	matter.	  As  a	 consequence
thereof, a working group was constituted in this behalf	 The
said  working group suggested an increase in the royalty  to
the  extent of Rs.70/- per ton of coal.	 The  working  group
also found
99
sufficient justification for compensating the coal producing
States	to the extent of 100 per cent of the loss caused  by
the   aforesaid	  judgment  of	this   Court.	 Since	 the
recommendation	was accepted by the Central Government,	 the
impugned Notification was issued by the Central	 Government.
According to the writ petitioners before the High Court	 the
increase  in the rates of royalty pursuant to the  Notifica-
tion  was to the extent of 400 per cent to 2000 per cent  as
compared  to the royalty fixed in 1981 on various  varieties
of coal.  It was further contended before the High Court  by
the writ petitioners that the royalty fixed in the  impugned
Notification was payable to the concerned State	 Governments
by  the coal companies.	 The coal companies passed  on	this
burden to their customers and showed this amount clearly and
specifically  in bills issued by them.	The  coal  companies
have  no objection to ,the Notification and  are  supporting
the  Central Government in this behalf The purchasers  being
consumers  of coal were the affected parties who  challenged
the said Notification.	About 60 petitions were filed before
the M.P. High Court by various consumers of coal.  The	High
Court heard learned counsel for all the respective  parties.
The Division Bench by its judgment dated 17th December, 1993
took  the view that
Section 9(3)
of the Act was not  invalid
or  illegal  on	 any ground.
However, so  far	as  impugned
Notification  on
Section 9(3)
was concerned, the High  Court
was of the opinion that the said Notification was lacking in
bonafides  and	as it was issued for meeting  the  financial
deficiency suffered by States on account of the judgment  of
this Court in
Orissa Cement
Case (supra) it was outside	 the
scope  of
Section  9(3)
of the Act.   Having  reached	that
conclusion, the Division Bench of the High Court quashed the
impugned  Notification dated 1.8.91 but so far as the  ques-
tion  of refund was concerned, the High Court took the	view
that no direction of refund of any amount could be issued as
the burden of enhanced royalty was already passed on to	 the
customers  by the manufacturers.  Accordingly, the writ	 pe-
tition was partly allowed.  This order of the Division Bench
dated  17.12.93	 is  brought in challenge by  the  State  of
Madhya	Pradesh by filing C.A. No. 275/ 94  after  obtaining
special	 leave	to appeal against the said order  from	this
Court.	The Union of India has also challenged the very same
order  in C.A. No.276/94 after obtaining special leave.	  So
far as Special leave petition No.8190/94 is concerned, it is
filed  by  M/s.	 Birla Jute & Industries Ltd.,	one  of	 the
consumers of coal, which has also felt aggrieved by the hike
in royalty of coal as imposed by the impugned  Notification.
It raised the very same contention in the High Court by	 way
of  Misc.
Civil Case No.833/93. The writ petition filed  by
M/s.  Birla Jute Industries Ltd., was also partly allowed by
the  High Court following its order dated 17.12.93.  By	 the
order dated 28.1.94, it was held that the petitioner therein
was  entitled to the same benefit on the same lines  as	 was
available  to  the  writ petitioners in	 matter	 decided  on
17.12.93.  The petitioner, Ws.	Birla Jute Industries  Ltd.,
by  special leave has contended that the High Court  was  in
error  in  not granting refund of  the	illegally  collected
royalty as impugned Notification was struck down by the High
Court.	In appeal, pursuant to SLP(C) No. 3395/94, the State
of  M.P. has brought in challenge a similar order passed  by
the High Court on 17.12.93 in Misc.  Petition No. 7907/ 92.
100
4.There	 are number of other civil appeals arising from	 the
similar orders passed in the said writ petitions.  But as we
have  heard  learned counsel in these four matters,  we	 are
disposing  of only these four matters in the first  instance
by this judgment.
S.Learned Solicitor General and Additional Solicitor General
in  support  of C.A. Nos. 275/94, 276/94  and  Civil  Appeal
arising	 out of SLP(C) No. 3 3 95/94,  vehemently  contended
that  the High Court was patently in error in striking	down
the impugned Notification dated 1.8.91. It was submitted  by
them  that  once this Court took the view in
Orissa  Cement
Company
's case that royalty could not be imposed by  States,
that it was within the domain of the Central Legislature  in
view  of  the  Entry 54 of List I of  Schedule	VII  of	 the
Constitution  and when the Parliament had  already  occupied
the field pertaining to regulation and development of  mines
and minerals in the country be enacting the Act in 1957,  if
the  rates of royalty were to be increased, it was only	 the
Central Government which could exercise power under
Section
9(3)
of  the Act and as the royalty had to be paid  to	 the
States,	 there	was nothing wrong in  issuing  the  impugned
Notification under which increased rates of royalty would be
made available to the concerned States.	 Equally, there	 was
nothing wrong in
Section 9(3)
which gives enough guidance to
the  Central  Government for issuing such  Notification	 and
that  such Notification could not be said to be ultra  vires
or  illegal or unconstitutional as wrongly held by the	High
Court.	 On  the  other hand,  Mr.  Sanghi,  senior  counsel
appearing  for the respondents, submitted that
Section	9(3)
of   the  Act  was  a  piece  of  excessive  delegation	  of
legislative  power  of	Parliament, that  it  laid  down  no
guidelines   for  the  Central	Government  to	follow	 for
increasing the rates of royalty.  That even otherwise as  it
sought to tax mineral rights the said Section was beyond the
legislative competence of the Parliament as such legislation
would  be  covered by Entry 50 of the List 2  of  the  VIIth
Schedule.   It	was next contended by Shri Sanghi  that	 the
impugned  Notification enhancing the royalty by	 almost	 200
per  cent was ultra vires the purpose and object of the	 Act
as the purpose of the Notification was to increase the	rev-
enues  of  the State Governments in  whose  territories	 the
concerned  mines were situated and as it had nothing  to  do
with  the  development of the mines,  the  Notification	 was
beyond the scope and ambit of
Section 9(3)
of the Act.	 Mr.
Sorabjee,   learned   senior  counsel  appearing   for	 the
appellant,  M/s.Birla  Jute  Industries	 Ltd.,	adopted	 the
arguments  of  Mr.  Sanghi and further	submitted  that	 the
Notification  issued  under
Section 9(3)
must	have  direct
nexus  with  royalty which would be a payment made  for	 the
privilege of removing the minerals and it had to be  charged
on the quantity removed.  That no Notification under
Section
9(3)
could  be issued by the Central  Government  only	 for
increasing  the general revenues of the States, that such  a
purpose	 is  outside  the  scope  of
Section  9(3)
and  in
substance   by	the  impugned  Notification,   the   Central
Government had imposed a tax for the purpose of swelling the
revenues of the States and not for the purpose of increasing
royalty	 on any permissible ground which may be	 within	 the
scope  of
Section 9(3)
of the Act.  Mr.  Dholakia,  learned
senior counsel appearing for Respondent No.1 in Civil Appeal
1994/95	 arising  out  of  SLP(C)  No.	3395/  94,   broadly
supported the aforesaid contentions of Shri Sanghi and	Shri
Sorabjee and further contended that
Section 9
of
101
the  Act  has nothing to do with  mineral  development	and,
therefore,  enactment  of
Section 9
could not  be  supported
under Entry 54 of the Union List but would be covered by the
sweep  of  Entry5O  of the  State  List.
Mr.	Chidambaram,
learned	 senior counsel, appearing for some of the  original
writ petitioners before the High Court in companion matters,
also adopted the arguments of Shri Sanghi and Shri  Sorabjee
and  further  contended that as
laid down by
this  Court  in
Indian Cement
case royalty is a tax, and there was no  Entry
in  the	 Union List which could support such a	tax  and  it
would clearly fall within the scope and ambit of Entry 50 of
the State List.	 He further contended that every tax  should
have  a	 tax  entry  and as  there  was	 no  specific  entry
regarding  imposition of tax by way of royalty in the  Union
List  such  tax could be covered by Entry 50  of  the  State
list,	and  so,  impugned
Section  9(3)
is	beyond	 the
legislative power of the Parliament.
6.Mr. Ramaswamy, leamed senior counsel, who was permitted to
intervene  supported the contention of the aforesaid  leamed
counsel for the writ petitioners and further contended	that
the  impugned  Notification, even if assumed  partly  to  be
based on relevant grounds, at least partly was not based  on
relevant grounds as it was not wholly issued for the purpose
of   development  of  minerals	but  for  the	purpose	  of
development  of	 State coffers and,  therefore,	 the  entire
Notification   has  to	be  struck  down  as   invalid	 and
incompetent.   An  alien purpose cannot be  mixed  with	 the
relevant  purpose  for exercising  any	statutory  powereven
including  the	power  to  exercise  delegated	 legislative
function.
7.   In	 the  light of the aforesaid rival  conditions,	 the
following points arise for our determination:-
1.   Whether
Section  9(3)
of the Act is  ultra  vires	 the
Constitution and/or is illegal on any other ground?
2.   Whether  the impugned Notification is beyond  scope  of
Section	 9(3)
of the Act and,	therefore,  incompetent	 and
invalid?
3.   Whether  the  impugned  Notification  is  a  piece	  of
colourable exercise of power?
4.   Whether  the  impugned Notification  is  arbitrary	 and
confiscatory in nature?
As discussed hereinafter, answers to the above points are as
follows:-
1st   In the negative;
2nd   In the negative,
	      3rd   In the negative;
4th   In the negative.
8.   We shall deal with these points seriatim.
Point No. 1
9.   So far as vires of
Section 9
are concerned, it must  be
kept  in  view that a Constitution Bench of this  Court	 has
held  in  the case Baijnath v.State of Bihar, (AIR  1970  SC
1436)  that the Act is enacted by Parliament under Entry  54
of  the	 Union list.  In this  connection  the	Constitution
Bench  speaking	 through  Hdayatullah  C.J.,  has  made	 the
following observations:-
"Entry  54  of the Union List speaks  both  of
	      Regulation and mines and minerals	 development
	      and Entry 23 of State list is subject to Entry
	      54 of Union list.	 It is open to Parliament to
	      declare that it is ex-
102
pedient  in the public interest that the	con-
	      trol  should vest in Central  Government.	  To
	      what  extent such a declaration can go is	 for
	      Parliament  to  determine	 and  this  must  be
	      commensurate with public interest.  Once	this
	      declaration is made and the extent laid  down,
	      the subject of legislation to the extent	laid
	      down   becomes   an  exclusive   subject	 for
	      legislation by Parliament. Any legislation  by
	      the State after such declaration and trenching
	      upon  the field disclosed in  the	 declaration
	      must  necessarily be unconstitutional  because
	      that field is abstracted from the	 legislative
	      competence of the State legislative.
10.Once	 it  is	 held  that the entire	Act  is	 within	 the
exclusive  domain  of legislative power	 of  the  Parliament
under  Entry  54 of the Union list it becomes  obvious	that
Section	 9
which is a part and parcel of the same Act  would
also  fall  within Entry 5 which deals	with  regulation  of
mines  an development of minerals and for which	 declaration
is already found in
Section 2
of the Act to the effect	that
such  regulation  of mines and	minerals  development  under
control	 of the Union is expedient in public  interest.	  We
may now turn to
Section 9
which reads as under:-
"9. Royalties in respect of mining leases:-
(1)   The	 holder	 of  mining  lease   granted
	      before the commencement of this Act shall, not
	      withstanding anything contained in  instrument
	      of  lease	 or  in any law	 in  force  at	such
			    commencement,  pay	royalty in respect  of	an
y
	      mineral  removed or consumed by him or by	 his
	      agent,  manager, employee, contractor or	sub-
lessee   from  the  leased  area	after	such
	      commencement  at the rate for the	 time  being
	      specified in the Second Schedule in respect of
	      that mineral.
(2)   The holder of a mining lease granted  on
	      or  after the commencement of this  Act  shall
	      pay royalty in respect of any mineral  removed
	      or  consumed by him or by his agent,  manager,
	      employee,	 contractor or sub-lessee  from	 the
	      leased  area  at the rate for the	 time  being
	      specified in the Second Schedule in respect of
	      that mineral.
(2-A)  The holder of a mining  lease,  whether
	      granted  before or after commencement  of	 the
	      Mines and Minerals (Regulation &	Development)
	      Amendment Act, 1972, (56 of 1972) shall not be
	      liable  to pay any royalty in respect  of	 any
	      coal  consumed  by  a  workman  engaged  in  a
	      colliery provided that such consumption by the
	      workman  does not exceed one-third of a  tonne
	      per month.
(3)   The	   Central   Government	  may,	  by
	      notification  in the official  Gazette,  amend
	      the Second Schedule so as to enhance or reduce
	      the rate at which royalty shall be payable  in
	      respect of any minerals with effect from	such
	      date as may be specified in the notification:
Provided that the Central Government shall not
	      enhance the rate of royalty in respect of	 any
	      mineral  more than once during any  period  of
	      (three years)."
11.It becomes obvious that Parliament while enacting
Section
9
has already laid down the rates of royalty to be  charged
on  the removal and consumption of mineral by any lessee  of
mining	lease, his agent or manager of sub-lessee, from	 the
leased area.  The rates of royalty are scheduled in the Act.
So far as coal is concerned it is by Entry 11 of the  Second
Schedule.  Separate rates of royalty are prescribed for dif-
ferent	types  of coal.	 However, the Parliament  felt	that
these  rates  of royalty may be required to be	enhanced  or
reduced from time to time due to fall of money value
103
with  the  passage  of time of vice  versa.  For  that	very
purpose	 the  Central  Government as  per
Section  9(3)
is
permitted  by  Parliament to amend the	Second	Schedule  by
Notification  to be published in Official Gazette from	time
to  time-subject to the proviso that the Central  Government
shall  not enhance mineral and mines royalty for  more	than
once during the period of three years.	The power  conferred
upon the Central Government under
Section 9(3)
is by way  of
delegated  legislative	power.	Vires of
Section  9(3)
was
challenged  on twin grounds by Shri Sanghi,  learned  senior
counsel.  In the first instance he submitted that if royalty
is  a tax, there should be a clear entry in the	 Union	list
permitting  the Parliament to impose such a tax.  He  placed
reliance on M/s.  International Tourist Corporation &  Ors.,
Avtar  Singh & Ors Namaskar Bus Service and Others V.  State
of  Haryana & Others, State of UP. & Others, (1981  (2)	 SCC
318) and State of Mysore & Others Vs.  M/s D Cawasji &Co.  &
Others,	 (1971 (2) SCR 799), and submitted that there is  no
such  entry regarding tax on royalty in the Union  list;  on
the contrary, tax on mineral rights is found in Entry 50  of
the  State  list.   Therefore,	Mr.  Sanghi  submitted	that
legislative  competence in connect-ion with tax	 on  mineral
rights would be exclusively of State legislature and not  of
the  Parliament and, therefore,
Section 9(3)
is	 beyond	 the
legislature competence of the Parliament.  The second leg of
challenge  was	that  in  any  case  by
Section  9(3)
the
Parliament has delegated its legislative power in favour  of
the Central Government by way of excessive delegation and no
guidelines are found in the Section as to on what basis	 the
Central	 Government  once  in three  years  can	 revise	 the
royalty	 rates and what would be the relevant  criteria	 for
the said exercise.
As  the Section is silent on these vital aspects, it has  to
be  held  to  be  suffering  from  the	vice  of   excessive
delegation of legislative power.
12.  In	 our  considered opinion there is  no  substance  in
either	of  the twin contentions for  challenging  vires  of
Section 9(3)
.  So far as to competence to enact
Section 9
is
concerned,  the question is no longer res integral.   It  is
covered by the Constitution Bench decision of this Court  in
the case
India Cement Ltd. & Others Vs.	 State of Tamil Nadu
&  Others
,  (1990  (1)	SCC  12).   In	that  decision	 the
Constitution Bench speaking through Sabyasachi Mukherji	 J.,
as  he then was, expressly rules that royalty is a  tax	 and
for imposing such royalty the State legislature will have no
power  under  Entry  50	 of the	 Second	 list.	 Mr.  Sanghi
contended that strictly royalty cannot -be said to be a	 tax
and  to that extent the decision of the	 Constitution  Bench
may  appear  to be erroneous.  It is not possible  to  agree
with  this  contention.	 In paragraph 34 of the	 report	 the
Constitution Bench has made the following pertinent observa-
tions:-
34.   "In the aforesaid view of the matter  we
	      arc of the opinion that royalty is a tax,	 and
-as such a cess on the royalty being a tax  on
	      royalty, is beyond the competence of the State
	      legislature  because Section 9 of the  Central
	      Act covers the field and the State legislature
	      is denuded of its competence under Entry 23 of
	      List  H.	In any event we are of	the  opinion
	      that cess on royalty cannot be sustained under
	      Entry  49 of List II as being a tax a  tax  on
	      land but a payment for the user of land."
13.It  is  true	 that  in paragraph 13	of  the	 report	 the
Constitution  Bench noted the on land.	Royalty	 on  mineral
rights is not
104
judgments  of  Rajasthan, Punjab and  Gujarath	High  Courts
which  had taken the view that royalty was not a tax and  it
is  equally true that it is not expressly mentioned  in	 the
judgment of the Constitution Bench that these judgments were
erroneous  or were required to be over ruled.  However on  a
conjoint  reading  of  paras 31 and 34	of  the	 report,  it
becomes	 obvious that the view that royalty is not a tax  as
expressed by these High Courts did not find favour with	 the
Constitution Bench of this Court which took a contrary view.
Therefore, these judgments necessarily stood over ruled,  on
this aspect.  It is true that in the last line of  paragraph
34  it is mentioned that royalty on mineral rights is not  a
tax  on	 land  but  a payment for  use	of  land  but  these
observations  are in connection with Entry 49 List II  which
deals  with a tax on land.  But so far as nature of  royalty
is  concerned  it  is  clearly rules to	 be  a	tax  by	 the
Constitution   Bench,  and  that  is  the  reason  why	 the
Constitution  Bench reached the conclusion that any cess  on
the royalty would be a tax.  It would be beyond	 legislative
competence  of the State legislature as Entry 50 in List  II
would  be of no avail once the Parliament has  occupied	 the
field  by  enacting the Act, especially
Section	 9
thereof.
The view of the Constitution Bench that royalty is a tax  as
found  in paragraph 34 of the report can also  be  supported
from other paragraphs of the report.
In paragraph 23 of the
report while agreeing with Mr. Nariman that royalty which is
indirectly  connected with land cannot be said to be  a	 tax
directly on land as a unit, it has been observed that no tax
can  be	 levied	 or leviable if	 no  mining  activities	 are
carried on.  Hence it is manifest that it is not related to,
land as a unit which is the only method of valuation of land
under  Entry  49  of List II but is  relatable	to  minerals
extracted.   Royalty is payable on a proportion of the	min-
erals extracted.  These observations in paragraph 23 clearly
indicates  that in view of the Constitution  Bench,  royalty
was  a tax which had a nexus with mining activities  meaning
thereby	 it was a tax on mineral rights.  Similarly in	para
27 of the report, the Constitution Bench noted with approval
of  the decision of the Division Bench of the High Court  of
Mysore	in
Laxminarayana Mining Co. Bangalore v. Taluk	Dev
.
Board  (AIR  1972 Mysore 299).	In the case  the  Court	 was
concerned  with	 the  Mysore village  Panchayats  and  Local
Boards	Act, 1959.  Under the said act the Board had  sought
to  levy tax on mining activities carried on by the  persons
holding mineral concessions.  The mysore Court had  observed
that  once the Parliament made a declaration by law that  it
is  expedient in the public interest to make  regulation  on
mines  and  minerals development under the  control  of	 the
Union to the extent to which such regulation and development
is undertaken by the law made by the Parliament. the'  power
of the State legislature under entries 23 and 50 of List  II
got  denuded.	It would, therefore, be not said  that	even
after  passing of the Central Act, the State legislature  by
enacting
Section 143
of the Act could confer power  on	 the
Taluk Board to levy tax on the mining activities carried  on
by   the   persons   holding   mineral	 concessions.
The
Constitution Bench then noted that at page 306 of the report
of Mysore case it was held that royalty fixed under  Section
9  of the Mines and Minerals Act was really a tax.  It	must
be kept in view that this decision of the Mysore High  Court
was noticed by the Constitution Bench and was not  dissented
from.
On the other hand it got approved by it.   It  must,
therefore, be
105
held that royalty imposed had to, be treated as tax as ruled
by the Constitution Bench of this Court in
India Cement
Case
(supra).   It is no doubt true that in the late decision  of
this  Court in Orissa Cement Ltd. & Ors. etc. etc. v.  State
of Orissa & Ors. etc. etc., (1991 (2) SCR 105), a threeJudge
Bench  of  this Court did not go into the  question  whether
there  was  any typegraphical error in the judgment  of	 the
Constitution Bench as found in para 34 of its report when it
held  that  royalty is a tax.  But in view of what  we	have
discussed have it becomes absolutely clear that there was no
typographical error but on the contrary the said  conclusion
logically flew from' the earlier paragraphs of the  judgment
referred to by us hereinabove.
14.  Once  the conclusion is reached that royalty is a	tax,
the next question arises whether Entry 50 of the State	list
can  at	 all be resorted to for imposing such a tax  by	 the
State  legislature.   Even that question  is  fully  covered
against	 the writ petitioners by the very same	Constitution
Bench judgment of India CementOrs.  In para 24 of the report
it  has been observed while repelling the contention of	 Mr.
Krishnamurthy Iyer for the State of Tamil Nadu that Entry 50
in List II of the Seventh Schedule can be of any avail,	 the
Constitution Bench noted that Entry 23 of List II deals with
regulation of mines and minerals development subject to	 the
provision   of	List  I	 with  respect	to  regulation	 and
development  under the control of the Union and Entry 54  in
List I deals with regulation of mines and minerals under the
control	 of  Union declared by the Parliament by law  to  be
expedient in public interest Thereafter it was observed that
even if minerals are part of the State list they are treated
separately  and, therefore, the principle that the  specific
excludes  the general must be applied.
In  this  connection
reference was made to the case of
H.R.S. Murthy v. Collector
of Chittor
1964(6) SCR 666), where it was held that cess  on
minerals  would	 be  covered by Entry 49 of  List  II.	 The
Constitution  Bench  with  regard to  H.R.S.  Murthy's	case
observed  in paragraphs 29 and 30 of
India Cement Ltd.
case
that attention of the Court was not invited to provisions of
Mines and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957
and
Section 9(3)
thereof
Section 9(3)
of the Act in terms states
that  royalties payable under the
IInd Schedule of  the	 Act
shall not be enhanced more than once during a period of four
years.	 It  is,  therefore,  a	 clear	bar  on	 the   State
Legislature  taxing  royalty so as to in  fact...amend	IInd
Schedule of the Central Act.
As seen earlier inparagraph 32
of  the	 report in
India Cement
Case, it  has  been  clearly
mentioned that in view of the express provisions of
Mines  &
Minerals Act, 1957
, Entry 50 cannot be of any assistance  to
sustain	 such  legislation by the, State.  Oza.	 J.  in	 his
concurring judgment has highlighted one additional dimension
of  the	 matter	 in  para 40 of the  report.   It  has	been
observed by Oza J., that it is no doubt true that mineral is
extracted  from the land and is available but it could	only
be extracted if there art three things: (1) land from  which
mineral	 could	be  extracted.	(2)  capital  for  providing
machinery,  instruments	 and  other  requirements,  and	 (3)
labour.	  It  is, therefore, clear that unit  of  charge  of
royalty is not only land but land + labour + capital.  It is
also to clear that if royalty is a tax or an imposition or a
levy,  it is not on land alone but it is a levy or a tax  on
mineral,  including  land, labour and  capital	employed  in
extraction  of	the  mineral.  It is  therefore	 clear	that
royalty if imposed by
106
the Parliament could only be a tax not only on land but also
on these three things stated above.
15.Inview  of  the decision of Constitution Bench it  is  no
longer open to the writ petitioners to submit that Entry  50
of -List II can still be available to State legislature.  It
is easy to visualise that once the Parliament has,  occupied
the  field  in	connection  with  regulation  of  mines	 and
minerals development in the country and when the  Parliament
declares  that it is expedient in the public interest so  to
do, Entry 23 of the State list regarding regulation of mines
and  minerals development would be of no avail to the  State
legislature as Entry 23 List II is subject to the  provision
of List 1, nor will Entry 50 of the State list can be of any
assistance  to	the State authorities.	In short,  both	 the
entries	  will	be  out	 of  way  in  enacting	 appropriate
legislation  imposing  the rates of royalty to	be  paid  by
those  who  extract minerals in the  country.	Once,  these
Entries are out of picture, it is Entry 54 in the Union list
which will operate and the imposition of tax on minerals ex-
tracted	 would	be squarely got covered by Entry 54  of	 the
Union  list.   To recapitulate, as the entire Act  has	been
upheld	by this Court in its earlier decisions to which	 we,
have  made reference in the light of Entry 54 of  the  Union
list,
Section 9
being part and parcel thereof cannot be	 out
of the sweep of Entry 54.  However, even assuming that there
should	be  a  specific taxing	entry  regarding  taxing  of
royalty on mineral rights which can sustain such legislation
under the said entry, being a topic of legislative power, we
find that there is no such specific entry in Union list	 nor
in  State  list	 or  concurrent list which  can	 be  of	 any
assistance  in this connection.	 Entry 50 in the State	list
is  out	 of  picture as we have	 seen  earlier.	  In-  these
circumstances the State legislature cannot rely on any entry
in the State list or concurrent list for imposing such a tax
once a valid legislation by Parliament under Entry 54 of the
Union  list  is	 holding  the  field.	In  the	 alternative
imposition  of such hybrid tax on mines + capital  +  labour
would  be  covered by residuary Entry 97 of the	 Union	list
which  empowers the Parliament to enact laws on	 topics	 not
covered	 by others specific entries in List II or List	III.
This conclusion squarely flows from the observations made by
Oza  J., in his concurring judgment in India Cement  Ors....
It  must,  therefore, be held that
Section 9
of the  Act  is
within	the  legislative competence of the  Parliament	both
under Entry 54 of the Union list as well as Entry 97 thereof
The  first ground of attack on
Section 9
by Shri  Sanghi  is
thus devoid of substance and is, therefore, -rejected.
16.  Mr. Sanghi next submitted that
Section  9(3)
is	  an
piece of 'delegated legislation	   and it should not  suffer
from the vice of excessive delegation.	No exception can  be
taken to this submission of Shri Sanghi.  Let us try to	 see
whether
Section 9(3)
suffers from any such vice.  It must be
kept in view that Parliament itself has laid down the  rates
of  royalty in the IInd schedule of the Act.   However,	 the
Parliament  felt  that with passage of time these  rates  of
royalty	 may have to be suitably modified.  This is  obvious
as the Act was enacted years back  in 1957.  The  purchasing
power  of rupee went on failing year after year	 and  decade
after decade.  Therefore, instead of Parliament itself every
time  being required to increase the rates, it left  to	 the
Central	 Government to do so but it imposed certain  fetters
on  the	 power	of the	Central	 Government.   Firstly,	 the
proviso of Section
107
9(3)
clearly lays down that such enhancement should not  be
made  before the end of four years and	now  after-amendment
before	the  end of three years.  This	itself	indicates  a
guideline
laid	 down  by
the Parliament that  the  rate  of
inflation  and	fall of money value of the rupee  should  be
considered  once in three years and that the royalty  should
be enhanced only once in three years.  The second  guideline
in
Section  9(3)
is  pertaining  to  the  very  topic	  of
delegation   of	  such	legislative  power.    The   Central
"Government has to keep in view the original rates mentioned
in  End	 Schedule  in connection  with	different  types  of
minerals  and  to suggest suitable enhancement once  in	 the
three  years depending upon the requirements of	 the  States
concerned  for whom the royalty is meant.  It is to be	paid
by  holder  of	mining lease who extracts  minerals.   If  a
person is merely in occupation of land which contains  mines
and minerals, he is not liable to pay any royalty but it  is
only  when  he holds a mining lease and by  virtue  of	that
extracts one or more minerals then only he is called upon to
pay  royalty  to  the State Government as the  lease  is  in
respect	 of  the land in which minerals vest  in  the  State
Government.   This exercise is to be carried out keeping  in
view the very object and purpose of the Act, namely, regula-
tion  of  mines and development of minerals  which  are	 the
catch  words of Entry 54 of List II under which the  Act  is
enacted.   Therefore,  fixation	 of royalty  should  have  a
direct	nexus with the minerals through out the	 country  on
uniform pattern so that activity of winning the minerals for
the  benefit  of the lessees of such mining  leases  in	 the
first  instance	 and ultimately for the economy as  a  whole
should not get in any way frustrated.  There are  sufficient
guidelines from the Act to enable the Central Government  to
exercise  its delegated legislative function in a  just	 and
proper	manner	keeping in view the uniform  development  of
minerals through out the country.  In this connection it  is
also  necessary	 to keep in view
Section 28
subsection	 (1)
which  provides that every rule or notification made by	 the
Central Government be placed before each House of Parliament
for  a	total period of 30 days in one session or  two	more
successive  session and if both Houses agree in	 making	 any
modification in the rule or Notification should not be made,
the  rule or Notification shall thereafter have effect	only
in  such modified form or be of no effect, as the  case	 may
be.  When such a safety valve is provided it cannot be	said
that the exercise of delegated legislative power by  Central
Government  in the first instance under
Section	 9(3)
would
suffer from any excessive delegation of legislative power or
effacement of legislative power of the Parliament.
17.  In our view the High Court correctly held that
Section
9(3)
does  not	 suffer from  any  excessive  delegation  of
legislative  power.  Before parting with this discussion  we
may  deal  with	 one more submission  of  Shri	Sanghi.	  He
submitted  that earlier the legislation had itself  provided
in
Section  9(3)
a ceiling for  enhancement  of  rates  of
royalty	 and  to  that extent there was a  safety  valve  or
guideline  by Parliament.  But after amendment this  ceiling
is  given  a  go  bye  and  hence  the	Section	 has  become
arbitrary.  It is not possible to agree with this contention
for  the obvious reason that whatever enhanced rate of	roy-
alty  is  fixed by Notification by  the	 Central  Government
under
Section 9(3)
, it has got to be filtered	through	 the
process	 of
Section 28(1)
and if the Parliament  finds	 the
proposed hike to be uncalled for it may
108
veto it out.  There are sufficient guidelines as to for what
purpose	  the	royalty	 can  be   enhanced   as   discussed
hereinabove, once in three years.  In this connection we may
profitably  refer to the decision of this Court in the	Case
N.K.  Papiah  &	 Sons.	v.  The	 Exercise  Commissioner	 and
another,  (AIR 1975 SC 1007).  In that case this  Court	 was
concerned  with the question of constitutional	validity  of
Section	 22
of Karnataka Excise Act.
Section  22
conferred
power on the Government to fix rates of excise duty.   There
was no guideline in
Section 22
about upper limit of the duty
which  could be fixed.	Repelling the contention  that	this
had resulted in excessive delegated power, Mathew J.  speak-
ing  for  this	Court  held  that  power  conferred  on	 the
Government by
Section 22
was valid.  From the mere fact that
it is not certain whether the preamble of the Act gives	 any
guidance  for fixing the rate of excise duty, it  cannot  be
said that the legislature has no control over delegate; that
requirement  of	 laying of rules before the  legislature  is
control	 over  delegated legislation.  The  legislature	 may
also retain its control over its delegate by exercising	 its
power of repeal.
18.  In	 the case of Delhi Cloth and General Mills  Co.Ltd.,
M/s.   Arvind  Mills  Ltd. etc. etc. v.	 Union	of  India  &
Ors,etc. etc. (AIR 1983 SC 937) another Bench of this  Court
speaking  through  Desai  J.  held  that  the  provision  of
Sections  58A
and
642
of the Companies Act  requiring  every
rule  enacted in exercise of the power conferred by it	must
be placed before each House of Parliament for a period of 30
days  and both Houses have power to suggest modification  in
the proposed rules to check any transgression of permissible
limits	of delegated legislation by the delegate,  made	 the
challenge   on	 the,	ground	 of   excessive	  delegation
unsustainable.	 In view of this settled legal	position  it
cannot be held that
Section 9(3)
suffers from any  excessive
delegation  of legislative power.  'Mere is full control  of
Parliament  under
Section 28
for checking such	exercise  of
the   delegate	and  for  correcting  the  same,  if   found
necessary.   The second ground canvassed by Shri Sanghi	 for
challenging  the vires of
Section 9(3)
is also	without	 any
substance  and stands rejected.	 Therefore,, point no. 1  is
answered in the negative.
Point No.2
19.  Sofaras  this  point is concerned,	 wehaveto  see	the,
background in which the impugned Notification dated 1.8.1991
saw  the  light	 of  the  day.	 After	1981  there  was  no
enhancement of royalty though a clear power was conferred on
the Central Government by
Section 9(3)
to enhance the  rates
of  royalty at the end of every four years and then  amended
after  every three years.  Almost a decade had	passed	when
the  impugned Notification was issued, on 1.8.1991.  In	 the
meantime,  at least on three occasions rates of	 royalty  as
found in earlier Notification of 1981 of the Act could	have
been  enhanced by the Central Government in exercise of	 its
power  under
Section 9(3)
but that was not done.   That	 was
because	 the  States themselves who were the owners  of	 the
minerals and were entitled to receive the amounts of royalty
on extracted minerals by the concerned lessee tried to	help
themselves  by	imposing  various  cesses  on  royalties  by
different  legislations.
It is no doubt  true	 that,	that
would  swell  the  exchequer  of the  States  but  the	said
exercise  was undertaken with a view to	 obtain	 appropriate
rates of royalty commensurate with the price of the
109
extracted  minerals  as	 charged from time to  time  by	 the
lessees.  This imposition of cesses by the States on royalty
as originally fixed by the Central Government under
Section
9(3)
was frowned upon by this Court and held to  be  beyond
the legislative. competence of the State legislature. It  is
under  these  circumstances that the  States  requested	 the
Centre	to repair the damage or loss to the State  exchequer
in  the light of the decision of
India Cement
Case  (supra)
and  that is the reason why a study group to look  into	 the
matter	was  formed  by	 the  Central  Government  in	this
connection.   The  report of the study group  clearly  shows
that  rates of royalty as earlier enhanced in 1981  had	 not
been, however, further enhanced for all these years and that
in the meantime attempts by the States to raise the rates of
royalty by way of imposed cesses on royalty were found to be
ultra vires the State legislature and in these circumstances
it was necessary in enhance the rates of royalty on  various
types of coal.	It is thereafter that the said	Notification
was  issued  by the Central Government	invoking  its  power
under
Section	9(3)
.  It was vehemently  contended  by	 Mr.
Sanghi,	 Mr.  Sorabjee and Mr. Ramaswamy that  the  impugned
Notification is beyond the scope of
Section 9
of the Act  as
it has nothing to do with the development of minerals but it
was  issued  only  for	compensating  the  States  who	have
suffered loss because of striking down of cesses imposed  on
royalty	 by this Court.	 Mr. Sorabjee invited our  attention
to  various  decisions	of High Courts and  this  Court	 for
submitting that royalty is levied on the minerals  extracted
by the' holders of the mining leases.
In the first instance
lie took us to decision of Punjab in case
Dr. Shanti  Saroop
Sharma	and  Another v. State of Punjab & Others
(AIR	1969
Punjab	&  Haryana 79), Gurudev J. in paragraph	 14  of	 the
report held that royalty is not defined either in the Act or
the Rules framed thereunder by the Central or the State Gov-
ernment.   Learned Judge has referred to what is  stated  at
page 893 of (Wharton's Law Lexicon (14th edition) in para 15
to the following effect:-
"	   royalty  is	payment	 to  a	 patentee by
	      agreement	 on every article made according  to
	      his patent; or to an author by a publisher  on
	      every  copy of his book sold; or to the  owner
	      of minerals for the right of working the	same
	      on every ton or other weight raised."
The  learned  Judge  also  referred  to	 various  dictionary
meanings  of  the  term	 royalty.   According  to   Stroud's
Judicial Dictionary of Words and Phrases (3rd Edition)
	      "In  its	secondary sense the  word  'royalty'
	      signifies, in mining leases, that part, of the
	      reddendum, which is variable and depends	upon
	      the  quantity of minerals gotten	(Att.	Gen.
	      Ontario  V.  Mercer  (18838AC  767)  Sup:	 see
	      Hereon  Greville Nugent V Mackenzie (1900)  AC
	      83,  cited RENT; Listowel v. Gibbings  (1858-9
	      Ir  CLR 223) Sup; or the agreed payment  to  a
	      patentee	on every article made  according  to
	      the patent.  "
According  to  Mozley  and Whiteley's  Law  Dictionary	(7th
Edition) page 328
	      "A pro rata payment to a granter or lessor  on
	      the   working  of	 the  property	leased,	  or
	      otherwise	 on  the  profits of  the  grant  or
	      lease.   The  word is specially used  in	ref-
	      erence to mines patents and copyrights."
According  to  Prem's Judicial Dictionary (Volume  IV)	1964
Edition, page 1457:
110
"Royalty is inter alia, a charge by the  owner
	      of  minerals from those to when he  gives	 the
			    concession to remove them, and the charge is o
n
	      production, the rate being fixed according  to
	      weight: Behru Lal v. State  of  Rajasthan	 AIR
	      1956 Raj 161."
According  to Wharton's Law Lexicon royalties  are  payments
which  the  Government may demand for the  appropriation  of
minerals,   timber  or	other  property	 belonging  to	 the
Government.   Two important features of royalty have  to  be
noticed,  they are, that the payment made for the  privilege
of  removing the articles is in proportion to  the  quantity
removed	 and the basis of the payment is an  agreement.	  In
para  22 learned Judge has concluded that the  word  Royalty
has a well recognised and defined meaning which means  share
of produce or profit paid to the owner of the land for being
granted	 privilege  of	producing  minerals  therefrom	 and
excludes  the  concept of fee simple title  to	minerals  in
place.	The same meaning has been given to the term  royalty
in  the cases
Saurashtra Cement & Chemical Industries  Ltd.,
Ranavav	 v.  Union  of India
(AIR 1979	Gujarat	 180)  Laxmi
Narayan Agarwalla & Others etc. v. State of Orissa & Others,
(AIR  1983  Orissa 21 0) and Surajdin Laxmanlal	 v.State  of
M.P.  Nagpur  & others (AIR 1960 M.P. 129).   Shri  Sorabjee
also  took us through the decision in case D.K. Trivedi	 and
Sons and Ors. etc. etc. v. State of Gujarat & 0rs. etc. etc.
(1986  (1) SCR 479), wherein at page 532 of the	 report	 the
dictionary  meanings as found in various  dictionaries	were
noticed.   Ultimately Madon J. speaking for the	 Court	made
the following observations at page 534 of the report:-
"In  a mining lease the consideration  usually
	      moving  from the lessee to the lessor  is	 the
	      rent for the area leased (often called surface
	      rent),  dead  rent  and  royalty.	  Since	 the
	      mining lease confers upon the lessee the right
	      not  merely to enjoy the property as under  an
	      ordinary	lease but also to  extract  minerals
	      from the land and to appropriate them for	 his
	      own  use or benefit, in addition to the  usual
	      rent  for	 the  area demised,  the  lessee  is
	      required to pay a certain amount in respect of
	      the  minerals extracted proportionate  to	 the
	      quantity so extracted. Such payment is  called
	      'royalty'."
In the light of the aforesaid meaning of the term 'royalty',
it   was  submitted  by	 Shri  Sorabjee	 that  the   Central
Government  under
Section  9(3)
can enhance  the  rates  of
royalty payable on the extracted minerals by the lessee	 and
it is to be paid to the lessor, the State concerned in whose
territory/jurisdiction	the  mines  are	 situated  but	 the
impugned  Notification was issued in exercise of that  power
not  for  developing mines but it is solely issued  for	 the
purpose	 of compensating the States exchequers for the	loss
of revenue suffered by them and that such a Notification has
nothing	  to  do  with	the  development  of  minerals	 and
therefore,  is beyond the scope and ambit of
Section  9(3)
.
Same  view was canvassed by learned counsel Shri Sanghi	 and
Shri Ramaswamy.
20.  Having given our anxious consideration we find there is
no  substance in this contention.  The reasons are  obvious.
The  legislature has entrusted the Central  Government	with
the power to enhance the rates of royalty from time to time.
It is of course true that traditionally speaking royalty  is
an  amount  which  is paid under contract of  lease  by	 the
lessee	 to  the  lessor,  namely,  the	 State	 Governments
concerned and-it is commensurate with the quantity
111
of minerals extracted.	But we cannot lose sight of the fact
that  since  1981 such enhancement of royalty has  not	been
done  by  the Central Government.  Rates  of  royalty  fixed
before a decade, with the passage of time and fall in  money
value  and  increase  in inflation  would  naturally  become
illusory.   Therefore, the States would	 legitimately  claim
for  increasing the rates or royalty.	They  unsuccessfully
tried to do so themselves by imposing cesses on royalty.  In
these  circumstances, it was perfectly open to	the  Central
Government  to	exercise its power under
Section  9(3)
and
enhance	 the  rates of royalty so that loss  to	 the  States
exchequer  of  the amounts which otherwise would  have	been
available  to  the States could be compensated.	 It  is	 not
that  the States were otherwise not entitled to the  royalty
amounts;  but  because of the operation of
Section  9
,	 the
power of the States to enhance the royalty get vested in the
Central Government.  But once the rates are enhanced by	 the
Central Government, the enhanced royalty was to be  received
by the State and same is to recovered from concerned  lessee
of minerals.  In fact Mr. Sanghi was right when he contended
that  there  is	 no question of the  royalty  amounts  being
distributed by the Centre to the States as per
Articles	 268
and
269
of the Constitution.  That once royalty amounts	 are
fixed  by  the Central Government under
Section  9(3)
,	 the
States	automatically  become entitled to receive  the	same
from lessees of minerals who are allowed to extract them  on
payment of such amounts of royalty to the State which is the
owner-lessor  of  these minerals.  Enhancement of  rates  of
royalty cannot be said to have no nexus with the development
of  minerals  as contended by learned counsel for  the	writ
petitioners, only because the enhanced rates of royalty	 are
to  go to swell the exchequers of concerned States.
In	 the
case  of
Orissa Cement Limited
(supra),	 while	interpreting
Entry  50 in the light of
Section 9
of the Act,	 Ranganathan
J. speaking for this Court has observed as under:-
"To take up Entry 50 first, a perusal of Entry
	      50 would show that the competence of the State
	      Legislature    with   respect    thereto	  is
	      circumscribed  by 'any limitations imposed  by
	      Parliament   by	law  relating	to   mineral
	      development'.   The  M.M.R.D. Act	 1957  is  -
	      there  can  be no doubt about this, a  law  of
	      Parliament  relating to  mineral	development.
S. 9
of the said Act empowers the Central Gov-
	      ernment  to fix, alter, enhance or reduce	 the
	      rates   of  royalty  payable  in	respect	  of
	      minerals, removed from the land or consumed by
	      the  lessee.  Sub-Section (3) of
Section 9
in
	      terms states that the royalties payable  under
	      the  Second Schedule to that Act shall not  be
	      enhanced	more  than once during a  period  of
	      three years.  India Cement has held that	this
	      is a clear bar on the State Legislature taxing
	      royalty so as, in effect, to amend the  Second
	      Schedule	to the Central Act and that  if	 the
	      cess is taken as a tax falling under Entry  50
	      it  will be ultra vires in view of the  provi-
	      sions of the Central Act."
At page 168 of the said report while dealing with the  topic
of development of minerals, Ranganathan J. examined the con-
tention that imposition of such cesses had no nexus with the
development of mineral.	 Relying upon the observations found
in earlier judgment of this Court it was observed that these
observations establish on the one hand that the	 distinction
sought	to be made between mineral development	and  mineral
area  development  is  not a real one as the  two  types  of
development  are inextricably and integrally  interconnected
and, on the other, that fees of the nature
112
we are concerned with, squarely fall within the scope of the
provisions  of the Central Act.	 The object of Section 9  of
the Central Act cannot be ignored.  The terms of Section  13
of  the Central Act extracted earlier empower the  Union  to
frame  rules  in  regard to  matters  concerning  roads	 and
environment.
Section 18(1)
empowers the Central  Government
to take all such steps may be necessary for the conservation
and  development of minerals in India and for protection  of
environment.  These in the very nature of things cannot mean
such amenities only in the mines but take in also the  areas
leading	 to  and all around the mines.	The  development  of
mineral	 areas is implicit in them.
Section  25
implicitly
authorises  the levy of rent, royalty, taxes and fees  under
the  Act  and  the  rules. The	scope  of  the	powers	thus
conferred  is very wide.
The purpose of the  Union  control
envisaged  by  Entry 54 and the M.M.R.D. Act,  1957,  is  to
provide	 for proper development of mines and  mineral  areas
and also to bring about a uniformity all over the country in
regard to the minerals specified in Schedule 1 in the matter
of royalties and, consequently, prices. Ranganathan J. agree
with  Mr.  Bobde who appeared for  Central  Government	that
prices	of minerals for exports were fixed and could not  be
escalated with the enhancement of the royalties and that  if
different royalties were to be charged by different  States,
their working would become impossible.	There appeared to be
force  in this submission.  As pointed out in
India  Cement
Case,  the  Central Act bars an enhancement of	the  royalty
directly or indirectly, except by the Union and in the	man-
ner specified by the 1957 Act.
21.   It   becomes,   therefore,   clear   that	   enhancing
uniformlyrates of royalty for the entire country even though
minerals might be extracted from different State's territory
is necessary for having uniform pattern of price of minerals
and  that has a direct linkage with the development of	min-
erals.	 It is also to be kept in view that  regulating	 the
rates  of  royalty  on extraction of minerals  has  also  an
important role to play in opening up new 1 mining areas	 for
winning	 minerals.   In	 this connection  we  may  refer  to
Section 18
of the Act which deals with mineral	development.
Sub-section (1) of
Section 18
lays down that it shall be the
duty of the Central Government to take all such steps as may
be necessary for the conservation and systematic development
of  minerals in India and for the protection of	 environment
by  preventing	or controlling any pollution  which  may  be
caused	by  prospecting	 or mining operation  and  for	such
purposes, the Central Government may by Notification in	 the
Official  Gazette, make such rules as it thinks	 fit.	Sub-
Section	 (2)  thereof lays down that in	 particular  and  v.
without	 prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  power
such  rules  may  provide for all or any  of  the  following
matters,  namely,  (a)	the opening of	new  mines  and	 the
regulation  of	mining	operations  in	any  area  (b)	 the
regulation of the excavation or collection of minerals	from
any mine.  It is obvious that rules framed under
Section  18
(2)
have a direct nexus with the development  of  minerals.
In this connection we may refer to Minerals Conservation And
Development Rules, 1988 framed under
Section 18
sub-section
(2) of the Act.	 It is true that these rules do not apply to
coal but as
laid down by
Section 18(1)
read with Section  30
A even for mining leases for coal such rules in	 appropriate
cases may be made applicable.
Rule 45 of these rules  deals
with monthly, quarterly and an-
113
nual  returns  by owners of every mine.	 When  we  refer  to
prescribed  return from the owner of the mine we  find	from
Form  1-9 that Form 1-1 will govern the monthly	 return	 for
other  mines and various information sought for iron ore  in
Part 1 of the form.  Item no.4 in that part deals with	rent
and  royalty paid.  Thus royalty amount has to be  mentioned
in  the	 form.	 It becomes, thus, clear  that	fixation  of
royalty rates is in the realm of development of minerals  as
envisaged  by
Section 18
of the Act.  It is, therefore,	 not
possible  to  agree with the learned counsel  for  the	writ
petitioners that fixation of rates of royalty has nothing to
do with the development of minerals.
22.That takes to the contention that even if it were so	 the
impugned Notification is ultra vires
Section 9(3)
as it	 has
nothing to do with the development of minerals.	 As we	have
already seen earlier, to have a uniform pattern of rates  of
royalty to be charged for extracting different qualities and
quantities  of minerals from different parts of the  country
is  a very vital aspect of the development of minerals.	  It
is true that one of the main objects of the Notification was
for recompensing the loss suffered by States, but the  facts
remains	 that  they  suffered loss since the  last  hike  in
royalty	 was  done in 1981 by the  Central  Government.	  It
cannot	be said that even as purchasing power of  rupee	 had
fallen and inflation had risen including the prices of	coal
in national and international market, there was no felt	 for
raising the rates of royalty to be charged for extraction of
minerals  like coal from the lease holders when the  mineral
belonged  to  the  State.  If the amount of  royalty  is  so
enhanced, it has to go to the coffers of the State concerned
which is the owner of the mineral.
This  is a logical corollary of enhanced rates	of  royalty.
It cannot be said to be an irrelevant consideration as tried
to be suggested by the learned counsel for the	petitioners.
On the contrary, it was a relevant consideration because the
States	have  to monitor the working of the  mines  and	 the
income	generating from extraction of minerals within  their
respective territories.	 If the Central Government exercised
its power under
Section 9(3)
of the Act though belatedly  in
1991 for bringing out this result, it cannot be said that it
has done what is ultra vires or beyond the scope of
Section
9(3)
of the Act.  In this connection we may keep in view the
basic fact that minerals as found in the bowels of the earth
or attached to earth surface by itself cannot develop.	 For
developing  it,	 it  has to be brought on  the	surface	 and
separated from the crust of the mother earth and that can be
done  by  mining operation for winning these  minerals.	  In
this connection it is profitable to look at
Section 3
of the
Act.   It  defines minerals to include all  minerals  except
mineral	 oils including natural gas and	 petroleum.   Mining
lease is defined to mean a lease granted for the purpose  of
undertaking  mining  operations	 and  includes	a  sub-lease
granted for such purpose.  Mining operation means any opera-
tions undertaken for the purpose of winning any mineral.  It
is obvious that development of mineral as envisaged by	Sec-
tion  18 of the Act and even by Entry 50 of List 11  of	 the
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution, necessarily would mean
extraction  of	mineral out of the bowels of earth  or	from
crust  of earth by mining operations.  Therefore,  the	term
development  of	 minerals has a direct linkage	with  mining
operation.    Without  that  minerals  cannot	develop	  by
themselves.  In Words and Phrases, Permanent Edition, Volume
No.27
114
issued by West Publishing Company, St. Paul Minn., the	term
mineral is defined at page 21 0 as follows:
"A  mineral  is a natural	 body  destitute  of
	      Organisation or life." It has also been  shown
	      that a mineral is anything that grows in mines
	      and contains metals.- It is further  mentioned
	      therein  that  the mineral as used in  a	deed
	      will  be	restricted to that given it  by	 the
	      custom of the country in which the deed is  to
	      operate.	 Mineral  in  ordinary	and   common
	      meaning is comprehensive term including  every
	      description of stone and rock deposit  whether
	      containing metallic or nonmetallic  substance.
	      The word mineral in popular sense means  those
	      inorganic	 constituents of the  earth's  crust
	      which are commonly obtained by mining or other
	      process  for bringing them to the surface	 for
	      profit.	Mineral hidden in the bowel  of	 the
	      earth  by	 themselves cannot yield  profit  to
	      anyone and they become minerals when they	 are
	      brought  out on the surface of the  earth	 buy
	      mining operations.
23.It  must therefore be held that regulation of  mines	 and
development   of  minerals  are	  interconnected   concepts.
Consequently,	it  is	not  possible  to  agree  with	 the
contention  of the learned counsel for the writ	 petitioners
that  imposition  of  royalty has nothing  to  do  with	 the
development  of minerals or that enhancing the rates of	 the
royalty	 by the impugned Notification is extraneous  to	 the
purpose	 of developing mines but is solely for swelling	 the
coffers	 of  the States.  Once that conclusion	is  reached,
there would survive no question of Notification being issued
partly	for  legitimate purpose of enhancing  royalty  rates
after  a  decade  from 1981 and	 partly	 for  an  irrelevant
purpose of swelling the State exchequer.  In fact the entire
purpose	 of  this  exercise is	for  a	legitimate  relevant
purpose	 for developing the minerals and enabling the  State
which  are the owners thereof to properly manage the  mining
leases	so  that minerals can develop on a  uniform  pattern
throughout  the	 country.
In that view of  the	 matter	 the
submission made by Shri Ramaswamy relying on case
S.  Pratap
Singh  v. The State of Punjab
(1964 (4) SCR 733) that  alien
purpose	 cannot	 be mixed with statutory purpose  is  of  no
avail to him.
The argument of Shri Sanghi relying upon	 the
decision of this Court in case Chanan Mal & Others, State of
Haryana	 & Others (1977 (1) SCC 340) in para 23 at page	 350
that declaration, under Section has a limited coverage	also
cannot	be  of any assistance to him for the  simple  reason
that  whatever may be covered by
Section 2
declaration,  it
has  definitely	 covered the imposition of  royalty  by	 the
Parliament  as	held in the Constitution Bench	decision  of
this  Court  in
India Cement
Case (supra).  As a  result  of
this   discussion  it  must  be	 held  that   the   impugned
Notification  cannot  be said to be ultra vires	 of
Section
9(2)
of the Act.  The second point is, therefore,  answered
in the negative.
Point No. 3
24.  The question is whether the impugned Notification is  a
piece  of colourable exercise of power and, therefore,	null
and void.  It has to be kept in view that it is an  exercise
of  delegated legislative function entrusted to the  Central
Government by Parliament under
Section 9(3)
.  The concept of
colourable legislation has a well defined connotation so far
as  parent  legislation	 is concerned.	If  the	 legislation
trespasses on a field not reserved for it under the relevant
entry of the.  Seventh Schedule it can be said to be
115
a colourable legislation meaning thereby it purports to	 get
covered	 by  an	 entry	which  does  not  give	 legislative
competence to the legislature concerned to enact such a law.
Adverting  to  the  concept  of	 colourable  legislation   a
Constitution  Bench of this Court in case of
Federation  of
Hotel  & Restaurant v. Union of India & Others
(AIR 1990  SC
1637), made the following pertinent observations:-
"The  constitutionality  of  the	law  becomes
	      essentially  a  question of power which  in  a
	      federal  constitution,  unlike a	legally	 om-
	      nipotent	legislature  like the  British	Par-
	      liament,	turns upon the construction  of	 the
	      entries  in  the	legislative  lists.   If   a
	      legislature  with limited or qualified  juris-
	      diction	transgressed   its   powers,	such
	      transgression may be open direct and overt  or
	      disguised	 indirect  and covert.	 The  latter
	      kind  of trespass is figuratively referred  to
	      as  'colourable legislation',  connoting	that
	      although	apparently the legislature  purports
			    to act within the limits of its own powers yet
,
	      in  substance  and in reality,  it  encroaches
	      upon  a field prohibited to it,  requiring  an
	      examination,   with   some   strictness,	 the
	      substance	 of the legislation for the  purpose
	      of  determining what is that  the	 legislature
	      was really doing.	 Wherever legislative powers
	      are  distributed	between the  Union  and	 the
	      States   situations   may	 arise	 where	 two
	      legislative  fields might apparently  overlap.
	      It  is  the  duty	 of  the  Courts,   however,
	      difficult	 it  may be, to	 ascertain  to	what
	      degree  and to what extent, the  authority  to
	      deal with matters failing within these classes
	      of subjects exists in each legislature and  to
	      define in the particular case before them, the
	      limits of the respective powers."
5.It  is obvious that this aspect of colourable	 legislation
would  not  strictly ply while judging the legality  of	 the
exercise of the delegated legislative function.
In fact it could not be contended by learned counsel for the
writ petitioners that the Central Government had no power to
act  under
Section 9(3)
.  Therefore, in the  strict  sense,
there is no question of the said Notification being a  piece
of  colourable legislation touching upon the power  of	some
other  authority  functioning under any other  provision  of
delegated legislation.	However, it has also to be  observed
that even in cases of delegated legislation, there are	well
defined	 limitations  beyond  which  if	 such  an   exercise
projects  itself, it would become ultra vires the  provision
permitting  such an exercise.  We may profitably refer to  a
decision  of  this Court in case Indian	 Express  Newspapers
(Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. and Others etc. etc. v. Union of India  &
Others. (AIR 1986 SC 515).  A Bench of three learned  Judges
of this Court speaking through Venkataramaiah J., as he then
was, in connection with Notification issued under
Section 25
of the Customs Act which was a piece of subordinate legisla-
tion has made the following observations:-
"A  piece of subordinate legislation does	 not
	      carry  the  same degree of immunity  which  is
	      enjoyed  by  a Statute passed by	a  competent
	      legislature.   Subordinate legislation may  be
	      questioned  on  any of the  grounds  on  which
	      plenary	legislation   is   questioned.	  In
	      addition	it  may also be	 questioned  in	 the
	      ground that it does not conform to the statute
	      under  which  it is made.	 It may	 further  be
	      questioned  on the ground that it is  contrary
	      to  some	other  statute.	  That	is   because
	      subordinate legislation must yield to  plenary
	      legislation.  It may also be questioned on the
	      ground  that  it is unreasonable	not  in	 the
	      sense of not being reasonable but in the sense
	      that it is manifestly arbitrary.	"
Keeping in view this legal position, let us
116
examine	 the challenge to the impugned Notification  on	 the
ground that it is a colourable device.	It was submitted  by
the  writ  petitioners that though purporting to  act  under
Section	 9(3)
of the Act and by which an effort was made  by
the  Central  Government to raise the rates of	royalty,  in
substance they wanted only augment the coffers of the  State
Government  and	 nothing more and in that manner  it  was  a
colourable  exercise  of power on the part  of	the  Central
Government.   While discussing Point No.2, we  have  already
repelled this contention.  For the reasons recorded  therein
even this contention has to be rejected.  Our attention	 was
invited	 by  &fr.   Sorabjee, learned counsel  for  the	 ap-
pellants,  M/s.	 Birla Jute and Industries Limited,  to	 the
counter filed by the Union of India and the State Government
in the High Court for justifying the impugned  Notification.
That  counter is found at page 52 in SLP(C) No, 8190/94.   A
combined counter was filed on behalf of the respondent	nos.
1,  3  and 4 in Misc.  Petition No.2907 of 1992	 before	 the
High Court in the case of Ws.  Saurashtra Cement & Chemicals
India  Ltd.  and  Another  and it was  relied  upon  by	 the
concerned  authorities in all the other cases.	In the	said
counter at paragraph 'Q' it has been averred that the  State
Government  tried various methods for increasing their	rev-
enue  from  time to time a.-, stated in the  petition.	 The
State Government enacted various Laws imposing Minerals Area
Development  and other cesses.	These have been struck	down
by  the	 Hon'ble Supreme Court and  the	 State	Governments,
therefore,  were left with practical difficulties in  making
necessary financial arrangement, The matter was examined  in
details	 on  the representation made by	 the  various  State
Governments and after considering all aspect of the  matter,
a  reasonable  increase in the royalty was  found  justified
and,  therefore, the Central Government has issued the	said
Notification.	That after revision of rates of	 royalty  on
coal  in  February, 1981 the next revision was due  in	Feb-
ruary,	1985, Study group was appointed in 1984 to  consider
all aspects in depth regarding revision of rates of  royalty
on  coal.  The study group met representatives of the  State
Government  and ascertained their views.  It also  issued  a
questionnaire  to  the State Governments, calling  for	data
relating to production of coal, rates of royalty, cesses, if
any  levied  by them and other	relevant  information.	 The
study  group  found that most of the coal  producing  States
were levying cesses and taxes on coal the incidence of which
was  much higher than that or royalty.	Some of these  taxes
cesses	were  being levied as a percentage of  the  pit-head
value of coal by the State Governments.	 All the State	Gov-
ernments representated to the study group that the rates  of
royalty	 on  coal should bear a close correlation  with	 the
prices	of  coal.
The coal producing  States,	particularly
West Bengal and Bihar pressed for fixation of royalty on  ad
valorem	 basis instead of the existing specific rates.	 The
study group expressed its views that any levy of royalty  on
ad  valorem  basis,  without a	commitment  from  the  State
Governments  to	 refrain from levying cesses, would  not  be
equitable as it would have a cascading effect on the  prices
of  coal paid by the consumers.	 Thereafter the counter	 re-
ferred	to  the striking down of cesses imposed	 by  various
State  legislatures by this Court and then at paragraph	 'T'
it is stated that Governments whose cess Acts were  declared
unconstitutional  and collection of cesses was stopped	were
suffering substantial losses of revenues, they approached
117
the Central Government to revise the rate of royalty on coal
immediately to help the to get out of the financial  crisis.
It  is	further	 averred in the counter	 that  in  order  to
examine	 the requests of State Governments to  increase	 the
rates  of royalty Department of Coal appointed	yet  another
study  group on 6th February, 1991 to examine the report  of
the  earlier study group and recommend appropriate  increase
in  royalty in the wake of the Supreme Court's	Judgment  in
India  Cements
Case and subsequent judgments  of  the	High
Courts.	  The  study  group discussed the  issues  with	 the
representatives of the coal producing States Governments and
considered  their views.  Then follows paragraph  'U'  which
states that after considering the report of the second study
group the rates of royalty on coal have been revised from an
average	 of  Rs.5.30 per tonne to Rs.70/-  per	tonne  w.e.f
1.3.1991.  These rates have not been made applicable to	 the
States	of  Assam and West Bengal because these	 States	 are
levying/collecting  cesses on coal as their Cess  Acts	have
not been struck down by the Courts so far.
26.Placing  reliance  on these averments, of  the  concerned
authorities  it was vehemently contended by Mr.Sorabjee	 and
Mr.  Ramaswamy that the impugned Notification is issued	 not
for the purpose of development of mineral as contemplated by
Section	 9(3)
but  entirely for  a  collateral	 purpose  of
compensating  the  State Governments for the  loss  of	cess
revenues and for welling their coffers.	 It is not  possible
to  agree  with this contention.   The	aforesaid  averments
clearly	 indicate that from 1981 rates of royalty  were	 not
increased further and there was a demand from all States  to
make  suitable increase in rates of royalty be	commensurate
with the rising prices of coal.	 That is why the first study
group was appointed in 1984 and that was followed by  second
study  group of 1991 Naturally the second study	 group	came
the  conclusion that the cesses impose were struck  down  by
this  Court and, there fore, there was a need  for  properly
enhancing  royalty  rates.   As
Section	 9(3)
is  the	only
Section	 remaining  in	field which  could  permit  such  an
exercise  and it only the Central Government which could  do
so,  accordingly the impugned Notification has been  issued.
It  tried to enhance the rates of royalty which earlier	 the
States unauthorisedly tried to bring about.  If the original
writ petitioner's contentions are accepted, it could even be
contended that neither the Central Government under
Section
9(3)
nor the State Governments could increase the rates  of
royalty	 and 1981 rates which have become illusory with	 the
passage	 of  time  would  continue  to	hold  the  field  ad
infinitum.  It has to be kept in view that a fresh  exercise
of  delegated  legislative  function in all  the  facts	 and
circumstances did justify such enhancement at lease after 10
years	of  the	 earlier  revision  in	1981.	The   motive
underlying the said enhancement to compensate the States for
loss  of revenue which they have suffered cannot be said  to
be totally irrelevant or having any vitiating effect on	 the
exercise  of  power under
Section 9(3)
which  is  otherwise
required  to be resorted to in the facts and  -circumstances
of  the case.  The motive of legislature or for that  matter
that  of  the delegate in exercising  delegated	 legislative
function  for  enacting a provision  within  its  competence
cannot	be considered to be in any way having  any  relevant
nexus  to the efficacy of the product of such  an  exercise.
As we have already discussed earlier, the mineral belongs to
the States, and so, if the Central Govern-
118
ment  has taken into consideration the fact that the  States
revenues are required to be re-compensated on account of the
loss suffered by them in their abortive efforts to  escalate
the  royalty,  it cannot be considered to be  an  irrelevant
consideration.	It clearly appeared that after 10 years from
1981  during which the royalty rates remained  static  there
was  a crying need of the day for the Central Government  to
exercise  its power under
Section 9(3)
and to revise  upward
the royalty rates in conformity v. with the rising prices of
the  minerals  around as mentioned in the  counter  and	 for
which  there  was  a strong representation  by	the  various
States Governments to the Central Government.  With  respect
we  are	 not in a position to endorse the view of  the	High
Court that the impugned Notification was a colourable devise
and was issued for extraneous purpose.	Equally, we are	 not
in a position to agree with the contention of Shri Ramaswamy
that the said Notification was issued for an alien  purpose.
The  third  point  for	our  consideration  is,	  therefore,
answered in the negative.
Point No.4
27.So  far as this point is concerned, it is true that	even
the  exercise  of delegated power can be challenged  on	 the
ground	that  it is highly arbitrary,  irrational  and	con-
fiscatory in nature and would not stand the test of
Article
14
and
19(1)(g).
Learned counsel for the writ	 petitioners
submitted that as compared to the rates of royalty fixed  in
198 1, the present rates have gone up by 200 to 400 per cent
and, therefore, they have become confiscatory in nature.  It
is  not possible to agree with this contention as  the	writ
petitioners  have  laid no evidence to show as to  how	this
escalation of rates for different types of coal extracted by
the lessee of mines had adversely affected their business or
that  they are thrown out of business because of such  heavy
burden	of escalated royalty.  It is not the case of any  of
writ  petitioners  that their mining operations	 had  to  be
closed	down  because  of  such high  rates  of	 royalty  as
enhanced  by  the  impugned  Notification.   Also  there  is
nothing	 on  record  to	 show whether  the  burden  of	this
enhanced rates of royalty is borne only by the lessee of the
mines  who  have  extracted the minerals and  has  not	been
passed	on  to the customers by adding it to  the  price  of
coal.	As all these are questions of facts there should  be
clear  pleading and proof There is no such material  on	 the
record	from  which  on	 the basis  of	such  arguments	 any
decision  can  be rendered.  Only on this short	 ground,  we
must hold that the original writ petitioners have failed  to
show  how the enhanced rates of royalty as per the  impugned
Notification  have  become unreasonable or  confiscatory  in
nature.	 Point No.4 is, therefore, answered in the negative.
28.As  all  the points raised by the  writ  petitioners	 are
answered  against  them, the inevitable result is  that	 the
orders	passed by the High Court in their favour  by  partly
allowing the writ petitions will have to be quashed and	 set
aside and their writ petitions will have to stand dismissed.
In  the	 result	 Civil Appeal Nos.275/94  and  276/  94	 are
allowed.   The	judgment  and order of	the  High  Court  in
M.P.No.	 10/93 dated 17.12.93 are quashed and set aside	 and
the  writ  petition  is dismissed.   Similarly,	 appeal	 No.
1994/95 from SLP(C) No. 3395 of 1994 moved by, the State  of
Madhya	Pradesh is also allowed.  The judgment and order  of
the High Court in Misc.	 Peti-
119
tion No.7907/92 dated 17.12.93 are quashed and set aside and
the   said  petition  is  also	dismissed.    Civil   Appeal
No.1995/95  arising out of SLP(C) No. 8190/94 moved by	M/s.
Birla  Jute and Industries Ltd. is dismissed.  In the  facts
and circumstances of the case, there will-be no order as  to
costs in all these matters.
120