[Cites
17
, Cited by
31
]
Supreme Court of India
Habibulla Khan vs State Of Orissa & Anr on 2 February, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1995 AIR 1123, 1995 SCC (2) 437, AIR 1995 SUPREME COURT 1124, 1995 AIR SCW 1161, (1995) 1 FAC 107, (1995) 1 ALLCRILR 649, (1995) 2 LAB LN 245, (1995) 32 ALLCRIC 321, 1995 CRILR(SC&MP) 206, (1995) 1 CRIMES 567, 1995 (2) SCC 437, (1995) 2 CHANDCRIC 40, (1995) 80 CUT LT 171, (1995) 2 RECCRIR 604, (1995) 2 JT 1 (SC)
Author:
P.B. Sawant
Bench:
P.B. Sawant
,
G.N.  Ray
PETITIONER:
HABIBULLA KHAN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF ORISSA & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT02/02/1995

BENCH:
SAWANT, P.B.
BENCH:
SAWANT, P.B.
RAY, G.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1995 AIR 1123		  1995 SCC  (2) 437
 JT 1995 (2)	 1	  1995 SCALE  (1)419


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
1.   Leave granted.
2.   A	common	question of law, viz., whether	sanction  is
required  for launching a criminal prosecution	against	 the
appellants, has been raised in these appeals.
3.
The  Orissa Special Courts Act,1990
[hereinafter  referred
to as the "
Special  Courts  Act
"] which came into  force  on
27th July, 1992 after receiving the assent of the President,
provides  for constitution of special courts for the  speedy
trial	of   certain  classes  of  offences  and   for	 the
confiscation  of  the property involved	 in  such  offences.
Section	 2
[d]	 of that Act defines "offence"	to  mean  an
offence of criminal misconduct within the meaning of  clause
(e)  of sub-section [1] of
Section 13
of the  Prevention  of
Corruption Act, 1988 [hereinafter referred to as the "Act"].
Section	 5
[1] of the
Special Courts Act
, as amended by	 the
Amendment of 1993 reads as follows:
"5  [1].	 If the State Government is  of	 the
	      opinion that there is prima facie evidence  of
	      the  commission of an offence alleged to	have
	      been combined by a person who held high public
	      or  political office in the State	 of  Orissa,
	      the State Government shall make a	 declaration
	      to that effect in every case in which it is of
	      the aforesaid opinion".
4.   Rule  2 (1) [f] (i) of the Orissa Special Courts  Rules
[hereinafter referred to as the "Rules"] reads as follows:
"2  (1} [f].  "Person holding  high  political
	      office" includes-
(i)   members of the Council of Ministers	 and
	      the Chief Minister".
5.Clause [e] of sub-section [1] of
Section   13
of the	 Act
defines "offence of criminal misconduct" as follows:
"13.  Criminal misconduct by a public servant.
- [1] A public servant is said to
	      commit the offence of criminal misconduct -
x	    x	     x	      x	       x x
	      (e)   if	he or any person on his behalf,	 is.
	      in    possession	or has, at any	time  during
the  period of his office, been in  possession
	      for   which   the	  public   servant    cannot
	      satisfactorily account, of pecuniary resources
	      or  property  disproportionate  to  his  known
	      sources of income.
Explanation.  -  For  the	 purposes  of	this
	      section,	"known	sources	 of  income"   means
	      income  received	from any lawful	 source	 and
	      such receipt has been intimated in  accordance
	      with  the	 provisions  of any  law,  rules  or
	      orders  for  the time being  applicable  to  a
	      public servant.
6.   It	 is  not  disputed  that  all  the  appellants	were
Ministers  in  the Council of Ministers of  the	 respondent-
State of Orissa during the period in which they were alleged
to  have been found in possession of pecuniary resources  or
property disproportionate to their known sources of  income.
Subsequently, they ceased to be Ministers due to the  change
of Government and thereafter were elected as the Members  of
the  Legislative  Assembly of the State ["MLA"	for  short].
They continued to be such Members till the prosecutions were
launched against them for the said criminal misconduct under
Section 13
[1] (e) of the Act.
7.   Shri  Habibulla  Khan,  the  appellant  in	 the  appeal
arising	 out  of SLP No. 1563 of 1993 filed  an	 application
before	the Special Court on 25th July, 1991  for  recalling
the  orders of the cognisance of the offence on	 the  ground
that at the time of taking the cognisance, he was an MLA and
as such a public servant within the meaning of Section 2 [c]
(viii) of the Act and, therefore, he could not be tried	 for
the offence under
Section 13
[1] (e) of the Act without	 the
sanction  of the Governor of the State under
Section  19
of
the Act who according to him was competent to remove an	 MLA
under
Article	192
of the Constitution.  On  18th  January,
1991,  the Special Court dismissed the	application  holding
that  an  MLA  was  not a public  servant  and	further	 the
Governor  was  not competent to remove an MLA and  hence  no
sanction was required under the said provision.	 This  order
was  assailed by the appellant before the High	Court  under
Section	 482
of  the Code of  Criminal	 Procedure  on	22nd
January,  1993.	 The learned Single Judge of the High  Court
referred  the matter to Division Bench which  dismissed	 the
matter	by  its impugned judgment of 5th May,  1993  holding
that  an  MLA  is a public servant  within  the	 meaning  of
Section 2
[c] (viii) of the Act; but the power of  "removal"
mentioned in
Section 19
of the Act partakes the character of
punishment and the Governor has no power of removal of an WA
under
Article 192
of the Constitution by way of	 punishment.
There was a distinction between the concept of "removal"  as
used in
Section 19
of the Act and that of "disqualification"
as  used  in
Article 192
of the  Constitution.	  Since	 the
Governor  was  not  the	 authority to  remove  an  &MA,	 the
sanction was not necessary under
Section 19
of the Act.
8.   The appellant, Nagarjuna Pradhan in appeal arising	 out
of  SLP No.2261 of 1994 raised similar plea on 17th  August,
1993  but  a long time after the  prosecution  was  launched
against him and 31 prosecution witnesses were examined.
9.   Similarly, the appellant, Rama
3
Chandra	 Ulaka in appeals arising out of to SLP	 Nos.2259-60
of   1994  raised  the	same  plea  belatedly  in  the	 two
prosecutions  launched	against him after 16  and  18  pros-
ecution witnesses respectively were examined in those cases.
10.  The  appellants are being prosecuted for  the  criminal
misconduct  which they are alleged to have committed  during
the  period they were holding high political  office  within
the meaning of
Section 5
[1] of the
Special Courts Act
read
with  Rule 2 (1) [f] (1) of the Rules made under  that	Act.
The  Special  Courts  Act
incorporates	 the  definition  of
"criminal  misconduct"	given in
section 13
[1] (e)  of	 the
Act.  The procedure for prosecution to be followed, however,
is as laid down under the
Special Courts Act
.  All that	 the
Special	 Courts Act
requires for launching a criminal  pros-
ecution	 against a person holding high political  office  is
that  the State Government should make a  declaration  under
Section 5
[1] of that Act that there is prima facie evidence
of  the commission of an offence by a person who  held	high
public	or political office in the State.  Hence the  provi-
sions of
Section 19
of the Act do not come into the  picture
in  the	 present case.	That being so, no  sanction  of	 the
Governor  or any other authority is necessary for  launching
the criminal prosecutions in question.
11.  Assuming,	however, that the procedure to	be  followed
before launching criminal prosecution is that under the Act,
the  admitted  facts  are  that	 the  appellants  are  being
prosecuted for the misconduct alleged to have been committed
by them during their tenure as the Members of the Council of
Ministers and not in their capacity as the MLAs.  Hence	 the
provisions of
Section 19
of the Act are inapplicable to	 the
facts  of  the present case as held in
R.S.  Nayak  v.	A.R.
Antulay
[(1984) 2 SCR 495].
12.  The second question is whether the appellants could  be
prosecuted  for the offence which they are alleged  to	have
committed during their tenure as ministers after they ceased
to  be the ministers.  This question has also been  answered
by two decisions of this Court.
In
S.A. Venkataraman v. The
State
[(1958) SCR 1040], it is held while construing similar
provision of
Section 6
of the predecessor of the present Act
which provision was similar to the provisions of Section  19
of  the present Act that no sanction was necessary  for	 the
prosecution  of the appellant
in that case
, as he was not  a
public	servant at the time of the taking of  cognizance  of
the offence.  The Court there observed as follows:
"In construing the provisions of a statute  it
	      is  essential  for a Court, in the  first	 in-
	      stance, to give effect to the natural  meaning
	      of the words used therein, if those words	 are
	      clear  enough.  It is only in the case of	 any
	      ambiguity	  that	a  Court  is   entitled	  to
	      ascertain	 the intention of  the	legislature.
	      Where a general power to take cognizance of an
	      offence is vested in a Court, any	 prohibition
	      to   the	exercise  of  that  power,  by	 any
	      provision	 of  law, must be  confined  to	 the
	      terms  of the prohibition.  The words  in
S.6
	      (1)
of the Act are clear enough and  must  be
	      given effect to.	The more important words 'in
	      cl.  (c)	of
s. 6 (1)
are	 "of  the  authority
	      competent	 to remove him from his office".   A
	      public  servant who has ceased to be a  public
	      servant  is  not a person removable  from	 any
	      office by competent authority.  The conclusion
	      is  inevitable  that at the time	a  Court  is
	      asked  to	 take cognizance not only  must	 the
	      offence have
	      been  committed  by a public servant  but	 the
	      person accused must still be a public  servant
	      removable	 from  his  office  by	a  competent
	      authority	 before	 the provisions of  s.6	 can
	      apply."
13.Similarly, a Constitution Bench in
Veeraswami v. Union of
India  and others
[(1991) 3 SCC 655], while  construing	 the
provisions  of	the  same
Section 6
of	 the  Prevention  of
Corruption  Act, 1947 held that no sanction under
Section  6
of  that Act was necessary for prosecution of the  appellant
in that case
since he had retired from service on  attaining
the  age of superannuation and was not a public	 servant  on
the date of filing the charge sheet.
14.However,  it	 was contended that while the  Governor	 had
given sanction to prosecute the Chief Minister when he	con-
tinued to be an MLA in the case of
R.S. Nayak v. A.R.Antulay
[supra], the question whether the sanction was necessary  to
prosecute  an  MLA as a public servant did not	arise.	 It,
was, therefore, contended that although the offence  alleged
to have been committed was during the appellants' tenure  as
ministers,   the  appellants  continued	 to  be	 MLAs	and,
therefore, as public servants on the day of the launching of
prosecution and hence sanction of the Governor under
Article
192
of the Constitution was necessary.
This  question	 has
also  been answered in
R.S. Nayak v. A.R.  Antulay
[supra].
Referring  to this Court's decision in
The State of  (S.P.E.
Hyderabad)  v.	Air Commodore Kailash Chand
[(1980)  2	 SCR
697], this Court held as follows:
".........  We would however, like to make  it
	      abundantly  clear	 that if the  two  decisions
	      purport  -to  lay down that even if  a  public
	      servant  has  ceased to hold  that  office  as
	      public  servant  which he is alleged  to	have
	      abused or misused for corrupt motives, but  on
	      the  date of taking cognizance of	 an  offence
	      alleged  to  have been committed by him  as  a
	      public servant which he ceased to be and holds
	      an  entirely different public office which  he
	      is  neither alleged to have misused or  abused
	      for  corrupt  motives,  yet  the	sanction  of
	      authority	 competent to remove him  from	such
			    latter office would be necessary before taking
	      cogaizance of the offence alleged to have been
	      committed by the public servant while  holding
	      an  office which he is alleged to have  abused
	      or  misused and which he has ceased  to  hold,
	      the decisions in our opinion, do not lay	down
	      the  correct  law and cannot  be	accepted  as
	      making a correct interpretation of
Sec.6
Therefore, upon a true construction of
Sec. 6
,
	      it  is implicit therein that sanction of	that
	      competent	 authority alone would be  necessary
	      which  is	 competent  to	remove	the   public
	      servant from the office which he is alleged to
	      have misused or abused for corrupt motive	 and
	      for  which  a prosecution is  intended  to  be
	      launched against him."
15.  Assuming  therefore, that the MLA is a  public  servant
within	the meaning of
Section 2 (c) (viii)
of the  Act,  in
view  of the aforesaid proposition of law
laid down in
R.S.
Nayak v. A.R. Antulay
[supra], this contention also does not
merit any consideration.
16.In view of the above, the appeals are dismissed.
8