[Cites
4
, Cited by
48
]
Supreme Court of India
Balwant Singh And Anr vs State Of Punjab on 1 March, 1995
Equivalent citations: AIR 1995 SUPREME COURT 1785, 1995 AIR SCW 2803, 1995 AIR SCW 2787, 1995 CRIAPPR(SC) 173, (1995) 2 RENCR 488, (1995) 3 SCR 817 (SC), (1995) 4 JT 187 (SC), (1996) 2 RENCJ 243, (1995) 1 LS 39, 1995 SCFBRC 311, (1995) 2 RENTLR 183, 1995 (3) SCC 709, 1995 SCC (CRI) 432, 1995 HRR 399
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  266 of 1985

PETITIONER:
BALWANT SINGH AND ANR.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 01/03/1995

BENCH:
DR. A.S. ANAND & FAIZAN UDDIN

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

1995 (1) SCR 411

The following Order of the Court was delivered :
Balwant Singh, who was working as an Assistant in the office of D.P.I.
Punjab in Chandigarh and Bhupinder Singh serving as a Senior Clerk in the
Punjab School Education Board, Chandigarh, at the relevant time, were on
31st October, 1984 at about 5.45 p.m. arrested from near Neelam Cinema,
Chandigarh and after completion of the investigation, tried for offences
under
section 124-A
and
153-A
IPC. They were each sentenced to suffer one
year rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 500 on each of the two counts.
In default of payment of fine, they had to undergo three months further
R.I. on each count. The substantive sentences were to run concurrently.
Through this appeal under
Section 14
of the Terrorist Affected Areas
(Special Courts) Act, 1984 both of them have challenged their conviction
and sentence as recorded by the learned Judge of the Special Court,
Chandigarh on 2.3.1985.
The prosecution case against the appellants is that in a crowded in front
of the Neelam Cinema, on 31st October 1984, the day Smt. Indira Gandhi, the
then Prime Minister of India was assassinated, after coming out from their
respective offices after the duty hours, raised the following slogans:
"1.    Khalistan Zindabad
2.      Raj Karega Khalsa, and
3.      Hinduan Nun Punjab Chon Kadh Ke Chhadange, Hun Mauka Aya Hai Raj
Kayam Karan Da."
The prosecution examined Constable Som Nath, PW2 and ASI Labh Singh PW3, in
support of its case besides PW1, who proved the order of sanction for
prosecution.
According to the testimony of Som Nath PW2 and Labh Singh PW3, they had
left the police station at about 5 p.m. or 5.15 p.m. and while they were
patrolling in the area of the main market of Sector 17, Chandigarh, they
noticed both the appellants raising slogans, as noticed above. Both the
witnesses conceded that when slogans were being raised, the people in
general were going bout doing their jobs and they did not gather on hearing
the slogans but stated that some people went away out of 'fear', In cross-
examination, Som Nath PW2 admitted that he could not name anyone or even
suggest whether any one out of the passer-by got afraid on hearing the
slogans and fled away from the place. According to the witnesses, both the
appellants had raised the slogans together. Though PW2 could not state as
to how many times each of the three slogans was raised by the appellants,
PW3 ASI Labh Singh admitted in the cross examination that the slogans
"Khalistan Ziridabad" was raised about five or six times while the second
slogan "Raj Karega Khaisa" was raised two or four times and that the third
slogan was raised only once or twice. ASI Labh Singh PW also admitted that
the slogans had been raised by the appellants before they were arrested and
that they did not raise any slogans afterwards. ASI Labh Singh PW, however,
added that the appellants raised slogans while they were being apprehended
once or twice and to the same effect is the statement made by PW2 Som Nath,
who, however, was confronted with his police statement recorded under
Section 161 Cr. P.C., wherein he had not mentioned that the appellants
raised any slogan while being apprehended. the appellants in their
statement recorded under Section 313 Cr, P.C., denied the prosecution
allegations against them. According to Balwant Singh, Bhupinder Singh,
appellant came to his office at about 4.30 p.m. and they left together
after he finished his day's duty at about 5 p.m. that while they were
proceedings towards the bus stand, in order to take a bus to go to Mohali
where they reside, they met Mewa Singh DW2 and Surender Pal Singh DW3 near
the fountain with whom they exchanged 'Sat Siri Akai' Being an Amritdhari
Sikh, he was wearing a kirpan. That near Neelam Cinema Dy. S.P. Sudhir
Mohan and Inspector Baldev Singh caught hold of them, presumably because he
was wearing a kirpan and both of them had not tied their beards. That the
police officials took them to the police station in Sector 17 in their
jeep. ASI Labh Singh was present at the police station attending to the
telephone. On their enquiry, as to why thy had been brought to the police
station and why they were being detained, ASI Labh Singh told him that only
the senior officers who had brought them to the police station could give
them an answer to their question. Bhupinder Singh, appellant made a
substantially similar statement.
Both Mewa Singh DW2, a Draftsman working in the Punjab Housing Board and
Surender Pal Singh DW3, a Junior Accountant working with the Punjab Housing
Board, corroborated the statement made by the appellants and stated that
they had met the appellants after the office hours near the Neelam Cinema
and had exchanged 'Sat Sri Akai' with them. They stated that in their
presence, the Dy. S.P. and Inspector Baldev Singh arrested the appellants
and took them to the police station in their jeep. That later on they
followed them to the police station but when they could not get any
information as to why the appellants had been taken to the police station,
they informed the family members of the appellants. Both the defence
witnesses stated that the appellants were not raising any slogans either
before or at the time of their arrest and this part of their testimony was
not challenged in the cross examination at all.
At the time of arrest of the appellants, the personal search of the
appellants was taken and the personal search memos were prepared. In the
personal search memo of Balwant Singh, the only two articles which are
shown to have been recovered are: one watch HMT and one gold ring. There is
no mention of any kirpan having been seized. After the arrest of the
appellants, the police produced them before the Ilaqa Magistrate when they
were remanded to judicial custody. DW1 Shitla Prashad, Munshi, District
Jail, Burail deposed that on November 1, 1984, Balwant Singh appellant was
admitted to the District Jail and that;
"At that time he was wearing a kirpan on his person which was taken off and
kept in safe custody at the time of his admission into jail and that kirpan
is still lying deposited with us. I have brought that kirpan."
Both PW2 and PW3, had however, stated in their statements that they did not
see Balwant Singh wearing any kirpan and that no kirpan was taken into
possession from him.
Mr. V.M. Tarkunde, the learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants
submitted that the prosecution has not been able to establish the case
against the appellants beyond a reasonable doubt. Learned Counsel argued
that though admittedly the occurrence had taken place in a busy place,
where number of independent persons were available, prosecution had not
associated any independent person at the time of arrest of the appellants
and that was a serious infirmity in the case, Mr. Tarkunde then submitted
that the very fact that both the police witnesses, Constable Som Nath and
ASI Labh Singh made unsuccessful effort to conceals that Balwant Singh was
carrying a kirpan, which fact stands established from the evidence of DW1
Munshi of the District Jail at Burail, it could be safely inferred that the
entire case against the appellants, was a made up affair and not based on
facts. The prosecution witnesses were guilty of giving False statements.
Learned counsel then, in the alternative, went on the submit that even if
the prosecution case to the effect that the appellants had raised the three
slogans was accepted, no offence under
Section 124A
IPC or 153A
IPC
could
be said to have been made out.
Learned counsel for the State, on the other hand, submitted that keeping in
view the tension which had been generated on the date of the assassination
of the former Prime Minister - Smt. Indira Gandhi, the raising of the three
slogans by the appellants attracted the provisions of
Section 124A
IPC and
153A
IPC
and the mere fact that no independent witness was associated,
could not detract from the reliability of the evidence of AS1 Labh Singh
and Constrable Som Nath. In this context, learned counsel referred to the
statement of PW3 Labh Singh who deposed that he was unable to associate any
of the independent persons from the public inspite of his making efforts
because none was willing to associate himself. Learned counsel urged that
nothing has been brought out on the record to show that either PW2 and PW3
had any animosity or reason to falsely implicate the appellants and that
their testimony inspired confidence.
Section 124A
IPC reads thus:
"124A. Sedition - whoever by words, either spoken or written, or by signs,
or by visible representation, or otherwise, brings or attempts to bring
into hatred or contempt, or excites or attempts to excite disaffection
towards, the Government established by law in India, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, to which fate may be added, or with imprisonment
which may extend to three years, to which fine may be added, or with fine.
Explanation 1 - The expression "disaffection" includes disloyalty and all
feelings of enmity.
Explanation 2 - Comments expressing disapprobation of the measures of the
Government with a view to obtain their alteration by Lawful means, without
exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not
constitute an offence under this section.
Explanation 3 - Comments expressing disapprobation of the administrative or
other action of the Government without exciting or attempting to excite
hatred, contempt or disaffection, do not constitute an offence tinder this
Section."
A plain reading of the above Section would show that its application would
be attracted only when the accused brings or attempts to bring into hatred
or contempt or excites or attempts to excite disaffection towards the
Government established by law in India, by words either written or spoken
or visible signs or representations etc. Keeping in view the prosecution
evidence that the slogans as noticed above were raised a couple of times
only by the appellant and that neither the slogans evoked a response from
any other person of the Sikh community or reaction from people of other
communities, we find it difficult to hold that upon the raising of such
casual slogans, a couple of times without any other act whatsoever the
charge of sedition can be founded. It is not the prosecution case that the
appellants were either leading a procession or were otherwise raising the
slogans with the intention to incite people to create disorder or that the
slogans in fact created any law and order problem. It does not appear to us
that the police should have attached much significance to the casual
slogans raised by two appellants, a couple of times and read to much into
them. The prosecution has admitted that no disturbance, whatsoever, was
caused by the raising of the slogans by the appellants and that inspite of
the fact that the appellants raised the slogans a couple of times, the
people, in general, were un-affected and carried on with their normal
activities. The casual raising of the Slogans, once or twice by two
individuals alone cannot be said to be aimed at exciting or attempt to
excite hatred or disaffection towards the Government as established by law
in India,
Section 124A
IPC, would in the facts and circumstances of the
case have no application whatsoever and would not be attracted to the facts
and circumstances of the case.
In so far as the offence under
Section 153A
IPC is concerned, it provides
for punishment for promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of
religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or community or
any other ground whatsoever or brings about disharmony or feeling of hatred
or ill-will between different religious, racial, language or regional
groups or castes or communities. In our opinion only where the written or
spoken words have the tendency or intention of creating public disorder or
disturbance of law and order or effect public tranquility, that the law
needs to step in to prevent such an activity. The facts and circumstances
of this case unmistakably show that there was no disturbance or semblance
of disturbance of law and order or of public order or peace and tranquility
in the area from where the appellants were apprehended while raising
slogans on account of the activities of the appellants. The intention to
cause disorder or incite people to violence is the sine qua non of the
offence under
Section 153 A
IPC and the prosecution has to prove the
existence of mens  rea in order to succeed. In this case, the prosecution
has not been able to establish any mens rea on the part of the appellants,
as envisaged by the provisions of
Section 153A
IPC, by their raising
causally the three slogans a couple of times. The offence under
Section
153A
IPC is, therefore, not made out.
On facts, we find that the prosecution witnesses PW2 and PW3 have not
spoken the whole truth. Both the prosecution witnesses PW2 and PW3 made a
deliberate attempt to conceal the existence of kirpan on the person of
Balwant Singh at the time of his arrest, which fact stands amply proved
from the evidence of DWl. The trial court while dealing with this aspect of
the case observed :
"On 1.11.1984 the accused were produced before the Magistrate, No order of
the Magistrate has been produced to show that Balwant Singh accused was
wearing a kirpan when he appeared before him. It was only thereafter that
the accused were sent to jail. It, therefore, appears that the kirpan was
supplied to Balwant Singh after he had been remanded by the Magistrate and
was on his way to the jail." (Emphasis ours)

We are unable to appreciate this reasoning. The trial court appears to have
made out a case which was neither spoken to nor relied upon either by the
prosecution or the defence. It is nobody's case that Balwant Singh and been
supplied with the kirpan when he was on his way to the jail. It defies
logic to think that some one from the public would have such as easy access
to a person in custody of the police so as to be able to arm him with as
kirpan, without the police escort knowing about it! It is not permissible
for the trial court to make such an inference on assumptions without any
evidence on the record. The Court must confine itself to the evidence to
decide the case and not base its opinion on surmises and conjectures. We
also regret to note that the trial court while recording the conviction
observed;
"To conclude, therefore, the accused shouted slogans 'khalistan zindabad',
Hindustan Murdabad', Hinduan Nun Punjab Chon Kadh Ke Chhadange Hun Mauka
Aya Hai Raj Kayam Karan Da, in the piazza of Sector 17 market which is
frequented by people of both the principle communities i.e. Hindus and
Sikhs at about 5.45 p.m. on the day when the beloved Prime Minister of
India Smt. Indira Gandhi was riddled with bullets.
It is not the prosecution case that either of the appellants had shouted
the slogan 'Hindustan Murdabad'. On what material did the learned Judge
find that the appellants had shouted that particular slogan belies our
comprehensions. Obviously, for convicting the appellants, the trial Judge
also pressed into aid the allegation that the appellants had shouted
'Hindustan Murdabad', which is nobody's case. The learned trial Judge, to
say the least, seems to have drawn upon his imagination a course not
permissible for a Court of Law.
It appears to us that the raising some slogan only a couple of times by the
two lonesome appellants, which neither evoked any response nor any reaction
from any one in the public can neither attract the provisions of Section
124A or
Section 153A
IPC Some more overt act was required to bring home the
charge to the two appellants, who are Government servants. The police
officials exhibited lack of maturity and more of sensitivity in arresting
the appellants for raising the slogans - which arrest -and act the casual
raising of one or two slogans - could have created a law and order
situation, keeping in view the tense situation prevailing on the date of
the assassination of Smt. Indira Gandhi. In situations like that, over
sensitiveness some times is counter productive and can result is inviting
trouble. Raising of some lonesome slogans, a couple of times by two
individuals, without anything more, did not constitute any threat to the
Government of India as by law established not could the same give rise to
feelings of enmity or hatred among different communities or religious or
other groups.
In our opinion, for what we have stated above, the prosecution has not
succeeded in establishing the case against the appellants beyond a
reasonable doubt. Their conviction and sentence for the offences under
Section 124A
and
153A
IPC, cannot be sustained. This appeal accordingly
succeeds and is allowed. The conviction and sentence of the appellants is
set aside. The appellants are on bail. Their bail bonds shall stand dis-
charged.