[Cites
8
, Cited by
110
]
Supreme Court of India
New India Assurance Co. Ltd vs Mandar Madhav Tambe & Ors on 14 December, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1996 AIR 1150, 1996 SCC (2) 328, AIR 1996 SUPREME COURT 1150, 1996 (2) SCC 328, 1996 AIR SCW 702, 1996 ( ) UJ (SC) 302, 1996 (2) BOM CJ 147, 1996 SCC(CRI) 307, 1996 (112) PUN LR 644, (1996) 1 PUN LR 644, 1996 BOMCJ 2 147, (1996) 2 KER LT 53, (1996) 1 MAH LJ 935, (1996) 2 GUJ LR 614, (1996) 1 TAC 506, (1996) 1 ACC 392, (1996) ACJ 253, (1996) 2 CIVLJ 210, (1996) 86 COMCAS 199
Author:
S.P Bharucha
Bench:
S.P Bharucha
,
B.N Kirpal
PETITIONER:
NEW INDIA ASSURANCE CO. LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MANDAR MADHAV TAMBE & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT14/12/1995

BENCH:
BHARUCHA S.P. (J)
BENCH:
BHARUCHA S.P. (J)
KIRPAL B.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1996 AIR 1150		  1996 SCC  (2) 328
 1996 SCALE  (1)400


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
O R D E R
     This is an appeal by special leave against the judgment
of the	Bombay High  Court upholding  the liability  of	 the
appellant  Insurance  Company  to  pay	the  amount  of	 the
appellant  Insurance   Company	to   pay   the	 amount	  of
compensation awarded  to respondent  No.1 who  had  suffered
some injuries as a result of an accident.
On 4th  July, 1979,  an accident occurred involving two
scooters. One  scooter	No.(MTM	 6327)was  being  driven  by
respondent No.1	 (the claimant )and the other (BYZ 5348) was
being driven  by  respondent  No.3.  As	 a  result  of	this
accident respondent No.1 suffered some injuries and he filed
an application before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal for
compensation.
The appellant  contested the  said application.  It was
contended on  its behalf that on 22nd July, 1977, respondent
No.3 had  obtained a learner's licence, which enabled him to
drive for  the purpose of learning to drive. The validity of
this learner's	licence had  expired on 21st November, 1977.
When the  accident took	 place on 4th July, 1979, respondent
No. 3  was neither holding a driving licence as contemplated
by the
Motor Vehicles	Act, 1939
,  nor	 was  he  holding  a
learner's licence.  It appears	that soon after the accident
respondent No.	3 obtained  a fresh learner's licence on 7th
July, 1979  and thereafter,  on 9th  July, 1979,  obtained a
driving licence.
The Motor	Accident Claims	 Tribunal,  vide  its  award
dated 2nd  June, 1984, came the conclusion that the accident
had occurred  due to  the negligence  of respondent No.3. It
found that  respondent No.1  was entitled to compensation of
Rs. 2,60,000/-.	 An award  was accordingly  passed directing
respondents 1 to 3 therein,including the appellant Insruance
company, to  jointly  or  separately  pay  the	said  amount
together with interest at the rate of 6% per annum.
The appellant  filed an  appeal against the said award.
The main  contention which  was not duly licensed to drive a
scooter, and  therefore, in  view of  the provisions  of the
Motor Vesicles Act and clause which had been inserted in the
Insurance Policy,  the insurance company was absolved of all
liability. This	 exclusion clause  in the  policy which	 the
appellant company relied upon, is follows:
"Provided that  the person driving holds
     a valid  driving licence  at the time of
     the accident  or had  held	 a  permanent
     driving licence  (other than a learner's
     licence) and  is not  disqualified	 from
     holding such a licence."
The High  Court came to the conclusion that the Act did
not contemplate the grant of a permanent driving licence. It
then proceeded	to hole	 that the  term `duly  licensed'  in
section 96(2)(b)(ii)
of the Act would include the holder of
a learner's  licence if he had once held such a licence then
the aforesaid exclusion clause would not be Applicable.
While granting leave to appeal this Court made it cleat that
the leave  was being  granted  on  the	condition  that	 the
appellant herein  herein would pay the amount awarded to the
claimant, irrespective of the result of the case.
On behalf of the appellant it has been contended by Mr.
Suri  that  at	the  time  when	 the  accident	of  occurred
respondent No.3	 did not hold any licence. This being so the
aforesaid  provisions  in  the	insurance  policy  and	also
Section 96(2)(b)(ii)
of the  Act absolved  the appellant of
any liability.
Learned counsel  for the  respondent  relied  upon	 the
observations of	 the judgment  under appeal  and also  on  a
similar view  taken in	the decision  of the  High Court  of
Himachal Pradesh  In United Insurance Company Lty. Vs. Tilak
Ram &  Ors. 1985  ACJ 481  and submitted observations of the
judgment under	appeal and  also on  a similar view taken in
the decision of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh in United
India insurance
Company Ltd.  vs. Tilak Ram and others
1985
ACJ 481	 and submitted that inasmuch as respondent no.3. had
held a	learner's licence at one point of time the insurance
company was  liable to	pay the amount of compensation which
sad been award.
The two questions which arise for consideration in this
appeal	are,  firstly.	whether	 the  appellant	 company  is
entitled to invoke the provisions of
Section 96(2)(b)(ii)
of
the said  Act, secondly	 whither the  above quoted exclusion
clause	in  the	 insurance  policy  absolves  the  appellant
company of any liability in the present case.
In order  to appreciate  the first	 contention,  it  is
necessary to refer to appreciate the first contention, it is
necessary to appreciate the first to the relevant provisions
of the	said Act.
Section 96(2)(b)(ii)
, on which reliance is
placed by the appellant, reads as under:
"(2) No  sum  shall  be  payable  by  an
     insurer under sub-section (I) in respect
     of any  judgment unless  before or after
     the commencement  of the  proceedings in
     which  the	 judgment  is  court  of  the
     bringing  if   the	 proceedings,  or  in
     respect   so long as execution is stayed
     thereon  pending	an  appeal;   and  an
     insurer to	 whom notice  of the bringing
     of any  such  proceedings	is  so	given
     shall be	entitled  to be	 made a party
     thereto and  to defend the action on any
     of the following grounds, namely:
(a)----------------
(b) That  there has  been	breach	of  a
     specified condition of the policy, being
     one of the following conditions, namely:
     (1)----------------------------
(ii) a  condition exclusing driving by a
     named person  or persons  or by a person
     who is  not  duly	licenced  or  by  any
     person  who  had  been  driving  licence
     during the	 period of  disqualification:
of"
This clause, inter alia, uses the expression "driving
licence" which	therm has  been defined	 in
Section 2(5A)
of
the Act as follows:
"Driving  Licence"	 means	the  document
     issued by	a competent  authority	under
     Chapter  II   authorising	 the   person
     specified	therein	  to  drive  a	motor
     vehicle  or   a  motor  vehicle  of  any
     specified class or description."
Section  3
inter alia provides that no person shall
drive motor  vehicle unless  him.
Section 7
provides for the
grant of  a driving  licence  and  sub-section	(6)  thereof
states that  no driving	 licence  shall	 be  issued  to	 any
applicant unless  he passes,  to  the  satisfaction  of	 the
licensing authority,  the test	of competence  to  drive  as
specified in  the 3rd Schedule. It is clear, therefore, that
a valued  driving licence  as contemplated  by the  said Act
would be  one id issued in accordance with the provisions of
chapter
II  of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939
, after a driving
test hes  been held.  A person	who holds  only a  learner's
licence	 is   one  who	 has  not  taken  the  driving	test
successfully. Chapter  II of  the Acts	does  not  made	 any
mention of  a learner's	 licence,except in
Section 21(2)(c)
which enables  the State  Government to	 frame rules,  inter
alia,  for  the	 issue	of  temporary  licences	 to  persons
receiving instruction in driving. It is in view of this that
in the	Bombay Motor  Vehicles Rules  a permission (Rule 16)
has been made, the relevant portion of which is as under:
"16.Learner's driving licence-
(i) .  Sub-Section (I)	of
Section  3
shall not	apply to any person driving a
     motors vehicle  in a public place during
     the course	 of receiving  instruction or
     gaining experience	 in driving  with the
     object of	presenting  himself  for  the
     test  required  by	 sub-section  (6)  of
Section 7
so long as -
(i) the	 driver is  the holder	of  a
     learner's driving	licence in Eorn L Lt.
to those  rules entitling	him to	drive
     the vehicle.
(ii) + + + +
(iii) there is besides the driver in the
     vehicle  as  instructor  a	 person	 duly
     licenced  to   drive  the	 vehicle  and
     sitting in such a position as to be able
     readily to stop the vehicle."
From the  aforesaid it  is clear that what was obtained
by respondent  No.3 from  the authorities  under the Act was
not a  licence within  the meaning  of
Section	2(5A)
of the
said Act. He had obtained a learner's licence allowed him to
be on  the road	 subject to  his fulfilling  the  conditions
contained therein.  One of the important conditions was that
if he was driving a motor vehicle then there must be besides
him in	the vehicle  as an instructor a person duly licenced
to drive  the vehicle and sitting insuch a position as to be
able readily  to stop  the vehicle."  It is  clear from this
that two  learners by  themselves cannot be in one car which
is which  is being  driven by  one of  them. If	 the learner
having a learner's licence under the rules is to drive a car
then he	 must have  sitting besides  in a person who is duly
licensed. This	clearly shows  that a  "driving licence"  as
defined in  the Act  is different  from a  learner's licence
issued under  Rule 96.	In other  words, a  person would  be
regarded as  being duly	 licensed only	if he has obtained a
licence under
Chapter II  of the  Motor Vehicles  Act
and a
person who  has obtained  a temporary  licence which enables
him to	leant driving cannot be regarded as having been duly
licensed. The  decision of  the single judge of the Himachal
Pradesh High  Court in United India insurance
Company
's case
(supra) to  which he  hes taken a contrary view must be held
to have been incorrectly decided.
Apart  from the  fact that  a learner  having  such  a
licence	 would	 not  be  regarded  as	duly  licensed,	 the
aforesaid clause in the insurance policy makes it abundantly
cleat that  the	 insurance  company,  in  the  event  of  an
accident, would be liable only if the vehicle was being by a
person holding	a valid	 driving licence  or	a  permanent
driving licence	 "other	 than  a  learner's  licence".	This
clause specifically  provides that  even if  respondent No.3
had held  a current  learner's licence	at the	time of	 the
accident, the  appellant would not be liable. In the present
case it is case it is clear that the respondent No.3 did not
have a	permanent learner's  licence before  the date of the
accident and  he had  held only	 a learner's  licence and it
leaped nearly  two years before the accident. The High Court
observed that  the Act	did  not  contemplate  a  "permanent
diving licence"	 because a driving licence is valid only for
a certain period after	which it has to be renewed. This may
be so,	but the use of the words "permanent driving licence"
licence"   in the  insurance policy  was to  emphasis that a
temporary or a learner's licence holder would not be covered
by the	insurance policy.  The intention  and meaning of the
policy clearly is that the person driving the Vehicle at the
time of	 the accident  must be	one  who  holds	 a  `driving
licence' within	 the meaning  of
Section  2(5A)
of  the Act.
This being  so, we are unable to with the conclusions of the
High that  the appellant  was liable to pay the amount which
had been  award	 in  favour  of	 respondent  No.1.  For	 the
aforesaid reasons,  the appeal	is allowed but with no order
as to  costs. Having  regard to the condition imposed at the
time of	 the grant of special leave that irrespective of the
outcome of  this appeal,the  amount awarded  will be paid by
the appellant  to the  claimants, no  other  relief  can  be
granted to the appellant.