[Cites
21
, Cited by
60
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Hind Wire Industries Ltd vs The Commissioner Of Income Tax, West ... on 20 January, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1995 AIR 1133, 1995 SCC (3) 136, AIR 1995 SUPREME COURT 1133, 1995 (3) SCC 136, 1995 AIR SCW 1175, (1995) 212 ITR 639, (1995) 1 SCR 519 (SC), 1995 KERLJ(TAX) 162, (1995) 124 TAXATION 649, (1995) 2 APLJ 1(1), (1995) 124 CURTAXREP 215, (1998) 99 ELT 25, (1995) 2 JT 317 (SC)
Author:
P.B. Sawant
Bench:
P.B. Sawant
,
G.N.  Ray
PETITIONER:
M/S. HIND WIRE INDUSTRIES LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, WEST BENGAL-V

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/01/1995

BENCH:
SAWANT, P.B.
BENCH:
SAWANT, P.B.
RAY, G.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1995 AIR 1133		  1995 SCC  (3) 136
 JT 1995 (2)   317	  1995 SCALE  (1)475


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
ORDER
1.   Special leave granted.  Heard counsel on both sides.
2.   What is challenged in these appeals is the decision  of
the  Calcutta  High  Court interpreting	 the  provisions  of
Section 154 [7] of the
Income Tax Act
[hereinafter  referred
to  as the 'Act'] as it stood at the time of the  assessment
order dated 21st September, 1979.
3.   Shortly  stated, facts are that the  appellant-assessee
was assessed for income tax originally under the  assessment
order  dated  21st September, 1979.  The  assessee  filed  a
petition  for rectification of the said order under
Section
154
of	 the  Act as it stood then on the  ground  that	 the
Income	Tax  Officer had not taken  into  consideration	 the
shift allowance available to the
319
assessee.  Consequent upon this application, the  assessment
order  was  rectified  on 12th July,  1982.  Thereafter	 the
assessee again applied for rectification of the fresh  order
of  12th July, 1982 on 4th July, 1986 contending that  while
he  was	 entitled   to depreciation  allowance	 on  factory
building at the rate of 10% he was allowed the	depreciation
only  at  only	at  the rate  5%.  The	Income	tax  Officer
dismissed  the	assessee's  claim on the  ground   that	 teh
application  was beyond time. This order was  confirmed	  by
the  Applicable	 Assistant Commissioner. In the	 appeal	 the
Tribunal  however allowed the application  holding that	 the
application   made on 4th July 1986 was	 within 4 years	  of
the  fresh order of assessment made on 12 th July, 1982	 and
hence  wihtin  limitation.  On	reference   the	 High  Court
reversed the order of the Tribunal  holding that  the period
of  4 years is to be calculated from the initial  orders  of
assessment,  viz from 21st September 1979 and not  from	 the
fresh order of assessment passed on 12th July 1982.
4.  There is no dispute that the assessee would be  entitled
to 105 depreciation allowance on the factory building and it
has  to	 be  granted  to  him  if  it  is  held	 that	this
rectification application was within time.
5.
Section 154
of the Act, as it stood at the relevant time,
read as follows:
"154. Rectification of mistake-
	      [1]  With	 a view to  rectifying	any  mistake
	      apparent from the record-
[a] the Income-tax Officer may amend any order
	      of assessment or of refund or any other  order
	      passed by him.
x	     x	     x	      x	     x	       x
	      [1A] Where any matter has been considered	 and
	      decided in any proceeding by way of appeal  or
	      revision	relating to an order referred to  in
	      sub-section  [1]	the authority  passing	such
	      order may, notwithstanding anything  contained
	      in  any law for the time being in force  amend
	      the order under  that sub-section in  relation
	      to any matter been so considered and decided.
x	 x	   x	     x	  x    x
	      [7]  Save as otherwise in
Section 155
or	sub-
	      section [4] of
section 186
no amendment  under
	      this section shall be made after the expiry of
	      four  years from the date of the order  sought
	      to be amended.
6.  What falls for consideration in the present case in	 the
interpretation of the expression"from the date of the  order
sought to be amended " insub-section [7]  of
Section 154
as
it stood then. It is obvious  that the word 'order' has	 not
been  qualified in any way and it does not necessarily	mean
the   original	order. It can be any  order   including	 the
amended or rectified order. A similar expression in Rule  38
of  the	 Mysore	 Sales Tax Act	fell  for  consideration  in
International  Cotton  Corporation v. C.T.O.
[ (1975  2	 SCR
345].  Dealing	with  the point raised this  court  held  as
under;
"The other attack that the rectification order
	      is  beyond the point of time provided in	Rule
	      38  of  the  Mysore Sales Tax  Rules  is	also
	      without  substance.  What	 was  sought  to  be
	      rectified	 was the assessment order  rectified
	      as  a consequence of this court's decision  in
	      Yaddalam's case. After such rectification	 the
	      original	assessment  order was no  longer  in
	      force  and that was not the order sought to be
	      rectified.   It  is  admitted  that  all	 the
	      rectification  orders  would  be	within	time
	      calculated  from	the  original  rectification
	      order. Rule
320
38  itself speaks of "any order' and there  is
	      no doubt that the rectified order is also "any
	      order" which can be rectified under Rule 38".
7.   This  decision was endorsed in
Deputy  Commissioner  of
Commercial Taxes v. H.R. Sri Ramulu
[(1977) 39 STC 180] when
this court observed there as follows::
"The  reason  for	 that is that  once  an	 as-
	      sessment	is reopened, the initial  order	 for
	      assessment ceases to be operative.  The effect
	      of  reopening the assessment is to  vacate  or
	      set aside the initial order for assessment and
	      to  substitute in its place the order made  on
	      re-assessment.   The  initial  order  for	 re-
	      assessment  cannot  be said  to  servive	even
	      partially,although the  justification for	 re-
	      assessment arises because of turnover escaping
	      assessment  in  a limited field or  only	with
	      respect to a part of the matter covered by the
	      intial   assessment  order.   The	 result	  of
	      reopening	   the	assessment is that  a  fresh
	      order  for reassessment would have to be	made
	      induding for those matters in respect of which
	      there   Ls  no  allegation  of  the   turnover
	      escaping	assessment.  As it Ls, we find	that
	      in the present case the assessment orders made
	      under
section 12A
were  comprehensive  orders
	      and were not confined namely to matters  which
	      had   escaped  assessment	 earlier.   In	 the
	      circumstances   the only orders  which couldbe
	      subject-matter of revision   by the  appellant
	      were  the orders made under
section 12A
of the	 Act and not the initialassessment
	      orders.
In the case of
J. Jaganmohan Rao v.	 Commissioner
	      of Income-taxand Excess	  Profits     Tax
	      Andhhra Pradesh
[(1970)	75 ITR	373  (SC)],
	      tins Court dealt with
section 34
of the Indian
	      Income-tax   Act	 1922,	which	relates	  to
	      reassessment  in the case of  income  escaping
	      assessment.   It was held by this	 Court	that
	      once  assessment is reopened, the previous un-
	      der-assessment  is  set aside  and  the  whole
	      proceedings  start  afresh.   Ramaswamy,	 J.,
	      speaking for the Court observed:
"
Section	34
in terms states  that  once	 the
	      Income-tax  Officer  decides  to	reopen	 the
	      assessment  he could do so within	 the  period
	      prescribed  by serving on the personliable  to
	      pay tax a notice containing all or any of	 the
	      requirements which may be included in a notice
			    under
section 22
[2] and may proceed to  asses
s
	      or reassess such income, profits or gains.  It
	      is,  therefore, manifest that once  assessment
	      is reopened by issuing a notice under sub-sec-
	      tion  [2]	 of
section 22
the  previous  under-
	      assessment   Ls  set  aside  and	 the   whole
	      assessment  proceedings  start  afresh.	When
	      once  valid  proceedings	are  started   under
section 34
[11 (b), the Income-tax Officer had
	      not only the jurisdiction but it was his	duty
	      to  levy	tax on the entiere income  that	 had
	      escaped assessment during Om year."
In  the  case of
Commissioner  of	 Sales	Tax,
	      Madhya Pradesh v. - H.M Esufaii H-M.  Abdulaii
[(1973) 32 STC 77 (SC):90 ITR 271 (SC)],	this
	      Court  dealt  with  reassessment	made   under
section  19
of  the  Madhya  pradesh
General
	      Sales  Tax Act, 1958
.  It was held  that	when
	      reassessment is made, the former assessment is
	       completely   reopened   and  in	 its   place
	      assessment is made.  Hegde, J., speaking	 for
	      the Court, observed:
"What  is true of the assessment must also  be
	      true  of reassessment because reassessment  is
	      nothing	but   a	  fresh	  assessment.	When
	      reassessment  is	made under
Section  19
,	 the
	      former assessment is completely  reopened	 and
	      in its place fresh
321
assessment  is  made.   While  reassessing   a
	      dealer,  the  assessing  authority  does	 not
	      merely assess him on the escaped turnover, but
	      it   assesses  him  on  his  total   estimated
	      turnover.	  While	 making	 reassessment  under
section 19
, if the assessing authority has  no
	      power  to make best judgment  assessment,	 all
	      that   the   assessee  need   do	 to   escape
	      reassessment is to refuse to file a return  or
	      refuse  to produce his account books.  If	 the
	      contention taken on behalf of the assessee  is
	      correct, the assessee can escape his liability
	      to  be reassessed by adopting  an	 obstructive
	      attitude.	  It is difficult to  conceive	that
	      such could be the position in law.
8.   What  fell	 for  consideration in	this  decision	were
Sections  12A
,
21
and
21
[2] and 21 [3] of the Mysore  Sales
Tax  Act.   The relevant provisions of
Section	12A
are  as
under:
"[1]  Where  for any reason the whole  or	 any
	      part  of the turnover of a dealer has  escaped
	      assessment  to tax or licence fee or has	been
			    assessed at a lower rate than the rate at whic
h
	      it is assessable, the assessing authority may.
	      subject to the pro visions of sub-section	 [2]
	      at any time within a period of five years from
	      the  expiry  of the year to winch the  tax  or
	      licence	fee relates, assess to the  best  of
	      its  judgment, the tax or licence fee  payable
	      on  the turnover referred to after  issuing  a
	      notice  to  the dealer and after	making	such
	      enquiry as it considers necessary"
9.
Section  21
of the said Act deals,  inter	 alia,	with
revisional powers of the Deputy commissioner.	Sub-sections
[2] and [3] of that section read as under:
"[2]  The Deputy Commissioner may of  his	 own
	      motion call for and examine the record of	 any
	      order passed or proceeding recorded under	 the
	      provisions  of  the Act by  a  Commercial	 Tax
	      Officer  subordinate to him and against  which
	      no  appeal  has been preferred  to  him  under
section  20
,  for the  purpose  of  satisfying
	      himself  as  to the legality or  propriety  of
	      such  order  or as to the regularity  of	such
	      proceeding  and pass such order  with  respect
	      thereto as he thinks fit.
[3]  In  relation to an  order  of  assessment
	      passed  under this Act, the power	 under	sub-
	      section [1] and [2] shall be exercisable	only
	      within a period of four year from the date  on
	      which the order was passed."
10.While holding that the expression "the date on which	 the
order was passed" in sub-section [3] of
Section 21
, did	 not
qualify the word 'order' and hence the period of four  years
has  to be calculated from the date of the rectified  order,
this Court referred to its earlier decision in
International
Cotton
case [supra] and also followed the decision of	this
Court  in
H.M. Esufali H.M. Abdulali
case [( 1 973)  90	 ITR
271 at 280] as under:
"What is true of the  assessment must also  be
	      true  of re-assessment   because re-assessment
	      is  nothing  but	a  fresh  assessment.	When
	      reassessment  is made under
section   19
,	 the
	      former   assessment is completely reopened and
	      in its place fresh assessment is made.   While
	      reassessing a dealer, the assessing  authority
	      does  not	  merely assess him on	the  escaped
	      turnover but it asses= him on his total  esti-
	      mated  turnover.	 While	making	reassessment
	      under
section 19
, if the assessing  authority
	      has no power to make best judgment  assessment
	      all   that  the  assessee need  do  to  escape
	      reassessement   is to refuse to file a  return
	      or refuse to produce taken on
322
behalf   of  the	assessee  is  correct,	 the
	      assessee	can escape his liability to  be	 re-
	      assessed by adopting an obstructive  attitude.
	      It is difficult to conceive that such could be
	      the position in law".
11.The	Court while dealing with the provisions of the	M.P.
General	 Sales Tax Act, 1958 quoted
Section 19
and  Rule  33
[1] and [2] which read as under:
"19.    Assessment   of	turnover    escaping
	      Assessment.  -- [1] Whereas an assessment	 has
	      been made under the Act repealed by
Section 52
and if for any reasons any sale or purchase of
	      goods chargeable to tax under this Act or	 any
	      Act  repealed by
Section 52
during any  period
	      has   been  under-assessed  or   has   escaped
	      assessment or assessed at a lower rate or	 any
	      deduction has been wrongly made therefrom, the
	      Commissioner  may,  at any  time	within	five
	      calendar	years  from  the date  of  order  of
	      assessment,   after   giving  the	  dealer   a
	      reasonable  opportunity  of  being  heard	 and
	      after  making  such enquiry  as  he  considers
	      necessary,  proceed in such manner as  may  be
	      prescribed to reassess within a period of	 two
	      calendar	years from the commencement of	such
	      proceedings,  the tax payable by	such  dealer
	      and  the commissioner may, where the  omission
	      leading to such reassessment  is	attributable
	      to  the dealer, direct that the  dealer  shall
	      pay.  by	way of penalty in  addition  to	 the
	      amount of tax so assessed, a sum not exceeding
	      that amount
	      Provided	that  in the case of  an  assessment
	      made under any Act repealed by
section 52
, the
	      period  for re-assessment escapement or  wrong
	      deduction	 shall	be  provided  in  such	 Act
	      notwithstanding the repeal thereof :
Provided	 further   that	  any	reassessment
	      proceedings    pending   on   the	  date	  of
	      commencement of the Madhya Pradesh
	      General Sales Tax [Amendment] Act, 1978 [No.25
	      of  1978] be completed in accordance with	 the
	      provisions  in force before the date  of	such
	      commencement  and	 within	 a  period  of	 two
	      calendar	 years	 from  the  date   of	such
	      commencement.
x	       x	 x	  x	   x
	      "33.   Manner of Assessment and  re-assessment
	      and imposition of penalty. -[1] Where -
[a]  a registered dealer has rendered  himself
	      liable to tax and penalty under subsection [1]
	      of Section 14-A, or
	      [a-i]  a	dealer has failed to comply  with  a
	      notice issued under sub-section (1) of Section
	      17, or
	       [b]  a registered dealer has  failed  without
	      sufficient cause to furnish prescribed returns
	      for  any	period	by the	prescribed  date  as
	      required by sub-section (1) of Section 17, or
	      [c]  a registered dealer has rendered  himself
	      liable  to  best	judgment  assessment   under
	      clauses  (a)  and (b) of	sub-section  (4)  of
	      Section 18, or
	      [d]  a dealer has rendered himself  liable  to
	      best  judgment assessement  under	 sub-section
	      (6) or sub-section (7) of Section 18, or
(e)   a  dealer being liable to pay  tax,	 has
	      willfully failed to apply for or
(f)  the	 sale  or purchase  of	goods  by  a
	      dealer  during  any  period  has	been   under
	      assessed or has escaped		     or	 has
	      been assessed at a lower rate or any deduction
	      has  been	 wrongly made therefrom	 within	 the
	      meaning of sub-section  (1) of	Section	 19,
	      or
323
(g)   a dealer has deliberately concealed	 his
	      turnover of sale or purchase in respect of any
	      goods or has furnished a false return then  in
	      every such case, the assessing authority shall
	      serve  on the dealer a notice which  shall  as
	      far  as may be, be in Form XVI specifying	 the
	      default,	escapement  or concealment,  as	 the
	      case  may	 be, and calling upon  him  to	show
	      cause  by such date, ordinarily not less	than
	      30 days from the date of service of the notice
	      as may be fixed in that behalf, why he  should
	      not  be assessed or reassessed to	 tax  and/or
	      penalty  should  not be imposed upon  him	 and
	      directing him to produce on the sale date	 his
	      books or account and other documents which the
	      assessing	  authority  may  require  and	 any
	      evidence	which  he  may wish  to	 produce  in
	      support of his objection:
Provided	that  no such notice shall  be	nec-
	      essary  where  the  dealer,  having   appeared
	      before  the assessing authority,	waives	such
	      notice.
[2]  On  the date fixed in the  notice  issued
	      under  sub-rule  11 or in case the  notice  is
	      waived on such date which may be fixed in this
	      behalf  the  assessing authority	shall  after
			    considering	 the  objections  raised  by   the
	      dealer  and examining such evidence as may  be
	      produced	by him and after taking	 such  other
	      evidence	as may be available, assess  or	 re-
	      assess  the  dealer  to tax  and/or  impose  a
	      penalty or pass any other suitable order".
12.In  view  of these authorities taking the view  that	 the
word  'any' in the expression "order sought to	be  amended"
would  mean even the rectified order, we are satisfied	that
the  High Court was wrong in setting aside the	decision  of
the  Tribunal.	 Shri G. Vishwanatha  Iyer,  learned  senior
counsel	 cited	before	us the decisions  of  the  Calcutta,
Gujarat,  Madras  and Orissa High Courts in
Bharat  Textile
Works	&  Ors.	 v.  Income-tax	 Officer,  Circle-IV,	3-A,
(Company
]  [(
1978) 114 ITR, 281, Ahmedabad  Sarangpur  Mills
Co.  Ltd.  v. A.S. Manohar, Income-Tax Officer,	 Circle	 IV,
Ward-A, [Companies, Ahmedabad
[(
1976) 102 ITR 7121,  Kothari
(Madras)  Ltd. v. Agricultural Income Tax  Officer
.  [(1989)
177  ITR  538] and commissioner of Income  Tax.	 v.  Kalinga
Tubes  [(1991) 187 ITR 595] respectively in support  of	 his
contention  that  the word 'order' used	 in  the  expression
"order	sought to be amended" would mean the original  order
of  the	 assessment.
As against this,	Dr.  Shankar  Ghose,
learned	 senior counsel referred us to the decisions of	 the
Patna  and  Karnataka  High  Courts  in
Bihar	State	Road
Transport Corporation v. Commissioner of Income Tax
[(1986)
ITR  162  114  at  130]	 and
Commissioner  of	 Income-tax,
Karnataka-II, Bangalore v. Mysore Iron & Steel Ltd.
[(1986)
157 ITR at 531] respectively which decisions have taken	 the
contrary  view.	 However, in view of the decisions  of	this
Court
referred to above
, we are of the opinion that the view
taken  by  the Tribunal in the present case is	the  correct
one.   We,  therefore, set aside the impugned order  of	 the
High  Court and restore that of the Tribunal.	The  appeals
are allowed accordingly with no order as to costs.
326