[Cites
18
, Cited by
98
]
Supreme Court of India
Indian Oil Corporation Ltd vs Municipal Corporation & Anr on 7 April, 1995
Equivalent citations: AIR 1995 SUPREME COURT 1480, 1995 (4) SCC 96, 1995 AIR SCW 2254, (1995) 3 SCR 246 (SC), (1995) 3 JT 626 (SC), 1995 ALL CJ 1 516, 1995 ALL CJ 2 792, (1995) 2 CIVILCOURTC 431, (1995) 2 MAD LJ 35, (1995) 2 KER LT 28, (1996) 1 LJR 120
Bench:
J.S. Verma
,
Sujata V. Manohar
PETITIONER:
INDIAN OIL CORPORATION LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MUNICIPAL CORPORATION & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT07/04/1995

BENCH:
J.S. VERMA & MRS. SUJATA V. MANOHAR, JJ.




ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
ORDER
1.   Heard the learned Additional Solicitor  General.
2.   The impugned judgment by a Full Bench   of	 the  Madhya
Pradesh	 High  Court overrules the decision  of	 a  Division
Bench  in
Municipal Corporation, Indore and Others  v.	Smt.
Ratnaprabha  Dhanda, Indore and Another
, 1989 MPLJ 20.	 The
challenge   in	this  special  leave  petition	is  to	 the
correctness  of	 the  Full  Bench  decision.   The  question
involved  relates to the construction of
Section  138(b)
of
the Madhya Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1956
629
(for short the "M.P. Act") which reads as under:-
"The  annual  value  of  any  building   shall
	      notwithstanding  anything	 contained  in'	 any
	      other  law  for  the time being  in  force  be
	      deemed  to be the gross annual rent  at  which
	      such building, together with its appurtenances
	      and  any furniture that may be let for use  or
	      enjoyment	 therewith might reasonably  at	 the
	      time of assessment be expected to be let	from
	      year  to	year,  less  any  allowance  of	 ten
	      percent  for the cost of repairs and  for	 all
	      other  expenses  necessary  to  maintain	 the
	      building	in  a state to	command	 such  gross
	      annual rent."
(emphasis supplied)
3.
In the High Court the matter was not res integra  being
concluded  by the authority of the direct decision by  a  3-
Judge  Bench of this Court in
Municipal Corporation,  Indore
and  Others v. Smt.  Ratna Prabha and Others
, 1977  (1)	 SCR
1017,  on the correct construction of Section 138(b) of	 the
M.P. Act.  No other direct decision of this Court is to	 the
contrary.  However, the Division Bench of the High Court  in
a later case between the very same parties took a  different
view  on  the  construction of the  same  provision  placing
reliance  on some other decisions of this Court wherein	 the
question  arose	 for decision in the context  of  a  similar
provision  in  some other statutes applicable in  the  other
States	wherein there was no non-obstante clause as  in	 the
M.P.  Act.
The Division Bench took the view that  the	 de-
cision of this Court in
Ratna Prabha
(supra) was not binding
on  it	even though it related to construction of  the	same
provision,  namely, Section 138(b) of the M.P. Act since  it
was  in conflict with later decisions of this Court  by	 co-
equal  Benches wan Daulat Rai Kapoor etc. etc. v. New  Delhi
Municipal  Committee & Another etc. etc., 1980 (2)  SCR	 607
and  Dr.  Balbir  Singh	 and Ors.  etc.	 etc.  v.  Municipal
Corporation, Delhi and Ors., 1985 (2) SCR 439.
Accordingly,
it proceeded on the basis that the decision of this Court in
Ratna  Prabha
(supra) is no longer good law binding  on	 it.
This  situation	 gave rise to the need for a Full  Bench  to
consider  the correctness of the view taken by the  Division
Bench.	 The  Full Bench has overruled the decision  of	 the
Division Bench.
In our opinion, the Full Bench was right in
its  view  that the decision of this Court in
Ratna  Prabha
(supra)	 binds	the  High  Court.  There  is  no  ground  to
entertain  this special leave petition which challenges	 the
decision of the Full Bench of the High Court.
4.The	only,	direct	decision  of  this  Court   on	 the
construction  of Section 138(b) of the M.P. Act, with  which
we  are concerned, is
Ratna Prabha
(supra).
It referred  to
the earlier decision in
The Corporation of Calcutta v.	Smt.
Padma Debi and Others
, 1962 (3) SCR 49 and distinguished  it
on the ground that
Section 127(a)
of the Calcutta  Municipal
Corporation  Act, 1923 on which the decision in
Padma	Debi
(supra)	 was  based, did not contain a non  obstante  clause
like  that  in Section 138(b) of the M.P.  Act.
The  other
earlier	 decisions  of this Court in which  construction  of
similar	 provision in other statutes was involved were	also
referred  and distinguished in
Ratna Prabha
(supra); and  it
was then held as under:-
"As has been stated, clause (b) of
section 138
of  the Act provides that the annual value  of
	      any building shall " notwithstanding  anything
	      contained in any other law for the time  being
	      in  force"  be deemed to be the  gross  annual
	      rent for
630
which  the building might "reasonably  at	 the
	      time  of the assessment be expected to be	 let
	      from  year  to  year".   While  therefore	 the
	      requirement of the law is that the  reasonable
	      letting  value  should  determine	 the  annual
	      value  of	 the  building,	 it  has  also	been
	      specifically  provided that this would  be  so
	      "notwithstanding	anything  contained  in	 any
	      other  law for the time being in	force".	  It
	      appears  to  us  that it	would  be  a  proper
	      interpretation of the provisions of clause (b)
	      of
section 138
of the Act to hold that  in  a
	      case where the standard rent of a building has
	      been  fixed  under
section 7
of	 the  Madhya
	      Pradesh  Accommodation Control Act, and  there
	      is  nothing to show that there has been  fraud
	      or  collusion,  that would be  its  reasonable
	      letting value, but, where this is not so,	 and
	      the  building  has never been let out  and  is
	      being  used in a manner where the question  of
	      fixing  its standard rent does not  arise,  it
	      would  be	 permissible to fix  its  reasonable
	      rent  without regard to the provisions of	 the
Madhya  Pradesh  Accommodation  Control	Act,
	      1961
.   This view will, in our  opinion,	give
	      proper  effect to the non-obstante  clause  in
	      clause  (b),  with  due regard  to  its  other
	      provision	 that  the letting value  should  be
	      reasonable ".
We  have	gone through the decision  in
Padma
	      Debi
's case (supra).  There the premises	were
	      on   rent	 and
section  127(a)
of   Calcutta
	      Municipal	 Corporation  Act,  1923,  did	 not
	      contain  a  non-obstante	clause.	  That	 the
	      section  provided,  inter alia, was  that	 the
	      annual  value shall be deemed to be the  gross
	      annual  rent  at which the  land	or  building
	      might at the time of assessment "reasonably be
	      expected	to  let from year to year.   "	This
	      Court  examined the significance of  the	word
	      "reasonable"   and  held	that  it  would	  be
	      incongruous  to  consider	 fixation  of	rent
	      beyond  the limits fixed by penal	 legislation
	      as  reasonable.	That  view  was	 taken	with
	      reference	 to  the  provisions  of  the
Rent
	      Control  Act
which penalised the taking  of  a
	      higher  rent, and also made it  irrecoverable.
While, therefore, we are in agreement with the
	      view  taken in
Padma Debi
's case (supra)	that
	      it   would  not  be  reasonable  to   consider
	      fixation	of rent beyond the limits  fixed  by
	      the
Rent Control Act
as reasonable, it  would
	      not  be  a proper	 interpretation	 of
section
	      138(b)
to hold that as no standard  rent	 has
	      been  fixed  so far in respect  of  die  Viram
	      Lodge,   the   Municipal	 Commissioner	 was
	      justified	  in   adopting	  another   suitable
	      criterion for determining the annual value  of
	      the building.  There is in fact nothing in the
	      Act to make it obligatory for the Commissioner
	      to follow the provisions of the
Madhya Pradesh
	      Accommodation Control Act
in spite of the non-
	      obstante clause and to limit the annual  value
	      to  any standard rent that the building  might
	      fetch under that Act.
xxx	xxx	   xxx
	      The High Court did not properly appreciate the
	      difference between the wording of
section	 127
of  the  Calcutta Municipal  Corporation	Act,
	      1923,  and
section  138(b)
of  the  Act,	 and
	      committed an error in thinking   that this was
	      virtually similar to Padma Debi's case.  "
(at pages 10 1 9-20 of SCR)
	      (emphasis supplied)
5.
In Dewan Daulat Rai (supra), an other 3-Judge Bench  of
this  Court  while  construing a similar  provision  in	 the
Punjab	Municipal  Act,	 1911
referred to  the	decision  in
RatnaPrabha
(supra) and distinguished it on the ground	that
there was n non-obstante clause in the relevant provision of
the
Punjab  Municipal Act
and therefore,  the	decision  in
Ratna  Prab
(supra) had no application.
No doubt,  i  doing
so, a reservation was expressed
631
about the view taken in Ratna Prabha (supra) on the basis of
the  existence of the non-obstante clause in Section  138(b)
of  the	 M.P.  Act  but	 that  cannot  have  the  effect  of
overruling  the	 decision  of this  Court  in  Ratna  Prabha
(supra)	 inasmuch  as  a  later	 co-equal  Bench  could	 not
overrule it and could only refer it for reconsideration to a
larger Bench, which it did not do.
6.   In	 Dr. Balbir Singh (supra), after pointing  out	that
the  relevant provisions in the
Delhi Municipal	 Corporation
Act,  1957
and the
Punjab Municipal Act, 1911
were  almost
identical,  the	 decision in Dewan Daulat  Rai	(supra)	 was
followed  by another 3-Judge Bench.
No reference  was	made
therein	 to  the  decision of this  Court  in
Ratna  Prabha
(supra).
7.   Recently, another 3-Judge Bench of this Court in
Morvi
Municipality v. State of Gujarat and Ors.
, 1993 (2) SCR 803,
dealt	with  the  same	 question  with	 reference  to	 the
provisions  of	the
Gujarat Municipalities  Act,  1963
.
It
referred  to  the earlier decisions and indicated  that	 the
presence   of  the  non-obstante  clause    "notwithstanding
anything  contained in any other law"  in Section 138(b)  of
the  M.P.  Act distinguished the decision of this  Court  in
Ratna Prabha
(supra); and since in the Gujarat act there was
no such non-obstante clause that decision had no application
to the
Gujarat Act
.
8.   It	 is  thus clear that the decision of this  Court  in
Ratna  Prabha
(supra) on the construction of Section  138(b)
of the M.P. Act has all along been understood and  justified
on  the basis of the presence of the non-obstante clause  in
Section 138(b) of the M.P. Act and the later decisions	have
distinguished it on that ground.
That is the basis on which
the  decision  in
Padma Debi
(supra)  was  distinguished  in
Ratna Prabha
(supra) itself It is also obvious that a  Bench
of  3-Judges only in the later decisions could not  overrule
the decision of this Court in Ratna Prabha, 1977 (1) SCR  10
1 7 and, therefore, none of the later decisions could be  so
read  to have that effect.
The Division Bench of  the	High
Court in 1989 MLJ 20 was clearly in error in taking the view
that the decision of this Court in
Ratna Prabha
(supra)	 was
not  binding on it.  In doing so, the Division Bench of	 the
High  Court did something which even a later co-equal  Bench
of  this Court did not and could not do.  The view taken  by
the  Division Bench of the High Court in 1989 MPLJ  20	pro-
ceeds  on a total misunderstanding of the law of  precedents
and
Article 141
of the Constitution of India, to  which  it
referred.   But for the fact that the view of  the  Division
Bench  of the High court proceeds on a	misapprehensions  of
the  law of precedents and
Article 141
of the  Constitution,
it  would  be exposed to the criticism of an  aberration  in
judicial discipline.  The decision of the Division Bench  of
the High Court was, therefore, rightly overruled by the Full
Bench in the impugned judgment.
9.   The   other  submission  of  the	learned	  Additional
Solicitor  General  is	a plea for  reconsideration  of	 the
decision  of this Court in Ratna Prabha, 1977 (1) SCR  1017,
which can arise only in this Court and was not available  in
the  High Court.  The decision in
Ratna Prabha
(supra),	 the
only  direct decision of this Court on the  construction  of
Section 138(b) of the M.P. Act has held the field for a long
time  and has formed the basis of assessment of	 the  annual
value  in  the	State of Madhya Pradesh	 since	then.
That
decision is based
632
on  the presence of the non-obstante clause in the M.P.	 Act
and distinguishes the earlier larger Bench decision in
Padma
Debi
(supra) on that ground.
There can be no doubt that the
view  taken  by	 this Court in
Ratna  Prabha
(supra)  is  a
reasonably permissible construction of Section 138(b) of the
M.P.  Act.
In	 the later decisions of	 this  Court,
Ratna
Prabha
(supra) was invariably distinguished and not referred
for  reconsideration  by a larger Bench.
There is  thus  no
ground	now  for reconsideration of the	 decision  in
Ratna
Prabha
(supra).
10.
In
The Keshav Mills Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-
tax, Bombay North, 1965 (2) SCR 908, the correct approach in
this behalf was indicated as under:-
"........	 In exercising this inherent  power,
	      however,	this Court would naturally  like  to
	      impose  certain  reasonable  limitations	 and
	      would be reluctant to entertain pleas for	 the
	      reconsideration  and revision of	its  earlier
	      decisions,  unless it is satisfied that  there
	      are  compelling and substantial reasons to  do
	      so  When	it is urged that  the  view  already
	      taken  by	 this Court should be  reviewed	 and
	      revised it may not necessarily be an  adequate
	      reason  for such review and revision  to	hold
	      that  though the earlier view is a  reasonably
	      possible	view, the alternative view which  is
	      pressed  on  the subsequent occasion  is	more
	      reasonable.   In	reviewing and  revising	 its
	      earlier decision, this Court should ask itself
	      whether in the interests of the public good or
	      for any other valid and compulsive reasons, it
	      is necessary that the earlier decision  should
	      be revised.......".
(at page 921 of SCR)
			   (emphasis supplied)
11.In  our  opinion,  the test	indicated  in
Keshav  Mills
(supra)	 for reconsideration of a decision of this Court  is
not  satisfied	in the present case and, therefore,  we	 are
unable	to  entertain the plea for  reconsideration  of	 the
decision in Rama Prabha.
12.The	special leave petition is, therefore, dismissed	 for
the above reasons.