[Cites
4
, Cited by
156
]
Supreme Court of India
Dr. G.N. Khajuria & Ors vs Delhi Development Authority & Ors on 31 August, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1996 AIR 253, 1995 SCC (5) 762, AIR 1996 SUPREME COURT 253, 1995 (5) SCC 762, 1995 AIR SCW 4024, 1995 HRR 557, (1996) 63 DLT 775, (1996) 4 JT 7 (SC)
Author:
B.L Hansaria
Bench:
B.L Hansaria
,
K. Ramaswamy
PETITIONER:
DR. G.N. KHAJURIA & ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT31/08/1995

BENCH:
HANSARIA B.L. (J)
BENCH:
HANSARIA B.L. (J)
RAMASWAMY, K.

CITATION:
 1996 AIR  253		  1995 SCC  (5) 762
 1995 SCALE  (5)172


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
HANSARIA,J.
The appellants  are some  of the  residents  of  Sarita
Vihar.	According   to	them,	respondent  No.	  1,   Delhi
Development Authority  (DDA), permitted	 a nursery school to
be opened  in Park  No.6 of  Pocket `A'	 of Sarita  Vihar by
respondent No.2	 in complete  violation of the provisions of
Delhi Development Act, 1957
(for short `the Act'). When they
approached with	 this grievance,  the High  Court  of  Delhi
found no merit and dismissed the writ petition.
2.   The short	and important  point which is required to be
determined  is	 whether  the	school	in  question  is  in
possession of  the land	 in question  in  violation  of	 the
statutory provisions contained in the Act. According to Shri
P.P. Rao,  learned Sr. Counsel appearing for the appellants,
there is  no escape  from the conclusion that the school was
allowed to  be opened  in the  park in violation of what has
been contained	in
Sections 7
and
8
of the Act. The stand of
DDA on	the other  hand, as  put forward by Shri Jaitley, is
that the  appellants have  either mis-conceived the stautory
provisions or  are interested,	for one reason or the other,
in seeing  that the  nursery school does not function at the
place allotted	to it by the DDA. The counsel for respondent
No.2 butresses	this submission	 by contending that a school
having been  allowed to be opened and this respondent having
spent substantial  amount of  money in	raising a  permanent
structure at  the site,	 we may	 not do	 anything,  at	this
stage, to  uproot the  school which  would  cause  not	only
financial loss	to  the	 respondent  but  would	 hamper	 the
educational progress of the students as well.
3.   A perusal	of
Sections  7
and
8
of the Act, which find
place in  Chapter III  under the  heading "Master  Plan	 and
Zonal  Development   Plans",  shows   that  the	 Development
Authority is  under an	obligation to  prepare a master plan
which shall define the various zones into which Delhi may be
divided for  the purposes  of development.
Section 8
enjoins
that a	zonal development  plan may  contain a site-plan and
use-land for  the development  of  the	zone  and  show	 the
approximate locations  and extents  of land-uses proposed in
the zone, inter alia, for such public works and utilities as
schools, public and private spaces. This is what finds place
in sub-section	(2) of
Section 8
. Clause (d) of sub-section
(2) provides  that the zonal development plan to be prepared
by the	Authority would	 in particular	contain	 provisions,
inter alia,  for the  allotment or  reservation of  land for
open spaces,  gardens, recreation  grounds and	schools,  as
mentioned in  sub-clause  (ii).	 Our  attention	 is  further
invited by  Shri Rao  to Rule  4 of  the  Delhi	 Development
(Master Plan  and Zonal Development Plan) Rules, 1959, whose
sub-rule (3) (g) states that a draft master plan may include
"education,  recreation	  and  community   facilities  plan"
indicating proposals  for parks,  open spaces, recreational,
educational and cultural centres.
4.   Relying on	 the aforesaid	provisions,  the  submission
advanced  for	the  appellants	  is  that  the	 Development
Authority was  under an	 obligation to	specify in the zonal
development plan,  locations and extents of land-uses, inter
alia, for parks and schools. According to Shri Rao, the land
which ultimately  was  allotted	 to  respondent	 No.  2	 for
opening a  nursery school  had originally been kept reserved
for park  because of  which the	 land could  not  have	been
allowed to  be used  for opening the school by any executive
or administrative decision of the DDA.
5.   Shri Jaitley  contends that the zonal development plans
are really  required to	 show in broad cutlines "Approximate
locations of  High Schools  and Primary Schools" as has been
mentioned  in  what  has  been	described  as  "Sub-Division
Regulations" a	copy of	 which is  placed at page 196 of the
paper book.  It is  submitted by  Shri Jaitley	that nursery
schools are  not required  to be  indicated  either  in	 the
master plan  or the  zonal development plan, as they are not
taken  to   be	schools	 stricto  sensu,  but  are  akin  to
recreational places,  some space for which is required to be
reserved in  residential colonies  in the  lay-out meant for
them. The  further limb	 of this  submission is	 that in the
lay-out for  Pocket `A'	 of Sarita Vihar, some space was, in
fact, reserved	for nursery  schools. Not  only	 this,	Shri
Jaitley would  contend that  there was no park at all at the
place where the school was allowed to be established.
6.   We would  agree with  Shri Jaitley	 that in  the  zonal
development plan  visualised by
Section 8
of the Act, land
used  for   nursery  school  may  not  be  indicated,  as  a
distinction is	permissible to be made between a high school
and a  primary school  on one hand and nursery school on the
other. Even so, we are of the firm view that any lay-out for
residential colony,  like  that	 of  Sarita  Vihar,  has  to
indicate space	reserved, not  only for	 nursery school, but
for park. This follows from what has been stated in
Sections
8(2) (a)
and
8(d)  (ii)
of the Act and Rule 4(3) (g) of the
aforesaid Rules.  We have  thought it  fit to  mention about
this aspect  because in the lay-out plan of Sarita Vihar, as
put on record, we find no mention about reservation of space
for park. This is simply inconceivable to us.
7.   We also  do not entertain any doubt that at the site at
which the school was allowed to be opened, there was a park.
This is	 apparent from	the  report  submitted	by  Director
(Monitoring)  to   the	Vice-Chairman	of  the	 Development
Authority pursuant  to his  order dated	 26.10.1992 which he
came to	 pass on  a reference being made to him by the Chief
Secretary on  23.10.1992. The Chief Secretary had passed the
order on  a representation  made by some residents of Sarita
Vihar,	 Pocket	   `A',	  complaining	about	unauthorised
construction in Park No.6. The Director (Monitoring) visited
the site  on 2.11.1992	and found  that a  part of  the park
located in  Pocket `A'	had actually  been enclosed  with  a
boundary  wall	 by   an   institution	 named	 Rattanatrya
Educational Research Institute, which body is none else than
respondent No.2.  The report further says that the Institute
was running  a nursery	school in  a few  temporary barracks
constructed  along  with  one  of  the	boundary  walls.  On
discussion with	 some office bearers of the Institute it was
informed that  the land in question measuring 800 sq. metres
had been  allotted to  the Institute by the DDA in July 1988
for the	 purpose of  running a	nursery school. The Director
(Monitoring) reported  that  the  residents  of	 surrounding
areas started  making objections when this Institute took up
the construction  of a regular school building after getting
the plan duly sanctioned from the Building Department of the
DDA. The  report has  categorically mentioned  that  in	 the
original lay-out  (which we  understood to be of 1984) there
was no	provision for  a  nursery  school  in  the  park  in
question. Subsequently,	 however, some	portion of  the park
was carved  out for  the nursery  school. That	such a	park
exists was  sought to  be proved  by Shri  Rao by  producing
certain photographs  as well,  one of  which contains a sign
board mentioning about "D.D.A. Park".
8.   We, therefore, hold that the land which was allotted to
respondent No.2	 was part of a park. We further hold that it
was not	 open to  the DDA  to carve  out any space meant for
park for  a nursery  school. We	 are of	 the considered view
that the  allotment in	favour of respondent No.2 was misuse
of power,  for reasons	which need  not be  adverted. It is,
therefore, a  fit case, according to us, where the allotment
in favour  of respondent  No.2 should  be cancelled  and  we
order accordingly. The fact that respondent No.2. has put up
up some	 structure stated  to be permanent by his counsel is
not relevant,  as the  same has	 been one  on a plot of land
allotted to it in contravention of law. As to the submission
that  dislocation   from  the	present	 site	would  cause
difficulty to  the tiny tots, we would observe that the same
has been  advanced only	 to  get  sympathy  from  the  Court
inasmuch as  children, for whom the nursery school is meant,
would travel  to any  other nearby place where such a school
would be  set up  aither by  respondent No.2 or by any other
body.
9.   The appeal	 is,  therefore,  allowed  by  ordering	 the
cancellation of allotment made in favour of respondent No.2.
It would  be open  to this respondent to continue to run the
school at  this site for a period of six months to enable it
to make	 such alternative  arrangments as  it thinks  fit to
shift the  school, so  that the	 children are not put to any
disadvantageous position suddenly.
10.  Before parting,  we have  an observation  to make.	 The
same is	 that a	 feeling  is  gathering	 ground	 that  where
unauthorised constructions  are demolished  on the  force of
the order  of courts,  the illegality  is not  taken care of
fully inasmuch as the officers of the statutory body who had
allowed the  unauthorised construction	to be  made or	make
illegal allotments  go scot  free. This should not, however,
have happen  for two  reasons.	First,	it  is	the  illegal
action/order of	 the officer  which lies  At the root of the
unlawful act  of the concerned citizen, because of which the
officer is  more to  be blamed	than the  recepient  of	 the
illegal benefit.  It is	 thus imperative,  according to	 us,
that while  undoing the	 mischief which	 would	require	 the
demolition of  the unauthorised construction, the delinquent
officer has  also to  be punished  in accordance  with	law.
This, however, seldom happens. Secondly, to take care of the
injustice completely,  the officer who had misused his power
has also to be properly punished. Otherwise, what happens is
that the  officer, who	made the  hay when  the sun  shined,
retains the  hay, which	 tempts other  to do  the same. This
really gives  fillip to	 the  commission  of  tainted  acts,
whereas the aim should be opposite.
11.  We, therefore,  call upon	respondent No.1	 to make  an
enquiry and  inform the	 Court within three months as to who
are the officers who had made the unauthorised allotment and
permitted unauthorised	construction. On knowing about this,
such further  orders would  be	passed	as  deemed  fit	 and
proper.
12.  Put up after three months.