[Cites
10
, Cited by
36
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. The Andhra Bank Ltd.,Hyderabad vs The Commissioner Of Income Tax,A.P. ... on 22 September, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1995 SCC, SUPL. (4) 133 JT 1995 (7) 373
Author:
S.C.  Sen
Bench:
S.C.  Sen
,
A.M Ahmadi
,
K.S. Paripoornan
PETITIONER:
M/S. THE ANDHRA BANK LTD.,HYDERABAD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX,A.P. III, HYDERABAD.

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/09/1995

BENCH:
SEN, S.C. (J)
BENCH:
SEN, S.C. (J)
AHMADI A.M. (CJ)
PARIPOORNAN, K.S.(J)

CITATION:
 1995 SCC  Supl.  (4) 133 JT 1995 (7)	373
 1995 SCALE  (5)477


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
SEN,J.
These are appeals from a judgment of the Andhra Pradesh
High Court  which answered  the following question of law in
the affirmative and against the assessee:-
"Whether  on   the	 facts	 and  in  the
     circumstances of  the case,  the sums of
     Rs.4,12,780/-  and	  Rs.5,50,000/-	  are
     liable to	be excluded  under Rule 1(xi)
(a) of the Surtax Rules in computing the
     chargeable profits in Surtax assessments
     for the  assessment  years	 1971-72  and
     1972-73?"
The assessment  years involved in this case are 1971-72
and 1972-73  for which	the  relevant  previous	 years	were
calendar years 1970 and 1971 respectively.
The dispute  in  this  case  is  about  computation  of
chargeable  profits   of  a   banking  company.	 'Chargeable
Profits' has been defined in sub-section (5) of
Section 2
of
The Companies  (Profits) Surtax	 Act, 1964  (for short	'the
Act') to mean the total income of an assessee computed under
the
Income  Tax Act,  1961
for	any previous  year or years,
.......... and adjusted in accordance with the provisions of
the First Schedule."
There is  a specific  rule in the
First Schedule of the
Act
relating  to computation  of  chargeable  profits  of  a
banking company which is as under :
"In computing  the chargeable profits of
     a	previous   year,  the	total  income
     computed for that year under the
Income-
     Tax Act
shall be adjusted as follows:-
1.	  Income, profits and gains and other
     sums  falling   within   the   following
     clauses  shall  be	 excluded  from	 such
     total income, namely:-
x	x  x  x	 x  x  x  x  x
(xi)	in  the	 case  of  a  banking
	  company-
(a) any	sum which  during the
	       previous year  is  transferred
	       by it  to a reserve fund under
	       sub-section (1)	of section 17
	       of the  Banking Companies Act,
	       1949.............,	  not
	       exceeding the  amount required
	       under the aforesaid provisions
	       to  be	so   transferred   or
	       deposited, as the case may be,
	       or"
The language  of clause  (xi) (a)	is  clear.  Whatever
amount as  deposited  in  the  reserve	fund  created  under
Section 17  (1)
of  the	 Banking  Regulation  Act  will	 not
qualify for deduction. The deduction will be limited only to
the amount  which is  required	to  be	transferred  to	 the
reserve fund by sub-section (1) of
Section 17
of the Banking
Regulation Act,	 1949. Sub clause (a) of clause (xi) clearly
states that  when an  amount is transferred to the statutory
reserve fund,  deduction will  be  limited  to	a  sum	'not
exceeding the amount required under the aforesaid provisions
to be  so transferred.'.  The legislative  intent is  not to
allow the  entire sum  transferred to  the reserve  fund  as
deduction but  to limit	 it to	the amount which is actually
required by  the provisions of
Section 17 (1)
of the Banking
Regulation Act to be transferred to the reserve fund.
Section 17
of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 makes it
necessary for a banking company to create a reserve fund and
transfer not  less than	 20/ of	 its profits to that reserve
fund.
"17. Reserve  Fund-  (1)  Every  banking
     company  incorporated   in	 India	shall
     create a  reserve fund and shall, out of
     the balance  of profit  of each  year as
     disclosed in the profit and loss account
     prepared under
Section 29
and before any
     dividend is  declared, transfer  to  the
     reserve fund  a sum  equivalent  to  not
     less  than	  twenty  per  cent  of	 such
     profit."
The mandate of
Section 17
is that every banking company
will have  to transfer	to a  reserve fund every year, a sum
equivalent to  "not  less  than	 twenty	 per  cent  of	such
profit". In other words, at least 20% of the profit as shown
in the	Profit and  Loss Account  before declaration  of any
dividend has  to be transferred to the reserve fund. This is
the statutory  requirement. If	a banking  company transfers
any amount  in excess  of 20%  of its  profit of any year to
this reserve  fund, the exclusion in clause (xi) (a) will be
limited to  20% of  the profit	which is  the requirement of
Section 17 (1)
of the Banking Regulation Act.
Mr.  Ramachandran	 on  behalf   of  the  assessee	 has
contended that	in this	 case, a reserve fund was created by
the assessee  bank to  comply with the provisions of
Section
17
of  the Banking Regulation Act. Even though the amount of
contribution for  the relevant	accounting period was higher
than 20%  of its  balance of profits, the entire amount will
have to be deducted from its total income in order to arrive
at chargeable  profit under  clause (xi)  of Rule  1 of	 the
First Schedule	to the	Act
, because the amount in excess of
the  statutory	minimum	 was  contributed  pursuant  to	 the
direction given	 by the	 Reserve Bank of India under
Section
35A
of	the Banking  Regulation Act  is binding on a banking
company. Therefore, the Bank was under a legal obligation to
transfer more  than 20%	 of its profits to the reserve fund.
Since this  transfer was made pursuant to direction given by
the Reserve  Bank of India, the entire amount so transferred
must be	 allowed as  deduction for computation of chargeable
profit.
We are  unable to	uphold	this  argument	for  several
reasons. In  the first place, clause (xi) of Rule c 1 of the
First  Schedule	  to  the  Act
specifically  restricts	 the
allowable amount  to a sum not exceeding the amount required
under the provisions of
Section 17
to be so transferred. Any
other sum  transferred to a reserve fund under the direction
of Reserve  Bank or  any other	law  will  not	qualify	 for
deduction. For	example, under the
Banking Regulation Act
, a
bank has  to maintain  a cash reserve under
Section 1
of the
Banking Regulation  Act. Any sum transferred to this reserve
will  not  be  eligible	 for  deduction	 from  total  income
computed  under	  the
Income	Tax  Act
.  Only	 the  amount
transferred to	the reserve  fund created  under
Section  17
will be	 eligible for deduction and the quantum of deduction
is restricted to the amount required under the provisions of
Section 17
of the Banking Regulation Act to be transferred.
Section 17
lays down  that before any dividend is daclared,
out of	the balance  of profit	of each year as disclosed in
the profit and loss account, a sum not less than 20% of such
profit will  have to  be transferred  to the  reserve  fund.
Deduction under clause (xi) has been specifically limited to
this  amount   which  is   required  by
Section  17
to  be
transferred to	the reserve  fund. The phrase 'not exceeding
the amount  required ......  to be so transferred' indicates
that any  other sum  in excess of the requirement of
Section
17
will not be eligible for deduction.
Assuming that  the assessee  bank	was  under  a  legal
obligation to  transfer a  sum in excess of 20% by virtue of
a. direction  given by	the Reserve  Bank of India, then the
excess contribution  to the  reserve fund was not because of
any requirement	 of
Section 17
but because of the provisions
of some	 other	Section.  The  exclusion  permissible  under
clause (xi)  of Rule  1 of  the first
Schedule of the Act
is
limited only  to the  sum "not exceeding the amount required
under the  aforesaid provisions	 to be so transferred ....".
The  'aforesaid	  provisions'  in   this  clause  means	 the
provisions of
Section 17 (1)
of the Banking Regulation Act.
If any	further sum  is transferred  to the  reserve fund by
virtue of provisions of some other Sections of the Act, such
sum  will  not	quality	 for  exclusion	 in  computation  of
chargeable profits.
Moreover, from the various circulars relied upon by the
assessee Bank,	it does	 not appear that the Reserve Bank of
India gave  any direction under
Section 35A
to transfer more
than 20%  to the  reserve  fund.  A  circular  letter  dated
27.12.1961 was	issued by  the	Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of
India, to all the scheduled Banks in which it was stated:-
"I am  aware that	several banks obliged
     to	 transfer   20	per   cent  of	their
     declared profits in terms of
section 17
,
     actually transfer	a quantum larger than
     that, I  have no  doubt such  banks will
     continue to maintain this practice."
This cannot  be construed as a direction by the Reserve Bank
of India  under
Section	 35A
. Similarly, the circular letter
written on  25th January, 1962 deals with 'a point which has
been raised by the Bank'. In reply the Executive Director of
the Reserve Bank of India stated:-
"In this connection, we advise as under:
2.	  Certain banks have already reserves
     which are equal to or exceed their paid-
up capital.  The intention	 is that such
     banks  should  transfer  not  less	 than
     twenty  per   cent	 of  their  disclosed
     profits  arrived  at  after  making  the
     usual and necessary provisions and after
     deduction of the provision for taxation.
3.	  There	  are	several	  banks	  the
     reserves of which are not equal to their
     paid-up  capital.	 The  intent  of  the
     Governor's letter	is  that  such	banks
     should, till  they reach parity of paid-
up capital and reserves, follow the same
     basis of computation as they observed in
     their profit  and loss account for 1960.
That  is	to  say,   if  they   compute
     transfers to  reserves on profits before
     tax they  should continue	to Co so till
     parity is reached."
This  letter  is  in  the  nature  of  advice  and  contains
direction as  to how  profit  should  be  calculated  before
transfer of  the requisite  20% is made to the reserve fund.
Banks having reserves equal to or in excess of their paid-up
capital should	transfer 20% of the profits after making the
usual provisions  and  after  deduction	 of  provisions	 for
taxation. But  those Banks  whose reserves  are not equal to
their paid-up  capital should  transfer 20% of their profits
Deforo tax  to the  reserve fund  till the parity of paid-up
capital is  reached. This circular letter was written by the
Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India.
Reliance has been placed upon two other letters written
by the Reserve Bank of India to the assessee Bank. The first
letter is  dated  29th	March,	1971  in  which	 the  Bank's
practice of  effecting transfer	 to the	 statutory  reserve,
after making  provisions for  Income Tax, has been commented
upon. In  this letter,	the  Deputy  Chief  Officer  of	 the
Reserve Bank  has made it clear that lin future, bank should
transfer to  the above	reserves a  sum not less than 20% of
its profits before providing for income tax. We may add that
our approval  does not	affect in  any	way  the  obligation
imposed on your bank by or under any other provisions of the
Banking Regulation  Act, 1949
or of the
Companies Act, 1956
or any other law for the time being in force.'
     The other	letter dated  25.5.1972 is  also in the same
vein.
None of these circular-letters sent by the Reserve Bank
of  India  nor	the  letters  written  specifically  to	 the
assessee-Bank go  to show that the Reserve Bank of India had
directed the Banks or the assessee-bank to transfer a larger
amount than  what was  required by
Section 17	(1)
of	 the
Banking Regulation  Act. Therefore,  this argument  that the
assessee had  been directed  by the  Reserve Bank  of  India
under
Section  35A
to  contribute a  larger  amount  to	 the
reserve fund  than what	 was required  by
Section  17(1)
is
misconceived.
In view  of the  aforesaid, we  hold that	the question
referred to  the High  Court was  correctly answered  by it.
These appeals  are dismissed.  These will  be  no  order  as
costs.
CIVIL APPEAL NO.861 OF 1985
     In view of our Judgment in Civil Appeals Nos.4895-96 of
1964, this appeal is also dismissed.