[Cites
10
, Cited by
31
]
Supreme Court of India
Gurnam Singh & Anr vs State Of Punjab on 19 October, 1995
Equivalent citations: JT 1995 (8), 235 1995 SCALE (6)70
Author:
M.K Mukherjee
Bench:
M.K Mukherjee
,
B.N Kirpal
PETITIONER:
GURNAM SINGH & ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF PUNJAB

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/10/1995

BENCH:
MUKHERJEE M.K. (J)
BENCH:
MUKHERJEE M.K. (J)
KIRPAL B.N. (J)

CITATION:
 JT 1995 (8)   235	  1995 SCALE  (6)70


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
J U D G E M E N T
M.K. MUKHERJEE, J.
Gurnam Singh  and Pala Singh, the two appellants before
us, along  with four  others were placed on trial before the
Judge, Special	Court, Ferozepore  to answer  charges  under
Sections 148
,
302
/
149
and
324
/
149
I.P.C.  On conclusion of
the trial  the learned	Judge convicted	 the two  appellants
under
Section  302
/
34
I.P.C.  and sentenced  each of them to
suffer imprisonment  for life,	while acquitting the others.
Aggrieved thereby  the appellants have preferred this appeal
under
Section  14
of  the Terrorist  Affected Area  (Special
Courts) Act, 1984.
Shorn of details the prosecution case is that on August
10, 1984  at  or  about	 5  P.M.  when	Malkiat	 Singh	(the
deceased) and  his  brother  Nachhatar	Singh  (P.W.4)	were
irrigating their  paddy field with the water of a Government
Khaal (water  channel)	which  is  brought  to	their  field
through an  outlet allotted to them, Gurnam Singh came there
and closed  the outlet.	 As soon  as Malkiat  Singh tried to
open it	 Gurnam Singh  gave a blow with a Kassi on his head.
P.W.4 then  rushed to his rescue but, by that time the other
appellant Pala	Singh reached there armed with a gandasa and
accompanied by	others. On  a lalkara  raised  by  Gurcharan
Singh (since  acquitted) Pala  Singh gave  a gandasa blow on
the head  of Malkiat  Singh. When  P.W.4 tried	to intervene
Pala Singh  assaulted him also. Thereupon the appellants and
others started	assaulting the	deceased further. Finding no
other alternative P.W.4 and his brother Jit Singh retaliated
by beating  Gurnam Singh. Then the accused persons fled away
with  their   respective  weapons.   Immediately  thereafter
Malkiat Singh  and P.W.4 were taken to the hospital at Bagha
Purana where  Dr. T.C. Aggarwal (P.W.1) examined them. P.W.1
also attended  to the  injuries of Gurnam Singh who had also
come to the hospital the same evening. P.W.1 sent the medico
legal reports  of  their  injuries  to	Bagha  Puana  Police
Station and  considering the  injuries sustained  by Malkiat
Singh referred	him to	the  Ludhiana  Hospital	 for  better
treatment. On  receipt of  the medico  legal  reports,	Shri
Natha Singh  (P.W.5) ASI  of Police attached to Bagha Purana
Police	Station	 went  to  the	Hospital  and  recorded	 the
statement of  Nachhatar Singh. He forwarded the statement to
the Police  Station for	 registering  a	 case  and  took  up
investigation. On  the same day he recorded the statement of
Malkiat Singh also.
While  in	the  Hospital  at  Ludhiana,  Malkiat  Singh
succumbed  to	his  injuries	on  August   17,  1984	 and
consequently the  case, which  was earlier  registered under
Section 324
I.P.C. was	 converted to  one under
Section 324
I.P.C. was  converted to one under
Section 32
I.P.C. He held
inquest upon  the dead body of Malkiat Singh and sent it for
postmortem examination on August 18, 1984. On receipt of the
report of  the	postmortem  examination	 and  completion  of
investigation P.W.5 submitted charge-sheet.
The  appellants  pleaded  not  guilty  to	the  charges
levelled against  them and their version of the incident, as
can be	gathered from the trend of cross-examination and the
suggestions put	 to P.W.4,  was that Gurnam Singh had opened
the outlet  in question	 as it was his turn to take water of
the canal  through it,	to which Nachhatar Singh and Malkiat
Singh objected	and both  of them assaulted him. In exercise
of his	right of  private defence  he then assaulted Malkiat
Singh and Nachhatar Singh.
That Malkiat Singh met with his death owing to injuries
sustained on August 10, 1984, as alleged by the prosecution,
stands conclusively  proved by	the  evidence  of  Dr.	T.C.
Aggarwal (P.W.1)  who  examined	 him  in  the  Bagha  Purana
Hospital on  that day at 6.15 P.M. and that or Dr. J.S. Lama
(P.W.2), who  held post	 mortem examination on his dead body
on August 18, 1984. According to P.W.1 Malkiat Singh had the
following injuries on his person:
"1.  Incised     wound	 on	right
     parietotemporal  region   measuring  5.5
     cms. x  1.5 cms. bone deep with profused
     bleeding.
2.	  Incised  wound   on  left  temporal
     region measuring 1.5 cms. x 0.25 cm x .5
     cm.
3.	  Incised wound	 on the left eye brow
     measuring 1 cm. x 0.25 cm. skin deep.
4.	  Lacerated wound  on the  face below
     and lateral  to left  eye measuring  0.5
     cm. x 0.5 cm.
5.	  Abrasion on the left hand measuring
2 cms. x 2 cms."
P.W.1 opined  that injury	Nos. 1,	 2 and	3  could  be
caused by a sharp edged weapon while the other injuries by a
blunt weapon.  He further  opined that injury No. 1 could be
caused by  a kassi  and injury	No.2  by  a  gandasa.  P.W.2
corroborated the  evidence of  P.W.1 regarding	the external
injuries found	on the	person of  Malkiat Singh and further
stated that  there were	 fractures of anterior cranial fossa
and middle  cranial fossa  on the right side. He opined that
the death  was the  result of injury No.1, namely, the wound
on the	right temporal	region. Indeed,	 this  part  of	 the
prosecution  case   was	 not  seriously	 challenged  by	 the
defence; on the contrary, as noticed earlier, the appellants
took the plea of right of private defence.
To prove  the authorship  of the  crime the prosecution
rested its  case principally  upon the ocular version of the
incident as  given out	by Nachhatar Singh (P.W.4). Besides,
it pressed  into service the statement of Malkiat Singh (the
deceased)  recorded   by  the  Investigating  Officer  under
Section 161
Cr.P.C., (Ext. P/15) which, consequent upon his
death due  to the injuries sustained in the incident, became
admissible in  evidence	 as  his  dying	 declaration.  P.W.4
detailed the entire prosecution case including the manner in
which he  sustained the	 injuries. Though  P.W.4  was  cross
examined  at   length  nothing	could  be  elicited  by	 the
appellants from	 which it  can be even remotely said that he
is unworthy  of credit.	 On the	 contrary  his	evidence  as
regards the  nature of	assault on  Malkiat Singh gets ample
support from  the medical  evidence which  we have discussed
earlier. That  P.W.4 sustained	injuries in  course  of	 the
incident as  claimed by	 him  also  gets  support  from	 the
evidence of  P.W.1 when	 he stated that he found a lacerated
wound as  also an incised wound on his person. While on this
point it  will be  pertinent to	 mention that the suggestion
put to	P.W.4 on  behalf of  the appellants  which  we	have
noticed earlier	 corroborates his claim as an eye-witness to
the incident.  Another circumstance which corroborates P.W.4
is the	prompt lodging of the F.I.F detailing the substratum
of the prosecution case.
It	 was,	however,  contended   by  Mr.  Sushil  Kumar
appearing on  behalf of	 the appellants	 that in  the F.I.R.
that he	 lodged P.W.4  did not disclose the fact that Gurnam
Singh had  sustained injuries  in  the	incident  much	less
explained those	 injuries. Consequently,  he submitted, P.W.
4's belated claim that on being assaulted he and his brother
Malkiat Singh  retaliated in  exercise	of  their  right  of
private defence	 to explain  away the injuries on the person
of Gurnam  Singh should	 not be	 accepted. For the foregoing
reasons the  learned counsel  for the appellants asked us to
hold that  there  was  no  reasonable  explanation  for	 the
injuries sustained  by the appellant Gurnam Singh which made
the evidence of the sole eye-witness, namely, P.W.4 suspect.
We do  not find any merit in this contention. The obligation
of the	prosecution to	give an explanation for the injuries
sustained by  an accused  in a	case of assault, if need be,
comes only  at the  stage of the trial and therefore absence
of such explanation in the F.I.R. would not by itself affect
the prosecution case. It was next contended on behalf of the
appellants that	 having regard	to the	nature	of  injuries
sustained by  Gurnam Singh  it must  be held  that a case of
right of  private defence  as contended by him was made out.
The evidence  of P.W.1 no doubt proves that Gurnam Singh had
sustained two abrasions, a contusion and an incised wound on
his forehead  but then the the explanation offered by P.W.4,
in the	absence of  any material  in support of the claim of
Gurnam Singh  as to  how he sustained those injuries must be
accepted. In  other words,  the evidence  on record  clearly
establishes that  the appellants  were the  aggressors	and,
therefore, the	deceased and P.W.4 were justified to assault
Gurnam Singh  in exercise of their right of private defence.
Since we  find the  evidence of	 P.W.4 to be wholly reliable
upon we	 need not  go into  the probative value of the dying
declaration.
Now that  it stands established that the two appellants
caused injury  Nos. 1, 2 and 3 on the person of the deceased
with kassi  and gandasa	 and the injury No. 1 was sufficient
in the	ordinary course	 of nature  to cause  death the only
other question	that requires  to be  decided is whether the
offence committed by the appellants, in furtherance of their
common intention,  falls under	Section 302 or under Section
304 (Part  I) I.P.C.  The answer to this question is not far
to seek	 for the  evidence of  P.W.4 clearly  shows that the
incident took  place in	 course of a sudden quarrel over the
opening of  the outlet	and therefore  the appellants can be
said to have committed an offence under Section 304 (Part I)
I.P.C. and not under Section 302 I.P.C.
For  the	foregoing  discussion	we  set	  aside	 the
conviction and	sentence of  the appellants  recorded  under
Section 32-3
I.P.C. and convict them under Section 304 (Part
I)/34
I.P.C
For the  altered conviction we sentence each of
them to	 suffer rigorous  imprisonment for  seven years. The
appellants, who	 are on	 bail, will  now surrender  to their
bail bonds to serve out the sentence.
The appeal is thus disposed of.