[Cites
36
, Cited by
91
]
Supreme Court of India
Canara Bank vs Nuclear Power Corporation Of India Ltd. ... on 6 March, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1995 SCC, SUPL. (3) 81 JT 1995 (3) 42, AIRONLINE 1995 SC 7, (1995) 84 COM CAS 70, 1995 SCC (SUPP) 81, (1995) 2 SCR 482, (1995) 2 COM LJ 203, (1995) 3 JT 42
Author:
S.P Bharucha
Bench:
S.P Bharucha
,
Jagdish Saran  Verma
,
K.S. Paripoornan
PETITIONER:
CANARA BANK

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NUCLEAR POWER CORPORATION OF INDIA LTD. AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/03/1995

BENCH:
BHARUCHA S.P. (J)
BENCH:
BHARUCHA S.P. (J)
VERMA, JAGDISH SARAN (J)
PARIPOORNAN, K.S.(J)

CITATION:
 1995 SCC  Supl.  (3)  81 JT 1995 (3)	 42
 1995 SCALE  (2)162


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
BHARUCHA, J.:
1. Leave granted.
Facts
2.   This  is an appeal from the judgment and order  of	 the
Company Law Board which raises an interesting question as to
the exclusive jurisdiction of the Special Court	 constituted
under the provisions of the Special Court (Trial of Offences
relating  to  Transactions in Securities)  Act,	 1992.	 The
Company	 Law Board (CLB) has held that its  jurisdiction  to
deal  with matters relating to securities, provided  by	 the
Companies  Act, 1956
, is not affected by the
Special  Court
Act
.
3.   The question arose in these circumstances.	 The  Canara
Bank (the appellant) had made an application before the CLB
46
under  Section	III  of the  Companies	Act  seeking  relief
against	 the  Nuclear Power Corporation of India  Ltd.	(the
first  respondent),  which had refused to  register  in	 its
books  in the name of the Canara Bank bonds of	the  Nuclear
Power  Corporation purchased by the Canara Bank.  The  Stan-
dard Chartered Bank (the fourth respondent) had also claimed
ownership  of the said bonds.  The Canara Bank alleged	that
it  had	 acquired  the	said  bonds  from  the	Andhra	Bank
Financial  Services Ltd. (the third respondent) through	 one
Hiten  P. Dalal, (the second respondent) who had acted as  a
broker.	  Hiten	 P.  Dalal is a person	notified  under	 the
provisions of
Section 3(2)
of the Special Court Act and was,
as the application of the Canara Bank before the CLB showed,
involved as a broker in the transaction relating to the said
bonds.	 The  application  of the Canara  Bank	was  pending
disposal  before  the CLB when, on 25th January,  1994,	 the
Special Court Act
was amended by the Special Court (Trial of
Offences  Relating to Transactions in Securities)  Amendment
Ordinance, 1994, and Section 9-A was introduced.  The Canara
Bank  and the Nuclear Power Corporation took the stand	that
the application of the Canara Bank stood transferred to	 the
Special Court by virtue of the provisions of
Section  9-A(2)
of  the	 Special  Court Act.  The  Standard  Chartered	Bank
(Stanchart) contended that the CLB retained the jurisdiction
to deal with the application.  The CLB held that it was	 not
a court within the meaning of the
Companies Act
nor was it a
civil court.  Its jurisdiction was, therefore, unaffected by
the provisions of
Section 9-A (2)
of the Special Court Act.
The Special Court Act
.
4.   The  Special Court act was enacted to provide  for	 the
establishment  of a special court for the trial of  offences
relating to transactions in securities and matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.  Securities were defined in
Section	 2(c)
to include shares, scrips, stocks, bonds,	 de-
bentures,  debenture  stock,  units  and  other	  marketable
securities  of	a  like nature,	 Government  securities	 and
rights	or interests in securities.
Section  3(1)
provided
for   the  appointment	by  the	 Central  Government  of   a
Custodian.   By	 reason	 of
Section  3
,	 the  Custodian	 was
empowered,  on being satisfied on information received	that
any  person  had been involved in any  offence	relating  to
transactions in securities after 1st April, 1991, and before
6th  June,  1992 (the stated dates), to notify the  name  of
such  person in the Official Gazette.  On and from the	date
of  such notification, by reason of
Section 3(3)
,  property,
movable	 and  immovable, belonging to  the  person  notified
stood  attached	 and, by reason of
Section  3(4)
,  could  be
dealt  with by the Custodian in such manner as	the  Special
Court directed.
Section 4(1)
empowered the Custodian, if he
was  satisfied, after such inquiry as he thought  fit,	that
any  contract or agreement entered into at any time  between
the  stated  dates in relation to any property of  a  person
notified had been entered into fraudulently or to defeat the
provisions of the
Special Court Act
, to cancel such contract
or agreement and, on such cancellation, such property  stood
attached.  Such cancellation was required to be preceded  by
a  reasonable opportunity to the parties to the contract  or
agreement to be heard.	Any person aggrieved by notification
under
Section 3(2)
or
Section 4(1)
was entitled to  file  a
petition of objection before the Special Court.	 The Special
Court  was  established by. It was to consist of  a  sitting
Judge of the
47
High Court nominated by the Chief Justice of the High  Court
within	the local limits of whose jurisdiction	the  Special
Court  was  situated,  with the	 concurrence  of  the  Chief
Justice of India.
Section 6
empowered the Special Court  to
take  cognizance  of and try such cases as  were  instituted
before	it or transferred to it.
Section 7
dealt  with	 the
jurisdiction of the Special Court and it read thus :
"7.  Jurisdiction	 of  Special  Court  -	Not-
	      withstanding  anything contained in any  other
	      law, any prosecution in respect of any offence
	      referred	to  in subsection (2) of
section  3
shall be instituted only in the Special  Court
	      and any prosecution in respect of such offence
	      pending  in any court shall stand	 transferred
	      to the Special Court."
Section	 9
made provision 'or the procedures and  powers  of
the Special Court.  It stated that the Special Court  should
in the trial of cases it follow the procedure prescribed  by
the
Code  of Criminal Procedure
for the  trial	 of  warrant
cases  before a Magistrate.  It was also provided  that	 the
Special	 Court	would be deemed to be a	 Court	of  Session,
having all the powers of such a court.
Section 10
provided
that an appeal would lie from any judgment decree,  sentence
or  order, not being an interlocutory order, of the  Special
Court  to the Supreme Court, both on facts and on  law.	  By
reason	of
Section 11(1)
, the Special Court could make	such
order as it deemed fit directing the Custodian in the matter
of disposal of property under attachment.
Section 11(2)
set
out  the  order	 in which the  liabilities  of	the  persons
notified  had to be discharged.
Section 13
stated that	 the
provisions  of the
Special Court Act
would have effect	not-
withstanding  anything inconsistent therewith  contained  in
any  other  law	 for  the time being in	 force,	 or  in	 any
instrument  having  effect by virtue of any law, or  in	 any
decree	or order of any court, tribunal or other  authority.
By reason of Section 15 the Special Court (Trial of Offences
Relating  to  Transactions in Securities)  Ordinance,  1992,
which preceded the
Special Court Act
, was repealed.
5.   The  Special  Court  (Trial  of  Offences	Relating  to
Transactions  in Securities) Amendment Ordinance, 1994,	 was
brought	 into effect on 25th January, 1994.   The  provision
thereof which is most relevant for our purpose is
Section 9-
A.  It reads thus :
"9A.  -  Jurisdiction, powers,  authority	 and
	      procedure of Special Court in civil matters  -
(1)  On  and  from  the  commencement  of	 the
	      Special  Court  (Trial  Offences	Relating  to
	      Transactions    in    Securities)	   Amendment
			    Ordinance,	 1994,	the  Special  Court   shal
l
	      exercise	all  such jurisdiction,	 powers	 and
	      authority	 as  were  exercisable,	 immediately
	      before  such commencement, by any civil  court
	      in relation to any matter of claim -
(a)relation to any property standing  attached
	      under subsection (3) of
section 3
;
(b)arising  out of transactions in  securities
	      entered  into after the 1st day of April	1991
	      and on or before the 6th day of June, 1992, in
	      which  a person notified under subsection	 (2)
	      of
section 3
is involved as a party,  broker.
	      intermediary or in any other manner;
	      (2)Every	suit,  claim  or  other	 legal	pro-
ceedings (other than on appeal) pending before
	      any court immediately before the
	      commencement  of the Special Court  (Trial  of
	      Offences	  Relating   to	  Transactions	  in
	      Securities) Amendment Ordinance, 1994,
48
being a suit claim or proceeding, the cause of
	      action  whereon  it is based is such  that  it
	      would  have been, if it had arisen after	such
	      commencement,  within the jurisdiction of	 the
	      Special  Court  under sub-section	 (1).  shall
	      stand transferred on such commencement to	 the
	      Special  Court and the Special Court  may,  on
	      receipt of the records of such suit, claim  or
	      other  legal proceeding, proceed to deal	with
	      it, so far as may be, in the same manner as  a
	      suit, claim or legal proceeding from the stage
	      which was reached before such transfer or from
	      any  earlier stage of de novo as	the  Special
	      Court may deem fit.
(3)On and from the commencement of the Special
	      Court   (Trial   or   Offences   Relating	  to
	      Transactions    in    Securities)	   Amendment
	      Ordinance,  1994,	 no  court  other  than	 the
	      Special  Court  shall have or be	entitled  to
	      exercise, any jurisdiction power or  authority
	      in relation to any matter of claim referred to
	      in subsection (1).
(4)   While dealing with cases relating to any	 matter
	      or claim under this section,the	  Special
	      Court shall not be bound by the	  procedure
	      laid down by
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908
	      (5  of  1908),  but shall	 be  guided  by	 the
			    principles	of natural justice, and subject	 t
o
	      the  other provisions of this Act and  of	 any
	      rules, the Special Court shall have the  power
	      to regulate its own procedure.
(5)   Without  prejudice	to the	other  power
	      conferred	 under this Act, the  Special  Court
	      shall  have, for the purposes  of	 discharging
	      its  functions under this section, the  powers
	      as are vested in a civil court under
the	Code
	      of  Civil Procedure
, 1908 (5 of  1908),  while
	      trying  a	 suit, in respect of  the  following
	      matters, namely :
(a)   summoning  and enforcing the  attendance
	      of any person and examining him an oath;
(b)requiring  the discovery and production  of
	      documents;
(c)   receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d)   subject   to  the  provisions   of	 the
sections	123
and
124
of the  Indian  Evidence
	      Act, 1872, requisitioning any public record or
	      document	or copy of such record	or  document
	      from any office;
(e)   issuing commissions for the	 examination
	      or witnesses or documents;
(f)   reviewing its decisions;
(g)   dismissing	 a  case  for	default	  or
	      deciding it ex parte,
(h)   setting aside any order of dismissal  of
	      any case for default or any order passed by it
	      exparte and
(i)   any other matter which may be prescribed
	      by  the Central Government  under	 sub-section
	      (1) of section 14."
The  Amendment	Ordinance also introduced  Section  9B.	  It
invested the Special Court with the jurisdiction and  powers
of  a  court conferred under the
Arbitration Act,  1940
,  to
decide	any  question  forming	the  subject  matter  of   a
reference  relating  to	 any matter or	claim  mentioned  in
Section	 9A(1).	 Every suit or other proceeding (other	than
an appeal) in relation to any matter or claim referred to in
Section	 9A(1) pending before any court and governed by	 the
Arbitration  Act
stood transferred to the Special  Court  on
the date of commencement of the Amendment Ordinance.
6.
An Act
replaced the Amendment Ordinance.  The Statement
of Objects and Reasons thereof said.
"Under the provisions of the Special Court.
(Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in
	      Securities) Act, 1992
, a Special Court was set
	      up at Bombay and a Custodian was appointed  to
	      deal  With  the situation arising out  of	 the
	      large  scale irregularities  and	malpractices
	      which   were   noticed   in   the	  securities
	      transactions  of banks, to ensure	 the  speedy
	      trial of the offenders, to recover  properties
	      of  the  offenders  With	a  view	 to  prevent
	      diversion	 of such properties by	the  persons
	      responsible for these offences. 2. During	 the
	      course  of  the  trial  of  these	 cases,	 the
	      jurisdiction    of    the	   Special    Court,
	      particularly  in matters of civil claims,	 was
	      being  challenged for %%,ant of specific	pro-
	      visions  in  the	Act.   The  Special   Court,
	      therefore,  needed to be conferred with  civil
	      jurisdiction.   For  the	said  purpose,	 the
	      Special Court (Trial) of Offences Relating  to
	      Transactions    in    Securities)	   Amendment
	      Ordinance,   1994,  was  promulgated  by	 the
	      President on the 25th January, 1994.........
	      Analysis of Section 9A.
7.By  reason of sub-section (1) of Section 9-A on  and	from
the  date  of commencement of the  Amendment  Ordinance	 the
Special	 Court exercises all such jurisdiction,	 powers	 and
authority as were exercisable by any civil court in relation
to any matter or claim (a) relating to any property standing
attached  and (b) arising out of transactions in  securities
entered	 into between the stated dates in which	 a  notified
person was in any manner involved.  By reason of sub-section
(2) any suit, claim or other legal proceeding (other than an
appeal)	 pending  before any court  immediately	 before	 the
commencement  of  the Amendment Ordinance, being a  suit  or
proceedings  the  cause of action whereof was such  that  it
would  have, if it had arisen after the commencement of	 the
Amendment  Ordinance,  been within the jurisdiction  of	 the
Special Court, stands transferred to the Special Court.	  By
reason	of subsection (3), on and from the  commencement  of
the  Amendment	Ordinance no court other  than	the  Special
Court may exercise any jurisdiction, powers or authority  in
relation  to any matter of claim referred to in	 sub-section
(1).
8.Sub-Section  (1) of Section 9A empowers the Special  Court
to   exercise	the  jurisdiction,  powers   and   authority
exercisable  by a civil court.	It so empowers	the  Special
Court  in relation to any matter or claim, inter alia,	that
arises	out  of	 transactions  in  securities  entered	into
between	 the  stated  dates in which a	notified  person  is
involved.   The words 'civil court' are used in the  context
of  the jurisdiction, powers and authority that the  Special
Court  may  exercise.	The Special Court  is  empowered  to
exercise such jurisdiction, powers or authority in  relation
to  the matters or claims therein specified.  These  matters
or  claims  include  those arising out	of  transactions  in
securities entered into between the stated dates in which  a
notified person is involved.  Sub-section (2) of Section  9A
deals  with  the transfer of certain suit% claims  or  other
legal  proceedings  (other than an appeal)  to	the  Special
Court.	Every suit, claim or other legal proceeding  pending
before	any court the cause of action whereof is such  that,
had  it	 arisen	 after the  commencement  of  the  Amendment
Ordinance,  the suit, claim or other legal proceeding  would
have  had  to  be filed before	the  Special  Court,  stands
transferred  to	 the Special Court.  Every  suit,  claim  or
other legal proceeding pending before any court the cause of
action	whereof	 arises out of	transactions  in  securities
entered into between the stated dates
50
in which a notified person is involved would, therefore,  if
it  is	pending before any court on the date  on  which	 the
Amendment  Ordinance came into force, stand  transferred  to
the Special Court.  By reason of sub-section (3) of  Section
9A,   on  and  after  the  commencement	 of  the   Amendment
Ordinance,  no	court  other  than  the	 Special  Court	 may
exercise  any jurisdiction, powers or authority in  relation
to any matter or claim referred to in sub-section (1),	that
is  to say, in relation to any matter or claim, inter  alia,
arising	 out of transactions in securities entered into	 be-
tween  the  stated  dates  in which  a	notified  person  is
involved'.
9.   A "court" other than the Special Court is	  debarred,
by reason of sub-section (3) of	   Section     9A,	from
exercising any jurisdiction, powers or authority, after	 the
commencement of the Amendment Ordinance, in relation to	 any
matter	or claim arising out of transactions  in  securities
entered	 into between the stated dates in which	 a  notified
person	is  involved.  Sub-section (2) of  Section  9A	also
speaks of a 'court'; a proceeding before a court, the  cause
of action of which arises out of a transaction in securities
entered	 into between the stated dates in which	 a  notified
person is involved, stands transferred to the Special Court.
The question, in these circumstances, is whether the use  of
the  words  'civil  court' in subsection  (1)  excludes	 the
application of Section 9 A to the CLB?
10.  Sub-section  (1) of Section 9-A is divisible  into	 two
parts.	By the first part, the Special Court is empowered to
exercise,  on  and from the commencement  of  the  Amendment
Ordinance,  all such jurisdiction, powers and  authority  as
were  exercisable  before  such commencement  by  any  civil
court.	 By the second part, the Special Court is  empowered
to exercise such jurisdiction, powers or authority in regard
to  the matters or claims thereon specified,  which  include
matters or claims arising out of transactions in  securities
entered	 into between the stated dates in which	 a  notified
person	is  involved.  So read, the Special  Court  has	 the
jurisdiction,  powers  and  authority of a  civil  court  to
exercise the same in regard to matters or claims arising out
of  transactions  in  securities entered  into	between	 the
stated	dates in which a notified person is involved.	Sub-
section	 (1) of Section 9A, therefore, invests	the  Special
Court with the jurisdiction, powers and authority  necessary
for  the purposes of entertaining matters or claims  of	 the
nature specified therein.  Sub-section (2) provides for	 the
transfer  of such matters or claims pending in any court  to
the  Special  Court  on the commencement  of  the  Amendment
Ordinance.   And sub-section (3) expressly debars any  court
other	than   the  Special  Court   from   exercising	 any
jurisdiction,  powers  or  authority  in  relation  to	such
matters or claims.
11. The question to pose, therefore, is: is the CLB a court.
If  it	is, it is divested of the jurisdiction,	 powers	 and
authority  to  entertain matters or claims  arising  out  of
transactions  in securities entered into between the  stated
dates  in which a notified person is involved, by reason  of
sub-section  (3);  and, by reason of sub-section  (2),	such
matters	 or claims pending before it on the commencement  of
the  Amendment	Ordinance stand transferred to	the  Special
Court.
12.  While  on Section 9A. it must also be noted  that	sub-
section	 (2) thereof mandates transfer to the Special  Court
of "every suit,
51
claim  or  other legal proceedings (other than	an  appeal)"
which is pending before any court on the commencement of the
Amendment  Ordinance  in which the cause  of  action,  inter
alia, arises out of a transaction in securities entered into
between	 the  stated  dates in which  a	 notified_person  is
involved.  It is, therefore, the proceeding in the court  of
first  instance	 that stands transferred.  If the  court  of
first  instance has finally disposed of the  proceeding	 and
its  order thereon is the subject of an appeal,	 the  appeal
does not stand transferred.
Section III of the Companies Act.
13.  Section  III of the Companies 1 Act, 1956, with  effect
from 31st May 1991, reads thus
	      "Power  to  refuse  registration	and   appeal
	      against  refusal - (1) If a  company  refuses,
	      whether  in  pursuance  of any  power  of	 the
	      company  under its articles or  otherwise,  to
	      register the transfer of, or the	transmission
	      by  operation  of	 law of the  right  to,	 any
	      shares   or  interest  of	 a  member  in,	  or
	      debentures  of, the company, it shall,  within
	      two   months  from  the  date  on	 which	 the
	      instrument  of transfer, or the intimation  of
	      such  transmission,  as the case may  be,	 was
	      delivered	 to the company, send notice of	 the
	      refusal  to the transferee and the  transferor
	      or  to  the person giving intimation  of	such
	      transmission,  as	 the  case  may	 be,  giving
	      reasons for such refusal.
(2)   The	 transferor  or transferee,  or	 the
	      person who gave intimation of the transmission
	      by  operation of law, as the case may be,	 may
	      appeal  to the Company Law Board	against	 any
	      refusal	of  the	 company  to  register	 the
	      transfer	or  transmission,  or  against	 any
	      failure on its part within the period referred
	      to in sub-section (1), either to register	 the
	      transfer or transmission or to send notice  of
	      its refusal to register the same.
(3)An  appeal under sub-section (2)  shall  be
	      made  within two months of the receipt of	 the
	      notice of such refusal or, where no notice has
	      been  sent by the company, within four  months
	      from the date the intimation of  transmission,
	      as  the  case  may be, was  delivered  to	 the
	      company.
(4) If -
(a)   the name of any person -
(i)   is without sufficient cause, entered  in
	      the register of members of a company or
(ii)  after  having been entered in  the	reg-
			    ister,  is, without sufficient  cause,  omitte
d
	      therefrom; or
(b)   default  is made, or  unnecessary  delay
	      takes  place, in entering in the register	 the
	      fact of any person having become, or ceased to
	      be,  a  member  [including  a  refusal   under
	      subsection (1)]
	      the  person  aggrieved, or any member  of	 the
	      company,	or  the company, may  apply  to	 the
	      Company  Law  Board for rectification  of	 the
	      register.
(5)   The	 Company  Law Board,  while  dealing
	      with an appeal preferred under subsection	 (2)
	      or  an application made under  subsection	 (4)
	      may, after hearing the parties, either dismiss
	      the  appeal or reject the application,  or  by
	      order -
(a)   direct that the transfer or transmission
	      shall  be	 registered by the company  and	 the
	      company  shall comply with such  order  within
	      ten days of the receipt of the order;or
(b)   direct rectification of the register and
	      also  direct  the company to pay	damages,  if
	      any, sustained by any party aggrieved.
52
(6)   The	 Company  Law  Board,  while  acting
	      under sub-section (5), may, at its discretion,
	      make -
(a)such	  interim  orders,  including  any  orders   as	  to
injunction or stay, as it may deem fit and just;
(b)  such orders as to costs as it thinks fit; and
(c)  incidental  or consequential	 orders	 re-
	      garding  payment of dividend or the  allotment
	      of bonus or rights shares.
(7) On any application under this section. the
	      Company Law Board -
(a)may  decide question relating to the  title
	      of   any	person	who  is	 a  party   to	 The
	      application  to have his name entered  in,  or
	      omitted from, the register;
(b)generally, may decide any question which it
	      is   necessary  or  expedient  to	 decide	  in
	      connection    with   the	  application	 for
	      rectification.
(8)   The	 provisions  of subsections  (4)  to
	      (7)shall	  apply	  in   relation	   to	 the
	      rectification  of the resister  of  debenture-
	      holders  as  they	 apply in  relation  to	 the
	      rectification of the register of members.
	      (9)   If	default is made in giving effect  to
	      the orders of the Company Law Board under this
	      section, the company and every officer of	 the
	      company who is in default shall be  punishable
	      with  fine  which may extend to  one  thousand
	      rupees  and  with	 a further  fine  which	 may
	      extend  to  one hundred rupees for  every	 day
	      after  the first day after which	the  default
	      continues
	      (10)  Every  appeal  or  application  to	 the
	      Company Law Board under sub-section
	      (2)   or	sub-section (4) shall be made  by  a
	      petition	in writing and shall be	 accompanied
	      by such fee as may be prescribed.
(11)  In the case of a private company  which
	      is not a subsidiary of a public company, where
	      the  right  to  any shares or  interest  of  a
	      member  in, or debentures of, the company	 -is
	      transmitted by a sale thereof held by a  Court
	      or  other public authority, the provisions  of
	      sub-section  (4) to (7) shall apply as if	 the
	      company were a public company:
Provided	that the Company Law Board  may,  in
	      lieu  of an order under sub-section (5),	pass
	      an order directing the company to register the
	      transmission of the right unless any member or
	      members of the company specified in the  order
	      acquire  the right aforesaid within such	time
	      as  may  be  allowed for the  purpose  by	 the
	      order,  on  payment to the  purchaser  of	 the
	      price  paid by him therefor or such other	 sum
	      as the Company Law Board may determine to be a
	      reasonable  compensation for the right in	 all
	      the circumstances of the case.
(12) If default is made in complying with any
			    of the provisions of this section, die  compan
y
	      and  every  officer of the company who  is  in
	      default,	shall be punishable with fine  which
	      may  extend  to  fifty rupees  for  every	 day
	      during which the default continues.
	       (13) Nothing  in	 this  section	and  section
	      108,109 or 110 shall prejudice any power of  a
	      private company under its articles to  enforce
	      the restrictions contained therein against the
	      right to transfer the shares of such company.
14.Section  III, as set out above, was incorporated  in	 the
Companies  Act
subsequent to the report of a  committee	 ap-
pointed to consider amendments to the
53
Companies  Act
,	 The  Sachar Committee, as  it	came  to  be
called, said :
"Under   the  existing  law,  there  are	 two
	      remedies	open to an aggrieved person to	file
	      an  appeal under section 111, or to  apply  to
	      the  Court  for  rectification  of  the  share
	      register	under  section 15
5
.  We-think	that
	      these  two remedies should now be	 assimilated
	      and  provision  be made (at one place)  for  a
	      person   aggrieved   (including	any   person
	      aggrieved	 by  a	refusal	 of  the  Board	  of
	      Directors	  to  register	a  transfer	  or
	      transmission  of	shares)	 to  apply  to	 the
	      Company	Law  Board  -  as  proposed  to	  be
	      constituted  - for rectification of the  share
	      register	on any of the grounds  mentioned  in
	      sub-clause  (a) or (b) of sub-section  (1)  of
	      the present section 155.
Our proposals are -
Accordingly, we would recommend as follows:
Sections	III  and 155 should  be	 assimilated
	      into a single statutory provision."
15.Section 155, as it read before 31st May, 1991, entitled a
person aggrieved or any member of a company or a company  to
apply  to  the	court for  rectification  of  the  company's
register of members if the name of any. person was,  without
sufficient  cause,  entered  in it  or,	 after	having	been
entered	 in  it,  was,	without	 sufficient  cause,  omitted
therefrom  or  default was made or  unnecessary	 delay	took
place  in  entering  on it the fact  of	 any  person  having
become, or ceased to be, a member.  The court 'was  entitled
to  order  rectification of the register and to	 direct	 the
company	 to  pay the damages, if any, sustained by  a  party
aggrieved.   The court was entitled to decide  any  question
relating  to the title of any person who was a party to	 the
application to have his name entered in or omitted from	 the
register.   An	appeal	from  the order	 of  the  court	 was
provided for.
16.It  will  be seen that the CLB now exercises	 the  powers
that were exercisable by the court under Section 155.  It is
entitled  to  direct rectification of the register  and	 the
payment of damages by the company.  It is entitled to decide
any  question relating to the title of any person who  is  a
party  to  the application to have his name  entered  in  or
omitted	 from the register and to decide any question  which
it  is necessary or expedient to decide in this	 connection.
An appeal to the High Court against any decision or order of
the  CLB  on a question of law is available  to	 any  person
aggrieved, thereby under the provisions of Section 105.
17.Whereas  sub-sections (2) and (3) of Section 111	term
the  pleading that the person aggrieved has to	file  before
the  CLB  an 'appeal', sub-section (4) requires	 the  person
aggrieved  to  apply,  sub-section (5) speaks of  it  as  an
'appeal'   or  an  'application',  sub-section	(7)  as	  an
'application'  and  sub-section (10) as an  "appeal  or	 ap-
plication", which shall be made "by a petition in  writing".
The  words "appeal" and "application" in the context of	 the
provisions  of Section III have the same meaning.   Plainly,
it is an application that has to be made.
18.The	powers under Section 155 were exercised by  a  civil
court.	 Reference may be made to the definition of  "court"
in  the
Companies Act
.
Section 2 (11)
defines	 "court"  to
mean,  with respect to any matter relating to that  company.
"District Court" is also defined.  The definition
54
thereof	 in
Section 2(14)
is that it is the principal  civil
court  of original jurisdiction in a district, but does	 not
include	 a  High  Court	 in the	 exercise  of  its  ordinary
original  civil	 jurisdiction.	Section IO  deals  with	 the
jurisdiction of courts and it reads thus:
"Jurisdiction of Courts - (1) The Court having
	      jurisdiction under this Act shall be -
(a)   the	 High Court having  jurisdiction  in
			    relation  to the place at which the	 registere
d
	      office  of the company concerned	is  situate,
	      except to the extent to which jurisdiction has
	      been  conferred  on  any	District  Court	  or
	      District Courts subordinate to that High Court
	      in pursuance of subsection (2); and
(b)   Where  jurisdiction	 has  been  so	con-
ferred,  the District Court in regard to	mat-
	      ters  falling within the scope of	 the  juris-
	      diction  conferred,  in respect  of  companies
	      having   their  registered  offices   in	 the
	      district.
(2)   The	   Central   Government	  may,	  by
	      notification  in	the  Official  Gazette	 and
	      subject to such restrictions, limitations	 and
	      conditions  as  it  thinks  fit  empower	 any
	      District	Court to exercise all or any of	 the
	      jurisdiction  conferred by this Act  upon	 the
	      Court, not being the jurisdiction conferred -
(a)   in	respect of companies  generally,  by
	      sections	237, 391, 394, 395 and 397  to	407,
	      both inclusive;
(b)   in	respect of companies with a paid  up
	      share  capital  of not less than one  lakh  of
	      rupees  by Part VII (sections 425 to 560)	 and
	      the  other provisions of this Act relating  to
	      the winding up of companies.
(3)   For	 the  purposes	of  jurisdiction  to
	      wind-up companies, the expression	 "registered
	      off  ice"	 means the place which	has  longest
	      been  the	 registered office  of	the  company
	      during  the six months  immediately  preceding
	      the  presentation of the petition for  winding
	      up.
19.The	provisions of
Section 10-E
of the Companies Act,  as
they  were -amended with effect from 31st May, 199  1,	read
thus:
"S.10-E. Constitution of Board of Company	 Law
	      Administration  - (1) As soon as may be  after
	      the commencement of the Companies	 (Amendment)
	      Act,  1988, the Central Government  shall,  by
	      notification    in   the	 Official    Gazette
	      constitute    a	Board	of    Company	 Law
	      Administration.
(IA) The Company Law Board shall exercise	 and
			    discharge  such powers and functions as may	 b
e
	      conferred	 on it, by or under this Act or	 any
	      other   law,  and	 shall	also  exercise	 and
	      discharge	 such other powers and functions  of
	      the  Central Government under this-Act or	 any
	      other  law  as may be conferred on it  by	 the
	      Central Government, by notification in the Of-
ficial  Gazette under the provisions  of	this
	      Act or that other law.
Reference to the provisions of Section 105 has already	been
made.
20.It  is to be noted that the CLB performs functions  which
are  administrative,  as  under Sections 224  and  269,	 and
curial, as under Section 111.
Contentions.
21.Mr.	Salve, learned counsel for the Canara Bank, who	 was
supported by Mr. J.C. Seth, learned counsel for the  Nuclear
Power  Corporation, submitted that Section 9-A(1)  conferred
upon the Special Court
55
the  jurisdiction of a civil court "in the wider sense",  as
including  courts  exercising powers  conferred	 upon  civil
courts.	  The  word  'civil' was used in  Section  9A(1)  to
contrast the provisions thereof with those of
Section  9(2)
,
whereunder  the Special Court was given all the powers of  a
Court  of Session.  The jurisdiction of the  Special  Court,
until  the  coming into force of  the  Amendment  Ordinance,
under
Sections	 7
,
8
and
9
of the Special Court Act  was  in
respect	 of  criminal matters and the powers of a  Court  of
Session	 had,  therefore, been conferred upon  it.   It	 was
found necessary to confer upon the Special Court the  powers
of  a civil court to deal with the civil matters set out  in
Section 9-A(1).	 Such an interpretation of Section 9A was in
accord	with  the legislative intent, which was	 to  exclude
from  the jurisdiction of all courts save the Special  Court
the matter described in Section 9-A(1).	 A clear  indication
of  this was provided by Section 9B by reason of which	even
matters	  in  court  relating  to  arbitration	 proceedings
concerning  causes  of	action arising out  of	the  matters
specified  in  Section 9-A(1) were confined to	the  Special
Court.	 The  legislative  intent was  to  place  all  cases
arising	 out  of such causes of action	before	the  Special
Court  so  that a court having knowledge of  all  the  cases
would  decide all matters provided for in the
Special  Court
Act
.   A  purposive interpretation ought, therefore,  to  be
placed	upon  the provisions of Section 9-A.   Emphasis	 was
laid upon the fact that, by reason of Section II 1(7) of the
Companies Act, the CLB had the power to decide the title  of
the  securities in question before it; the  jurisdiction  in
this  behalf  conflicted with the  jurisdiction	 exclusively
conferred upon the Special Court by Section 9-A.
22.Mr.	Nariman,  learned counsel for  Stanchart,  submitted
that the relevant question was whether the CLB was a  'civil
court'.	  In  his submission it was not.  Mr.  Nariman	drew
attention  to  the provisions of
Section 13
of	the  Special
Court  Act, which stated that the provisions of the
Special
Court	Act
would  have  effect  notwithstanding   anything
contained, inter alia, "in any decree or order of any court,
tribunal or other authority", and emphasised the distinction
made  by  Parliament  between  court,  tribunal	 and   other
authority.   The CLB was not intended to be covered  by	 the
provisions  of Section 9-A(1), for those provisions did	 not
exclude the jurisdiction of a tribunal or authority but only
of a court.  Secondly, the jurisdiction of the Special Court
was  in	 regard to matters arising out	of  transactions  in
securities entered into between the stated dates in which  a
person notified was involved as a broker, intermediary or in
any  other  manner.   It  would be  very  difficult  for  an
intending  litigant  to know whether a person  notified	 had
been involved in a transaction relating to securities  which
he had purchased and which were not being registered in	 his
name, as a broker or intermediary or in any other manner  at
any  time  between  the stated dates.	It  was,  therefore,
inappropriate to hold that such a litigant was bound to take
recourse to the law before the Special Court and not  before
the  CLB  under
Section 111
of the  Companies  Act,	par-
ticularly  when, by reason of the provisions of	 the  latter
provision, he had to move ,within a specified time limit.The
interpretation	suggested on behalf of the Canara  Bank	 was
not really a purposive interpretation.	Attention was  drawn
to the provisions of
Section 4
whereunder the Custodian	 was
entitled, if satisfied after such inquiry as be thought	 fit
that any contract
56
or  agreement  entered	into between  the  stated  dates  in
relation to any property of a person notified under
Section
3(2)
had  been entered into fraudulently or to	 defeat	 the
provisions of the
Special Court Act
, to cancel such contract
or  agreement whereupon such property stood attached.	Even
if  the	 CLB under the provisions of
Section 111
of  the
Companies Act made any order ,with regard to any securities,
that order would stand at naught if an order relating to the
same  securities  was made under
Section 4
of	the  Special
Court  Act by reason of the fact that, under
Section  13
of
the  Special  Court Act, the Special Court  Act	 had  effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in
any  decree  or	 order	of  any	 court,	 tribunal  or  other
authority.    In  any  event,  an  appeal  did	 not   stand
transferred  to	 the Special Court under the  provisions  of
Section 9A(2), and what was filed before the CLB under	Sec-
tion III of the Companies Act was an Appeal.
Discussion.
23.As to what are courts and tribunals, the leading decision
is  M/s.
Harinagar  Sugar  Mills  Ltd.  v.  Shyam   Sundar
Jhunjhuwala
and ors., (1962) 2 S.C.R. 33 9, delivered by  a
Constitution Bench of this Court.  A person who held a large
number	of shares in the appellant company  transferred	 two
blocks	of the shares to his son and  daughter-in-law.	 The
transferees   applied  to  the	company	 to   register	 the
transfers.    Purporting  to  act  under  the  Articles	  of
Association  of the company, the directors resolved  not  to
register  the transfers.  The transferees preferred  appeals
under
Section	111
of	 the Companies	Act  which,  as	 the
provision read at that time, lay to the central	 Government.
The  Central  Government  set aside the	 resolution  of	 the
directors   and	 directed  the	company	 to   register	 the
transfers, but it did not give any reasons for its decision.
The  company obtained special leave to appeal under
Article
136
of the Constitution against the decision of the  Central
Government.   The transferees raised the objection that	 the
Central Government, exercising powers under Section 111, was
not  a	tribunal  exercising  judicial	functions  and	was,
therefore, not subject to the appellate jurisdiction of	 the
Supreme	 Court under
Article 136.
J.C. Shah, J.  spoke	 for
four of his brethren and held that a person aggrieved by the
refusal to register the transfer of shares had two  remedies
under  the
Companies Act
, namely, to apply to the court	 for
rectification of the register under Section 155 or to appeal
against the resolution refusing to register the transfer un-
der  Section 111. It was common ground that in the  exercise
of power under Section 155, the court had to act judicially;
to  adjudicate upon the right exercised by the directors  in
the light of the powers conferred upon them by the  Articles
of  Association.   The transferees, however,  submitted	 and
were supported by the Union of India, that the authority  of
the Central Government under Section 111, was  nevertheless,
purely	administrative.	  In  an appeal	 under	Section	 111
there  was a lis or dispute between the	 contesting  parties
relating  to their civil rights, and the Central  Government
was  invested  with  the power	to  determine  that  dispute
according to law. it had to consider and decide the proposal
and  the objections in the light of the evidence and not  on
grounds	 of  policy  or	 expediency.   The  power  to  order
registration  of  transfers had to be exercised	 subject  to
limitations  similar to those imposed upon the	exercise  of
the power of the court in a
57
petition under Section 155.  Those restrictions also applied
to the exercise of the power by the Central Government.	 The
Central	 Government  had to decide  whether,  in  exercising
their  power,  the directors were not  acting  oppressively,
capriciously  or  corruptly or in some way mala	 fide.	 The
decision had manifestly to stand those objective tests.	 The
exercise of such authority of rendering a decision upon	 the
respective contentions by reason of which the rights of	 the
contesting parties were directly affected was judicial.	  It
was  immaterial that the statute which conferred  the  power
upon  the Central Government did not expressly set  out	 the
extent	of  the power; the very nature of  the	jurisdiction
required  that	it be exercised subject to  the	 limitations
which  applied to the court under Section 155.	Section	 III
also  provided that in the circumstances  specified  therein
reasonable  compensation  could be awarded in  lied  of	 the
shares.	 This compensation, which was to be reasonable,	 had
to be ascertained by the Central Government, and  reasonable
compensation  could  not be ascertained except	by  the	 ap-
plication  of  some  objective standards of  what  was	just
having	regard	to all the circumstances of the	 case.	 The
authority  of the Central Government to entertain an  appeal
under  Section 111 was an investiture of the judicial  power
of the State.  As the dispute between the parties related to
civil  rights and the
Companies Act
provided for a right  of
appeal	and  made  detailed  provisions	 about	hearing	 and
disposal  according to law.  It was impossible to avoid	 the
inference   that  a  duty  was	imposed	 upon  the   Central
Government  in	deciding  the  appeal  to  act	 judicially.
Hideyatullah,	J.  delivered  a  separate  but	  concurring
judgement.   The  said	that all tribunals  were  no  courts
though all courts were tribunals
The  word  "courts" was used to	 designate  those  tribunals
which	were   set  up	in  an	organised  State   for	 the
administration of justice.  By administration of justice was
meant  the  exercise of the judicial power of the  State  to
maintain  and uphold rights and to punish wrongs.   Whenever
there  was  an	infringement of a right or  an	injury,	 the
courts	were there to restore the ' vinculum  juris'.	When
rights were infringed or invaded, the aggrieved party  could
go  and	 commence  a 'querela'	before	the  ordinary  civil
courts.	 These courts were invested with the judicial  power
of  the	 State	and their authority  was  derived  from	 the
Constitution  or some Act of legislature constituting  them.
Their  number was ordinarily fixed and they were  ordinarily
permanent  and	could  try any suit or	cause  within  their
jurisdiction.  Their numbers might be increased or decreased
but  they  were almost always permanent and went  under	 the
compendious  name  of "Courts of Civil	Judicature".   There
could  be no doubt that the Central Government did not	come
within this class.  With the growth of civilisation and	 the
problems  of modern life, a large number  of  administrative
tribunals had come into existence.  These tribunals had	 the
authority  of law to pronounce upon valuable  rights.	They
acted in a judicial manner and even on evidence on oath, but
they  were  not	 part  of  the	ordinary  courts  of   civil
judicature.  They shared the exercise of the judicial  power
of  the State but were brought into existence  to  implement
some  administrative  policy or to  determine  controversies
arising	 out  of some administrative law.   They  were	very
similar	  to   courts  but  were  not  courts.	  When	 the
Constitution spoke of "courts" in
Articles 136
, 227
and
228
and  in
Articles 233
to 237 and the Lists,  it	contemplated
courts of civil judicature but
58
not  tribunals other than such courts.	ThiS was the  reason
for using both the expressions in
Articles 134
and
227.
By
"   courts"  was  meant courts of civil	 judicature  and  by
"tribunals" those bodies or men who were appointed to decide
controversies arising under certain special laws.  Among the
powers	of the State was included the power to	decide	such
controversies.	 This was undoubtedly one of the  attributes
of the State and was aptly called the judicial power of	 the
State.	In the exercise of this power, a clear division	 was
noticeable.   Broadly speaking certain special matters	went
before	tribunals and the residue went before  the  ordinary
courts	of  civil judicature.  What distinguished  them	 had
never  been successfully established, A court in the  strict
sense  was  a  tribunal which was a  part  of  the  ordinary
hierarchy  of courts of civil judicature maintained  by	 the
State under its Constitution to exercise the judicial  power
of  the	 State.	  These courts performed  all  the  judicial
functions  of the State except those that were	excluded  by
law from their jurisdiction.  The word "judicial" was itself
capable of two meanings.  It might refer to the discharge of
duties exercisable by a judge or by justices in court or  to
administrative	duties which need not be performed in  court
but in respect of which it was necessary to bring to bear  a
judicial mind to determine what was fair and just in respect
of  the materials under consideration.	That an officer	 was
required  to  decide matters before him	 judicially  in	 the
second	sense  did not make him a court or even	 a  tribunal
because	 that  only  established that  he  was	following  a
standard  of  conduct and was free from	 bias  or  interest.
Courts and tribunals acted judicially in both senses and  in
the  term 'courts' were included the ordinary and  permanent
tribunals  and	in the term 'tribunals'	 were  included	 all
others	which were not so included.  The matter	 would	have
been simple if the
Companies Act
had designated a person  or
persons,  whether by name or by office, for the	 purpose  of
hearing an appeal under Section 111. It would then have been
clear that though such person or persons were not 1  courts'
in  the sense explained, they were clearly tribunals'.
The
Companies  Act
said that an appeal would lie to the  Central
Government.   The  court  was,	therefore,  faced  with	 the
question whether the Central Government could be said to  be
a  tribunal.   The  function  that  the	 Central  Government
performed  under the
Companies Act
and Rules was to hear  an
appeal	against	 the  action of	 the  directors.   For	that
purpose	 a memorandum of appeal setting out the grounds	 had
to be filed and the company, on notice, was required to make
representations,  if  any, and so also the other  side,	 and
both sides were allowed to tender evidence to support  their
representations.   The Central Government by the order	then
directed  that	the  shares be registered  or  need  not  be
registered.   The Central Government was also  empowered  to
include	 in its orders directions as to payment of costs  or
otherwise.   The  function  of the  Central  Government	 was
curial and not executive.  There was provision for a hearing
and  a	decision  on evidence, and that	 was  indubitably  a
curial	function.  In its functions the	 Central  Government
often  reached decisions but all its decisions could not  be
regarded as those. of a tribunal.  Resolutions of Government
might affect rights of parties and yet they might not be  in
the  exercise of judicial power.  Resolutions of  Government
might  be  amenable to writs under
Articles 32
and
226
in
appropriate  cases  but	 might not he subject  to  a  direct
appeal under
Article 136
as
59
the decisions of a tribunal.  The position, however, changed
when Government embarked upon curial functions and proceeded
to  exercise  judicial power and decide disputes.  In  these
circumstances,	it was legitimate to regard the officer	 who
dealt  with  the  matter and even  Government  itself  as  a
tribunal.  The word "tribunal" was a word of wide import and
the  words "court" and "tribunal" embraced within  them	 the
exercise  of judicial power in all its forms.  The  decision
of the Central Government thus fell within the powers of the
Supreme Court under
Article 136.
24.In  Kihoto Hollohan v. Zachillhu
and ors. (1992) Suppl  2
S.C.C. 65 1, the observations in the case of Harinagar Sugar
Mills  Ltd. v.Shyam Sunder Jhunjhunwala andors. (ibid)	were
quoted with approval and it was said that where there was  a
lis - an affirmation by one party and denial by another, the
dispute	 involved the rights and obligations of the  parties
to it and the authority was called upon to decide it,  there
was  an	 exercise  of judicial power.	That  authority	 was
called a tribunal if it did not have all the trappings of  a
court.
25.In the case of
Harinagar Sugar Mills Ltd. v. Shyam Sunder
Jhunjjunwala  and Ors.
this court was called upon to  decide
whether an order of the Central Government under
Section 111
of the Companies Act, as it then read, was appealable  under
Article 136
of the Constitution.
Article 136
empowers	this
court  to grant special leave to appeal from  any  judgment,
decree	determination,	sentence or order in  any  cause  or
matter	passed	or made by "any court or  tribunal"  in	 the
territory  of India.  The connotation of the  words  "court"
and "tribunal" was determined in the judgment in the context
of
Article  136.
The  argument  was	 that  the   Central
Government, acting under
Section 111
of the Companies Act,
as  it then read, was exercising  administrative  authority.
The  court held that it was exercising	judicial  authority.
The majority judgment relied upon the provisions of  Section
III for so holding.  Hidayatullah, J., concurring held	that
all  tribunals	were  not  courts  though  all	courts	were
tribunals.   The  word "courts" was used  to  designate	 the
tribunals  that a State established to	administer  justice.
They  were  fixed and permanent and could try  any  suit  or
cause  within  their  jurisdiction.   They  went  under	 the
compendious name of "Courts" of Civil Judicature".  A  large
number	of administrative tribunals had come into  existence
with  the growth of civilisation and the problems  of  modem
life.	They  acted in a judicial manner but they  were	 not
part  of  the  ordinary courts of  civil  judicature.	What
distinguished them had never been successfully	established.
When  the Constitution spoke of "courts" in
Article 136
and
other  Articles, it contemplated courts of civil  judicature
but  not  tribunals other than such courts.   This  was	 the
reason	both expressions were used in
Articles 136
and
226.
The  judgment  is,  therefore,	determinative  in   deciding
whether	 a tribunal is subject to the jurisdiction  of	this
court  under
Article 136
or of the High Court under
Article
227
, but it does not hold that a "Court" is only a court  of
civil judicature in the ordinary hierarchy of courts.
26.In  our  view,  the word ",court" must be  -read  in	 the
context	  in  which  it	 is  used  in  a  statute.   It	  is
permissible, given the context, to read it as  comprehending
the courts of civil judicature and courts or
60
some  tribunals exercising curial, or judicial, powers.	  In
the context in which the word "court" is used in
Section  9A
of  the Special Court Act, it is intended to  encompass	 all
curial	or  judicial bodies which have the  jurisdiction  to
decide	matters	 or  claims,  inter  alia,  arising  out  of
transactions  in securities entered into between the  stated
dates in which a person notified is involved.
27.The occasion for enacting the
Special Court Act
must	 not
be  lost sight of.  The Statement of Objects and Reasons  of
the Bill to replace the Amendment Ordinance has already been
quoted.	 A Joint Parliamentary Committee was constituted  to
investigate what the Statement of Objects and Reasons called
"the large scale irregularities and malpractices which	were
noticed	 in the securities transactions of banks".  This  is
what  the Joint Parliamentary Committee said in	 its  report
about the "scam" :
scam  is basically a deliberate  and  criminal
	      misuse  of Public funds through various  types
	      of  securities  transactions with the  aim  of
	      illegally siphoning of funds of banks and PSUs
	      to  select  brokers for  speculative  returns.
	      The  latest irregularities in  the  securities
	      and  banking transactions, are  manifestations
	      of  this chronic disorder since they  involved
	      not only the Banks but also the stock  market,
	      financial institutions, PSU, the central	bank
	      of  the country and even the Ministry  of	 Fi-
	      nance,  other economic ministries	 in  varying
	      degrees.	The most unfortunate aspect has been
	      the   emergence	of   a	 culture   of	non-
accountability which permitted all sections of
	      the  Government and Banking system over the  3
	      Years.   The state of the country's system  of
	      governance,  the persistence of  non-adherence
	      to  rules,  regulations  and  guidelines,	 the
	      alarming	decay  over  time  in  the   banking
	      systems  has been fully exposed.	These  grave
	      and  numerous irregularities persisted for  so
	      long that eventually it was not the observance
	      of  regulations but their breach that came  to
	      be regarded and defended as "market practice".
	      Through  all  these years the ability  of	 the
	      concerned	 authorities to effectively  address
	      themselves to the problems has been tested and
	      found  wanting.	The  consequence  of   these
	      irregularities   in  securities  and   banking
	      transactions  are	 both financial	 and  moral.
	      During the period from July, 1991 to May, 1992
	      the  most glaring proof of the  nexus  between
	      the  irregularities  in banks  and  the  over-
	      heating of stock market which came to light is
	      explained	 by the graphic	 representations  of
	      the  BSE Index and the fact that there  was  a
	      sharp  increase  in  securities	transactions
	      during  the corresponding period of the  banks
	      involved	in  serious  irregularities  related
	      with  the scam.  What is more apparent is	 the
	      systematic and deliberate abuse of the  system
	      by  certain  unscrupulous	 elements.   It	  is
	      abundantly clear that the scam was the  result
	      of  failure  to check  irregularities  in	 the
	      banking system and also liberalization without
	      adequate	safeguards.   There  is	 also	some
	      evidence of collusion of big industrial houses
			    playing  an important role.	 It is	because	 o
f
	      these elements that the economy of the country
	      had to suffer and while some gained  thousands
	      of  crores, millions of investors	 lost  their
	      savings.	 The criminality of the	 pepetrators
	      of the scam becomes all the more despicable as
	      it was during this period that the country was
	      passing	 through    most    trying    times,
	      economically and financially.  An	 observation
	      that  the	 Committee has been  constrained  to
	      make  at a number of places in the  succeeding
	      chapters	is that for all these not many	have
	      yet been identified and effectively  punished.
"
28. Having regard to the enormity of the
61
"scam" and its vast ramifications, Parliament thought it was
necessary  that	 all the matters of claims  arising  out  of
transactions  in securities entered into between the  stated
dates  in  which a person notified was	involved  should  be
brought before and tried by the same forum.  That forum	 had
been  invested with the jurisdiction to try persons  accused
of  offences relating to transactions in securities  entered
into between the stated dates.	It was also required to give
directions to the Custodian in regard to property  belonging
to   persons  notified	which  stood  attached	 under	 the
provisions of the
Special Court Act
.  The object of amending
the
Special  Court Act
invest the Special  Court  with	 the
power  and authority to decide civil claims arising  out  of
transactions  in securities entered into between the  stated
dates  in which a person notified was involved	has  already
been  stated.	In  these circumstances,  it  is  proper  to
attribute  to  the  word "court" in
Section  9A(1)
of	 the
Special	 Court Act, not the narrower meaning of a  court  of
civil judicature which is part of the ordinary hierarchy  of
courts,	 but  the broader meaning of a curial body,  a	body
acting	judicially to deal with matters and  claims  arising
out  of transactions in securities entered into between	 the
stated	dates  in which a person notified is  involved.	  An
interpretation that suppresses the mischief and advances the
remedy must, plainly, be given.
29.In  Halsbury's Laws of England (4th edition,	 Volume	 10,
paragraphs 701 and 702), this is observed :
701. Meaning of "court".	Originally the	term
	      "court"	meant,	among  other   things,	 the
	      Sovereign's   place.   It	 has  acquired	 the
			    meaning   of   the	place  where   justice	 i
s
	      administered  and, further, has come  to	mean
	      the  persons who exercise	 judicial  functions
	      under  authority	derived either	directly  or
	      indirectly from the Sovereign.  All tribunals,
	      however, are not courts, in the sense in which
	      the   term  is  here  employed.	Courts	 are
	      tribunals	 which	exercise  jurisdiction	over
	      persons by reason of the sanction of the	law,
	      and  not merely by reason of  voluntary,	sub-
mission  to their jurisdiction.	Thus,  arbi-
	      trators,	committees  of clubs and  the  like,
	      although	they  may  be  tribunals  exercising
	      judicial	functions, are not "courts" in	this
	      sense  of	 that term.  On the  other  hand,  a
	      tribunal may be a court in the strict sense of
	      the  term	 even though the chief part  of	 its
	      duties  is  not  judicial.   Parliament  is  a
	      court.  Its duties are mainly deliberative and
	      legislative; the judicial duties are only part
	      of its functions.	 A coroner's court is a true
	      court  although  its  essential  function	  is
	      investigation.
"702.   What is a court in law.  The  question
	      is whether the tribunal is a court, or whether
	      it is a court of justice for, there are courts
	      which   are  not,	 courts	 of   justice.	  In
	      determining  whether a tribunal is a  judicial
	      body the facts that it has been appointed by a
	      non-judicial  authority, that it has no  power
	      to administer on oath, that the chairman has a
	      casting  vote,  and that	third  parties	have
	      power to intervene are immaterial,  especially
	      if  the  statute	selling it  up	prescribe  a
	      penalty for making false statements;  elements
	      to be considered are (1) the requirement for a
	      public hearing, subject to a power to  exclude
	      the  public  1  a	 proper	 case,	and  (2)   a
	      provision that a member of the tribunal  shall
	      not  take part in any decision in which he  is
	      personally  interested, or unless he has	been
	      present throughout the proceedings.
	      A	 tribunal is not necessarily a court in	 the
	      strict  sense  of	 exercising  judicial  power
	      merely because (1), it gives a fund  decision;
	      (2) it hears witnesses on oath;
62
(3)   two	 or more contending  parties  appear
	      before  it between whom it has to decide:	 (4)
	      it gives decisions which affect the rights  of
	      subjects:	 (5) there is an appeal to a  court;
and (6) it is a body to which a matter referre
d
	      by another body;
Many  bodies are not courts even	though	they
	      have to decide questions, and in so doing have
	      to  act  judicially,  in the  sense  that	 the
	      proceedings  must be conducted  with  fairness
	      and  impartiality.  Examples are the  benchers
	      of  the  Inins of Court when  considering	 the
	      conduct	of   one  of  their   members,	 the
	      disciplinary committee of the General  Medical
	      Council  when considering questions  affecting
	      the  conduct of a medican man, a	trade  union
	      when exercising disciplinary jurisdiction over
	      its members.........
30.These passages, from the earlier edition of Halsbury,were
cited  by  this court in
Thakur Jugal Kishore Sinha  v.	 The
Sitamarhi Central Co-operative Bank Ltd.
, (1967) 2 SCR	163.
The  question there was whether the provisions of  the	Con-
tempt of
Courts Act
applied to a Registrar exercising powers
under
Section	48
of the  Bihar  and	Orissa	Co-operative
Societies  Act.	  It was held that the jurisdiction  of	 the
ordinary civil and revenue courts of the land was ousted  in
the  case  of  disputes	 that  fell  under  Section  48.   A
registrar  exercising  powers under Section  48,  therefore,
discharged  the duties which would otherwise have fallen  on
the  ordinary civil and revenue courts.	 He had	 not  merely
the  trappings of a court but in many respects he was  given
the  same powers as were given to the ordinary civil  courts
of  the land by
the Code of Civil Procedure
,  including	 the
power to summon and examine witnesses on oath, the power  to
order  inspection  of documents, to hear the  parties  after
framing issues, to review his own order and to exercise	 the
inherent  jurisdiction of courts mentioned in  Section	151.
In adjudicating a dispute under Section 48 of the Bihar Act,
the Registrar was held to be, "to all intents and purposes a
Court discharging the same functions and duties in the	same
manner as a Court of law is expected to do."
31.Now, under
Section 111
of the Companies Act as  amended
with  effect  from  31st May, 1991,  the  CLB  performs	 the
functions  that were therefore performed by courts of  civil
judicature  under  Section  15
5
. It is	 empowered  to	make
orders	directing rectification of the company register,  as
to  damages, costs and incidental and consequential  orders.
It  may	 decide any question relating to the  title  of	 any
person	who  is a party before it to have his  name  entered
upon  the company's register; and any question which  it  is
necessary  or  expedient  to decide.  It  may  make  interim
orders.	 Failure to comply with any order visits the company
with  a	 fine.	 In  regard to	all  these  matters  it	 has
exclusive  jurisdiction (except under the provisions of	 the
Special	 Court	Act
,  which is the  issue  before  us).	  In
exercising its function under Section 111  the CLR must, and
does, act judicially.  Its orders are appealable.  The	CLR,
further,  is a permanent body constituted under	 a  statute.
It  is	difficult to see how it can be said to	be  anything
other than a court, particularly for the purposes of
Section
9A
of the Special Act.
32.We shall assume that a shareholder whose name the company
has  refused to enter in its register would be put  to	some
difficulty  in	deciding  whether  he  should  approach	 the
Special Court or the CLB, but that is no reason to interpret
the provisions of Section 9A in a manner that would
63
defeat	its  intendment	 and  adversely	 affect	 the  public
interest.   In any event, the time taken in approaching	 the
CLB in a matter that should have been filed before the	Spe-
cial  Court would not be of any consequence for there is  no
time  limit  within which the Special Court has	 to  be	 ap-
proached;  and	it is most unlikely that the  Special  Court
would  be approached unless the shareholder were  sure	that
his claim fell within Section 9A(1).
33.It  will  be	 remembered  that  Mr.	Nariman	 had   drawn
attention  to  the provisions of
Section 4
of	the  Special
Court  Act  and	 argued	 that even if  the  CIB,  under	 the
provisions  of	Section III of the Companies Act,  made	 any
order with regard to any securities, that order would  stand
at  naught if an order relating to the samE  securities	 was
made  under
Section 4
of the Special Court Act by reason  of
the  fact that, under
Section 13
of the Special	 Court	Act,
order  of  the	Special	 Court	had  effect  notwithstanding
anything  inconsistent therewith contained in any decree  or
order  of any court, tribunal or other	authority.
Section
3(2)
of  the Special Court Act empowers the  Custodian,  on
being satisfied on information received that any person	 has
been  involved in any offfence relating to  transactions  in
securities  entered into between the stated dates to  notify
the  name of such person in the Official Gazette.   On	such
notification, by reason of
Section 3(3)
, the property of the
person	notified stands attached.  That property, by  reason
of
Section  3(4)
, is to be dealt with by the  Custodian  in
such  manner  is  the Special Court may	 direct,
Section  4
states that if the Custodian is satisfied after such inquiry
as  he may think fit that any contract or agreement  entered
into fraudulently or to defeat the provisions of the
Special
Court  Act
,  he	 may  cancel  such  contract  or   agreement
whereupon such property stands attached.  The scope,  there-
fore, of
Section 4
is limited.	It applied only in regard to
property  that belongs to a person notified.  Section  9A(1)
is  much  wider	 and  it invests  the  Special	Court  with.
jurisdiction  to entertain matters or claims arising out  of
transactions  in securities entered into between the  stated
dates  in which a person notified is involved not only as  a
party  but  also as a broker, intermediary or in  any  other
manner.	  The argument based on
Section 4
must,  therefore,
fail.
34.  As has been pointed out, sub-sections(2)	  and (3) of
Section 111
of the Companies Act term the pleading that the
person	aggrieved  has to file before the CLE  an  'appeal',
sub-section (4) requires the person aggrieved to apply, sub-
section (5) speaks of it as an 'appeal' or an 'application',
subsection (7) as an 'application ' and sub-section (10)  as
an  'appeal  or application' which shall be made by  a	"pe-
tition in writing".  The words "appeal" and "application" in
the context of the provisions of Section 111 have, therefore
the same meaning and it is, plainly, an original application
that is made.  The shareholder does not resort to a superior
court  to  review  the	decision of  an	 inferior  court  or
tribunal.   The fact, therefore, that
Section 9A(2)
of	 the
Special	 Court Act speaks of the transfer of  'every  suit',
claim or other legal proceeding (other than an appeal)" does
not  exclude  the "application' or "appeal" made  under	 the
provisions  of
Section 111
of the Companies Act  from	 the
purview of
Section 9A(1)
of the Special Court Act.
Conclusion
35.  For all these reasons, the appeal must
succeed.   Noorder  on the transfer petition is	 now  called
for.
36.  The  appeal is allowed.  The judgment and order of	 the
CLB  under  appeal  is set aside.  The	application  of	 the
Canara	Bank pending before the CLB shall stand	 transferred
to the Special Court constituted under the provisions of the
Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in
Securities) Act, 1992
.
37.  the Transfer Petition is dismissed.
38.  There shall be no order as to costs.
66