[Cites
1
, Cited by
382
]
Supreme Court of India
Chandigarh Administration vs Jagjit Singh on 10 January, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1995 AIR 705, 1995 SCC (1) 745
Author:
B.P.  Jeevan Reddy
Bench:
B.P.  Jeevan Reddy
PETITIONER:
CHANDIGARH ADMINISTRATION

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
JAGJIT SINGH

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/01/1995

BENCH:
JEEVAN REDDY, B.P. (J)
BENCH:
JEEVAN REDDY, B.P. (J)
MANOHAR SUJATA V. (J)

CITATION:
 1995 AIR  705		  1995 SCC  (1) 745
 JT 1995 (1)   445	  1995 SCALE  (1)131


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
B.P. JEEVAN REDDY, J.-
SLP (C) No. 11609 of 1994
1.   Leave granted.  Heard counsel for the parties.
2.   This  appeal is preferred against the judgment  of	 the
Punjab	and  Haryana High Court allowing the  writ  petition
filed  by the respondents, Jagjit Singh and  Jaswant  Singh.
The facts leading to the filing of the writ petition are not
in  dispute  and  may be stated.   Indeed,  they  speak	 for
themselves.
3.An  auction was held by the Chandigarh  Administration  on
29-9-1975  wherein the respondents were the highest  bidders
in respect of a plot admeasuring 338 sq. yds. in Sector	 31-
A,  Chandigarh	for a sum of Rs 34,500.	 The right  sold  in
auction	  was  the  leasehold  for  ninetynine	years.	  An
allotment letter was issued on 27-11-1975.  The	 respondents
deposited  25%	of  the	 money	immediately.   The   balance
consideration  was payable in three equal  instalments,	 the
first  of  which  fell due on  27-9-1976.   The	 respondents
defaulted  in paying the same whereupon the  Estate  Officer
issued	a notice to show cause as to why the lease in  their
favour	be not cancelled.  After giving due  opportunity  to
the  respondents, the lease was cancelled, at the same	time
forfeiting a sum of Rs 3450 representing 10% of
748
the  premium.	The respondents preferred an appeal  to	 the
Chief  Administrator  against  the  said  action  which	 was
dismissed  on 2-5-1978.	 The Chief  Administrator,  however,
reduced,  the  amount of forfeiture from 10% to 2  1/2%.   A
revision  preferred against the Chief Administrator's  order
was  dismissed by the Chief Commissioner on  1-1-1979.	 The
respondents then applied to the Estate Officer for refund of
the  amount  paid  by  them.   After  deducting	 the  amount
forfeited, the amount deposited by them was refunded in full
on 25-4-1979.
4.Having   obtained   the  refund  of  their   amount,	 the
respondents  filed  a  review  petition	 before	 the   Chief
Commissioner seeking review of his order dated 1-1-1979.  It
was  dismissed	on  10-1-1980.	A  second  review  petition,
however, met with success.  The Chief Commissioner  directed
that the plot shall be restored to the respondents  provided
they make the entire payment within sixty days from the date
of his order.  He directed that in default of such  payment,
the  review  petition  shall  stand  dismissed,	 vide  Chief
Commissioner's order dated 9-5-1985.  Instead of paying	 the
amount	within the time prescribed, the respondents  queried
how the amount of Rs 1.02 lakhs (directed to be deposited by
the  Chief  Commissioner in his order  dated  9-5-1985)	 was
arrived	 at.  Be that as it may, they failed to comply	with
the  order of the Chief Commissioner, with the	result	that
the  second  review  petition  filed  by  them	also   stood
dismissed.  The respondents then filed yet another petition,
styling	 it as a mercy petition, before the advisor  to	 the
Administrator which too was dismissed.
5.On 3-12-1990, the respondents started yet another round by
filing WP No. 15477 of 1990 in the High Court of Punjab	 and
Haryana	 offering  to  pay the	amount	aforesaid  with	 12%
interest.   The High Court recorded the	 respondents'  offer
and  directed them to bring a draft for the full  amount  on
the  next  day of the hearing.	The respondents	 produced  a
draft in a sum of Rs 1,72,402.56p before the Court on  15-1-
1991  which was kept in safe custody of the Registrar.	 The
writ  petition was, however, dismissed on 18-3-1991  holding
that  since the respondents were persistent  defaulters	 and
also  because  the  prices of plots  have  gone	 up  steeply
meanwhile,  the plot cannot be restored to them.   A  review
petition filed by the respondents was dismissed by the Court
on 29-7-1991.
6.Having   failed  in  the  High  Court,   the	 respondents
approached the Estate Officer yet again to settle their case
in  the	 light	of an alleged policy of	 the  Government  to
restore	 the  plots  to defaulters  by	charging  forfeiture
amount	of  5%.	  This request was rejected  by	 the  Estate
Officer	 on  18-12-1991.  After all  this,  the	 respondents
approached the High Court once again with WP (C) No. 3394 of
1992  for  a direction to the respondents to  implement	 the
alleged	 policy of the Chandigarh Administration to  restore
the  plot by charging a forfeiture amount of 5%.  They	also
challenged  the cancellation of lease (effected in the	year
1977) in this writ petition.  They deposited a sum of rupees
two  lakhs  purporting to be under the orders  of  the	High
Court.	The writ petition has been allowed by the High Court
on 14-10-1993 on the ground that inasmuch as in another case
pertaining to Smt
749
Prakash Rani, the Administrator had restored the plot to her
even  after  her  writ petition was dismissed  by  the	High
Court, the respondents must also be restored the plot on the
same terms.  The High Court pointed out that Prakash  Rani's
matter	was  settled before the Lok Adalat  and	 the  Estate
Officer agreed to waive the forfeiture by charging 5% of the
premium	 amount	 by his orders dated 4-9-1991 but  when	 the
respondents'  case was taken up by Estate Officer  on  1-10-
1989,  he rejected the respondents' case, which,  says	that
the  High Court, amounts to discriminatory treatment.	When
it  was	 pointed out by the counsel for	 the  Administration
that  the case of Prakash Rani was different inasmuch as  in
that case the amount paid by the allottee was never returned
to her as has been done in the case of respondents, the High
Court merely brushed aside the argument and allowed the writ
petition directing the appellants herein (respondent to	 the
writ petition) to restore the site to the respondents  (writ
petitioners) inasmuch as they had already paid up the entire
amount of auction money including penal interest.  The Court
observed that if on taking an account, any further amount is
found  due, a demand can be raised against  the	 respondents
according to rules.  It is this order which is questioned in
this appeal.
7.In  our  opinion, the writ petition could  not  have	been
allowed	 by the High Court for more than one  reason,  viz.,
(1)  On	 the  default of the respondents to  pay  the  first
instalment on the prescribed date, the lease in their favour
was  cancelled after due notice and hearing as far  back  as
1977.	They  also took back the amount	 deposited  by	them
minus  the  amount  forfeited.	This  happened	in  1978-79.
Having	taken back the amount, they could not have  agitated
their  right  to  the  plot  by	 filing	 consecutive  review
petitions  before the Chief Commissioner  or by filing	writ
petition  seeking  restoration of the plot.   Not  only	 the
lease was cancelled but they had acquiesced in it by  taking
back  the  money; (2) Be that as it may, when  their  second
review	petition  was  allowed	by  the	 Chief	Commissioner
permitting them to pay the entire amount within sixty  days,
the  respondents  failed to avail of  the  said	 concession.
This  happened	in the year 1985; (3)  Their  writ  petition
filed  in  the	year 1990 (WP No.  15477  of  1990)  seeking
restoration  of	 the plot was dismissed on the	ground	that
they were persistent defaulters and also on the ground	that
because	 of the rise in prices, the plot cannot be  restored
to  them.   This  happened in March  1991.   Even  a  review
petition  filed by the respondents was rejected by the	High
Court.	 The filing of WP (C) No. 3394 of 1992	(from  which
this  appeal  arises) in the above  circumstances  was	thus
nothing but a desperate gamble.	 The only ostensible  reason
given  for filing this second writ petition was the  alleged
policy	of  the	 Administration	 to  restore  the  plots  to
defaulters on their paying 5% of the premium amount.  It is,
however,  significant  that the writ petition has  not	been
allowed	 on the basis of the said policy, if any, but  on  a
different ground altogether.  It is this: Inasmuch as in the
case  of  Prakash  Rani, the plot was  restored	 to  her  on
charging  5%  of  the  premium	amount	notwithstanding	 the
dismissal  of her writ petition by the High Court, the	plot
of  the	 respondents  should  also  be	restored  to   them.
Firstly, the judgment of the High Court does not show that
750
the High Court has investigated the facts and  circumstances
of Prakash Rani's case nor has it recorded any finding	that
her  case is identical in all respects to  the	respondents'
case.	The High Court does not also say that the  point  of
distinction  pointed  out by the  Administration's  counsel,
viz., that the said lady had never taken back her amount and
that  her amount was lying with the Administration,  is	 not
correct.   And	yet  her case has been made  the  basis	 for
allowing  the respondents' writ petition upholding the	plea
of discrimination.
8.We are of the opinion that the basis or the principle,  if
it  can be called one, on which the writ petition  has	been
allowed	 by  the  High Court is	 unsustainable	in  law	 and
indefensible  in principle.  Since we have come across	many
such  instances,  we think it necessary to  deal  with	such
pleas at a little length.  Generally speaking, the mere fact
that the respondent authority has passed a particular  order
in  the case of another person similarly situated can  never
be the ground for issuing a writ in favour of the petitioner
on  the plea of discrimination.	 The order in favour of	 the
other  person might be legal and valid or it might  not	 be.
That has to be investigated first before it can be  directed
to be followed in the case of the petitioner If the order in
favour of the other person is found to be contrary to law or
not warranted in the facts and circumstances of his case, it
is obvious that such illegal or unwarranted order cannot  be
made  the basis of issuing a writ compelling the  respondent
authority  to  repeat  the illegality  or  to  pass  another
unwarranted  order.   The  extraordinary  and  discretionary
power  of  the	High Court cannot be exercised	for  such  a
purpose.  Merely because the respondent authority has passed
one illegal/unwarranted order, it does not entitle the	High
Court to compel the authority to repeat that illegality over
again  and  again.  The illegal/unwarranted action  must  be
corrected,  if	it  can be done	 according  to	law  indeed,
wherever  it  is  possible,  the  Court	 should	 direct	 the
appropriate  authority	to  correct  such  wrong  orders  in
accordance  with law but even if it cannot be corrected,  it
is  difficult  to  see how it can be made a  basis  for	 its
repetition.  By refusing to direct the respondent  authority
to  repeat  the illegality, the Court is not  condoning	 the
earlier	 illegal  act/order  nor  can  such  illegal   order
constitute   the  basis	 for  a	 legitimate   complaint	  of
discrimination.	  Giving  effect  to  such  pleas  would  be
prejudicial to the interests of law and will do incalculable
mischief  to public interest.  It will be a negation of	 law
and  the  rule of law.	Of course, if in case the  order  in
favour	of  the	 other person is found to be  a	 lawful	 and
justified one it can be followed and a similar relief can be
given to the petitioner if it is found that the petitioners'
case  is similar to the other persons' case.  But  then	 why
examine	 another  person's case in his absence	rather	than
examining  the case of the petitioner who is present  before
the   Court  and  seeking  the	relief.	  Is  it  not	more
appropriate and convenient to examine the entitlement of the
petitioner  before the Court to the relief asked for in	 the
facts and circumstances of his case than to enquire into the
correctness  of	 the order made or action taken	 in  another
person's case, which other person is not before the case nor
is his case.  In our considered opinion, such a course --
751
barring	 exceptional situations	 would neither be  advisable
nor desirable.	In other words, the High Court cannot ignore
the  law  and  the well-accepted norms	governing  the	writ
jurisdiction  and say that because in one case a  particular
order has been passed or a particular action has been taken,
the  same must be repeated irrespective of the fact  whether
such  an  order or action is contrary to law  or  otherwise.
Each  case  must be decided on its own merits,	factual	 and
legal,	in accordance with relevant legal  principles.	 The
orders	and actions of the authorities cannot be equated  to
the  judgments of the Supreme Court and High Courts nor	 can
they  be  elevated  to	the  level  of	the  precedents,  as
understood  in the judicial world. (What is the position  in
the  case  of orders passed by authorities  in	exercise  of
their quasi-judicial power, we express no opinion.  That can
be dealt with when a proper case arises.)
9.Coming  back to the facts of this case, if only  the	High
Court  had  looked  to the facts of  this  case	 instead  of
looking	 to  the facts of some other case, we are  sure,  it
would  have  dismissed	the writ petition  in  view  of	 the
several	 facts stated hereinbefore.  The High Court fell  in
grave error in allowing the writ petition on the said ground
and  in	 importing the theory of discrimination	 in  such  a
situation.   Question  of discrimination could	have  arisen
only if two findings were recorded by the High Court,  viz.,
(1)  the  order in favour of Prakash Rani was  a  legal	 and
valid  one  and	 (2) the case of the  writ  petitioners	 was
similar in material respects to the case of Prakash Rani but
she  has  not  been accorded the same  treatment.   No	such
findings have been recorded by the High Court in this case.
10.The appeal is accordingly allowed and the judgment  under
appeal	set aside.  The respondents shall pay the  costs  of
the appellants, which are assessed at Rs 10,000.
SLP (C) No. 15931 of 1994
11.The	facts  of this case, if anything,  are	worse.	 The
respondent  was the highest bidder in respect of a  plot  in
the  auction  held  on 13-7-1974.  She paid  the  first	 25%
amount	but  defaulted in paying the  first  instalment.   A
showcause  notice was issued to her proposing to cancel	 the
lease in her favour.  Pursuant to the show-cause notice, the
respondent  appeared and expressed her inability to pay	 the
amount, whereupon the lease in her favour was cancelled	 and
an  amount  of	10% of the premium  amount  forfeited.	 The
respondent  filed an appeal before the	Chief  Administrator
contending  only that the amount forfeited is high and	that
it  should be reduced and the balance refunded to her.
The
Chief  Administrator  allowed  her appeal  and	reduced	 the
amount forfeited.  The respondent accordingly took back	 her
amount	minus  the  forfeited  amount,	in  December   1976.
Seventeen  years later, she filed the writ petition  in	 the
Punjab	and Haryana High Court, being CWP No. 7760 of  1993,
from  which  this appeal arises, challenging  the  order  of
cancellation  dated 30-3-1976.	The writ petition  has	been
allowed by the
752
High  Court on the ground that the matter is covered by	 the
High Court's earlier decision in
Jaswant Singh v. Chandigarh
Admn.1
12.Inasmuch  as	 the  respondent's writ	 petition  has	been
allowed	 on  the  only	ground that it	is  covered  by	 the
decision  in  Jaswant  Singh1, it  is  necessary  to  notice
whether the principle of
the said decision
governs the facts
of this case.  The two grounds urged by the writ  petitioner
in  Jaswant Singh 1 as recorded in para 3 of  the  judgment,
are:
"(1)  the	 authorities under the Act  have  no
	      jurisdiction to order forfeiture of 25% of the
	      premium; (2) that when during the time allowed
	      by  the  Chief Administrator  to	deposit	 the
	      amount of forfeiture the review had been filed
	      and the Chief Commissioner had ordered stay of
	      the operation of the order, while disposing of
	      the review petition, it was incumbent upon the
	      Chief Administrator to grant time for  deposit
	      of the amount due."
A  perusal of the facts of the case stated in paras 2 and  3
of  the judgment clearly discloses that there is  absolutely
no  similarity	in the facts of that case  and	the  present
case.  The facts of that case are altogether different.	  It
is in those facts and circumstances that that writ  petition
was  allowed.	We are unable to see any  relevance  of	 the
principle  of
the said decision
to the case before  us.	  By
saying	this,  we  may not be understood  to  say  that	 the
decision  in  Jaswant  Singh1 is  correct.   We	 express  no
opinion thereon since it is not necessary for us to do so in
this case.
13.So  far  as	the case before us is  concerned,  the	fact
remains that when the lease was cancelled on the  respondent
expressing   her  inability  to	 pay  the  first  or   other
instalments, the only contention raised by her in appeal was
for reduction of the amount forfeited.	She never questioned
the  cancellation  of the lease.  On  the  amount  forfeited
being reduced, she coolly took back the money and kept quiet
for a period of seventeen years.  It is only after the lapse
of  17 years that she woke up evidently in view of the	rise
in  prices and approached the High Court more in the  nature
of a gamble than for vindicating her legitimate rights.	 The
explanation  given by her for her seventeen  years'  slumber
was that she had filed a revision before the  Administration
and was awaiting its result.  The appellants have denied the
receipt of any such revision.  The respondent is not able to
substantiate her plea.	Moreover, if indeed she had filed  a
revision,  she	has  not  explained why	 did  she  wait	 for
seventeen  years  without  making  any	enquiry	 about	 its
progress and without making any efforts to have it  disposed
of.   It  is  evident that the said plea  is  a	 false	one,
invented  for  the  purpose  of	 the  writ  petition.	 It,
therefore,  follows  that  the High Court was  in  error  in
allowing  this	writ petition as  well.	  Accordingly,	this
appeal	too  is allowed and the judgment  under	 appeal	 set
aside.	The appellants shall be entitled to their costs from
the respondent, quantified at Rs 10,000.
1 1992 PLJ 522: AIR 1992 P&H 150
754