[Cites
7
, Cited by
40
]
Supreme Court of India
P. Udayani Devi vs V.V. Rajeshwara Prasad Rao & Anr on 24 February, 1995
Equivalent citations: 1995 AIR 1357, 1995 SCC (3) 252, AIR 1995 SUPREME COURT 1357, 1995 (3) SCC 252, 1995 AIR SCW 1314, (1995) 2 SCR 332 (SC), 1995 ALL CJ 1 399, 1995 ALL CJ 2 781, (1995) 3 JT 523 (SC), (1995) 2 CURLJ(CCR) 297, (1995) 1 CURCC 612, (1995) 2 LANDLR 156, (1995) 3 CIVLJ 115
Author:
S.C.  Agrawal
Bench:
S.C.  Agrawal
PETITIONER:
P. UDAYANI DEVI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
V.V. RAJESHWARA PRASAD RAO & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT24/02/1995

BENCH:
AGRAWAL, S.C. (J)
BENCH:
AGRAWAL, S.C. (J)
FAIZAN UDDIN (J)

CITATION:
 1995 AIR 1357		  1995 SCC  (3) 252
 JT 1995 (3)   523	  1995 SCALE  (2)43


ACT:



HEADNOTE:



JUDGMENT:
S.C. AGRAWAL, J.:
1.leave granted.
2.We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
3.These	 appeals are by the auction purchaser of a  property
sold  to him in execution proceedings.	A money	 decree	 was
passed	against	 respondent No. 1 in O.S. No.  148  of	1970
filed  by respondent No. 2. In execution of the said  decree
the  property  of respondent No. 1 was sold  by	 auction  on
March 26, 1985 to the appellant whose bid of Rs.  3,01,000/-
was  the  highest.  In the sale certificate dated  April  8,
1987  the property that was sold was thus described  in	 the
Schedule:
"East  Godavari District,	 Rajahmundry  Taluk,
	      Gandhi-nagaram.	Block  No.  11,	 Rajahmundry
	      Belonging to the judgment debtors and named as
	      "Chandrika Nilayam" in S.S. No. 67 and present
	      No.  21-6 terraced house, situated within	 the
	      following boundaries -
525
525
East  :	  House of M.V. Reddy
South :	  Main Road
West  :	  Park
North :	  House of Mullapudi Satyanaranayam
4.   The   same	  description	was  given   in	  the	sale
proclamation.	Before	issuance  of  the  sale	 certificate
respondent No. 1 had filed petitions, E.A. Nos. 397 of	1985
and 506 of 1985 under Order 21 Rules 90 and 91,
C.P.C
.,	 for
setting	 aside	the sale which was held on March  26,  1985.
One of the grounds that was urged for setting aside the sale
in  the	 said petitions was that respondent No. 1  had	only
1/4th  share in the property and further that  the  property
was  worth Rs. 5 lakhs and the bid was too low.	 Along	with
the  said petitions respondent No. 1 also filed	 a  schedule
which gave the description of the property in the same terms
as mentioned in the sale proclamation and sale	certificate.
The said petitions were dismissed by the executing court  by
order  dated  April 21, 1986 and the sale was  confirmed  on
April  8, 1987 and the sale certificate was granted  to	 the
appellant.   In	 pursuance  of	the  sale  certificate	 the
appellant obtained possession of the entire property  within
the boundaries as mentioned in the sale certificate on April
22,  1987.  After the delivery of the possession  respondent
No.  1	filed  a  suit, O.S. No. 107/87,  in  the  court  of
Subordinate  Judge, Rajahmundry for a declaration  that	 the
sale certificate dated April 8, 1987 issued in favour of the
appellant  does not pass title to the property bearing	Door
No. 14/7 and relates only to the terraced building and for a
permanent   injunction	 restraining  the   appellant	from
interfering  with the peaceful possession and  enjoyment  of
respondent  No. 1 in respect of the other building.   During
the  pendency  of the said stilt respondent No.	 1  filed  a
petition, F.A. No 478 of 1990, in the execution proceedings,
under
Section	47
read with
Section 151
C.P.C.	 wherein  he
prayed for a declaration that the sale certificate does	 not
pass  title  to	 the appellant in respect  of  the  property
mentioned   in	the  schedule  to  the	 said	application,
hereinafter referred to as "the petition schedule property",
on  the ground that even though there was no attachment	 and
sale of the said property and even though the appellant	 did
not  purchase the same and even though the sale	 certificate
does not contain it the appellant had	taken  the  delivery
of  possession	of  the	 said  property	 in  the   execution
proceedings.   The  boundaries	of  the	 petition   schedule
property are thus described by respondent No. 1 in the	said
pension -
East : House belonging to M.V. Reddy
West :	Terraced building now taken de livery by  the  first
respondent (appellant herein)
South :	 Main Road
North :	  House belonging, to Mullapudi Satyanarayana
5.   The  said	petition was contested by the  appellant  as
well  as  by  the  decree holder  (respondent  No.  2.)	 who
asserted  that	the  petition  schedule	 property  was	also
brought	 to sale after attachment and was in fact  sold	 by,
the  court and it is also covered by the  sale	certificate.
The Subordinate Judge, by order dated November 5, 1991, dis-
missed	the said petition of respondent No. 1. It  was	held
that  the petition schedule property is located	 within	 the
boundaries mentioned in the schedule to the exccu-
526
tion  petition	as well as in the schedule attached  to	 the
sale  certificate.   The  Subordinate  Judge  rejected	 the
contention  that  there	 were two  buildings,  the  terraced
building  and the upstair building, and held that  there  is
only one structure on the terrace which looks like a  stair-
case room and there is absolutely no upstair building at all
and that the major portion of the building is aterraced	 one
and  that  in spite of the location of a small room  on	 the
terrace	 the  building	remains a  terraced  building  only.
According to the Subordinate Judge the sale proclamation and
sale  certificate  clearly  go to  show	 that  the  property
purchased by the appellant extends upto the park on the west
and  upto the house of M.V. Reddy on the east and  that	 the
petition  schedule  property  is  part	and  parcel  of	 the
property  within  the said boundaries  and,  therefore,	 the
petition  schedule  property  was  also	 purchased  by	 the
appellant  under the sale certificate and the appellant	 was
entitled  for  the entire property  including  the  petition
schedule property under the sale certificate and is entitled
to  take the delivery of the entire property  including	 the
petition  schedule property.  Feeling aggrieved by the	said
order  of  the Subordinate Judge respondent No.	 1  filed  a
revision  petition, C.R.P. No. 3998 of 1991, in	 the  Andhra
Pradesh High Court.  The said revision petition was  allowed
by  the	 High Court by judgment dated March 29,	 1994.	 The
High Court was of the view that when respondent No. 1 raised
the  contention	 that within the boundaries there  is  other
upstair	 building with vacant site of 300 and odd sq.  yards
and that the property that was sold pursuant to the  auction
and  delivered	was only the terraced  building,  the  lower
court  ought  to have appointed a Commissioner in  order  to
find  whether in fact there is any upstair building  in	 the
said  site  and that if there is also upstair  building	 and
vacant	site  within  the boundaries the  appellant  is	 not
entitled  to  take delivery of the upstair building  as	 the
only  property	that was brought to sale  was  the  terraced
building within the boundaries mentioned therein and further
that  the  sale certificate does not refer  to	the  upstair
building  and the vacant site.	The High  Court,  therefore,
remitted  the  matter  to  the	executing  court  with	 the
direction to appoint a Commissioner to make local inspection
of  the	 petition  schedule  property  and  if,	 within	 the
boundaries  mentioned in the sale certificate, there  is  an
upstair	  building  which  is  not  included  in  the	sale
certificate and the vacant site adjacent to it he may direct
redelivery  of	that  property and if there  is	 no  upstair
building and the vacant site within the boundaries mentioned
in  the sale certificate, the Subordinate Judge may  dispose
of  the execution application in accordance with  law.	 The
appellant filed a review petition for the review of the said
order of the High Court but the same was dismissed by  order
dated  November 23, 1994.  These appeals are  filed  against
the  said orders of the High Court dated March	29,1994	 and
November 23, 1994.
6.Shri	R.F. Nariman, the learned senior  counsel  appearing
for  the  appellant, has submitted that the High  Court,  in
exercise  of its revisional jurisdiction under
Section	 115
C.P.C., was in error in interfering with the order passed by
the  Subordinate Judge dismissing the application  filed  by
respondent  No.	 1 under
Section 47
read  with
Section	 151
C.P.C.	 The  submission  of  Shri  Nariman  was  that	 the
boundaries  of	the property which was sold in	the  auction
sale are clearly indicated in the sale certificate and	they
are the same boundaries
527
as  are mentioned in the sale proclamation and that in	view
of  the said description in the sale certificate the  entire
property  lying	 within those boundaries  was  the  subject-
matter	of sale in favour of the appellant.  The  submission
of  Shri  Nariman was that the sale  certificate  issued  in
favour	 of  the  appellant  is	 conclusive  and  that	 the
Subordinate Judge had correctly construed it and that  there
was  no	 infirmity in the order passed	by  the	 Subordinate
Judge which could justify interference by the High Court  in
exercise of its revisional jurisdiction.
7.   We find considerable substance in this contention.	 The
position  in law is wellsettled that "certificates  of	sale
are  documents	of  title  which ought	not  to	 be  lightly
regarded  or loosely construed." [See :
Rambhadra  Naidu  v.
Kadiriyasami  Naicker
, (1921) LR 48 IA 1551.
In
Sheodhyan
Singh & Ors. v. Musammat SanicharaKuer & Ors.
, 1962 (2)	 SCR
753,  in the sale certificate the boundaries as well as	 the
plot  number  were  mentioned but there	 was  a	 mistake  in
mentioning the plot number.  It was held :
"The  matter  may have been  different  if  no
	      boundaries had been given in the final  decree
	      for  sale as well as in the  sale	 certificate
	      and  only the plot number was mentioned.	 But
	      where we have both the boundries and the	plot
	      number  and the circumstances are as  in	this
	      case,  the mistake in the plot number must  be
	      treated as mere misdescription which does	 not
	      affect the identity of the property sold.	 [p.
	      759]
8.   In	 the  instant  case,  we  find	that  in  the	sale
certificate  the  boundaries of the property that  was	sold
have   been  clearly  indicated.   In  addition,  the	sale
certificate  also gives the description of the	property  as
"Chandrika  Nilayam"  bearing the number "S.S.	No.  67	 and
present	 No.  21-6".   The mention of  the  words  "terraced
house"	in the description cannot be construed to mean	that
only  a part of the property failing within  the  boundaries
was sold and a part of the said property was left out.	 The
expression "terraced house" is not an expression of  precise
connotation  as pointed out by the Subordinate	Judge.	 The
main  building	having the terrace and a room on  the  first
floor  can properly be described as the terraced  house	 and
other structures and land within the boundaries are part  of
the said property.  There is no dispute that the  possession
of the entire property, including the house having a room on
the  first floor, was delivered to the appellant  after	 the
sale  certificate  has	been issued  in	 his  favour.	What
respondent  No. 1 wants is to divide the property  mentioned
in the sale certificate in two portions having the following
boundaries
(I) East  :   House of M.V. Reddy
    West  :   Terraced	building  mentioned  in	  the	sale
certificate
     South :   Main Road
     North :   House of Mullapudi Satyanarayana
(II) East   : Building having a room on the first floor	 and
open land
     West  :  Park
     South : Main Road
     North :   House of Mullapudi Satyanarana
9.  According to respondent No- 1 only
528
property (11) was sold in the auction sale and is covered by
the   sale  certificate.   The	plain  terms  of  the	sale
certificate do not lend support to this contention.  Accord-
ing  to	 the sale certificate the  entire  property  falling
within	the boundaries was the subject-matter of  the  sale.
In  view of the said description in the sale certificate  it
is  not possible to split up the property into two  portions
and  confine the sale certificate to a part of the  property
and  thereby alter the boundaries of the property  that	 has
been sold.
10.Moreover, it is settled law that the question as to	what
was  sold in execution of the decree is a question of  fact.
[See  :
S.M. Jakati & Anr. v.  S.M. Borkar & Ors.
,  1959	 SCR
138,  at  p. 1401 1. In the present  case,  the	 Subordinate
Judge,	after  an examination of the  sale  certificate	 and
other  documents,  has recorded a finding  that	 the  entire
property falling within the boundaries mentioned in the sale
certificate has been sold.  That was a finding of fact.	 The
High Court, in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction,	 was
not  justified in reopening the finding of fact recorded  by
the  Subordinate  Judge.   The judgment of  the	 high  Court
cannot, therefore, be upheld and must be set aside.
11.The appeals are accordingly allowed, the judgment of	 the
High Court dated March 29, 1994 as well a.% the order  dated
November 23, 1994 arc set aside and the order dated November
5,  1991 passed by the Subordinate Judge is  restored.	 The
appellant will be entitled to his costs.
531