[Cites
43
, Cited by
39
]
Supreme Court of India
Chairman, R.S.R.T.C. & Anr vs Santosh & Ors on 10 May, 2013
Equivalent citations: AIR 2013 SUPREME COURT 2150, 2013 (7) SCC 94, 2013 AIR SCW 2791, 2013 (3) AJR 160, (2013) 127 ALLINDCAS 133 (SC), 2013 (3) SCC (CRI) 37, 2013 (7) SCALE 230, (2013) 4 CIVLJ 781, (2013) 2 CLR 67 (SC), (2013) 3 JCR 91 (SC), (2013) 4 CPR 616, 2013 (2) CLR 67, 2013 (127) ALLINDCAS 133, AIR 2013 SC (CIVIL) 1906, (2013) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 171, (2013) 2 ACC 501, (2013) 3 RAJ LW 2114, (2013) 3 ACJ 1906, (2013) 4 ALL WC 4058, (2013) 6 MAH LJ 97, (2013) 4 MPLJ 292, (2013) 4 PUN LR 3, (2013) 3 TAC 19, (2013) 7 SCALE 230, (2013) 99 ALL LR 475
Bench:
Fakkir Mohamed Ibrahim Kalifulla
,
B.S. Chauhan
REPORTABLE


                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) No.3265 of 2012




      Chairman, Rajasthan State Road Transport
      …Petitioners
      Corporation & Ors.


                                   Versus


      Smt. Santosh & Ors.                                    …Respondents


                                  O R D E R
1.    Originally this petition had been filed challenging the judgment
      and order of the Rajasthan High Court dated 21.9.2011 passed  in  S.B.
      Civil Misc. Appeal No. 480 of 2001, wherein the complete liability  of
      providing compensation in a vehicular accident had been fixed upon the
      appellant-Rajasthan  State  Road  Transport  Corporation  (hereinafter
      referred to as the ‘RSRTC’), while unfastening the  liability  of  the
      driver and the owner of the vehicle,  known  as  ‘Jugaad’,  under  the
      provisions of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
(hereinafter referred to as
      the ‘Act’).
2.    At the time of hearing the petition, this court vide order dated
      6.2.2012 did not consider it proper to examine the issue in respect of
      compensation. However, the question was raised by Shri  Imtiaz  Ahmed,
      learned counsel appearing for the RSRTC that this court  must  examine
      whether ‘Jugaad’ is a vehicle under the Act, and  in  case,  it  is  a
      motor vehicle under
Section 2(28)
of the Act, whether such ‘Jugaad’ is
      required to be insured and registered before it is permitted to ply on
      the road and whether the driver of ‘Jugaad’ must compulsorily  have  a
      driving licence. As such important issues have  been  raised  by  Shri
      Imtiaz Ahmed, we had requested Shri H.P. Raval, learned ASG to  assist
      the court, after taking instructions from the Road Transport  Ministry
      of the Central Government about the status of ‘Jugaad’ under the  Act.
      Shri Raval  responded  to  the  aforesaid  queries  on  13.4.2012  and
      submitted that it is a motor vehicle as defined under
Section 2(28)
of
      the Act, and the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways had
      issued a circular dated 26.7.2007 issuing instructions  to  all  State
      transport authorities clarifying that  ‘Jugaad’  is  a  vehicle  under
Section 2(28)
of the  Act  and  all  the  States  are  under  a  legal
      obligation to  enforce  the  same.  Therefore,  no  person  should  be
      permitted to ply a ‘Jugaad’ as it violates all the provisions  of  the
      Act. It must have a registration and  insurance and  the  driver  must
      have a valid driving license and in  case  of  an  accident  etc,  the
      liability under the provisions of the Act, may be properly determined.
       However, Shri Raval has raised a grievance that in spite of  issuance
      of such a circular, most of the States have not enforced the terms  of
      the said circular issued by the Central Government.
3.    Considering the aforesaid grievance raised by Shri  Raval,  this
      court impleaded the Transport Secretary/Commissioner of all the States
      as party respondents and asked them to submit their  response.   While
      some of the States have submitted that it is not a vehicle within  the
      meaning of the provisions of
Section 2(28)
of the Act.  The  State  of
      Karnataka has submitted the vehicle like ‘Jugaad’ was not in existence
      in the State.
4.    It has further been pointed  out  by  learned  counsel  for  the
      parties that enforcement of the provisions of the Act  and  the  rules
      framed  under  it,  come  within  the  jurisdiction   of   the   State
      Governments.  Therefore,  they  must  be  directed  to  ensure  strict
      compliance of the said provisions  of  the  Act.   It  has  also  been
      pointed out by Shri Siddharth Luthra, learned ASG that a letter  dated
      19.7.2012 was sent by the  Director  (RT)  of  the  Ministry  of  Road
      Transport  &  Highways,  Government  of  India,  to  all   the   State
      Authorities to ensure compliance of the statutory  provisions  of  the
      Act and the rules.
5.    Shri Manish Singhvi, learned senior counsel  appearing  for  the
      State of Rajasthan has submitted that the government of Rajasthan  has
      examined the matter and decided to prohibit the plying of “Jugaad”  on
      the roads completely. Such a vehicle cannot be used for any commercial
      purpose, without being registered and duly insured and  in  compliance
      with the other statutory requirements. However, the  State  Government
      carved out an exception that farmers/poor villagers may  be  permitted
      to use the same for their agricultural purposes as an interim  measure
      till the rules are  framed  in  this  regard.   It  has  further  been
      submitted that in case ‘Jugaads’ are found plying on the  roads,  they
      shall be impounded and will be dealt with strictly in accordance  with
      law.  A similar stand has been taken by the majority of the States.
6.    An application has been filed by  Rashtriya  Kisan  Morcha,  for
      impleadment/intervention  which  is  allowed.  The  Morcha  raised   a
      grievance  that  in  case  plying  of  the  ‘Jugaad’   is   prohibited
      completely, it will create a  serious  problem  for  the  farmers,  as
      seizure/impounding of “Jugaad”  would  have  penal  consequences.  The
      ‘Jugaad’ is nothing, but an improved version of a bullock  cart  which
      has been used for centuries in the villages.  The  farmer  communities
      should not be restrained from using the improved carts/jugaad  in  the
      villages to and  from  houses  to  the  farms  and  for  bringing  the
      agricultural produces from their agricultural lands.
7.    Some of the lawyers have raised the issue that issuing any  kind
      of  direction  by  this  Court  in  these  regards  would  amount   to
      legislation  which  is  not  permissible  in  law.   Thus,  they  have
      suggested   that  instead  of  issuing  the  directions,  the  Central
      Government and the State authorities be directed to  frame  a  policy,
      amend the rules specifically and  enforce  the  same.  However,  other
      lawyers have opposed this view and submitted that the  issue  involved
      herein is restricted  only  with  enforcement  of  law  and  not  with
      legislation.  As the “Jugaad” is  a  vehicle  within  the  meaning  of
Section 2(28)
of the Act.
8.    We have considered the rival submissions made by learned counsel
      for the parties and perused the record.
So far as the legislation  by  the  court  is  concerned,  as  a
      corollary to the doctrine of separation  of  powers,  a  judge  merely
      applies the law that it gets from the legislature.  Consequently,  the
      Anglo-Saxon legal tradition has insisted that the judge only  reflects
      the law regardless of the anticipated consequences, considerations  of
      fairness or public policy.  He is simply not authorised to legislate.
9.
In kindred spirit, in
M. Nagaraj & Ors.  v.  Union  of  India  &
      Ors.
, AIR 2007 SC 71, Justice Kapadia, writing for the  Constitutional
      Bench, observed:
“The Constitution is not an ephemeral legal document embodying a
           set of legal rules for the passing hour. It sets out  principles
           for an expanding future and is intended to endure  for  ages  to
           come and consequently to be adopted to  the  various  crisis  of
           human  affairs.  .  .  .  A  constitutional  provision  must  be
           construed not in a narrow and constricted sense but  in  a  wide
           and liberal manner so as  to  anticipate  and  take  account  of
           changing  conditions  and  purposes  so  that  a  constitutional
           provision does not get fossilized but remains flexible enough to
           meet the newly emerging problems and challenges.”
10.   Accordingly, in
State of U.P. & Ors. v. Jeet S.  Bisht  &  Anr.
,
      (2007) 6 SCC 586, even  though the  matter  was  referred  to  another
      Bench, owing to a split decision—Justice S.B.  Sinha  aptly  described
      the modern understanding of the separation of powers thus:
“Separation  of  power  in  one  sense  is  a  limit  on  active
           jurisdiction of each organ. But it has another deeper  and  more
           relevant  purpose:  to  act  as  check  and  balance  over   the
           activities of other organs. Thereby the active  jurisdiction  of
           the organ is not challenged; nevertheless there are  methods  of
           prodding to communicate the  institution  of  its  excesses  and
           shortfall in duty. . . .Separation of power  doctrine  has  been
           reinvented in modern times. . . .  The  modern  view,  which  is
           today gathering momentum in Constitutional Courts world over, is
           not only to demarcate the realm of  functioning  in  a  negative
           sense, but also to define the minimum content of the  demarcated
           realm of functioning.”
11.
In
Dayaram v. Sudhir Batham & Ors.
,  (2012)  1  SCC  333,  this
      Court doubted the competence of this Court to issue  such  directions,
      which were allegedly to  be  legislative  in  nature.  Therefore,  the
      matter was referred to a larger bench, and  such  larger  bench  held,
      that in exercise of the powers conferred upon it  by
Article  32
r/w
Article 142
of the Constitution, the directions issued by  this  Court
      were valid and laudable, as the same had been made to fill the  vacuum
      that existed in the absence of any legislation, to  ensure  that  only
      genuine SC/ST and OBC candidates would be able to secure the  benefits
      of certificates issued, and that bogus candidates would be  kept  out.
      Simply filling up an existing vacuum till the legislature  chooses  to
      make  appropriate laws, does not amount to taking over  the  functions
      of the legislature.
12.   In its activist streak, this Court has also imparted new  vigour
      to the process of constitutional interpretation.  For  instance,  this
      Court has insightfully identified
Article  32
as  the  constitutional
      provision that provides for the enforcement of fundamental  rights  in
      areas of  legislative vacuum. Not only has it  held  that  fundamental
      rights are  limitations  upon  the  State  power,  but  the  right  to
      constitutional remedies is itself a  fundamental  right  enshrined  in
Article 32
of the Constitution, and in the case of an infringement  of
      a fundamental right by the State, an aggrieved party can approach this
      Court for a remedy.
13.
In
Vishaka & Ors. v. State of Rajasthan  &  Ors.
,  AIR  1997  SC
      3011, this Court held:
“In view of the above,  and  the  absence  of  enacted  law  to
           provide for the effective enforcement of the basic  human  right
           of gender equality and guarantee against sexual  harassment  and
           abuse, more  particularly  against  sexual  harassment  at  work
           places,  we  lay  down  the  guidelines  and   norms   specified
           hereinafter for  due  observance  at  all  workplaces  or  other
           institutions, until a legislation is enacted  for  the  purpose.
           This is done in exercise of the power available under
Article 32
of the Constitution for enforcement of  the  fundamental  rights
           and it is further emphasised that this would be treated  as  the
           law  declared  by  this  Court  under
Article   141
of   the
           Constitution.”
14.   Providing further reinforcement to the
Article 32
jurisprudence,
      in
Vineet Narain v. Union of India
, AIR 1998 SC 889, this Court  noted
      that the issuance of guidelines and directions, in the exercise of the
      powers under
Articles 32
and
142
, has become an integral part  of  our
      constitutional  jurisprudence.  It  also  pointed  out  that  such  an
      exercise of powers was absolutely necessary to fill the void in  areas
      with legislative vacuum. In addition, the Court noted:
“As pointed out in
Vishaka
(supra),  it  is  the  duty  of  the
           executive to fill the vacuum by  executive  orders  because  its
           field is co-terminus with that the legislature, and where  there
           is inaction even by  the  executive  for  whatever  reason,  the
           judiciary must  step  in,  in  exercise  of  its  constitutional
           obligations under the aforesaid provisions to provide absolution
           till such time as the legislature acts to perform  its  role  by
           enacting proper legislation to cover the field.
On this basis, we now proceed to give the directions  enumerated
           hereafter for rigid compliance till such time as the legislature
           steps  in  to  substitute  them  by  proper  legislation.  These
           directions made under
Article  32
read  with
Article  142
to
           implement the rule  of  law  wherein  the  concept  of  equality
           enshrined in
Article 14
is embedded, have the force of law under
Article 141
and by virtue of
Article 144
it is the duty  of  all
           authorities, civil and judicial, in the territory  of  India  to
           act in aid of this Court.”


      (See also: L.K. Pandey v. Union of India & Anr., AIR 1986 SC 272;
D.K.
      Basu v. State of West Bengal
, AIR 1997 SC 610;  Ramamurthy v. State of
      Karnataka, AIR 1997 SC 1739; Supreme Court
Bar Association v. Union of
      India
, AIR 1998 SC 1895; and
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v.  Rajesh  Ranjan
,
      AIR 2005 SC 972).
15.   Thus, the aforesaid cases clearly  reveal  that  the  courts  in
      India have not  violated  the  mandatory  constitutional  requirement,
      rather  they  have  only  issued  certain  directions  to   meet   the
      exigencies. Some of them are admittedly legislative in nature, but the
      same have been issued only to fill up the existing  vacuum,  till  the
      legislature enacts a particular law to deal with  the  situation.   In
      view of the same, it is permissible to issue  directions  if  the  law
      does not provide a solution of a problem, as an interim measure,  till
      the proper law is enacted by the legislature.
We may also issue necessary directions as an interim measure, if
      the need so arisen.
16.
The Act
replaced the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1939
, in  view  of  the
      changes in transport technology,  pattern  of  passenger  and  freight
      movements,  taking  into  consideration  the  road  safety  standards,
      pollution control measures, standards in transportation  of  hazardous
      and explosive materials.
17.
In
M.K. Kunhimohammed v. P.A. Ahmedkutty &  Ors.
,  AIR  1987  SC
      2158, this Court has made certain suggestions to raise  the  limit  of
      compensation payable as a result of vehicular accidents in respect  of
      death and permanent disablement in the event of their being  no  proof
      of fault on the part of the person involved in the accident  and  also
      in hit and  run  motor  accidents.   In  this  case,  the  court  also
      suggested the removal of certain disparities in the liability  of  the
      insurer to pay compensation. The said recommendations/suggestions were
      also taken into consideration and incorporated in the Act.
18.   The object of bringing and  repealing the Act 1939 had  been  to
      rationalise  certain  definitions  with  additions  of   certain   new
      definitions of new types of vehicles, strict  procedures  relating  to
      grant of driving licenses and period of validity thereof; standards of
      anti-pollution control devices; provisions  for  issuance  of  fitness
      certificates of vehicles and provision for enhancing  compensation  in
      case of no fault liability and in hit and run vehicular accidents  and
      also maintenance of State register for driving licenses  and  vehicles
      registration.
19.
Section 2(2)
of the Act defines articulated vehicle which  means
      a motor vehicle to which a semi-trailer  is  attached;
Section  2(34)
defines public place;
Section  2(44)
defines  `tractor’  as  a  motor
      vehicle which is not itself constructed to  carry  any  load;
Section
      2(46)
defines  `trailer’ which means any vehicle, other than  a  semi-
      trailer and a side-car, drawn or intended  to  be  drawn  by  a  motor
      vehicle.
Section 3
of  the  Act  provides  for  necessity  for  driving
      license;
Section 5
provides  for  responsibility  of  owners  of  the
      vehicle for contravention of
Sections 3
and
4
;
Section 6
provides  for
      restrictions on the holding of driving license;
Section  56
provides
      for  compulsion  for  having  certificate  of  fitness  for  transport
      vehicles;
Section 59
empowers the State to fix the age  limit  of  the
      vehicles;
Section 66
provides for necessity for  permits  to  ply  any
      vehicle for any commercial purpose;
Section 67
empowers the  State  to
      control road transport;
Section 112
provides  for  limits  of  speed;
Sections 133
and
134
imposes a duty on the owners and the  drivers  of
      the vehicles in case of accident and injury to a person;
Section  146
provides that no person shall use any vehicle at a public place unless
      the vehicle is  insured.   In  addition  thereto,  the  Motor  Vehicle
      Taxation Act provides for imposition of passenger  tax  and  road  tax
      etc.
20.
Section 2(28)
of the Act defines “Motor Vehicle” as under:
“Motor Vehicle” or “vehicle” means any  mechanically  propelled
           vehicle  adapted  for  use  upon  roads  whether  the  power  of
           propulsion is transmitted thereto from an external  or  internal
           source and includes a chassis to  which  a  body  has  not  been
           attached and a trailer; but does not include a  vehicle  running
           upon fixed rails or a vehicle of a special type adapted for  use
           only in a factory or in any other enclosed premises or a vehicle
           having less than four wheels fitted with engine capacity of  not
           exceeding twenty five cubic centimeters.”

          (Emphasis added)


            Thus, any vehicle which is mechanically  propelled  and  adapted
      for use upon roads and does not fall within  the  exceptions  provided
      therein, is a Motor Vehicle within the meaning of
Section 2(28)
of the
      Act.
21.
In
Natwar Parikh & Co. Ltd. v. State of Karnataka &   Ors.
,  AIR
      2005 SC 3428, this Court dealt  with  the  issue  while  dealing  with
      “Tractor” and held as under:
“Under
Section 61
of the 1988 Act, which comes within Chapter IV
           dealing with registration of  motor  vehicles,  registration  of
           trailers  is  made  compulsory.   Under
Section   61(2)
,   the
           registration mark assigned  to  a  trailer  is  required  to  be
           displaced on the side of the drawing  vehicle.  In  the  present
           case, we are not concerned with  tractors  in  the  conventional
           sense. Even the legislature has used the word "drawing  vehicle"
in place of tractors. Under
Section 61(3)
, it is  provided  that
           no person shall drive a motor vehicle  to  which  a  trailer  is
           attached unless the registration mark of the  motor  vehicle  is
           displayed on the trailer. Similarly, under
Section 66
in Chapter
           V which refers to control of transport vehicles, no owner  of  a
           motor vehicle  can  use  the  vehicle  as  a  transport  vehicle
           carrying passengers or goods without  a  permit.  Under
Section
           66(2)
, the holder of a goods carriage permit may use the vehicle
           for drawing any trailer. Therefore, under the
M.V.  Act,  1988
,
           the Parliament has kept in  mind  the  existence  of  a  vehicle
           classifiable as "tractor-trailer"…
Section 2(28)
is a comprehensive definition  of  the  words
           "motor vehicle". Although, a  "trailer"  is  separately  defined
           under
Section 2(46)
to mean any vehicle drawn or intended to  be
           drawn by motor vehicle, it is still included into the definition
           of the words "motor vehicle" under
Section 2(28)
. Similarly, the
           word "tractor" is defined in
Section  2(44)
to  mean  a  motor
           vehicle which is not  itself  constructed  to  carry  any  load.
           Therefore, the words "motor vehicle" have been  defined  in  the
           comprehensive sense by the legislature. Therefore,  we  have  to
           read the words "motor vehicle" in the  broadest  possible  sense
           keeping in mind that the Act has been enacted in order  to  keep
           control over motor vehicles, transport vehicles etc. A  combined
           reading of the definitions under
Section 2
, …….. shows that  the
           definition  of  "motor  vehicle"   includes   any   mechanically
           propelled vehicle apt for use upon  roads  irrespective  of  the
           source of power and  it  includes  a  trailer.  Therefore,  even
           though a trailer is drawn by a motor vehicle, it by itself being
           a motor vehicle, the tractor- trailer would constitute a  "goods
           carriage" under
Section 2(14)
and  consequently,  a  "transport
           vehicle" under
Section 2(47)
. The test to be applied in  such  a
           case  is  whether  the  vehicle  is  proposed  to  be  used  for
           transporting goods from one place to another. When a vehicle  is
           so  altered  or  prepared  that  it  becomes  apt  for  use  for
           transporting goods, it can be stated that it is adapted for  the
           carriage of goods. Applying the above  test,  …….  the  tractor-
           trailer …… falls under
Section 2(14)
as a "goods  carriage"  and
           consequently,  it  falls  under  the  definition  of  "transport
           vehicle" under
Section 2(47)
of the M.V. Act, 1988.”
22.     The Tractor is a machine run by diesel or petrol. It is a self-
      propelled vehicle for hauling other vehicles. It is used for different
      purposes. It is also used for agricultural purposes, along with  other
      implements; such as harrows, ploughs, tillers, blade-terracers,  seed-
      drills etc. It is a self-propelled vehicle capable of pulling alone as
      defined under the definition of  Motor  Vehicles.  It  does  not  fall
      within any of the exclusions as defined under the Act. Thus, it  is  a
      Motor Vehicle in terms of the definition under
Section  2(28)
of  the
      Act, which definition has been adopted by the Act.  So,  even  without
      referring to the definition of the Tractor, if the definition  of  the
      Motor Vehicle as given under the Act is strictly construed, even  then
      the Tractor is a Motor Vehicle as defined under the Act.  The  Tractor
      is not only used for agricultural purposes but is also used for  other
      purposes as stated above.  Therefore,  it  cannot  be  said  that  the
      Tractor in its popular meaning is only used for agricultural  purposes
      and, thus, is not a Motor  Vehicle  as  defined  under  the  Act.  The
      Tractor is a Motor Vehicle is also proved  by  this  definition  under
Section 2(44)
of the Act. Different types of Motor Vehicles have  been
      defined under the provisions of the Act, and the  Tractor  is  one  of
      them. Thus, considering the question from any angle, the Tractor is  a
      Motor Vehicle as defined under the Act.
23.
Section 3
of the Act casts an obligation on a driver to hold  an
      effective driving license for the type of vehicle which he intends  to
      drive.
Section 10
of  the  Act  enables  the  Central  Government  to
      prescribe forms of driving licenses for various categories of vehicles
      mentioned in sub-section (2)  of  the  said  Section.  The  definition
      clause in
Section 2
of the Act defines various categories of  vehicles
      which are covered in broad  types  mentioned  in  sub-section  (2)  of
Section 10
. They are 'goods carriage', 'heavy goods  vehicle',  'heavy
      passenger motor vehicle', 'invalid carriage', 'light  motor  vehicle',
      'maxi-cab', 'medium goods vehicle', 'medium passenger motor  vehicle',
      'motor-cab', 'motorcycle', 'omnibus', 'private service vehicle', 'semi-
      trailer',  'tourist  vehicle',  'tractor',  'trailer'  and  'transport
      vehicle'.
24.   The Allahabad High Court in Writ Tax No. 573 of 2011-
Kishun Ram
      v. State of U.P. & Ors.
, held that ‘Jugaad’ was squarely covered under
      the definition of motor vehicles as specified under
Section  2(28)
of
      the Act, since it was mechanically propelled adapted for use  on  road
      and hence other relevant provisions of the  Act/rules were applicable.
      The Court further directed that as the said  vehicle  did  not  comply
      with the provisions of the Act/Rules, the seizure effected by the U.P.
      authorities could not be interfered with by the court.
25.   Further, in Writ Petition No. 6611(M/B) of 2005 -  Avnish  Kumar
      v. State of U.P. & Ors.  decided  on  23.2.2011,  the  Allahabad  High
      Court has issued directions to the  statutory  authorities  to  ensure
      compliance of the provisions of the Act and the rules, and to  prevent
      the illegal plying of such vehicles, the  statutory  Authorities  must
      take effective measures in conformity with the statutory rules.
26.   Learned standing counsel appearing for the State of Haryana  has
      submitted that even the Punjab and Haryana High Court while delivering
      the judgment as early as 29.3.1995 had directed the State  authorities
      to ensure that no ‘Jugaad’ shall be permitted to ply in the  State  of
      Haryana  under  any  circumstance.  The  relevant  part  of  the  said
      judgment reads as under:
“An interim direction is issued that no  such  Jugars  shall  be
           permitted to ply in the State of Haryana under any circumstance.
           All such Jugars being plied shall be seized by the concerned law
           enforcing agencies of the State. Since  the  aforesaid  vehicles
           are being plied against the provisions of law and these vehicles
           are not recognised under the
Motor Vehicles Act
, the same cannot
           be released in favour of a person, who is not even  admitted  to
           be the registered owner of such vehicle. Despite directions,  we
           have not been intimated as to  how  such  unauthorised  vehicles
           were ordered to be released and by whom. Prima facie, it appears
           to us that the aforesaid Jugars could not be released either  by
           the law enforcing agencies or by the Magistrates.”
                                                            (Emphasis added)
27.   As such ‘Jugaads’ were being plied against the provisions of the
      Act and the rules framed under it, and in case any ‘Jugaad’  is  found
      on the road and is seized by the police authorities, it could  not  be
      released in favour of its owner either by the law enforcing agency  or
      even by  the  Magistrate.   Plying  of  such  vehicles  was  in  utter
      disregard/violation of the provisions of the Act and the rules  framed
      thereunder.
28.   As to whether a particular  vehicle  can  be  defined  as  motor
      vehicle in terms of
Section 2(28)
of the Act, is to be  determined  on
      the facts of each case  taking  into  consideration  the  use  of  the
      vehicle and its suitability for being used upon the road. Once  it  is
      found to be suitable for being used on  the  road,  it  is  immaterial
      whether it runs on the public road or private road,  for  the  reason,
      that actual user for a particular purpose, is no  criteria  to  decide
      the name.  Definition of motor  vehicle  takes  within  its  ambit,  a
      dumper and tractor.  Tractor which is used basically for  agricultural
      purpose and a dumper is used in the factory premises, can suitable  be
      adapted for being used on the road,  therefore,  they  will  meet  the
      requirement of definition of motor vehicle under
Section 2(28)
of  the
      Act.  The word `only’ used in
Section 2(28)
of the Act  clearly  shows
      that the exemption is confined only to those kinds of  vehicles  which
      are exclusively being used in a factory or  in  any  closed  premises.
      Thus, a vehicle which is not adapted for use upon the road, is only to
      be excluded.
29.   However, Shri S.C. Maheshwari, learned senior counsel  appearing
      for the  applicant  could  not  satisfactorily  reply  as  under  what
      circumstances,  if  the  tractor  which  is   exclusively   used   for
      agricultural purpose, does  require  registration  and  insurance  and
      driver also require a driving license, why the same  provisions  would
      not apply in case of `Jugaad’.
30.   ‘Jugaad’ does not require the permit,  insurance  or  a  driving
      licence for its driver. There is no specification  for  its  body.  It
      does not require fitness certificate. However, passenger vehicle has a
      upper limit of number of passengers it can carry. The same remains the
      position for the goods vehicle as there is  a  specification  for  the
      maximum load it can carry. The ‘Jugaad’  is  not  liable  to  pay  any
      passenger or road tax like other vehicles.
31. In view of  the  above,  as  the  `Jugaad’  is  covered  in  the
           definition of the motor vehicle under
Section 2(28)
of the  Act,
           the statutory authorities  cannot  escape  from  their  duty  to
           enforce the law  and  restrain  the  plying  of  `Jugaad’.   The
           statutory authorities must ensure that  `Jugaad’  can  be  plied
           only after meeting the requirements of the Act.   The  same  has
           become a menace to public safety as  they  are  causing  a  very
           large number of accidents.  ‘Jugaads’ are not  insured  and  the
           owners of the `Jugaad’  generally  do  not  have  the  financial
           capacity to pay compensation to persons who  suffer  disablement
           and to dependents of those, who lose life. Thus, considering the
           gravity of the circumstances,  the  statutory  authorities  must
           give strict adherence to the circular referred to hereinabove by
           the Central Government.
32.   However, we clarify that it is open to the statutory authorities
      to make exemptions by issuing a notification/circular specifically  if
      such a vehicle is exclusively used for agricultural purposes  but  for
      that sufficient specifications have to be provided so that  it  cannot
      be used for commercial purposes.
The matter is closed now.
………………………………..................................J.
                                    (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)




                           ………………………………...................................J.
                                          (FAKKIR MOHAMED IBRAHIM KALIFULLA)


      NEW DELHI,
      May 10, 2013.
-----------------------
21