[Cites
6
, Cited by
11
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Commissioner Of Income-Tax, Madras vs Krishnamma And Co., Gudur on 15 April, 1955
Equivalent citations: AIR1955AP262
Author:
Chief Justice
Bench:
Chief Justice
JUDGMENT
 

  Subba Rao, C.J.
(1) The Income-tax Appellate Tribunal, Madras Bench"B" has  referred the following question under
Section 66 (1)
, Income-tax Act to the High Court of Judicaqture, Madras:
"Whether it is  open to the Income-tax Officer, after holding that a firm is genuine, to pass an order refusing registration under the provisions of
S. 26-A
, Income-tax Act purporting  to be under
Section 23
of the Act".
The reference has been transferred to this  Court after its constitution.
(2) The assessee firm had five partners, one of whom was a minor represented by his father and  guardian. The partnership was reduced to writ-guardian. The partnership was reduced to writing and it was registered under
S. 26-A
of the Act for  the assessment year 1949-50. For the assessment  year 1950-51, an appslication ofr the renewal of  registration of the firm was filed  under  Section 26-A of the act on 30-9-1950. As objection was taken to that deed on the ground that one of the  partners was a minor, a fresh deed of partnership  was executed on 12-10-1950 byall the partners including thequondam minor as by that time he also became a major.
For the assessment year 1950-51 as the assessee made default underSection 22 (4) of the Act, he  made the assessment underS. 23 (4). On the  same day, he passed an order on the application  made under Section 26-A refusing registration on  the ground that the deed was illegal as the minor  was made liable to shasre thelosses. He also  made an observation at the end of the order to the following effect:
"At any rate I am unable  to register the firm now inasmuch as the assessment of the firm is made under
S. 23 (4)
of the Act".
When theassessee preferred an appeal against that order,, it was dismissed by the Assistant Appellate Commissioner. The assessee preferred an appeal to the Tribunal. The Tribunal held that the  partnership deed was valid on the ground that  thedocument should be viewed as conferring only the benefits of the partnership on the minor. Indeed the correctness of this position was not canvassed on behalf  of the Income-tax Officer before them. They further held that the order refusing  registration was not made under
Section  23 (4)
of the Act, and as the said deed was othewise valid, it should have been registered under
Section 26-A
of the Act.
On the  aforesaid facts, at the instance of the   Commissioner of Incoem-tax the aforesaid question was referred to the High Court.
(3) Learned Counsel for the Commissioner contended that the order was made under
Section 23  (4)
of theAct, and therefore, though the application was properly made and though he was  satisfied that the firm was in existence and was validly constituted, the Income-tax Officer was within his rights in refusing registration.
(4) To appreeciate the contention of the learned Counsel, the relevant provisions of the Act may be read:
"Section 26-A. Application may be made  to the Income-tax Officer on behalf of any  firm  constituted under an instrument of partnership specifying the individual shares of the parnters, for registration for the purposes of this Act and of any other  enactment for the time being in force relating to income-tax or Super-tax.
(2) The application shall be made by such person or persons and at such times and  shall contain such particulars and shall be insuch form and  be verified in such manner as may be prescribed, and  it shall be dealt with by the Income-tax Officr in such manner as may be prescribed."
The manner of disposal of such an application is prescribed by Rr. 2 to 6-B the Income-tax Rules. Rule 4 says:
"It on receipt of the application referred to in R. 3 the Income-tax Officer is satisfied that there is or was a firm in existence constituted as shown in the instrument of partnership and that the application has been properly made, he shall enter in writing at thefoot of theinstrument or certified copy as the case may be, certificate in the following form, namely:
"This  instrument of partnership--certified copy of an instrument of partnership -- has this day been registered with me, the Income-tax  Officer ..................................................... in the province of ............................. under  Section 26-A, Income-tax shall have effect for the assessment for the year ending 31st March19............................"
Sub-rule  2 of R. 4 states:
"If the Income-tax Officer is not  satisfied, he shall pass an order in writing refusing to recognise the instrument of partnership or the certified copy thereof and furnish a copy of such order to  the applicant", 
 

 The said order is made  appealable...............................................
Section 23 (4)
:--
"If any person fails to make the return required by any notice given under sub-section (2) of
Section 22
and has not made a return or a revised return under sub-section (3) of the same section  or fails to comply with all the terms of a notice issued under sub-section (4) of the same  section or having  made a return, fails to comply with all the  terms of a notice issued under sub-s. (2) of this section, the Income-tax Officer shall make the assessment to the best of his judgment and determine the sum payable by the assessee on the basis  of such assessment and in the case of  a firm, may refuse to register it or may cancel its registration if it is already registered...............................
Provided that the registration of a firm shall not be cancelled until fourteen days have  elapsed  from the issue of a notice by the  Income-tax Officer to the  firm intimating his intention to  cancel  its registration.
(5) Under the said provisions, a firm for the purpose of assessment   can applyfor its registration. Unders. 26-
A of the  Act
, if the Income-tax Officer  is satisfied that the firm is in existence as shown in the partnership deed and the application has been property made, he is bound to  register it. He can only refuse it if he is not satisfied in regard to the aforesaid particulars. But
S. 23 (4)
gives him an overriding power to refuse registration notwithstanding the fact that the conditions laid  down in R. 4 have been complied with, if he asseses  thefirm unders. 23 (4) of the Act.
Though it was suggested before us, that as one of the partners was a minor, the partnership deed was in valid, this  objection was not raised before  the Tribunal. The Tribunal proceeded on the basis that the deed should be construed as one  whereunder the minor had only been given the  benefit of the partnership. We, therefore, proceed on the basis  that the partnership deed originally filed was valid and that the conditions  laid down in R. 4 were satisfied.
If so, the Income-tax Officer was bound to register the same, unless he exercised his powers under
S. 23 (4)
of the Act.
(6) Theorder made by the Income-tax Officer does not disclose that he exercised his discretion to refuse registration under
S. 23 (4)
of  the Act. He regused registration under S. 26-A on the  ground that one of the partners was a minor, though he added the following rider to his order:
"At any rate, I am unable to register the firm now inasmuch as the assessment of the firm is made under
s. 23 (4)
of the Act"
(7) A perusal of the entire order clearlyshows that the Income-tax Officer refused registration as,  in his view, the plrovisions  of R. 4 of the  Income-tax Rules were not complied   with. He did not exercise his discretion under
S. 23 (4)
, butmade onlya casual observation in regard to his power under that section.
Section 23 (4)
does not purport to plrescribe an automatic refusal of registration. Under that section discretionary power is conferred on the Income-tax Officer to refuse  registration in case an assessment is under that section and in this case, he did not purport to exercise his discretion one way or other.
The order must, therefore be deemed to have been made under S. 26-A (1) having regard to the  provisions of R. 4 of the  Income-tax  Rules. Though the procedure prescribed for the registration of a firm is the same, whether the order is made under  R. 4 of the Income-tax Rules or under
S. 23 (4)
an assessee cannot be made to suffer the penal consequences of an Order of the Income-tax Officer  unless an express order is made under that section. There is no such order in this case. We answer the question accordingly.
(8) Theapplicant will pay the costs of the respondent which we fix at Rs.200.
(9) Answer accordingly.