[Cites
1
, Cited by
365
]
Supreme Court of India
Manager, Icici Bank Ltd vs Prakash Kaur & Ors on 26 February, 2007
Equivalent citations: 2007 (1) JKJ 23, AIR 2007 SUPREME COURT 1349, 2007 AIR SCW 1667, 2007 (3) ALL LJ 245, 2007 (3) AIR KAR R 128, 2007 CLC 465 (SC), (2007) 2 CURLJ(CCR) 572, (2007) 2 CTC 334 (SC), (2007) 1 JCC 681 (SC), (2007) 3 JCR 175 (SC), (2007) 36 OCR 815, 2007 CRILR(SC&MP) 264, (2007) 52 ALLINDCAS 113 (SC), 2007 (3) SCALE 507, 2007 (2) SCC 711, 2007 (1) JCC 681, 2007 (2) CALCRILR 315, 2007 (2) CTC 334, (2007) 1 CURCRIR 538, (2007) 2 NIJ 458, (2007) 2 BANKJ 729, (2007) 2 CAL HN 63, (2007) 2 CHANDCRIC 240, (2007) 1 KER LJ 846, (2007) 1 MAD LJ(CRI) 1031, (2007) 2 BANKCAS 226, (2007) 1 MAD LW 880, (2007) 138 DLT 248, (2007) 136 COMCAS 327, (2007) 1 CRIMES 407, (2007) 3 CIVLJ 860, 2007 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 231, 2007 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 264, (2007) 1 MADLW(CRI) 223, (2007) 2 MAD LJ 854, (2007) 1 ORISSA LR 472, (2007) 2 RAJ CRI C 751, (2007) 2 RAJ LW 1229, (2007) 2 RECCRIR 76, (2007) 3 ANDHLD 79, (2007) 2 SUPREME 422, (2007) 2 ALLCRIR 2023, (2007) 3 SCALE 507, (2007) 2 UC 850, (2007) 67 ALL LR 179, (2007) 3 ALLCRILR 207, (2007) 78 CORLA 30, (2007) 2 RAJ CRI C 757, (2007) 2 BANKCLR 4
Author:
Ar. Lakshmanan
Bench:
Ar. Lakshmanan
,
Altamas Kabir
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  267 of 2007

PETITIONER:
Manager, ICICI Bank Ltd

RESPONDENT:
Prakash Kaur & Ors

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 26/02/2007

BENCH:
Dr. AR. Lakshmanan & Altamas Kabir

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
(Arising Out of SLP (Crl.) No. 15 OF 2007)

Dr. AR. Lakshmanan, J.
I had the privilege of perusing the judgment proposed by 
my learned Brother - Hon'ble Mr. Justice Altamas Kabir.  
While respectfully concurring with the conclusion arrived by 
the learned Judge, I would like to add the following few 
paragraphs:-
1) Regarding the role of Recovery Agents  use of abusive 
language  due process of law RBI guidelines.
FACTORS:
?	The issue of Banks employing alternate means of 
recovery other than by due process of law i.e., either 
through Courts, Tribunals, Adalats or Commissions is an 
issue that has to be viewed from two angles (1) from the 
angle of the common man and (2) from the angle of the 
bank.
REASONS:
?	First of all, the entrance of the multi national banks into 
the country has spread the culture of Credit Cards, 
Loans on an unimaginable level where rather than the 
rich, it is the middle class, the lower middle class and the 
lower class who are at the receiving end of the bonanzas 
promised by the Banks.
?	Inadequate information on the Credit Card application, 
Loan Applications, Advertisements or even while meeting 
the bankers in person in respect of the lending rates and 
hidden charges, leads to this class of people being lured 
into the buying of the Credit Cards or taking of the home 
loan or education loan without knowing the ramifications 
of non-payment and default.
?	The first mistake here is most definitely on the part of the 
bank who does not believe in educating the masses 
regarding the promises.  Once the credit card or loan is 
taken and there appears a default, then the witch-hunt 
begins.
?	Now the bank is the aggressor and the public is the 
victim.  The first step to recovery of the money due is 
through the so called RECOVERY/COLLECTION 
AGENTS.  A very dignified term used for paid recovery 
agents who are individual and independent contractors 
hired by the Banks to trace the defaulters and to both 
physically, mentally and emotionally torture and force 
them into submitting their dues.
?	A man's self respect, stature in society are all immaterial 
to the agent who is only primed at recovery.  This is the 
modernized version of Shylock's pound of flesh.  No 
explanation is given regarding the interest charge and the 
bank takes cover under the guise of the holder of the 
card or loan having signed the agreement whose fine 
print is never read or explained to the owner. 
?	When a harassed man approaches the Court or the police 
station he is not armed with a recording phone and finds 
it difficult to give evidence of the abuse he has suffered.  
Here the bank gets away with everything.  Young and Old 
members of the family threatened on streets, institutions 
and also at home at godforsaken hours by these agents 
who have the full support of their contractor bank.  The 
stance taken by the bank in any suit alleging such 
incidents is that no such agent has been appointed by 
them or their agents do not misbehave in the manner 
aforesaid and if found guilty the agents have to bear the 
cross and the bank gets away scot free.
?	Using of the abusive language for recovery is the norm of 
the day for most nationalized or multi national bank or 
non-nationalized bank.  Though some are smart enough 
to record the abuse and proceed to establish the same 
through Court of Law, most of them are unfortunate not 
to have recourse to it.  Such people form the majority and 
such litigations are pending in large volumes before the 
Civil and Consumer Courts.  Again the banks escape 
liability since these agents are not salaried employees of 
the bank and hence not directly liable for anything. 
?	Taking it from the angle of the common man the inflow of 
software money and high salaries has resulted in 
uncontrolled expenditure.  Rather than utility it is a 
fashion to carry a card for it makes a statement 
depending on the type of card one carries. 
?	To maintain ones image one pays the price of utilizing the 
card without realizing that even a single day's delay in 
payment results in more than 100 to 200 rupees being 
charged as default and penalty charges, which if 
accumulates over a month, results in the charges 
exceeding the actual payment due.
?	As for loans, when litigation is commenced by the 
customer against the bank or an institution, then they 
refuse to divulge the true statement of account stating 
that it will be produced in court.  This gives ample scope 
for manipulation.
SUGGESTIONS  
?	Chronic defaulters should mean a default of a maximum 
of three months if intermittent payments have been 
made.
?	It is mandatory that the banks be held vicariously liable 
for such acts of agents.  These agents have to be 
identified as registered agents of the bank and should be 
bought directly under the purview of the RBI. 
?	It may be useful that in view of the enormous amount of 
litigation pending and being filed against the banks that 
the recovery agents be made employees of the bank and 
the bank be held liable directly for all actions of such 
employees.
?	Also every statement sent by the bank should disclose 
clearly the rate of interest and the default interest and 
penalty charges separately calculated and added to the 
amount pending and due by the customer.
?	At the very first month of default, the card should 
automatically be terminated by the bank to prevent 
further use/misuse.
?	At the time of issuance of card itself, the issuance letter 
should contain every single charge being made, explained 
in simple terms and the penalty the customer will bear 
for such non-payment.
?	These agents should be held responsible for every 
background check done on the person to whom the card 
is issued and the defaulter should be made liable along 
with the agent.  This would ensure that the agent does 
not source illegal or fraudulent customer. 
?	This is dealt with elaborately in the RBI guidelines issued 
on 21.11.2005 but which still remains only on paper and 
is not being followed.
2) HIRE PURCHASE:
FACTORS:
Very many banks and more importantly banks like ICICI have 
extended liberal credit facilities for purchase of vehicles 
whether two wheelers or four wheelers, more the number the 
targets are achieved.  This results in a certain amount of 
default cases.  The default can be two-fold  (1) genuine and 
(2) fraudulent.  Both, in the case of genuine and fraudulent 
the method usually adopted by these institutions is to engage 
thug/hooligan/gangster for recovery or the two wheelers or 
four wheelers.  Many times even notice is not given to them.
They seize the vehicles even in public places deliberately to 
cause embarrassment.  There is no codification till date.  This 
requires immediate attention.  In all the cases of hire 
purchase, advance cheques for a period of 36 months or 48 
months or 60 months are obtained and since there is no 
proper collection process, they not only seize the vehicles but 
also continue to present the cheques merely to harass the 
customers.  A recent incident has taken place when the 
Recovery Agent had gone and threatened a school going child 
for the money due by the father.
Unless we have an effective supervisory system the abuse 
will continue.
SUGGESTION
Most of the non-banking financial institutions adopt the 
arbitration route for the purpose of getting a commissioner of 
the Court appointed for seizing the vehicles.  
The most important aspect would be a broad guideline for 
fixing the targets, whether they be for lending or for recovery.  
This would result in a proper balance between the extreme 
differences of working conditions between the Multinational 
Commercial Banks and Nationalized and Non-nationalized 
Banks who are doing the very same credit business with  
dignity.
3) Agency systems to be abolished 
FACTORS
Though there are voices raised stating that the agency system 
should be abolished, this has to be examined from the view of 
the bank for whom this system has proved to be extremely 
productive in view of chronic and regular defaulters and 
customers who have a premeditated intention of cheating the 
bank.  Such people are identified easily by the agents and 
produced physically before the bank who resort to all means 
including the local police help to force such customers to 
repay their dues.
REASON  
The delay in the Courts and the in-effective and corrupt police 
structure enables the bank to seek the help of such agencies 
which proves to be cost effective and less cumbersome.
SUGGESTION 
?	Abolition of the system is not the answer but effective 
control over the agency by the respective banks is 
essential.
?	Even though, the Reserve Bank of India Guidelines 
permit the use of an Independent Agency, no prescribed 
qualification or licence is granted. 
?	If there could be a guideline only licensed recovery agents 
would be employed and misuse of the agents as against 
the borrowers can be eradicated.
?	License also should be granted after the respective agents 
get through in a course conducted by the banks. 
?	In accordance with the RBI Guidelines, in any proven 
cases the license of the agent should be cancelled with 
penal consequences on them.
?	This could be the best alternative if the banks do not 
come forward to employ their own personnel and depute 
them for recovery of outstandings.
4)	RBI Guidelines
?	The widely published and circulated guidelines dated 
21.11.2005 has constituted a working group on 
regulatory mechanisms and for fair trade practices. 
?	It came into effect as of 30th November, 2005 and covers 
a wide area pertaining to the rights of the customers and 
right to privacy, confidentiality, practice of debt 
collections, Redressal of grievances and monitoring 
systems to be implemented by the banks. 
?	Pursuant to this certain knowledgeable 
persons/executives aggrieved by the agencies behaviour 
took recourse through the Ombudsman. 
?	Not many are aware of this forum and the banks 
continue to be safe.
5)
Banking Regulations Act
?
Banking Regulations Act
does not, in any way, provide 
the details of the conduct of the bank business.
?	It only contemplates the registration of a bank, 
incorporation of a bank and thereafter puts the bank 
under the control of RBI.
?	While there are guidelines both for lending and recovery 
which contemplates that no use of force or abuse is used 
in recovery proceedings, in the absence of an effective 
overseeing body, these abuses continues. 
?	Since every bank should hold a license issued to carry on 
the banking business in India by the RBI in accordance 
with the conditions imposed by the RBI, if and when both 
nationalized and MNB's violate any of the rules and 
regulations consistently over a period of time, then 
strictures ought to be imposed on such digressing banks 
to curb their high handed activities and to make them 
answerable to the general public.
?	Only this would reinstate the confidence of the masses in 
the banking system who are already burdened with the 
population of over 60 years of age having lost 
tremendously on the lowering of the interest rates.
?	The banking procedures should be people friendly at the 
same time, strict in its enforcement and educative 
enough to guide the public on the benefits of prudent 
banking and savings and at the same time, enlighten 
them on the pitfalls of borrowing or taking credit from 
institutions for various purposes, way beyond their 
means.
CONCLUSION:
On an overall assessment of the system presently existing in 
India, the Multi National Banks score over the nationalized 
banks in terms of connectivity and ease in functioning, since 
they are highly automated and efficient.  The staff too is well 
trained and well paid also.  The disadvantage here is that the 
more the pay, the greater the pressure.  Every facility is 
provided but work is extracted to the maximum irrespective of 
the age or personal circumstances.  In a nationalized bank, 
since there is no fear of immediate removal, the attitude of the 
staff is tolerant.  No effort is made to go a little more to help 
the masses.  Burden is shifted easily at the lower level.  The 
middle management and higher management are under 
tremendous pressure, since they are to achieve targets on par 
with the Multi National Banks.  Though there is job security 
and comfort in pension, there is no answerability.  This leads 
to a recalcitrant attitude and apathy.
As a conclusion, one can state that though efficiency is 
necessary, it should not be attained under pressure and this 
situation would only improve if answerability is made the 
prime criteria in both the sectors.
ADDITIONAL INPUTS

Considering the difficulties of the customers as well as 
banks, the concept to be developed is to create distinct and 
separate department for recovery. This should be manned by 
persons who will not resort to violence or force when they are 
in the process of recovery of the dues.
While the fraudulent defaulters can be dealt with by 
taking the Police help for such action, it is only when law is 
taken into the hands of the so called recovery agents,  who are 
appointed on contract basis, the issue gets aggravated. A 
separate wing, wherein appropriate training is given in 
accordance with RBI guidelines would facilitate the bank in its 
recovery process and also would provide more responsibilities 
to the persons so engaged.
Yet another suggestion would be that of loans whether 
they are Personal Loans or Credit Cards or Housing Loan with 
less than Rs.10 lakhs exposure, can be referred to Lok Adalat 
which can be specially created for resolving the issues between 
the banks and the borrowers. In fact, the Lok Adalat should be 
used as an effective machinery to resolve the issues and 
concentrate with reference to keeping the fine balance between 
the Banks and Borrowers.
If the Agency System is inescapable, then the Agency 
must be coupled with a license issued after conducting 
examination. Appropriate training should be given to the 
agents who should have requisite qualification and maturity to 
handle delicate and sensitive situation. Merely because the 
Agency System is convenient to the banks, and has been 
approved by RBI, it should not lead to lawlessness and 
conduct resulting in challenge to rule of law.
While performance of the banks are always co-related 
with reference to its growth, its assets utilization and finally 
profit in the balance sheet, that and that alone cannot be 
relied upon, with reference to a country like India, where there 
is enormous disparity in respect of various sections of the 
society.  These are all positive steps that would bring in the 
over all balance in the working of all these institutions.
Whether it is a bank, which concentrate on higher 
segment of banking or it is a bank which concentrate upon 
middle class, lower middle class and such other segment of 
the Indian Public who look to and requires the banking 
comfort, it is not mere question of lending the money  that 
matters, but also the consequences thereafter.  The social 
responsibility is larger than the banks profit and growth ratio 
alone.
Keeping in mind the social responsibility, it is absolutely 
necessary to appoint a Special Committee who will look into 
the disparity in working conditions, at least upto the 
managerial level and make such recommendations to the RBI 
and Union of India for all remedial actions.
In conclusion, we say that we are governed by a rule of 
law in the country.  The recovery of loans or seizure of vehicles 
could be done only through legal means.  The Banks cannot 
employ goondas to take possession by force.