[Cites
14
, Cited by
293
]
Supreme Court of India
I.G. (Karmik) & Ors vs Prahalad Mani Tripathi on 27 April, 2007
Equivalent citations: 2007 AIR SCW 3305, 2007 (6) SCC 162, 2007 (4) ALJ 308, 2007 (3) AIR JHAR R 428, AIR 2007 SC (SUPP) 1264, (2007) 3 SCT 483, (2007) 3 ALLMR 866 (SC), (2007) 6 SCALE 370, (2007) 3 LAB LN 96, (2007) 4 SUPREME 256, (2007) 114 FACLR 9, (2008) 1 SERVLJ 89, (2008) 1 ESC 107, (2007) 4 SERVLR 595, (2007) 2 CURLR 818
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
,
Markandey Katju
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2208 of 2007

PETITIONER:
I.G. (Karmik) & Ors

RESPONDENT:
Prahalad Mani Tripathi

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 27/04/2007

BENCH:
S.B. Sinha & Markandey Katju

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

CIVIL APPEAL NO.    2208        OF 2007
(Arising out of SLP (C) No.  15618 of 2003) 

S.B. SINHA, J.
Leave granted.
Respondent's father Shri Narmadeshwar Mani Tripathi was a 
constable. He was in Uttar Pradesh Police Service.   He died in harness on 
2.1.1986.   Grant of appointment to a dependant of an employee who died in 
harness is governed by statutory rules, in terms whereof the appellant filed 
an application for his appointment.  He disclosed his academic qualification 
therein.    He was considered for appointment as a Constable. He was not 
found eligible therefor having not satisfied the physical standard stipulated 
under the rules. He was appointed as a Peon. He accepted the said 
appointment without any demur whatsoever. He, however filed an 
application before the Uttar Pradesh Services Tribunal, Lucknow praying for 
his absorption in the post of Constable (M) with consequential benefits from 
the date of his initial appointment. By reason of a Judgment and Order dated 
24.7.2000, the Tribunal arrived at a finding that although, ordinarily, rule of 
estoppel apply in a case of this nature, having regard to the representations 
made by him before the authorities in the instant case, the same should not 
be applied.  It directed the appellant to appoint him in Class III posts with a 
further direction that the services rendered by him in the post of ordinary 
Peon be counted towards his pensionary benefits in the class III posts.
A Writ Petition was filed before the High Court questioning the 
correctness of said order.  By reason of the impugned judgment dated 
27.11.2002, the High Court declined to interfere therewith despite 
observing;
"A word of caution, is put on record that the right to 
claim appointment under the dying in harness rules on 
compassionate ground can be neither used as a devise 
to seek employment nor it is a new mode of 
recruitment in Government service nor can be treated 
as a channel of promotion to higher post.   The 
impugned order has been passed on the basis of facts 
of the present case."
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant would submit 
that the Order of the Tribunal and consequently that of the High Court 
suffers from a manifest error in so far as they failed to take into 
consideration;
(i)	Respondent having accepted the post of a Peon, was estopped from 
claiming a higher post after a period of five years.
(ii)	The rules provided for appointment only to a post for which the 
candidate possessed the academic and other qualifications.	
	The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent, on the 
other hand, would submit that in the facts and circumstances of this case, 
this Court should not exercise its discretionary jurisdiction under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India as not only a prayer was made by the respondent 
for his appointment to a post which was commensurate with the academic 
qualifications he possessed, and the Superintendent of Police recommended 
therefor, but having regard to his alleged deficiencies in physical fitness 
only, the Police Headquarters directed his appointment only as a peon.
An employee of a State enjoys a status.   Recruitment of employees of 
the State is governed by the rules framed under a statute or the proviso 
appended to
Article 309
of the Constitution of India.   In the matter of 
appointment, the State is obligated to give effect to the constitutional scheme 
of equality as adumbrated under
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution of 
India. All appointments, therefore, must conform to the said constitutional 
scheme. This Court, however, while laying emphasis on the said proposition 
carved out an exception in favour of the children or other relatives of the 
officer who dies or who becomes incapacitated while rendering services in 
the police department.  See
Yogender Pal Singh and Others v. Union of 
India and Others
[A.I.R. 1987 SC 1015].
Public employment is considered to be a wealth.  It in terms of the 
constitutional scheme cannot be given on descent. When such an exception 
has been carved out by this Court, the same must be strictly complied with.    
Appointment on compassionate ground is given only for meeting the 
immediate hardship which is faced by the family by reason of the death of 
the bread earner.  When an appointment is made on compassionate ground, 
it should be kept confined only to the purpose it seeks to achieve, the idea 
being not to provide for endless compassion.
In
National Institute of Technology & Ors. v. Niraj Kumar Singh
[2007 (2) SCALE 525], this Court has stated the law in the following terms:-
"16.  All public appointments must be in consonance 
with
Article 16
of the Constitution of India.    Exceptions 
carved out therefore are the cases where appointments 
are to be given to the widow or the dependent children of 
the employee who died in harness.   Such an exception is 
carved out with a view to see that the family of the 
deceased employee who has died in harness does not 
become a destitute.   No appointment, therefore, on 
compassionate ground can be granted to a person other 
than those for whose benefit the exception has been 
carved out.   Other family members of the deceased 
employee would not derive any benefit thereunder."
In
State of Rajasthan v. Umrao Singh
[(1994) 6 SCC 560],  this Court 
has categorically stated that once the right is consummated, any further or 
second consideration for higher post on the ground of compassion would not 
arise.
Again in
State of Haryana and Another v. Ankur Gupta
[(2003) 7 
SCC 704], this Court held;
"6. As was observed in
State of Haryana v. Rani 
Devi
it need not be pointed out that the claim of 
the person concerned for appointment on 
compassionate ground is based on the premise that 
he was dependent on the deceased employee. 
Strictly, this claim cannot be upheld on the 
touchstone of
Article 14
or 16 of the Constitution 
of India. However, such claim is considered as 
reasonable and permissible on the basis of sudden 
crisis occurring in the family of such employee 
who has served the State and dies while in service. 
That is why it is necessary for the authorities to 
frame rules, regulations or to issue such 
administrative orders which can stand the test of
Articles 14
and
16.
Appointment on compassionate 
ground cannot be claimed as a matter of right. Die-
in-Harness Scheme cannot be made applicable to 
all types of posts irrespective of the nature of 
service rendered by the deceased employee.
In
Rani Devi
case it was held that the scheme 
regarding appointment on compassionate ground if 
extended to all types of casual or ad hoc 
employees including those who worked as 
apprentices cannot be justified on constitutional 
grounds.
In
LIC of India v. Asha Ramchhandra 
Ambekar
it was pointed out that the High Courts 
and Administrative Tribunals cannot confer 
benediction impelled by sympathetic 
considerations to make appointments on 
compassionate grounds when the regulations 
framed in respect thereof do not cover and 
contemplate such appointments.
It was noted in
Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana
that as 
a rule, in public service appointments should be 
made strictly on the basis of open invitation of 
applications and merit. The appointment on 
compassionate ground is not another source of 
recruitment but merely an exception to the 
aforesaid requirement taking into consideration the 
fact of the death of the employee while in service 
leaving his family without any means of 
livelihood. In such cases the object is to enable the 
family to get over sudden financial crisis. But such 
appointments on compassionate ground have to be 
made in accordance with the rules, regulations or 
administrative instructions taking into 
consideration the financial condition of the family 
of the deceased."
See also
Food Corporation of India & Anr. v Ram Kesh Yadav & 
Another
[JT 2007 (4) SC 1].
Respondent, thus, could be offered an appointment only to the post for 
which he was suitable.
Furthermore, Appellant accepted the said post without any demur 
whatsoever. He, therefore, upon obtaining appointment in a lower post could 
not have been permitted to turn round and contend that he was entitled for a 
higher post although not eligible therefor.   A person cannot be appointed 
unless he fulfils the eligibility criteria.   Physical fitness being an essential 
eligibility criteria, the Superintendent of Police could not have made any 
recommendation in violation of the rules.    Nothing has been shown before 
us that even the petitioner came within the purview of any provisions 
containing grant of relaxation of such qualification.   Whenever, a person 
invokes such a provision, it would be for him to show that the authority is 
vested with such a power.
The pre-requisite for making such a appointment by granting 
relaxation has been
laid down by
this Court in
Indian Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. Devki Devi and Others
[(2006) 5 SCC 523].
See 
also
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and Others v. Sajal Kumar Roy and 
Others
[(2006) 8 SCC 671].
For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgment cannot be 
sustained.  It is set aside accordingly.  The Appeal is allowed.  In the facts 
and circumstances of this case, however, there shall be no order as to costs.