[Cites
18
, Cited by
319
]
Supreme Court of India
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd vs Brij Mohan & Ors on 15 May, 2007
Equivalent citations: AIR 2007 SUPREME COURT 1971, 2007 (7) SCC 56, 2007 AIR SCW 3734, 2007 (3) SCC(CRI) 304, 2007 (7) SCALE 753, (2007) 4 RAJ LW 3013, (2007) 57 ALLINDCAS 189 (SC), (2008) 1 MAD LW 858, (2007) 5 ANDHLD 70, (2007) 115 FACLR 285, (2008) 1 LAB LN 149, (2008) 1 CURLR 35, (2007) 3 KER LT 123, (2007) 4 PUN LR 88, (2007) 3 TAC 20, (2007) 7 SCALE 753, (2007) 4 ACC 254, (2007) 3 ACJ 1909, (2007) 3 RECCIVR 271, (2007) 6 ANDH LT 314, (2007) 5 MAD LJ 312, (2007) 68 ALL LR 794, (2007) 3 ALL WC 2471
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
,
Markandey Katju
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2532 of 2007

PETITIONER:
Oriental Insurance CO. Ltd

RESPONDENT:
Brij Mohan & Ors

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 15/05/2007

BENCH:
S.B. Sinha & Markandey Katju

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2532 of  2007
[Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 10655 of 2004]

S.B. SINHA, J.
1.	Leave granted.
2.	Appellant Insurance Company is before us being aggrieved by 
and dissatisfied with the judgment and order dated 27.1.2004 passed by a 
Division Bench of the High Court of Rajasthan dismissing an appeal from 
the judgment and award dated 7.4.1999 passed by Motor Accident Claims 
Tribunal, Baran in the State of Rajasthan.
3.	First Respondent Brij Mohan filed the claim petition.  He was a 
labourer.  On or about 11.3.1998 he was travelling on a trolley attached to a 
tractor.  There exists a dispute as to whether both the tractor and the trolley 
were insured or not.  It may not be necessary to determine the said question. 
He was engaged to dig earth from a place known as Shishwali Ka Rasta.  
The earth so dug was loaded on the trolley attached to the tractor.  
Respondent and other workers were returning to the Bhatta (brick-klin).  He 
was sitting on the earth loaded on the trolley.  The tractor allegedly was 
being driven rashly and negligently by Hemraj, the driver.  He slipped down 
from the trolley, came under the wheels thereof  injuring his gall-bladder and 
left thigh, as a result whereof he suffered grievous injuries.
4.	The learned Tribunal noticed the defence raised by the appellant 
herein in the said proceedings which, inter alia, were :
(i)	the trolley was not insured, and only the tractor was insured;
(ii)	as  the  tractor  was  not  being  used  for  agricultural work,  the 
	claim petition was not maintainable.
(iii)	issuance of premium having been paid only for one person, 
	namely, the driver 	of the tractor;  no award could be passed 
	against the 	insurer.
5.	The Tribunal, however, by reason of its award, awarded a sum of Rs. 
1,96,100/- by way of compensation in favour of the respondent in respect of 
the injuries suffered by him as a result of the said accident.  An appeal, 
preferred thereagainst, as noticed hereinbefore, has been dismissed by the 
High Court by reason of the impugned judgment.
6.	Mr. M.K. Dua, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant 
submitted that the Tribunal as also the High Court committed manifest errors 
in passing the impugned Award and judgment insofar as they failed to take 
into consideration :
(i)	The tractor alone was insured and thus the claim petition was 
	not maintainable.
(ii)	In any event, Respondent no.1 was merely a gratuitous 
	passenger and thus the claim was not covered under
Section 
	147
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
(iii)	The tractor having not been used for agricultural purpose there 
	had been a violation of the conditions of contract of insurance.
7.	Ms. Indu Malhotra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent, on the other hand, submitted :
(i).	The question as to whether both the tractor and the trolley were 
	insured or not having not been raised before the Tribunal, this 
	Court should not permit the appellant to raise the said 
	contention before this Court.
(ii)	The representative of the appellant in his statement before the 
	Court admitted that putting the earth and leveling the field 
	would also be an agricultural work and thus it cannot now be 
	contended that the tractor was not being used for the said 
	purpose.
(iii)	In any event, having regard to the grievous injuries suffered by 
	the respondent, this Court should direct the appellant to pay the 
	awarded amount and recover the same from the owner of the 
	tractor and  trolley.
8.	The Tribunal in its award has, inter alia, noticed that the appellant 
herein had raised a specific defence, namely, the trolley was not insured.  It 
does not appear that the said contention of the appellant had been gone into.  
There is nothing on records to show that the owner of the tractor had 
produced any insurance cover in respect of the trolley.  It is furthermore not 
disputed that the tractor was insured only for the purpose of carrying out 
agricultural works.   The representative of the Insurance Company Mr. Hari 
Singh Meena on cross-examination merely accepted the suggestion that 
cutting the earth and levelling the field with earth would be an agricultural 
work but respondent no.1 himself categorically stated in his claim petition 
before the Tribunal stating that the earth had been dug and was being carried 
in the trolley to the brick-klin.  Evidently the earth was meant to be used 
only for the purpose of manufacturing bricks.  Digging of earth for the 
purpose of manufacture of brick-klin indisputably cannot amount to carrying 
out of the agricultural work.
9.
In
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. V. Chinnamma & Ors.
[(2004) 8 
SCC 697], this Court held :-
"14. An insurance for an owner of the goods or his 
authorised representative travelling in a vehicle became 
compulsory only with effect from 14-11-1994 i.e. from 
the date of coming into force of amending Act 54 of 
1994.
15. Furthermore, a tractor is not even a "goods carriage".
The expression goods carriage has been defined in
Section 2(14)
to mean
"any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use solely 
for the carriage of goods, or any motor vehicle not so 
constructed or adapted when used for the carriage of 
goods"
(emphasis supplied)
whereas "tractor" has been defined in
Section 2(44)
to 
mean
"a motor vehicle which is not itself constructed to carry 
any load (other than equipment used for the purpose of 
propulsion); but excludes a roadroller".
"Trailer" has been defined in
Section 2(46)
to mean
"any vehicle, other than a semi-trailer and a sidecar, 
drawn or intended to be drawn by a motor vehicle".
16. A tractor fitted with a trailer may or may not answer 
the definition of goods carriage contained in
Section 
2(14)
of the Motor Vehicles Act. The tractor was meant 
to be used for agricultural purposes. The trailer attached 
to the tractor, thus, necessarily is required to be used for 
agricultural purposes, unless registered otherwise. It may 
be, as has been contended by Mrs K. Sharda Devi, that 
carriage of vegetables being agricultural produce would 
lead to an inference that the tractor was being used for 
agricultural purposes but the same by itself would not be 
construed to mean that the tractor and trailer can be used 
for carriage of goods by another person for his business 
activities. The deceased was a businessman. He used to 
deal in vegetables. After he purchased the vegetables, he 
was to transport the same to the market for the purpose of 
sale thereof and not for any agricultural purpose. The 
tractor and trailer, therefore, were not being used for 
agricultural purposes. However, even if it be assumed 
that the trailer would answer the description of "goods 
carriage" as contained in
Section 2(14)
of the Motor 
Vehicles Act, the case would be covered by the decisions 
of this Court in Asha Rani1 and other decisions following 
the same, as the accident had taken place on 24-11-1991 
i.e. much prior to coming into force of the 1994 
amendment."
10.	Furthermore, respondent was not the owner of the tractor.  He was 
also not the driver thereof.  He was merely a passenger travelling on the 
trolley attached to the tractor.  His claim petition, therefore, could not have 
been allowed in view of the decision of this Court in
New India Assurance 
Co. Ltd. v. Asha Rani & Ors.
[(2003) 2 SCC 223] wherein the earlier 
decision of this Court in
New India Assurance Co. v. Satpal Singh
[(2000) 1 
SCC 237] was overruled.
In
Asha Rani
(supra) it was, inter alia, held :-
"25.
Section 147
of the 1988 Act, inter alia, prescribes 
compulsory coverage against the death of or bodily 
injury to any passenger of "public service vehicle".
Proviso appended thereto categorically states that 
compulsory coverage in respect of drivers and conductors 
of public service vehicle and employees carried in a 
goods vehicle would be limited to the liability under the
Workmens Compensation Act
. It does not speak of any 
passenger in a "goods carriage".
26. In view of the changes in the relevant provisions in 
the 1988 Act vis-`-vis the 1939 Act, we are of the 
opinion that the meaning of the words "any person" must 
also be attributed having regard to the context in which 
they have been used i.e. "a third party". Keeping in view 
the provisions of the 1988 Act, we are of the opinion that 
as the provisions thereof do not enjoin any statutory 
liability on the owner of a vehicle to get his vehicle 
insured for any passenger travelling in a goods vehicle, 
the insurers would not be liable therefor.
27. Furthermore, sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of
Section 147
speaks of liability which may 
be incurred by the owner of a vehicle in respect of death 
of or bodily injury to any person or damage to any 
property of a third party caused by or arising out of the 
use of the vehicle in a public place, whereas sub-clause
(ii) thereof deals with liability which may be incurred by 
the owner of a vehicle against the death of or bodily 
injury to any passenger of a public service vehicle caused 
by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in a public 
place."
[See also
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v.  Bommithi Subbhayamma and 
Others
[(
2005) 12 SCC 243 and United India Insurance Co. Ltd., Shimla v. 
Tilak Singh and Ors.
[(2006) 4 SCC 404].
11.	Although the effect in 1994 amendment in the
Motor Vehicles Act
did 
not call for consideration in
Asha Rani
(supra), a 3 Judge Bench of this 
Court had the occasion to consider the said question in
National Insurance 
Co. Ltd. Vs. Baljit Kaur & Ors.
[(2004) 2 SCC 1] in the following terms :
"17. By reason of the 1994 amendment what was added 
is "including" owner of the goods or his authorised 
representative carried in the vehicle. The liability of the 
owner of the vehicle to insure it compulsorily, thus, by 
reason of the aforementioned amendment included only 
the owner of the goods or his authorised representative 
carried in the vehicle besides the third parties. The 
intention of Parliament, therefore, could not have been 
that the words any person occurring in
Section 147
would 
cover all persons who were travelling in a goods carriage 
in any capacity whatsoever. If such was the intention, 
there was no necessity of Parliament to carry out an 
amendment inasmuch as the expression any person 
contained in sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
of
Section 147
would have included the owner of the 
goods or his authorised representative besides the 
passengers who are gratuitous or otherwise.
18. The observations made in this connection by the 
Court in Asha Rani case2 to which one of us, Sinha, J., 
was a party, however, bear repetition: (SCC p. 235, para
26)
26. In view of the changes in the relevant provisions in 
the 1988 Act vis-`-vis the 1939 Act, we are of the 
opinion that the meaning of the words any person must 
also be attributed having regard to the context in which 
they have been used i.e. a third party. Keeping in view 
the provisions of the 1988 Act, we are of the opinion that 
as the provisions thereof do not enjoin any statutory 
liability on the owner of a vehicle to get his vehicle 
insured for any passenger travelling in a goods vehicle, 
the insurers would not be liable therefor.
19. In Asha Rani2 it has been noticed that sub-clause (i) 
of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 147
of the 
1988 Act speaks of liability which may be incurred by 
the owner of a vehicle in respect of death of or bodily 
injury to any person or damage to any property of a third 
party caused by or arising out of the use of the vehicle in 
a public place. Furthermore, an owner of a passenger-
carrying vehicle must pay premium for covering the risks 
of the passengers travelling in the vehicle. The premium 
in view of the 1994 amendment would only cover a third 
party as also the owner of the goods or his authorised 
representative and not any passenger carried in a goods 
vehicle whether for hire or reward or otherwise.
12.
Interpretation of the contracts of insurance in terms of
Section 147
and
149
of the Motor Vehicles Act came up for consideration recently 
before a Division Bench of this Court in
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. 
Laxmi Narain Dhut
[2007 (4) SCALE 36], wherein it was held :-
"24. As noted above, there is no contractual relation 
between the third party and the insurer.  Because of the 
statutory intervention in terms of
Section 149
, the same 
becomes operative in essence and
Section 149
provides 
complete insulation.
25. In the background of the statutory provisions, one 
thing is crystal clear i.e. the statute is beneficial one qua 
the third party.  But that benefit cannot be extended to the 
owner of the offending vehicle.  The logic of fake licence 
has to be considered differently in respect of third party 
and in respect of own damage claims."
It was further observed :
"36. It is also well settled that to arrive at the intention of 
the legislation depending on the objects for which the 
enactment is made, the Court can resort to historical, 
contextual and purposive interpretation leaving textual 
interpretation aside.
37. Francis Bennion in his book "Statutory 
Interpretation" described "purposive interpretation" as 
under:
'A purposive construction of an enactment is one 
which gives effect to the legislative purpose by-
(a) following the literal meaning of the enactment where 
that meaning is in accordance with the legislative 
purpose, or
(b) applying a strained meaning where the literal 
meaning is not in accordance with the legislative 
purpose.'
38. More often than not, literal interpretation of a statute 
or a provision of a statute results in absurdity.  Therefore, 
while interpreting statutory provisions, the Courts should 
keep in mind the objectives or purpose for which statute 
has been enacted.  Justice Frankfurter of U.S. Supreme 
Court in an article titled as Some Reflections on the 
Reading of Statutes (47 Columbia Law Reports 527), 
observed that, "legislation has an aim, it seeks to obviate 
some mischief, to supply an adequacy, to effect a change 
of policy, to formulate a plan of Government.  That aim, 
that policy is not drawn, like nitrogen, out of the air; it is 
evidenced in the language of the statutes, as read in the 
light of other external manifestations of purpose."
[See also
The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. v. Meena Variyal  Ors.
[2007 (5) SCALE 269]
13.	However, respondent no.1 is a poor labourer.  He had suffered 
grievous injuries.  He had become disabled to a great extent.  The amount of 
compensation awarded in his favour appears to be on a lower side.  In the 
aforementioned situation, although we reject the other contentions of Ms. 
Indu Malhotra, we are inclined to exercise our extraordinary jurisdiction 
under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India so as to direct that the award 
may be satisfied by the appellant but it would be entitled to realize the same 
from the owner of the tractor and the trolley wherefor it would not be 
necessary for it to initiate any separate proceedings for recovery of the 
amount as provided for under the
Motor Vehicles Act
.
14.	It is well settled that in a situation of this nature this Court in exercise 
of its jurisdiction under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India read with
Article 136
thereof can issue  suit directions for doing complete justice to the 
parties.
15.
In
National Insurance Company Ltd. v. Kusum Rai & Others
(2006) 4 
SCC 250], this Court observed :
"19. Thus, although we are of the opinion that the 
appellant was not liable to pay the claimed amount as the 
driver was not possessing a valid licence and the High 
Court was in error in holding otherwise, we decline to 
interfere with the impugned award, in the peculiar facts 
and circumstances of the case, in exercise of our 
jurisdiction under
Article 136
of the Constitution but we 
direct that the appellant may recover the amount from the 
owner in the same manner as was directed in 
Nanjappan."
16.	This appeal is allowed with the aforementioned directions.  There  
shall, however,  be no order as to costs.