[Cites
30
, Cited by
94
]
Supreme Court of India
Dharappa Sangappa Nandyal vs Bijapur Co-Operative Milk Producers ... on 26 April, 2007
Equivalent citations: AIR 2007 SUPREME COURT 1848, 2007 (9) SCC 109, 2007 AIR SCW 2882, 2007 LAB. I. C. 2471, 2007 (4) AIR KAR R 214, 2007 (6) SCALE 307, (2007) 4 KANT LJ 161, (2007) 3 SCT 491, (2007) 6 SCALE 307, (2007) 113 FACLR 1159, (2007) 3 LAB LN 139, (2007) 4 SUPREME 120, (2007) 2 CURLR 942
Bench:
G P Mathur
,
R V Raveendran
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2175 of 2007

PETITIONER:
Dharappa Sangappa Nandyal

RESPONDENT:
Bijapur Co-operative Milk Producers Societies Union Ltd

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 26/04/2007

BENCH:
G P Mathur & R V Raveendran

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

CIVIL APPEAL NO 2175 OF 2007
(Arising out of SLP [C] No.3796/2006)


RAVEENDRAN, J.
Leave granted.
This appeal is filed against the judgment dated 15.6.2005 passed by 
the High Court of Karnataka in Writ Appeal No.2131/2005.
2.	The appellant claims that he was employed as a daily-wage labourer 
in the Rural Dairy Centre, Bijapur, on 13.5.1977. He further alleges that he 
worked continuously and uninterruptedly till his services were illegally 
terminated with effect from 1.3.1980. The appellant did not challenge his 
termination.
3.
Section 10
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 ( '
ID Act
' for short) 
was amended in Karnataka by the Industrial Disputes (Karnataka 
Amendment) Act, 1987 [
Karnataka Act
No.5 of 1988] inserting the 
following as sub-section (4A) with effect from 7.4.1988 :
"(4A) Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 9-C
and in this 
section, in the case of a dispute falling within the scope of
section 2-A
, the 
individual workman concerned may, within six months from the date of 
communication to him of the order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment 
or termination or the date of commencement of the Industrial Disputes 
(Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1987, whichever is later, apply, in the 
prescribed manner, to the Labour Court for adjudication of the dispute and 
the Labour Court shall dispose of such application in the same manner as a 
dispute referred under sub-section (1)."
Taking advantage of the new provision, on 4.10.1988, the appellant made an 
application to the Labour Court, Hubli (KID No.1055/88 subsequently 
transferred and renumbered as KID No. 497/1995 on the file of the Labour 
Court, Bijapur) seeking a declaration that his termination from service on 
1.3.1980 was null and void and a direction for reinstatement with full back-
wages, continuity of service and other consequential reliefs. The appellant 
contended that his termination amounted to illegal retrenchment, as the 
respondent failed to comply with the mandatory requirements of
Section 25-
F
of ID Act even though he had worked continuously for more than 240 
days in a year.
4.	The respondent (Karnataka Milk Federation, Unit : Bijapur) filed an 
objection statement contending that it came into existence and took over the 
Rural Dairy  Centre, Bijapur, long after the alleged termination of appellant 
by Rural Dairy  Centre,  Bijapur. The respondent denied the claim of the 
appellant that he was a daily wage worker between 13.5.1977 and 1.3.1980 
and that his services were termination in violation of
section 25F
of the ID 
Act.
5.	The appellant gave evidence and produced a certificate dated 
19.2.1978 allegedly issued by the Dairy  Supervisor, Rural Dairy Centre, 
Bijapur, certifying that he had worked as a casual labourer from 13.5.1977 to 
19.2.1978.  None was examined on behalf of the respondent to deny the said 
certificate.  On consideration of the material, the Labour Court accepted the 
said service certificate, but did not accept his further self-serving statement 
that he worked up to 1.3.1980 as such claim was not supported by any 
document. The Labour Court made an award dated 15.10.1996 directing 
reinstatement, holding that Appellant had worked for more than 240 days in 
the year preceding termination (13.5.1977 to 19.2.1978), and the termination 
of his service, without complying with
section 25F
of ID Act, amounted to 
illegal retrenchment. However, as there was an inordinate delay of 10 years 
in filing the claim statement, the Labour Court awarded only 50% back-
wages in addition to continuity of service and consequential benefits. The 
respondent challenged the said award in W.P. No.7227/1997.
6.	During the pendency of the said writ petition, a Division Bench of 
Karnataka High Court held in
Veerashiva Co-operative Bank Ltd. vs. 
Presiding Officer, Labour
Court [2001 (3) Kar.L.J. 519] that the procedure 
for adjudication and the remedy provided under the
Karnataka Co-operative 
Societies Act, 1959
('KCS Act' for short) being comprehensive, the 
jurisdiction of Labour Courts under
ID Act
to deal with such disputes was 
barred.
The decision in Veerashiva Co-operative Bank was approved and 
reiterated by a Full Bench of the Karnataka High Court in
Karnataka Sugar 
Workers Federation v. State of Karnataka
[2003 (4) Kar.L.J. 353].
7.	Following the decision of the Full Bench, a Single Judge of the High 
Court, allowed the Respondent-employer's writ petition, by order dated 
1.2.2005, holding that
ID Act
was inapplicable to a dispute raised by an 
employee of a co-operative society. He therefore set aside the award of the 
Labour Court, reserving liberty to the appellant to work out his remedy in 
accordance with law. The said order of the learned Single Judge was 
challenged by the appellant in a writ appeal. A Division Bench of the High 
Court, by its judgment dated 15.6.2005, dismissed the writ appeal, holding 
that an employee of a co-operative society having a claim against the 
employer has to raise a dispute under Section 70 of the KCS Act. The 
Division Bench purported to follow the decision of the Full Bench in 
Karnataka Sugar Workers Federation. The said decision of the Division 
Bench is challenged in this appeal by special leave.
8.	The Appellant contends that amended Section 70 of the KCS Act took 
away the jurisdiction of Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals functioning 
under the
ID Act
, only when the amendments to the said section as per Act 2 
of 2000 came into effect on 20.6.2000, and it did not nullify an award made 
by the Labour Court prior to that date, that is on 15.10.1996. It was also 
contended that the respondent not having raised any objection about want of 
jurisdiction before the Labour Court, could not subsequently be permitted to 
raise the plea of want of jurisdiction before the High Court. The Respondent 
on the other hand, supported the decision of the High Court and contended 
that the Labour Court had no jurisdiction having regard to section 70 of the 
KCS Act. The respondent also contended that the award of the Labour Court 
was otherwise also unsustainable as the claim itself was hopelessly barred by 
limitation, delay and laches. Therefore, the following two questions arise for 
our consideration :
(i)	Whether the jurisdiction of Labour Court under the ID Act, was 
barred by section 70 of the KCS Act with reference to co-
operative societies and if so, from when.
(ii)	Even if Labour Court had jurisdiction, whether the appellant 
was entitled to file an application under
Section 10(4A)
of ID 
Act in respect of a cause of action which occurred in 1978.
Re : Question (i) :
9.	It is necessary to refer to the metamorphosis of section 70 of the KCS 
Act, before considering this question. The said section originally stood as 
follows :
"70. Disputes which may be referred to Registrar for decision.  (1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, 
if any dispute touching the constitution, management, or the business of a 
co-operative society arises.
(a) and (b) x x x x x (omitted as not relevant)

[c] between the society or its committee and any past committee, 
any officer, agent or employee, or any past officer, past agent or 
past employee or the nominee, heirs, or legal representatives of any 
deceased officer, deceased agent, or deceased employee of the 
society, or
(d) x x x (omitted as not relevant)

such dispute shall be referred to the Registrar for decision and no Court  
shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or other proceeding in respect 
of such dispute.
(2)	For the purposes of sub-section (1), the following shall be deemed 
to be disputes touching the constitution, management or the business of a 
co-operative society, namely.
(a) 	a claim by the society for any debt or demand due to it 
from a member or the nominee, heirs or legal representatives of a 
deceased member, whether such debt or demand be admitted or 
not;
(b) 	a claim a surety against the principal debtor where the 
society has recovered from the surety any amount in respect of any 
debt or demand due to it from the principle debtor, as a result of 
the default of the principal debtor whether such debt or demand is 
admitted or not;
(c) 	any dispute arising in connection with the election of a 
President, Vice-President, Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary, 
Treasurer or Member of Committee of the society.
(3)  	x x x (omitted as not relevant).
Section 70 was amended by Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Amendment) 
Act, 1976
(Karnataka Act
19 of 1976). The Amendment Act received the 
assent of the Governor on 7.3.1976. It was brought into effect from 
20.1.1976. The Amendment Act added the following as clauses (d) and (e) 
in sub-section (2) of section 70 :
(d)	any dispute between a co-operative society and its 
employees or past employees or heirs or legal representatives of a 
deceased employee, including a dispute regarding the terms of 
employment, working conditions and disciplinary action taken by a 
co-operative society;
(e)	a claim by a co-operative society for any deficiency caused 
in the assets of the co-operative society by a member, past 
member, deceased member or deceased officer, past agent or 
deceased agent or by any servant, past servant or deceased servant 
or by its committee, past or present whether such loss be admitted 
or not."
Section 70 was again amended by Karnataka Co-operative Societies (Second 
Amendment) Act, 1997
(Karnataka Act
No.2/2000) in the following manner:
(i) 	In sub-section (1), for the words "no court", the words "no 
civil or Labour or Revenue court or Industrial Tribunal" were 
substituted.
(ii) 	At the end of clause (d) of sub-section (2), the words 
"notwithstanding anything contrary contained in the
Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947
(Central Act 14 of 1947)" were inserted.
The said Amendment Act (Act 2 of 2000) received the assent of the 
President on 18.3.2000 and was brought into force on 20.6.2000. After the 
said amendments in 1996 and 2000, Section 70 of KCS Act (relevant 
portion) reads thus:
"Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in 
force, if any dispute touching the constitution, management, or the 
business of a Co-operative Society arises -  between the Society or its 
committee and  any officer, agent or employee, or any past officer, past 
agent or past employee  of the Society, _.. such dispute shall be referred 
to the Registrar for decision and no Civil or Labour or Revenue Court or 
Industrial Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or other 
proceeding in respect of such dispute.
For the purposes of sub-section (1), the following shall be deemed to be 
disputes touching the constitution, management or the business of a Co-
operative Society, namely . (d) any dispute between a Co-operative 
Society and its employees or past employees or heirs or legal 
representatives of a deceased employee, including a dispute regarding the 
terms of employment, working conditions, and disciplinary action taken 
by a Co-operative Society notwithstanding anything contrary contained in 
the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
(Central Act 14 of 1947)."
10.	"Co-operative societies" fall under Entry 32 of the State List.
"Industrial and labour disputes" fall under Entry 22 of the Concurrent List.
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
is an "existing law" with respect to a matter 
enumerated in the Concurrent List, namely, industrial and labour disputes. A 
dispute between a co-operative society and its employees in regard to terms 
of employment, working conditions and disciplinary action, is an industrial 
and labour dispute squarely covered by an existing law
(ID Act
), if the 
employees are 'workmen' as defined in the
ID Act
. Clause (1) of
Article 254
provides that if any provision of a law made by a State Legislature is 
repugnant to any provision of an existing law with respect to one of the 
matters enumerated in the Concurrent List, then, subject to the provisions of 
clause (2), the existing law shall prevail, and the law made by the 
Legislature of the State shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be void. 
Clause (2) of
Article 254
, however, provides that where a law made by the 
Legislature of a State with respect to one of the matters enumerated in the 
Concurrent List, contains any provision repugnant to an existing law with 
respect to that matter, then, the law so made by the Legislature of such State 
shall, if it has been reserved for the consideration of the President and has 
received his assent, prevail in that State. The question of repugnancy can 
arise only with reference to a legislation made by Parliament falling under 
the Concurrent List or an existing law with reference to one of the matters 
enumerated in the Concurrent List. If a law made by the State Legislature 
covered by an Entry in the State List incidentally touches any of the entries 
in the Concurrent List,
Article 254
is not attracted. But where a law covered 
by an entry in the State List (or an amendment to a law covered by an entry 
in the State List) made by the State Legislature contains a provision, which 
directly and substantially relates to a matter enumerated in the Concurrent 
List and is repugnant to any provision of an existing law with respect to that 
matter in the Concurrent List then such repugnant provision of the State law 
will be void. Such a provision of law made by the State Legislature touching 
upon a matter covered by the Concurrent List, will not be void if it can co-
exist and operate without repugnancy with the provisions of the existing law. 
What is stated above with reference to an existing law, is also the position 
with reference to a law made by the Parliament. Repugnancy is said to arise 
when : (i) there is clear and direct inconsistency between the Central and the 
State Act; (ii) such inconsistency is irreconciliable, or  brings the State Act 
in direct collision with the Central Act or brings about a situation where 
obeying one would lead to disobeying the other. If the State Legislature, 
while making or amending a law relating to co-operative societies, makes a 
provision relating to labour disputes falling under the Concurrent List, then
Article 254
will be attracted if there is any repugnancy between such 
provision of the
State Act (MCS Act
) with the existing law
(ID Act
). We 
will have to examine the issue in this case keeping the above legal position 
in mind.
11.	The effect of the amendments to Section 70 of KCS Act, by Act 2 of 
2000 is that  if any dispute (including any dispute relating to the terms of 
employment, working conditions and disciplinary action), arose between a 
co-operative society and its employees or past employees or heirs/legal 
representatives of a deceased employee, on and from 20.6.2000, such 
dispute had to be referred to the Registrar for decision and no Civil Court or 
Labour Court or Industrial Tribunal would have jurisdiction to entertain any 
suit or proceeding in respect of such dispute.
12.	Even prior to 20.6.2000, having regard to the amendment to Section 
70 of KCS Act by Act 19 of 1976 with effect from 20.1.1976, any dispute 
between a co-operative society and its employees or past employees or 
heirs/legal representatives of a deceased employee including a dispute 
regarding the terms of employment, working conditions and disciplinary 
action taken by a co-operative society, was deemed to be a dispute touching 
the constitution, management, or business of a co-operative society which 
had to be referred to the Registrar for adjudication. But prior to 20.6.2000, 
there was no express exclusion of the jurisdiction of the Labour Court and 
Industrial Tribunal. As a result, if an employee of a Co-operative Society 
answered the definition of 'workman' and the dispute between the co-
operative society and its employee fell within the definition of an 'industrial 
dispute', then the employee had the choice of two alternative forums  either 
to raise a dispute before the Registrar under Section 70 of the KCS Act or 
seek a reference to the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal under
Section 
10(1)(c)
of the ID Act (or approach the Labour Court by an application 
under
Section 10(4A)
of ID Act).
13.
In
Co-operative Central Bank Ltd. v. Additional Industrial Tribunal, 
A.P.
(AIR 1970 SC 245), this Court considered
Section 61
of the Andhra 
Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1964, which dealt with disputes which 
could be referred to the Registrar. The said section was in pari materia with 
Section 70 of KCS Act, as it originally stood, before the amendments under 
Act 19 of 1976 and Act 2 of 2000.  This  Court held that where a State Co-
operative
Societies Act
had received the assent of the President, if any 
provision of such State Act was repugnant to any provision of the
ID Act
, 
the provisions of the State Act will prevail over the provisions of the
ID Act
. 
This Court accepted the general proposition that the jurisdiction of the 
Industrial Tribunal/Labour Court under the
Industrial Disputes Act
will be 
barred if the disputes can be competently decided by the Registrar under 
section 61 of the Andhra Pradesh Act, in view of the fact that the Andhra 
Pradesh Act had received the assent of the President. This Court then 
proceeded to examine whether disputes relating to service conditions of 
workmen could be referred to the Registrar for decision under Section 61 of 
the State Act and held that the disputes could only be decided by an 
Industrial Tribunal dealing with an industrial dispute. This Court held that 
the Registrar under the
Co-operative Societies Act
, could not grant the relief 
in respect of such disputes because of the limitations placed on his powers 
under the Act itself, and having regard to  the expression "touching the 
business of the society" in Section 61 which did not include a dispute in 
regard to conditions of service of workmen.
14.	Though the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959 was reserved 
for the assent of the President and received his assent on 11.8.1959, the 
Amendment Act 19 of 1976 which added clause (d) to sub-section (2) of  
Section 70, (whereby a dispute between a Co-operative Society and its 
present or past employee/s in regard to any disciplinary action or working 
conditions was deemed to be a dispute touching the constitution, 
management, or the business of a co-operative society), was neither reserved 
for, nor received the assent of the President. In the absence of the assent of 
the President, clause (d) of Section 70(2) could not be called in aid to 
contend that section 70(1)(c) of the KCS Act would prevail over the 
provisions of the
Industrial Disputes Act
. Consequently, even after the 1976 
amendment to the KCS Act, the Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals 
functioning under the
ID Act
continued to have jurisdiction in regard to 
disputes between a Society and its workmen if the co-operative society 
answered the definition of an 'industry' and the dispute was an 'industrial 
dispute'. But when sub-section (1) of section 70 of KCS Act was further 
amended by Act 2 of 2000 by specifically excluding the jurisdiction of 
Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals with the simultaneous addition of the 
words "notwithstanding anything contrary contained in the
Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947
" in clause (d) of Section 70(2) of KCS Act, the said 
Amendment Act (Act 2 of 2000) was reserved for the assent of the President 
and received such assent on 18.3.2000. The amended provisions were given 
effect from 20.6.2000. Therefore, only with effect from 20.6.2000, the 
jurisdiction of Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals were excluded in 
regard to disputes between a co-operative Society and its employees (or past 
employees) relating to terms of employment, service conditions or 
disciplinary action. It follows therefore that in the year 1996, the Labour 
Court had the jurisdiction to make an award in regard to such a dispute. The 
High Court could not have interfered with it on the ground that Section 70 of 
the KCS Act was a bar to the jurisdiction of the Labour Court to decide the 
dispute.
15.	The 1976 Amendment to the KCS Act did not bring about any 
inconsistency with the provisions of the
ID Act
nor did it purport to prevail 
over the provisions of the
ID Act
. Its effect was merely to provide an 
additional or alternative forum for adjudication of the disputes between co-
operative societies and its employees, relating to employment, working 
conditions and disciplinary action. The 1976 Amendment Act, therefore, 
was valid, even in the absence of the assent of the President. On the other 
hand, the 2000 Amendment specifically excluded the jurisdiction of 
Industrial Tribunals and Labour Courts under the
ID Act
, and intended to 
prevail over the provisions of the
ID Act
in regard to adjudication of 
disputes. The said Amendment required the assent of the President and was, 
in fact, reserved for the assent of the President and obtained his assent. If the 
1976 Amendment was to be read as excluding the jurisdiction of the 
Industrial Tribunals and Labour Courts, then it was necessary to read the 
provisions of Section 70, as amended by the 1976 Act, as prevailing over the 
provisions of the
ID Act
. In which event, it would have required the 
President's assent, and in the absence of such assent, the Amendment to the 
extent it purported to prevail over the Central enactment, would have been 
void. Therefore, the only way to read the 1976 Amendment is to read it in a 
literal and normal manner, that is, as not excluding the jurisdiction of the 
Industrial Tribunals and Labour Courts but as merely conferring a 
concurrent jurisdiction on the Registrar under Section 70 of the KCS Act.
16.	This aspect has been completely overlooked by the Division Bench of 
the Karnataka High Court in Veerashaiva Co-operative Bank. It misled itself 
to an erroneous assumption that two decisions of this Court in
R.C. Tiwari v. 
Madhya Pradesh State Co-operative Marketing Federation Ltd.
(1997 (5) 
SCC 125) and Sagarmal v. District Sahkari Kendriya Bank Ltd., Mandsaur 
and another [1997 (9) SCC 354] laid down the proposition that once a 
specific procedure and effective remedy is provided under a
Co-operative 
Societies Act
, it ipso facto excluded the settlement of disputes under
section 
10
of the Industrial Disputes Act. On that assumption, the High Court held 
that Section 70 of the KCS Act, excluded the jurisdiction of Labour Courts/ 
Industrial Tribunals in regard to references under
Section 10
of the ID Act 
stood excluded. The High Court held so in view of clause (d) of sub-section 
(2) of Section 70 which provided that any dispute between a co-operative 
society and its employees (past or present) in regard to terms of 
employment, working conditions and disciplinary action will be deemed to 
be a dispute to be decided by the Registrar under sub-section (1) of Section 
70, overlooking the fact that Amendment Act 19 of 1976 by which clause
(d) was inserted in Section 70(2), had not received the assent of the 
President and therefore the jurisdiction of the Registrar under Section 70(1) 
of the KCS Act as expanded by section 70(2)(d), could not prevail over the 
provisions of the
ID Act
. If the amendment to section 70(2) by Act 19 of 
1976 should be read or construed as having the effect of enabling section 
70(1) of KCS Act to prevail over the provisions of
ID Act
, then the said 
amendment Act (Act 19 of 1976) would have required the assent of the 
President under
Article 254(2).
But there was no such assent.
17.	As the Division Bench had relied on two decisions of this Court in
R.C. Tiwari
(supra) and Sagarmal (supra), it is necessary to refer to them. 
But before doing so, we have to note that many a time, a principle laid down 
by this Court with reference to the provisions of a particular State Act is 
mechanically followed to interpret cognate enactments of other States, 
without first ascertaining whether the provisions of the two enactments are 
identical or similar. This frequently happens with reference to the laws 
relating to rent and accommodation control,  co-operative societies and land 
revenue. Before applying the principles enunciated with reference to another 
enactment, care should be taken to find out whether the provisions of the Act 
to which such principles are sought to be applied, are similar to the 
provisions of the Act with reference to which the principles were evolved. 
Failure to do so has led to a wrong interpretation of section 70 of the KCS 
Act, in Veerashiva Co-operative Bank and Karnataka Sugar Workers 
Federation.
18.
R.C. Tiwari
(supra) related to Madhya Pradesh, where
ID Act
itself 
was inapplicable (except to the extent indicated in
M.P. Industrial Relations 
Act, 1960
).  In that case, an employee of a co-operative society who had 
been dismissed from service for mis-conduct, raised a dispute under the
Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 1960
. The concerned Deputy 
Registrar held that the dismissal was proper and rejected the reference. 
Thereafter the employee sought a reference under
section 10(1)
of the ID 
Act. The Labour Court held that the domestic inquiry was vitiated and set 
aside the order of dismissal. The said order was challenged by the employer-
Society before the Madhya Pradesh High Court. The High Court held that in 
view of the provisions of
Section 55
of the Madhya Pradesh Co-operative 
Societies Act, 1960, the Labour Court had no jurisdiction and therefore the 
reference to the Labour Court was bad. It also held that the findings recorded 
by the Deputy Registrar, Co-operative Societies against the employee in the 
award made under
Section 55
of the Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies 
Act, would operate as res judicata. This Court upheld
the said decision
of the 
High Court and dismissed the special leave petition. The decision was 
rendered with reference the special provisions of the
M.P. Co-operative 
Societies Act, 1960
and the
M.P. Industrial Relations Act, 1960
. Having 
regard to
Section 110
of the M.P. Industrial Relations Act, the provisions of 
the Central Act -
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
(except Chapters V-A, V-B 
and V-C relating to lay off and retrenchment, special provisions relating to 
lay off, retrenchment and closure in certain establishments and unfair labour 
practices), did not apply to any industry to which the said
M.P. Industrial 
Relations Act
applied.
ID Act
did not apply in the State of Madhya Pradesh 
for adjudication of disputes between the employer and employees, not 
because of any bar in the MP Co-operative Societies Act, but because of the 
State having made a law relating to industrial disputes, namely the
M.P. 
Industrial Relations Act, 1960
which had received the assent of the 
President.
The M.P. Co-operative Societies Act, 1960
, vide section 55, 
specifically provided that where a dispute including a dispute relating to 
terms of employment, working conditions and disciplinary action by a 
Society arises between a Society and its employees, the Registrar or any 
officer appointed by him shall decide the dispute and his decision shall be 
binding on the Society and its employees; and Section 93 of the M.P. Co-
operative
Societies Act
provided that nothing contained in the
M.P. 
Industrial Relations Act, 1960
shall apply to a Society registered under that
Act (M.P. Co-operative Societies Act
). It is in those circumstances that in 
R.C. Tiwari, this Court held that the
I.D. Act
did not apply to a dispute 
between a Society and its employees in regard to any disciplinary action. In 
that case, the question of any repugnancy between a State Act (Madhya 
Pradesh State Co-operative Societies Act) and the Central Act (the
Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947
) did not arise. The State of Karnataka does not have a 
State Act governing industrial disputes as in Madhya Pradesh and therefore, 
the question of
Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act
excluding the 
applicability of a State law relating to industrial disputes did not arise. The 
decision in R.C.Tiwari was not, therefore, relevant or applicable. The 
Division Bench of Karnataka High Court committed an error in following 
the decision in R.C. Tiwari to hold that the jurisdiction of Labour Court 
under the
ID Act
was barred, in view of section 70 as amended by the 
Amendment Act 19 of 1976, even prior to the amendment of Section 70(1) 
and (2) by Act 2 of 2000.
19.	The decision of this Court in Sagarmal (supra) also related to Madhya 
Pradesh. In that case, the appellant was an employee of a Co-operative Bank 
and he was removed from service after a disciplinary inquiry. The employee 
challenged his removal by seeking a reference to the Labour Court under
section 10
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.  A reference was made and 
the Labour Court granted him relief of reinstatement with back-wages. The 
employer Bank challenged the award in a writ petition and the High Court 
quashed the award on the ground that it was a nullity, having been made in 
an incompetent reference. While affirming the decision of the High Court, 
this Court held that the provisions of the
ID Act
, did not apply to the 
respondent co-operative bank, and the only question was about the 
availability of remedy either under the
Madhya Pradesh Co-operative 
Societies Act, 1960
or under the
Madhya Pradesh Industrial Relations Act, 
1960
. This Court observed that if such a question had arisen,
section 93
of 
the Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act would have come into 
effect, but no occasion arose for consideration of such question inasmuch as 
the employee did not resort to the remedy either under the
Madhya Pradesh 
Co-operative Societies Act, 1960
or under the
Madhya Pradesh Industrial 
Relations Act, 1960
, but chose the remedy of a reference under
Section 10
of 
the ID Act, which was inapplicable in the State of Madhya Pradesh. This 
Court reiterated that as the only question before the High Court was the 
competence of a reference under
Section 10
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947, and not the availability of the remedy under the Madhya Pradesh Co-
operative
Societies Act, 1960
or the
Madhya Pradesh Industrial Relations 
Act, 1960
, the view taken by the High Court that the reference under
Section 
10
of the ID Act was incompetent, and the award made therein a nullity, did 
not suffer from any infirmity. In short,
Section 10
of the ID Act was held 
inapplicable not because the
Madhya Pradesh Co-operative Societies Act, 
1960
prevailed over the provisions of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
but 
because in Madhya Pradesh, the provisions of the
ID Act, 1947
(except 
certain specified provisions relating to lay off etc.) did not apply in view of 
the provisions of the
Madhya Pradesh Industrial Relations Act, 1960
.  
Therefore, the decision in Sagarmal was also of no assistance.  Therefore the 
decision in Veerashiva Co-operative Bank was erroneous.
20.	The Full Bench of the Karnataka High Court in Karnataka Sugar 
Workers Federation, decided two issues. Firstly, it upheld the constitutional 
validity of amendment of Section 70 of the KCS Act, by Act 2 of 2000. That 
question does not arise for our consideration and the decision thereon does 
not require to be disturbed. Secondly, it upholds and reiterates the decision 
in
Veerashaiva Co-operative Bank
(supra).  To that extent, it is not good 
law.
21.
In
Management of Hukkeri v. S.R. Vastrad [ILR
2005 Karnataka 
3882], a learned Single Judge of the Karnataka High Court held that even 
before the amendment of Section 70 by Act 2 of 2000, the legal  position 
was that Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals under
ID Act
did not have 
jurisdiction in regard to disputes between society and its employees because 
of insertion of clause (d) in Section 70(2) of KCS Act introduced with effect 
from 20.1.1976, relying on Veerashiva Co-operative Bank and Karnataka 
Sugar Workers Federation. The said decision also, therefore, stands 
overruled.
22.	The resultant position can be summarized thus :
a)	Even though clause (d) was added in Section 70(2) with effect from 
20.1.1976, section 70(1) did not exclude or take away the jurisdiction of the 
Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals under the
I.D. Act
to decide an 
industrial dispute between a Society and its employees. Consequently, even 
after insertion of clause (d) in Section 70(2) with effect from 20.1.1976, the 
Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals under the
I.D. Act
, continued to have 
jurisdiction to decide disputes between societies and their employees.
(b) 	The jurisdiction of Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals to decide 
the disputes between co-operative societies and their employees was taken 
away only when sub-section (1) and sub-section (2)(d) of section 70 were 
amended by Act 2 of 2000 and the amendment received the assent of the 
President on 18.3.2000 and was brought into effect on 20.6.2000.
(c)	The jurisdiction to decide any dispute of the nature mentioned in 
section 70(2)(d) of the KCS Act, if it answered the definition of industrial 
dispute, vested thus :
(i)	exclusively with Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals 
till 20.1.1976;
(ii)	concurrently with Labour Courts/Industrial Tribunals 
under ID Act and with Registrar under section 70 of the KCS 
Act between 20.1.1976 and 20.6.2000; and
(iii)	exclusively with the Registrar under section 70 of the 
KCS Act with effect from 20.6.2000.
23.	We therefore hold that the award of the Labour Court was not without 
jurisdiction. We, however, make it clear that this decision shall not be 
applied to re-open matters decided relying on Veerashiva Co-operative Bank 
and Karnataka Sugar Workers Federation, which have attained finality.
Re : Question (ii)
24.	As we have held that the Labour Court had jurisdiction, the next 
question that arises for consideration is the validity of the award. As noticed 
above, according to the appellant, the termination was with effect from 
1.3.1980. The Labour Court found that the termination was in fact from 
19.2.1978. The employee made an application under
section 10(4A)
of the 
I.D. Act on 4.10.1988. But for the insertion of sub-section (4A) in
section 10
of the ID Act on 7.4.1988, the appellant's challenge would not have been 
entertained at all as the claim had become stale on account of the same not 
being agitated for more than 10 years. The Labour Court, however, 
proceeded on the assumption that any claim application filed within six 
months from the date when sub-section (4A) was introduced, is to be 
considered as in time, irrespective the date of termination or cause of action. 
Such assumption is erroneous and would lead to absurd results.
25.
Section 10(4A)
, no doubt, applied to termination orders passed prior 
to 7-4-1988. But the question is whether recourse to
section 10(4A)
can be 
had in regard to any order of termination irrespective of when it was passed, 
and without reference to any time limit.
Section 10(4A)
enables an 
individual workman to challenge a termination order before the Labour 
Court, within "six months from the date of communication" of such order of 
termination. Having thus fixed the time within which such application has to 
be filed, the legislature added the words "or the date of commencement of 
the Industrial Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1987, whichever is 
later". What is the Legislative intent behind the said addition? Is it intended 
to provide a one time revival to all claims, including stale, dead, non-
existing claims relating to orders of termination passed years or decades 
ago? Or does it extend the time only to those who were entitled to seek the 
benefit of
Section 10(4A)
as on 7-4-1988 on account of communication of 
termination orders within six months before that date by giving them a 
uniform time limit of six months from 7-4-1988, to approach the Labour 
Court?
26.	The Legislative intent should be ascertained by keeping in view the 
position before the amendment, the nature of remedy provided, and the need 
therefor. It is also necessary to keep in view the general principles relating to 
limitation. Statutes relating to limitation are said to be retrospective in nature 
in the sense that that apply to all proceedings brought after they come into 
force, even for enforcing causes of action which had accrued prior to the 
date when such statute came into force. But they are also prospective in the 
sense that they do not have the effect of reviving a right of action which was 
already barred on the date of its coming into operation. Therefore, where the 
right to file an action had come to an end on expiry of period of limitation 
prescribed under a law relating to limitation and thus becomes barred by 
limitation, the right is not revived by a later limitation Act, even if it 
provides a longer period of limitation. Let us illustrate with reference to an 
action for which the period of limitation was one year under the Limitation 
Act, 1908 and three years under the new
Limitation Act, 1963
which come 
into force on 1.1.1964.
The Limitation Act, 1963
will apply to all suits filed 
after 1.1.1964, though the cause of action might have accrued before that 
date. But if cause action had accrued on 1.1.1962, and therefore, the right to 
file a suit came to an end on 1.1.1963 under the old Act, a suit cannot 
obviously filed on 1.4.1964, on the ground that the suit is within time as per 
the new law of limitation. In other words, any law relating to limitation, 
though will apply to cause of actions accruing earlier, will apply only if the 
cause of action was 'live' as on the date when the new Act came into force 
and not to claims which were 'dead' or unenforceable when the new law 
came into force. This general Rule is however subject to any express 
statutory provisions to the contrary.
27.	This Court while dealing with
Section 10(1)(c)
and (d) of the
ID Act
, 
has repeatedly held that though the Act does not provide a period of 
limitation for raising a dispute under
Section 10(1)(c)
or (d), if on account of 
delay, a dispute has become stale or ceases to exist, the reference should be 
rejected. It has also held that lapse of time results in losing the remedy and 
the right as well. The delay would be fatal if it has resulted in material 
evidence relevant to adjudication being lost or rendered unavailable [vide -
Nedungadi Bank Ltd vs. K. P. Madhavan
kutty [2000(2)  SCC 455];
Balbir 
Singh vs. Punjab Roadways
[2001 (1) SCC 133]; Asst.
Executive Engineer 
vs Shivalinga [2002 (1) LLJ 457]; and
S.M. Nilajkar vs. Telecom DT. 
Manager
[2003 (4) SCC 27] ]. When belated claims are considered as stale 
and non-existing for the purpose of refusing or rejecting a reference under
Section 10(1)(c)
or (d), in spite of no period of limitation being prescribed, it 
will be illogical to hold that the amendment to the Act inserting
section 
10(4A)
prescribing a time limit of six months, should be interpreted as 
reviving all stale and dead claims.
28.	The object of
Section 10(4A)
is to enable workmen to apply directly 
to the Labour Court for adjudication of disputes relating to termination, 
without going through the laborious process of seeking a reference under
section 10(1)
of ID Act. The Legislative intent was not to revive stale or 
non-existing claims.
Section 10(4A)
clearly requires that a workman who 
wants to directly approach the Labour Court, should do so within six months 
from the date of communication of the order. Then come the words "or the 
date of commencement of the Industrial Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) 
Act, 1987, whichever is later". The reason for these words is obvious. In 
cases where the cause of action arose prior to 7.4.1988, some additional time 
had to be provided to make the provisions effective. Let us take the example 
of a workman who had received the termination order on 10-10-1987. If
section 10(4A)
, which come into effect on 7.4.1988,  had merely stated that 
the application had to be filed within six months from the date of 
communication, he had to file the application before 10-4-1988, that is 
hardly three days from the date when the amendment came into effect. The 
Legislature thought that workmen should be given some reasonable time to 
know about the new provision and take steps to approach the Labour Court. 
Therefore, all workmen who were communicated orders of termination 
within six months prior to 7-4-1988 were given the benefit of uniform six 
months time from 7-4-1988, irrespective of the date of expiry of six months. 
When a new remedy or relief is provided by a statute, such a transitional 
provision is made to ensure that persons who are given a special right, do not 
lose it for want of adequate time to enforce it, though they have a cause of 
action or right as on the date when the new remedy or relief comes into 
effect.
29.
Section 10(4A)
does not therefore revive non-existing or stale or dead 
claims but only ensures that claims which were live, by applying the six 
month rule in
Section 10(4A)
as on the date when the Section came into 
effect, have a minimum of six months time to approach the Labour Court. 
That is ensured by adding the words "or the date of commencement of the 
Industrial Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1987, which is later" to the 
words "within six months from, the date of communication to him of the 
order of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination." In other words 
all those who were communicated orders of termination during a period of 
six months prior to 7-4-1988 were deemed to have been communicated such 
orders of termination as on 7-4-1988 for the purpose of seeking remedy. 
Therefore, the words "within six months from the date of commencement of 
the Industrial Disputes (Karnataka Amendment) Act, 1987, whichever is 
later" only enables those who had been communicated order of termination 
within six months prior to 7-4-1988, to apply under
Section 10(4A)
.
30.
Section 10(4A)
provides an alternative procedure to seek redressal in 
regard to an order of termination, by making an application directly to the 
Labour Court, within six months from the date of communication of the 
order of termination, without the intervention or assistance of an employees 
union and without having to approach the appropriate Government for 
making a reference. Such a provision cannot be interpreted as reviving stale 
and dead claims nor as enabling a workman to seek remedy beyond six 
months from the date of communication, except to the extent expressly 
provided for. The true and proper interpretation of
Section 10(4A)
is that an 
individual workman can apply to the Labour Court for adjudication of the 
dispute relating to an order of discharge/dismissal/retrenchment/termination 
within six months from the date of communication to him, of such order of 
termination. Where such remedy becomes available to a workman as on 7-4-
1988 on account of his having received the communication of termination 
order within six months prior to 7-4-1988, then the six months period stands 
extended upto 7-10-1988. To summarize :
(i)	In regard to termination orders communication on or after 7-4-
1988, the outer limit for making an application under
Section 
10(4A)
is six months from the date of communication of the order.
(ii)	In regard to termination orders communicated during a period of 
six months prior to 7-4-1988, the period of limitation would be up 
to 7-10-1988 even though the six months period from the date of 
communication may actually expire between 7-4-1988 to 7-10-
1988.
(iii)	In regard to termination orders communicated prior to 7-10-1987, 
no claim application under
Section 10(4A)
, could be filed, as there 
is no provision for such applications. The remedy under
section 
10(1) (c)
and (d) will continue to be available, subject, however, to 
the rule that stale and dead claims will not be referred.
The intent of
Section 10(4A)
is to give a right to the aggrieved workman to 
challenge the termination order within six months from the date of accrual of 
cause of action and not to furnish an one time revival in regard to stale and 
non-existing claims. Therefore, a claim application of the petitioner filed on 
4.10.1988 in regard to alleged termination on 1.3.1980 (or 19.2.1978 as 
found by the Labour Court) was not maintainable under
Section 10(4A)
of 
ID Act and could not have been entertained by the Labour Court.
31.	We, therefore, find no reason to interfere with the final order in the 
judgment of the High Court setting aside the award, though for different 
reasons.  The appellant is not entitled to any relief.  The appeal is, therefore, 
dismissed. Parties bear respective costs.