[Cites
25
, Cited by
74
]
Supreme Court of India
Commissioner Of Income Tax, New Delhi vs Oriental Fire & General Insurance Co. ... on 18 May, 2007
Equivalent citations: AIR 2007 SUPREME COURT 2248, 2007 AIR SCW 3925, 2008 TAX. L. R. 602, (2007) 2 CURLJ(CCR) 506, (2007) 201 TAXATION 340, 2007 (8) SCALE 170, 2007 (6) SCC 496, (2007) 291 ITR 370, (2007) 4 SUPREME 483, (2007) 8 SCALE 170
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
,
Markandey Katju
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2741 of 2007

PETITIONER:
Commissioner of Income Tax, New Delhi

RESPONDENT:
Oriental Fire & General Insurance Co. Ltd

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 18/05/2007

BENCH:
S.B. Sinha & Markandey Katju

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

CIVIL APPEAL NO.       2741                 OF 2007 
[Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) Nos. 1008-1010 of 2005]
W I T H 
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2742, 2743, 2744, 2745 OF 2007
[Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) Nos.2037 of 2005, 5350, 5351 and 10820 of 2006] 

S.B. SINHA, J  :
1.	Leave granted in all the Special Leave Petitions.
2.	Respondent is a subsidiary to the General Insurance Corporation of 
India.  It is wholly a government owned company engaged in the business of 
general insurance.  It is an income-tax asessee.  Its affairs, indisputably, are 
governed by the provisions of the
Insurance Act, 1938
(for short, 'the 1938 
Act).  For the assessment years 1974-75, 1975-76 and 1978-79, it filed its 
income tax  returns.  Such returns were filed relying on or on the basis of  
the annual accounts furnished by it before the Controller of Insurance.
3.	The Assessing Officer  opined that Respondent was not entitled to any 
deduction in respect of the  provisions of taxation by way of "reserve for bad 
and doubtful debts" and "entertainment allowance". The Commissioner 
(Appeals), however, in respect of the assessment year 1974-75 allowed 
various deductions and the order of the Assessing Officer disallowing 
certain expenditure was set aside by orders dated 09.02.1979 and 
09.09.1980.
4.	Both the orders were questioned by the  Revenue before the Income 
Tax Appellate Tribunal (for short, 'the Tribunal).  By reason of an order 
dated 30.11.1981, the Tribunal held that the Assessing Officer was not 
correct in refusing to accede to the deductions under the aforementioned 
heads claimed by the assessee.
5.	The following questions of law were referred to the High Court  under
Section 256
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short, 'the 1961 Act').
"1.	Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of 
the case, and on a true interpretation of
section 44
of the 
Income Tax, 1961 read with Rule 5 of the First Schedule 
to the said Act, the Tribunal was right in confirming the 
addition of the following amounts to the Balance of 
profits disclosed by the annual accounts of the assessee 
Insurance Company
i)	Tax deducted at source :		Rs.76,74,713/-
ii)	Provision for taxation :		Rs.6,57,00,000/-
Total						Rs.7,33,74,713/-
(This question is referred at the instance of the assessee 
for the assessment year 1974-75)
2.	Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of 
the case, the Tribunal was correct in law in holding that 
reserve for bad and doubtful debts cannot be added to the 
Balance of profit disclosed in the annual accounts of the 
assessee insurance company ?
(This question is referred at the instance of Revenue for 
the assessment year 1974-75)"
6.	The High Court, however, by reason of the impugned judgment 
answered the said reference in favour of the respondent and against the 
Revenue.  Indisputably, the question as to whether the respondent was 
entitled to deductions under the head "Entertainment Allowance" is not in 
question before us.
7.	Mr. Mohan Parasaran, the learned Additional Solicitor General 
appearing on behalf of the Revenue, would submit that the terms 'provision' 
and 'reserve' connote two different meanings, and, thus, there cannot be any 
provision for "bad and doubtful debts" and in that view of the matter, the 
High Court committed a serious error in passing the impugned judgment.
8.	The Assessing Authority, the learned counsel would point out, has 
assigned sufficient and cogent reason for arriving at its decision.  It was 
furthermore argued that the provisions for tax cannot be claimed to be an 
expenditure and in that view of the matter the Assessing Officer in regard to 
the concept of provision for tax was entitled to invoke its jurisdiction in 
arriving at a finding as to whether the assessee was entitled to the deductions 
claimed by it or not.
9.	Mr.  M.S. Syali, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the 
assessee, on the other hand, would support the impugned judgment.
10.	Determination of liability of income tax under the provisions of the 
1961 Act for the purpose of computation of income of an assessee, inter 
alia, for carrying on business in insurance is governed by
Section 44
thereof 
and Rule 5(a) of the First Schedule appended thereto, which read as under :
"
S.44
.-Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in the provisions of this Act relating to the 
computation of income chargeable under the head 
"Interest on securities", "Income from house property, 
capital gains or Income from other sources, or in
sections 
28
to
43
A, the profits  and gains of any business of 
insurance, including any such business carried on by a 
mutual insurance company or by a cooperative society, 
shall be computed in accordance with the rules contained 
in the First Schedule."
"Rule 5(a).- The profits and gains of any business of 
insurance other than life insurance shall be taken to be 
the Balance of the profits disclosed by the annual 
accounts, copies of which are required under the
Insurance Act, 1938
(4 of 1938) to be furnished to the 
Controller of Insurance, subject to the following 
adjustments :
(a)	Subject  to  the  other provisions of this rule, any 
	expenditure or allowance which is not admissible 
	under the provisions of
Sections 30
to 43A in 
	computing the profits and gains of a business shall 
	be added back."
11.
Section 44
contains a non obstante clause.  It provides for a special 
mode in which the assessee carrying on business, inter alia, in general 
insurance should be assessed.
12.	The reason for it is not far to seek as the matter relating to "carrying 
on business"  in General Insurance is covered by the 1938 Act.  By reason of
Section 11
of the 1938 Act every insurer is required to prepare : (a) Balance 
Sheet; (b) Profit and Loss Account ; and  (c) a revenue account;  at the 
expiry of each calendar year wherefor special forms are prescribed.  Their 
Balance Sheets and Profit and Loss Accounts etc. are audited by the 
auditors.  Prudential regulation in the context of insurance business has 
seminal importance as it caters to its very nature, which entails pooling of 
risk.  Acturial oversight involves keeping a tab on 'financial condition' of 
companies, valuation of liabilities, inter alia, with regard to which      
investigation is required to be made at intervals of not less two years from 
the date they are submitted before the Controller of Insurance.  The said 
authority has a wide jurisdiction.  It may take evidence and order revaluation 
as also investigate into the affairs of the insurance company.  The statute 
provides for checks and balances.  It mandates as to the kind of investments 
which the insurer must make.  The provisions of the 1938 Act and the 
regulations framed thereunder provide for the details in which the accounts 
are to be maintained.
13.	Insurance companies in view of the provisions of the said Act, 
however, are dealt with also under the 1961 Act differently.
Section 44
thereof, as noticed hereinbefore, begins with a non-obstante clause.  The 
jurisdiction of the Income Tax Officer in passing the orders of assessment is 
limited.  Keeping in view the fact that the business carried out by the 
assessee is not governed by the ordinary principles applicable to business 
computation as laid down in
Section 10
of the 1961 Act, the insurance 
companies do not compute their profits annually in the manner laid down 
therein.
14.	A bare perusal of Rule 5(a) of the 1961 Act  would categorically 
demonstrate that ordinarily the annual accounts furnished before the 
Controller of Insurance would be taken to be the balance of the profits 
disclosed thereby.  The same, however, is subject to the adjustments 
mentioned therein, namely, any expenditure or allowance which is not 
admissible under the provisions of
Sections 30
to 43A in computing the 
profits and gains of the business.  If the said provision is found to be 
applicable, the amount may be added back.
15.	The rules lay down as to how the Income Tax Officer must proceed in 
the matter if he finds any inaccuracy in the said accounts.
16.	The question came up for consideration before this Court in relation to 
business of life insurance in Life Insurance Corporation of India. v. 
Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi & Rajasthan [1964 (5) SCR 880].  
Therein,  this Court had the occasion to consider the relevant provisions of 
the 1938 Act as also the 1961 Act.
In respect of  business of insurance other 
than life insurance,  a matter  fell for consideration in
Pandhyan Insurance 
Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-Tax, Madras
[1965 (1) SCR 367], 
wherein  it was categorically held that the rules do not empower the Income 
Tax Officer to adjust the accounts on the basis of revaluation made by him 
or to correct the discrepancy between what is entered into the accounts and 
what is fact.
17.
In
Commissioner of Income-Tax, West Bengal, Calcutta v. Calcutta 
Hospital and Nursing Home Benefits Association
[1965 (3) SCR 632] 
application of  Rule 6  to the Schedule appended to the
Income Tax Act
came up for consideration of this Court, wherein the law was
laid down in
the following terms :
"11. The Section adopted the device of a deeming 
provision. The profits arising from the transactions of a 
company or society with its members were deemed to be 
profits arising from transactions with non-members 
Parliament assumed that the latter were taxable. As this 
hypothesis was wrong Parliament failed in its objective. 
But the Indian Legislature did not adopt any deeming 
device. It defined income to include profits of any 
business of insurance carried on by a mutual insurance 
association. What are those profits is then explained by 
reference to the Schedule. The effect of this in substance 
is to incorporate Rule 6 into the definition. If the 
legislature had defined income to include profits of 
insurance earned on by a mutual insurance association 
computed according to Rule 6, very little would have 
remained arguable."
18.	There cannot be any doubt whatsoever, as was submitted by the 
learned Additional Solicitor General, that there exists a distinction between  
a  'provision' and 'reserve'.  It was so held in Vazir Sultan Tobacco Co. 
Ltd., Hyderabad etc. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Andhra Pradesh, 
Hyderabad etc.  [(1981) 4 SCC 435] in the following terms :
"9. The distinction between the two concepts of 
reserve and provision is fairly well known in commercial 
accountancy and the same has been explained by this 
Court in
Metal Box Company of India Ltd. v. Workmen
thus:
The distinction between a provision and a reserve is 
in commercial accountancy fairly well known. 
Provisions made against anticipated losses and 
contingencies are charges against profits and 
therefore, to be taken into account against gross 
receipts in the P.&L. account and the Balance-sheet. 
On the other hand, reserves are appropriations of 
profits, the assets by which they are represented 
being retained to form part of the capital employed 
in the business. Provisions are usually shown in the 
Balance-sheet by way of deductions from the assets 
in respect of which they are made whereas general 
reserves and reserve funds are shown as part of the 
proprietors interest. (See Spicer and Pegler: Book-
keeping and Accounts, 15th Edn., p. 42.)
In other words the broad distinction between the two is that 
whereas a provision is a charge against the profits to be 
taken into account against gross receipts in the Profit and 
Loss Account , a reserve is an appropriation of profits, the 
asset or assets by which it is represented being retained to 
form part of the capital employed in the business. Bearing 
in mind the aforesaid broad distinction we will briefly 
indicate how the two concepts are defined and dealt with 
by
Companies Act, 1956
."
19.	Our attention, in this behalf, has also been drawn by the learned
Additional Solicitor General to State Bank of Patiala, Patiala v. 
Commissioner of Income Tax, Patiala
[(1996) 3) SCC 513], wherein 
Paripoornan, J. speaking for a Division Bench noticed :
"12. A fair reading of the above decisions would 
go to show that if the transfer of amount is made ad hoc, 
when there is no known or anticipated liability, such fund 
will only be treated as reserve. In this case, substantial 
amounts were set apart as reserves. No amount of bad 
debts was actually written off or adjusted against the 
amount claimed as reserves. No claim for any deduction 
by way of bad debts were made during the relevant 
assessment years. The assessee never appropriated any 
amount against any bad and doubtful debts. The amounts 
throughout remained in the account of the assessee by 
way of capital and the assessee treated the said amounts 
as reserves and not as provisions designed to meet 
liability, contingency, commitment or diminution in the 
value of assets known to exist at the relevant dates of 
Balance-sheets. These facts have been found by the 
Tribunal. On the facts, the amount set apart as reserves 
cannot be said to be so earmarked, when any liability has 
actually arisen or was anticipated by the assessee. It 
cannot be said either, that the amounts set apart out of the 
profits were designed to meet any known liability, that 
existed at the date of the Balance-sheet. Tested in the 
light of the decisions of this Court, referred to 
hereinabove, it appears to us, that the amounts set apart 
towards bad and doubtful debts in these cases are 
reserves qualifying for appropriate relief under Rule 
1(xi)(b) of the First Schedule and Rule 1(iii) of the
Second Schedule of the Act
."
20.	The said decision was rendered in a case involving the
Companies 
(Profits) Surtax Act, 1964
.  It was decided on the fact situation obtaining
in 
that case
.
21.
Section 36(1)(vii)
of the Act lays down the following conditions for 
allowance of a claim for a bad debt  :
i) 	It must be a proper debt, or a part thereof;
ii)	It must be of a revenue nature as contra distinguished from that 	
		of  capital nature;
(a)	It has been taken into account in computing the 
	income of the assessment of that previous year or of an 
	earlier previous year, or
(b)	represents   money  lent  in   the   ordinary   course  of the 
			business of banking.
iii)	which is established to have become a bad debt in the previous 	
		year; and
iv)	has   been  written  off   as   irrecoverable  in the accounts of the 
		assessee for the previous year.
22.	We are, however, of the opinion that it is not necessary for us to dwell 
further upon the said question, inasmuch as a distinction between a 
'provision' and 'reserve' had been kept in mind by the authorities under the 
1961 Act as also the High Court.  Every provision, however, needs not be an 
expenditure, as the same may represent  a liability.
23.	While calculating the profit and loss, what is primarily necessary to be 
taken into account is the gross profit.  The amount of income tax payable for 
the said purpose would not come within the purview of the definition of the 
term 'expenditure'.  It was so held in Ashton Gas Company v. Attorney 
General and Others [(1906) AC 10] in the following terms :
"My Lords, so presented,  the case appears to me 
to be perfectly clear.  The fallacy has been in arguing as 
if you can deduct from the income tax which you have 
got to pay something which alters what is the real nature 
of the profit.  Now the profit upon which the income tax 
is charged is what is left after you have paid all the 
necessary expenses to earn that profit.  Profit is a plain 
English word; that is 2what is charged with income tax.  
But if you confound what is the necessary expenditure to 
earn that profit with the income tax, which is a part of the 
profit itself, one can understand how you get into the 
confusion which has induced the learned counsel at such 
very considerable length to point out that this is not a 
charge upon the profits at all.  The answer is that it is.  
the income tax is a charge upon the profits; the thing 
which is taxed is the profit that is made, and you must 
ascertain what is the profit that is made before you 
deduct the tax  you have no right to deduct the income 
tax before you ascertain what the profit is. I cannot 
understand how you can made the income tax part of the 
expenditure"
24.	Yet again in Allen (H.M. Inspector of Taxes) v. Farquharson Brothers 
and Company [XVII Tax Cases  54],  it was held :
"Now it is not  necessary for me to discuss, and I 
do not need to discuss, in detail or, indeed, at all, 
although my attention was properly called to it by 
counsel, the exact nature of the Income Tax and its 
distinction from Excess Profits Duty.  The distinction, of 
course, is perfectly familiar and, in a general way, is 
recollected by anybody who has ever had anything to do 
with these things.  Income Tax is not a deduction before 
you arrive at the profits; it is a part of the profits.  It is, as 
has been expressed by some well-known person  I 
cannot remember who, but it does not matter  the 
Crown's share of the profits.  Excess Profits Duty was 
quite a different sort of thing.  That was a deduction, the 
sum to be deducted before you arrived at the profits for 
the purpose of computation, with the result that you 
deducted the Excess Profits Duty in arriving at the 
computation and then if, as sometimes happened, later 
on, some Excess Profits Duty was got back, that Excess 
Profits Duty had to be brought in."
25.	The said principle has been applied  by this Court in
Bharat 
Commerce & Industries Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Central-II
[(1998) 3 SCC 510], stating  :
"6. The expenses
in that case
were incurred for a 
very different purpose from the purpose for which the 
assessee has paid interest in the present case. When 
interest is paid for committing a default in respect of a 
statutory liability to pay advance tax, the amount paid 
and the expenditure incurred in that connection is in no 
way connected with preserving or promoting the business 
of the assessee. This is not expenditure which is incurred 
and which has to be taken into account before the profits 
of the business are calculated. The liability in the case of 
payment of income tax and interest for delayed payment 
of income tax or advance tax arises on the computation 
of the profits and gains of business. The tax which is 
payable is on the assessees income after the income is 
determined. This cannot, therefore, be considered as an 
expenditure for the purpose of earning any income or 
profits.
The ratio of Birla Cotton Mills case is not 
applicable in the present case."
26.	It is, therefore, evident that the provision of income tax being not an 
expenditure, the Assessing Officer could not have exercised its jurisdiction 
in relation thereto.
27.	Reliance has been placed by the learned Additional Solicitor General 
on
Madras Motor & General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income 
Tax, Madras
[1979 (117) ITR 534].  In
the said decision
also, the Madras 
High Court categorically held that the provision for payment of income-tax 
is a liability and not an expenditure.
The question again came up for 
consideration recently in
General Insurance Corporation of India v. 
Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay
[(1999) 8 SCC 60] wherein this 
Court rejected the contention of the learned counsel for the assessee therein, 
in the fact situation obtaining
in that case
,  opining :
"19. There is another approach to the same issue.
Section 44
of the Income Tax Act read with the rules 
contained in the
First Schedule to the Act
lays down an 
artificial mode of computing the profits and gains of 
insurance business. For the purpose of income tax, the 
figures in the accounts of the assessee drawn up in 
accordance with the provisions of the
First Schedule to 
the Income Tax Act
and satisfying the requirements of 
the
Insurance Act
are binding on the assessing officer 
under the
Income Tax Act
and he has no general power 
to correct the errors in the accounts of an insurance 
business and undo the entries made therein."
28.
Section 40(a)(ii)
of the 1961 Act, it will bear repetition to state, 
provides for a non-obstante clause.  It is of wide magnitude.
Sections 32
to
38
of the 1961 Act refer to expenditure admissible under the Act.
Section 
40
, however, seeks to make an exception thereto stating that some 
expenditures would not be allowed.
Section 40(a)(ii)
, however, does not say 
that the income-tax would be an expenditure.  It does not provide as to how 
a total income of a person should be computed.  It provides for other types 
of taxes.  The said provision has, therefore, no application in the instant case.
29.	So far as the question of 'bad and doubtful claims' is concerned, again 
the same is not an expenditure.
Section 36(1)(vii)
of the Act whereupon the 
learned Additional Solicitor General placed  strong reliance,  cannot be said 
to have any application whatsoever in the instant case.  It is not relevant for 
computing the profit under  the 1961 Act.  In any event,
Section 44
of the 
Act provides for a non -obstante clause and, thus, would prevail over the 
former.
30.	For the reasons aforementioned, we find no merit in these appeals, 
which are dismissed accordingly with costs.  Counsel's fee is assessed at Rs. 
10,000/- in each case.