[Cites
9
, Cited by
305
]
Supreme Court of India
S.C.Chandra & Ors vs State Of Jharkhand & Ors on 21 August, 2007
Equivalent citations: 2007 (8) SCC 279, AIR 2007 SUPREME COURT 3021, 2007 AIR SCW 5480, 2007 LAB IC 4043, 2008 (1) AIR JHAR R 610, 2007 (10) SCALE 209, (2007) 4 JCR 117 (SC), (2008) 1 SERVLJ 282, (2008) 1 LAB LN 46, (2007) 5 SERVLR 361, (2007) 6 SUPREME 438, (2007) 4 SCT 76, (2007) 10 SCALE 209
Author:
A.K.Mathur
Bench:
A.K.Mathur
,
Markandey Katju
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1532 of 2005

PETITIONER:
S.C.Chandra & Ors

RESPONDENT:
State of Jharkhand  & Ors

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 21/08/2007

BENCH:
A.K.MATHUR & MARKANDEY KATJU

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T 

A.K.MATHUR,J.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1532   OF 2005
With :
C.A.No.6595 of 2005, C.A. Nos.6602-6603 of 2005 &
		C.A.No.6601 of 2005.
C.A. NO.1532 OF 2005.
1.		This appeal is directed against the order dated 4.3.2004 
passed by learned Single Judge  of High Courtof Jharkhand at 
Ranchi in Writ Petition No.3666 of 2001 whereby the learned Single 
Judge  dismissed the writ petition following the decision given by the 
Division Bench of the Jharkhand High  Court  in
Chatradhar Mahto & 
Ors.  V. State of Jharkhand & Ors
.
2.		Brief facts which are necessary for disposal of this appeal 
are that the writ petitioners- appellant filed a writ petition in the High 
Court of Jharkhand seeking a writ of mandamus against respondent 
Nos.3 to 6 to release and pay D.A. with arrears along with interest 
and further a direction was sought to be issued to respondent Nos.3 
to 6  not to close the school or in the alternative a direction was 
sought to be issued to respondent Nos.1 & 2 to take over the 
management and control of the school in question.  All the writ 
petitioners claimed themselves as teachers and non-teaching staff of 
the School and claimed themselves to be the employees of the 
Hindustan Copper Limited (hereinafter to be referred to as 'HCL'). It 
was alleged that in the year 1933 Indian Copper Corporation, a 
private sector unit, registered in the United Kingdom started a  Lower 
Primary School at Moubhander for the children  of its employees 
which was named as Moubhander Lower Primary School.  In the year 
1944-45,  the school was upgraded to Upper Primary School i.e. upto 
Class V.  In 1958-59 the School was upgraded to a Middle School 
and recognition to Middle School was accorded  by the then District 
Superintendent of Education, Chaibasa. Thereafter on 21.9.1972 the
Indian Copper Corporation (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act, 1972
was notified and the Indian Copper Corporation was taken over by 
the Central Government and it became a part of HCL, a Government 
of India enterprise.  It was alleged that thereafter the School was 
sought to be taken over by the State Government  but this was 
resisted  by the Managing Committee of the School.  It was alleged 
that the management of HCL was running two schools, one at 
Mosabani and another at Moubhander as proprietary schools and  
they were managed by the Managing Committee.  The present 
school was getting the financial assistance from the management of 
the HCL.  The Bihar Non-Government Secondary Schools (Taking 
over of Management and Control) Act, 1981 (hereinafter to be 
referred to as the  'Act' ) was passed.
Section 19
of the Act laid down 
certain  conditions  for grant of recognition to such proprietary schools  
run through the Managing Committee  and therefore, it was 
contended that the school was run by the Managing Committee  and 
the service conditions of staff of the school were approved by the 
Executive Director and thereafter request was made by the HCL to 
the Education Commission  for grant of recognition  as a High School.
The school was recognized by the State Government under the 
provisions of the Act of 1981.  It was alleged that the Managing 
Committee of the School was constituted and reconstituted by the 
Management of the HCL.  Thereafter 10+ 2 stream was introduced in 
the said School and a request was made by the President of the 
School to the Director, Bihar Secondary Education seeking 
permission to upgrade the ICC High School, Moubhander  to +2 
stage and the same was recognized by the Government of Bihar. 
However, in the meanwhile  because of critical financial situation the 
managing committee of the school requested the  management of the 
HCL to approach the State Government for taking over of the school 
at the earliest.  The school was not taken over under the Act of 1981 
by the newly formed State of Jharkhand. Since the management of 
HCL was closed on account of financial stress, therefore, no financial 
aid could be extended to the school and the writ petitioners could not 
get their salaries as the financial aid was not coming from the 
management of the HCL and therefore, they approached the High 
Court of Jharkhand for issuance of writ of mandamus against 
respondent nos. 3 to 6  to release pay and arrears along with 
dearness allowance and they also sought a further direction not to 
close down the school and in the alternative a direction was also 
sought to be issued against respondent nos. 1 & 2 to take over the 
management of the school.
3.         A reply was filed by the Management  of HCL.  It took the 
stand that  there was no relationship of employer and employee 
between the management of HCL and the school and it was stated 
that the company was merely  providing grant for imparting education 
and the school was run by the Managing Committee. It was also 
contended that  the school was not the liability of the management of 
the HCL. The school was being managed by the Managing 
Committee and only financial aid was provided by the management of 
HCL from time to time but since the management of HCL was in 
financial doldrums  it was unable to manage the school. However, it 
was categorically stated that there was no relationship of employer 
and employee between the management of HCL and the staff of the  
school.
4.		Learned Single Judge after considering the matter in 
number of petitions, came to the conclusion that the school was not 
the dominant object of the HCL and it found that there was no 
relationship of employer and employee  between the Management of  
HCL and the teachers and other staff of the School.  Therefore, no 
direction was given and the writ petition was dismissed by the learned 
Single Judge relying on the aforesaid judgment in the case of  
Chatradhar Mahto & Ors. V. State of Jharkhand & Ors.. Hence the 
writ petitioner- appellants approached this Court by filing  the special 
leave petition against the order of learned Single Judge dated 
4.3.2004.
5.		We have heard learned counsel for the parties and 
perused the records. The basic question before us is whether a writ 
of mandamus could be issued against the management of HCL. 
Learned Single Judge relying on the  Division Bench  in an identical 
matter pertaining to Bharat Coking Coal Limited  dismissed the writ 
petition of the appellants. This issue was examined in an analogous 
writ petition and in the aforesaid case, this issue was extensively 
considered as to whether  the management of the school is the direct 
responsibility of the HCL or not. After considering the matter in detail, 
learned Single Judge relying on the aforesaid judgment  found that  
there is no relationship of master and servant with that of the 
teachers and other staff  of the school with the HCL as the 
management of the school was done by the Managing Committee  
through liberal financial grant was being made by the Corporation. By 
that there was no direct connection of the management of the HCL 
with that of the management of the school. Though through various 
communication an impression was sought to be given that the school 
is being run by the  HCL but in substance  the HCL   only used to 
provide financial assistance to the school but the management of the 
school was entirely different than the management of the HCL.  
Giving financial assistance does not necessarily mean that all the 
teachers  and staff who are working in the school have become the 
employees of the HCL.  Therefore, we are of the view that the view 
taken by learned Single Judge appears to be correct  that there was 
no relationship of the management of the HCL with that of the 
management of the school  though most of the employees of the HCL 
were in the managing committee of the school. But by that no 
inference can be drawn that the school had been established by the 
HCL.  The children of workers of HCL  were being benefited by  the 
education imparted  by this school. Therefore, the management of 
HCL was giving financial aid but by that it cannot be construed that 
the school  was run by the management of HCL. Therefore,  under 
these circumstances, we are of opinion that the  view taken by the 
learned Single Judge appears to be correct.
6.            Next, it was contended that  even if  the school is not a part 
of the management of the HCL, yet a direction could be given to the 
State of Jharkhand  under the Act of 1981 to take over the 
management of the school and in that connection our attention was 
invited to the definition of proprietary school as defined in
Section 
2(d)
of the Act which reads as under :
"  (d) "Proprietary secondary school" means 
such secondary school whose  entire financial liability 
is borne out by ( any Registered Trust, Association or 
corporate body, individuals or a group of individuals) 
and which according to such conditions and 
registrations laid down from time to time by the State 
Government, may be declared by it proprietary 
secondary school."
Section 3
laid down taking over control and management of non-
government secondary schools by State Government.
Section 19
laid down that  proprietary secondary school can be established.
Section 19
only says that if  any registered Trust ( Association, 
Corporate Body, individual or group of individuals)  applies for setting 
up a secondary school and promises in writing to bear the entire 
financial burden of the school, the State Government shall have the 
power  to permit establishment of such school  after fulfillment of the 
prescribed conditions for recognition under
section 19
. By this it does 
not mean that  writ of mandamus can be issued to the State 
Government for taking over the management of the school. The 
proprietary secondary school is defined under
Section 2(d)
of the Act.  
The State Government can declare a particular school as proprietary 
secondary school under
Section 19
of the Act  on fulfilling certain 
conditions but the basic thing is that the entire finance will have to be 
burdened  by the  Trust, Association, Corporate Body, individual or 
group of individuals. By that the employees of the school will not be 
State Government employees.  A counter affidavit was filed on behalf 
of the State of Jharkhand supported by the affidavit of  Shri Rajendra 
Nath Tripathy, Regional Deputy Director of Education, South Chhota 
Nagpur Division, Ranchi and in  paragraph 12 of the counter affidavit 
it was pointed out that in order to fulfill the constitutional mandate that 
all children between 6 -14  years of age shall be given free and 
compulsory education, the Jharkhand Government has given consent 
and directed the concerned authorities  to take the students of this 
school and admit them in State Committee managed schools or in 
other Government schools within the same area in equivalent classes 
in which they were studying.  Copy of the letter  dated 15.3.2003 has 
been annexed as Annexure-R-1. Therefore, the Government of 
Jharkhand in order to fulfill the constitutional mandate has got these 
students admitted to various schools. Therefore, the studies of the 
students have not been affected. So far as  issuance of mandamus to 
the State Government for taking over of the proprietary school is 
concerned,  that cannot be issued because  the proprietary school as 
defined under
section 2(d)
read with
Section 19
of the Act will have to 
make a request to the State of Jharkhand that they will bear  all the 
financial responsibilities.  If the Managing Committee makes a 
request to this effect to the State of Jharkhand, then the Government 
may consider but at present there is no such offer by the Managing 
Committee  and as such no direction can be given to the State of 
Jharkhand to grant recognition to proprietary school because nobody 
is prepared to take the financial responsibilities of the management of 
the school. Hence, no direction can be issued to the State 
Government to take over the management of the School.
7.		In this view of the matter, we are of opinion that the view 
taken by learned Single Judge of the High Court of Jharkhand 
appears to be correct and there is no ground to interfere with the 
impugned order. Consequently, the Civil Appeal is dismissed with no 
order  as to costs.
C.A.No.6595 , C.A.Nos. 6602-6603  and C.A.No.6601 of 2005.
8.           All these appeals involve common question of law, therefore, 
they are disposed of by this common judgment. For the sake of 
convenient disposal of these appeals, the facts stated in C.A.No.6595 
of 2005 are taken into consideration.
9.		The writ petitioner-appellants  prayed   before the High 
Court of Jharkhand by filing writ petition that direction and order may 
be given to the respondents to fix their  pay scale at par with the pay 
scale of Government Secondary School teachers or at par with Grade 
I and II Clerks of the respondent-company. They also prayed that the 
facilities such as, provident fund, gratuity, pension and other retrial 
benefits  should also be made available to them and it was further 
prayed that the State Government should take over the management 
of Ram Kanali School under the provisions of the Bihar Non-
Government Secondary Schools (Taking over of Management and 
Control) Act, 1981 (hereinafter to be referred to as the 'Act').  A 
counter affidavit was filed by the Bharat Coking Coal Limited 
(hereinafter to be referred to as BCCL)  that  the present Ram Kanali 
School  was not owned by  the said BCCL  and the school was run by 
the Managing Committee and the writ petitioners were never 
appointed by the BCCL and therefore, they were not the employees 
of BCCL. It was also submitted that BCCL used to release non-
recurring grants  to the privately managed schools on  the 
recommendation of the Welfare Committee. But this release of grant 
was subject to certain conditions.  This non-recurring grant-n-aid  did 
not make the school a part of the management of BCCL and 
therefore any teacher in such privately managed school cannot be 
said to be  the employee of BCCL  thereby entitling him all benefits as 
are available to the regular employees  of BCCL.  It was also pointed 
out that the managing committee of Ram Kalai school was given 
grant-in-aid but that has been stopped and they totally disowned the 
responsibilities for any benefits whatsoever.  However, learned Single 
Judge allowed the writ petition and directed that these teachers who 
were working in the school were entitled to the pay scale given to the 
clerks working in BCCL with effect from the date of the judgment  with 
all consequential benefits such as provident fund, gratuity and other 
service benefits available to the employees of BCCL.  So far as 
taking over  of the school  by the State of Jharkhand was concerned, 
no direction was given by learned Single Judge.  Aggrieved against 
this order passed by the learned Single Judge, appeal was prepared  
and along with this appeal two  more appeals were filed  by the BCCL  
before the Division Bench. Therefore, all these three appeals were 
taken up by the Division Bench together and the same were disposed 
of by the common order. The Division Bench examined the matter at 
a greater detail and came to the conclusion that the incumbents were 
not  entitled to the pay scale of the employees of BCCL or equivalent 
to the Government employees and accordingly set aside the order of 
learned Single Judge by order dated 21.1.2004.  Hence, aggrieved 
against this order, all these three appeals have been preferred by the 
private respondents.
10.		We have heard learned counsel for the parties and 
perused the records.  The Division Bench after considering the matter 
came to the conclusion that from the record available the existence of 
relationship of employer and employee  between the management of  
BCCL and  the teachers working the school could not be established. 
The Division Bench further held that BCCL is not an instrumentality of 
the State  as  per
section 617
of the Companies Act as its dominant 
function is to raise coal and sell and imparting education is not its 
dominant function.  The Division Bench further held that the plea that 
a direction may be  issued to the State Government in terms of  the 
Act to take over  the school in question was totally misconceived.  As 
such, the Division Bench  set aside the order of learned Single Judge 
and dismissed the writ petitions.
11. After going through the order of the Division Bench we are of 
opinion that the view taken by the Division Bench of the High Court  is 
correct.  Firstly, the school is not being managed by the BCCL as 
from the facts it is more than clear that the BCCL was only extending  
financial assistance from time to time. By that it cannot be saddled 
with the liability to pay these teachers  of the school as being paid to 
the clerks working with BCCL or in the Government  of Jharkhand.  It 
is essentially a school managed by a body independent of the 
management of BCCL. Therefore, BCCL cannot be saddled with the 
responsibilities of granting  the teachers the salaries equated to that 
of the clerks working in BCCL.
12.         Learned counsel for the appellants have relied on
Article 39
(d) of the Constitution.
Article 39 (d)
does not mean that all the 
teachers working in the school  should be equated  with the clerks  in 
the BCCL or Government of Jharkhand. For application of the 
principle of equal  pay  for equal work.  There should be total identity 
between  both groups i.e. the teachers of the school  on the one hand 
and the clerks in BCCL,  and as such the teachers cannot be equated 
with the clerks of the State Government or of the BCCL. The question 
of application of
Article 39(d)
of the Constitution has recently been 
interpreted by this Court in
State of Haryana & Ors. V. Charanjit 
Singh & Ors.
[ (2006) 9 SCC 321] wherein their Lordships have put 
the entire controversy to rest and held that the principle, 'equal pay 
for equal work' must satisfy the test  that the incumbents are 
performing equal and identical work as discharged by employees 
against whom  the equal pay is claimed.  Their Lordships have  
reviewed all the cases bearing on the subject and after a detailed 
discussion have finally put the controversy to rest that the persons 
who claimed the parity should satisfy the court that the conditions are 
identical and equal and same duties are being discharged  by them.
Though a number of cases were cited for our consideration but no 
useful purpose will be served as in
Charanjit Singh
(supra) all these 
cases have been reviewed by this Court. More so, when we have 
already held that the appellants are not the employees  of BCCL, 
there is no question seeking  any parity of the pay with that of the 
clerks of BCCL.
13.               Hence, as a result of our above discussion, we do not 
find any merit in these appeals and the same are dismissed with no 
order as to costs.