[Cites
34
, Cited by
112
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Girnar Traders vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 27 August, 2007
Equivalent citations: 2007 (7) SCC 555, AIR 2007 SUPREME COURT 3180, 2007 AIR SCW 5782, 2007 (6) AIR BOM R 280, (2007) 6 SUPREME 25, (2007) 3 CURCC 337, (2007) 10 SCALE 391, (2007) 3 LANDLR 287, (2007) 2 LACC 282, (2007) 4 ALL WC 3851, (2008) 1 BOM CR 454
Author:
P.P. Naolekar
Bench:
B.N. Agrawal
,
P.K. Balasubramanyan
,
P.P. Naolekar
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  3703 of 2003

PETITIONER:
M/s. Girnar Traders

RESPONDENT:
State of Maharashtra & Ors

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 27/08/2007

BENCH:
B.N. Agrawal & P.K. Balasubramanyan & P.P. NAOLEKAR

JUDGMENT:
J  U D G M E N T
WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3922 of 2007
[arising out of S.L.P.(C) No. 11446 of 2005]

M/s. S.P. Building Corporation & Anr.             Appellants
   
 
					Versus

State of Maharashtra & Ors.	                    Respondents
P.P. Naolekar, J.
1.		We have had the benefit of perusing the judgment 
prepared by learned brother P.K. Balasubramanyan, J. in Civil 
Appeal No.3703 of 2003 titled M/s.
Girnar Traders  v.  State of 
Maharashtra and Others
, wherein learned brother has taken 
into  consideration  various    decisions  of  this Court,  
including   decisions delivered by  3-Judge Benches, and 
various aspects considered therein, and thought it proper to 
refer the question regarding interpretation and applicability of 
Section 11A introduced into the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
(for short the
LA Act
) by Amendment Act 68 of 1984  to the
Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act, 1966
(for short 
the MRTP Act) for consideration by a larger Bench.
A 3-
Judge Bench of this Court in
Nagpur Improvement Trust   
v.  Vasantrao and Others
, (
2002) 7 SCC 657 and U.P. Avas 
Evam Vikas Parishad  v.  Jainul Islam and Another
, 
(1998) 2 SCC 467, on interpretation of the provisions of the  
Acts under challenge,  has  held that the
LA Act
was 
incorporated in those statutes, that is, they were cases of   
legislation by incorporation and, therefore, the amendment 
brought about subsequently in the
LA Act
would not apply to 
the statutes in question.  However, beneficial amendment of 
payment of compensation under the amended provisions of 
the
LA Act
was made applicable and the owner of the land was 
held to be entitled to the beneficial payment of compensation.  
It appears, it was so held to save the Acts from the vice of 
arbitrary and hostile discrimination.  There does not appear to 
be any justifiable reason for not applying  this principle so far 
as it relates to the acquisition of  land.  If the land is not 
acquired within the stipulated time, then the whole 
proceedings in acquisition comes to an end, and thereby the 
owner of the land would be entitled to retain his land which 
appears to  be  the   superior  right  than  the  owners  right  
to  get  the  compensation for  acquisition of his land.
A 2-
Judge Bench of this Court in
State of Maharashtra and    
Another   v.  Sant Joginder Singh Kishan Singh and 
Others
, 1995 Supp. (2) SCC 475 has held that
Section 11A
of 
the LA Act is a procedural provision and does not stand on the 
same footing as
Section 23
of the LA Act.  We find it difficult to 
subscribe to the view taken.  Procedure is a mode in which the 
successive steps in litigation are taken.  Section 11A not only 
provides a period in which the land acquisition proceedings 
are to be completed but also provides for consequences, 
namely, that if no award is made within the time stipulated, 
the entire proceedings for the acquisition of the land shall 
lapse.  Lapsing of the acquisition of the land results in owner 
of the land retaining ownership right in the property and 
according to us it is a substantive right accrued to the owner 
of the land, and that in view thereof we feel
Section 11A
of the 
LA Act is part of the law which creates and defines right, not 
adjective law which defines method of enforcing rights.  It is a 
law that creates, defines and regulates the right and powers of 
the party. For this and the other reasons assigned by our 
learned brother, we are in agreement with him that the 
question involved requires consideration by a larger Bench 
and, accordingly, we agree with the reasons recorded by my 
learned brother for referring the question to a larger Bench.  
However, on consideration of the erudite judgment prepared 
by our esteemed & learned brother Balasubramanyan, J., 
regretfully we are unable to persuade ourselves to agree to the 
decision arrived at by him on interpretation of Section 127 of 
the MRTP Act and also reference of the case to a larger Bench.   
Section 127 of the MRTP Act is a special provision and would 
be attracted in the peculiar facts and circumstances 
mentioned in the Section itself.  The Section provides a 
procedure for the land owner to get his land de-reserved if 
steps are not taken by the State Government within the 
stipulated period and the relief which the owner of the land is 
entitled to is also provided therein.  The steps to be taken for 
acquisition of land as provided under Section 127 of the MRTP 
Act have to be taken into consideration keeping in mind the 
time lag between the period the land is brought under 
reservation and inaction on the part of the State to acquire it.  
Section 127 of the MRTP Act is a unique provision providing 
remedial measure to the owner of the land whose land is 
under the planning scheme for a long period of time, which 
would be interpreted in the facts and circumstances of each 
individual case.  It does not have any universal application 
and, therefore, the applicability thereof would depend on the 
facts of each case.
S.L.P.(C) No.11446 of 2005  titled M/s. S.P. 
Building Corporation and Anr.  v.  State of Maharashtra and 
Others, is required to be decided  by  this Bench only and, 
therefore,  we propose to decide it as follows:
2.		Leave granted.
3.		The brief facts necessary for deciding the questions 
raised in this appeal are that appellant No.1  is a partnership 
firm registered under the
Indian  Partnership  Act,  1932
and 
is the owner of an immovable property, i.e. a piece of land, 
bearing City Survey No.18/738, admeasuring about 5387.35 
sq.yds. situated at Carmichael Road, Malabar Hill Division, 
Mumbai-400026.
4.		On 7.7.1958, Bombay Municipal Corporation had 
issued a declaration under
Section 4(1)
of the Bombay Town 
Planning Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the Act of 
1954), expressing its intention to prepare a development plan 
for the area under its jurisdiction and published a 
development plan in accordance with the provisions of the said 
Act on 9.1.1964.  The plan was submitted by the Corporation 
to the Government of Maharashtra for sanction on 8.7.1964 
and on 6.1.1967 the Government of Maharashtra accorded 
sanction to the development plan which pertained to D Ward 
of the Corporation area and the plan came into force on 
7.2.1967.  The land of the appellant was notified for 
development as Open Space and Childrens Park.  On 
11.1.1967, the
Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning Act,  
1966
(hereinafter referred to as the MRTP Act) repealed the 
Act of 1954 saving the proceedings already initiated under the 
Act of 1954.
5.           Proceedings were taken up for acquisition of the land.  
Since no award was made as per Section 11A of the Land 
Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984 which came into force on 
24.9.1984, the acquisition proceedings were declared by the 
Land Acquisition Officer to have lapsed.  Later on a revised 
development plan sanctioned by the State Government on 
6.7.1991  came into effect on 16.9.1991.  On 3.2.1998 the 
appellants served notice through their advocates under 
Section 127 of the MRTP Act asking for re-notifying the 
property or to release the said property from reservation and 
accord sanction/approval to develop the property by the 
owner.  In reply, the Municipal Corporation, Greater Mumbai 
informed the appellants that purchase notice issued by their 
advocates was invalid as ten years had not expired since the 
sanction of the revised development plan, came into force on 
16.9.1991.  On 18.10.2000, the appellants again served 
purchase notice under Section 127 of the MRTP Act.  Again 
the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai informed the 
appellants that the notice was invalid as the period of ten 
years had not lapsed from the date of the revised plan.
6.		On 15.3.2002, the appellants addressed yet another 
notice to the Municipal Corporation, Greater Mumbai under 
Section 127 of the MRTP Act stating therein that ten years 
period had lapsed on 16.9.2001 and since no proceedings for 
acquisition of the land as contemplated under Section 127(1) 
of the MRTP Act or under the
Land Acquisition Act
, 1894 
(hereinafter referred to as the
LA Act
) having been 
commenced nor has any award been made or compensation 
paid, the property should be de-reserved.  The purchase notice 
was served on the Municipal Commissioner, Greater Mumbai 
on 19.3.2002.
7.		The counsel for respondent-Municipal Corporation 
has submitted certain documents before us at the time of 
hearing.  In pursuance of the purchase notice served on the 
Municipal Corporation, Greater Mumbai, a meeting of the 
Improvement Committee was called.  On 9.9.2002 (document 
no.1), the Improvement Committee passed Resolution No.183 
recommending the Municipal Corporation to initiate the 
acquisition proceedings under the provisions of Section 126(2) 
and (4) of the MRTP Act read with
Section 6
of the LA Act,  as 
amended upto date, or in the alternative to recommend 
acquisition as provided under Section 126(1) of the MRTP Act.  
The rates for acquisition under the
LA Act
and that under the 
provisions of Section 126(1) of the MRTP Act  were also 
provided for.  On 13.9.2002 (document no.2) without there 
being any resolution sanctioning acquisition or taking steps 
for acquisition, an application was sent by the Chief Engineer 
(Development Plan) to the State Government for initiating 
acquisition proceedings under Section 126 of the MRTP Act as 
amended upto date read with
Section 6
of the LA Act.  
Thereafter, on 16.9.2002 (document no.3) the Corporation 
passed Resolution No.956 whereby  sanction was given to 
initiate the acquisition proceedings of the land and the 
Municipal Commissioner  was authorised to make an 
application to the State Government under the provisions of  
Section 126(2) & (4) of the MRTP Act read with
Section 6
of the 
LA Act, as amended upto date; and / or, initiate proceedings 
under Section 90(1) & (3) of the
Bombay Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1888
as amended upto date, for the land 
being purchased by the Commissioner on behalf of the 
Corporation.  After the Resolution was passed, on 17.9.2002 
(document no.4) a letter was written by the Chief Engineer 
(Development Plan) to the Secretary, Urban Development 
Department, Government of Maharashtra informing that the 
Corporation have accorded sanction to initiate acquisition 
proceedings and for the said purpose authorized the Municipal 
Commissioner to make an application to the State Government 
as per the provisions of Section 126(1) of the MRTP Act as 
amended upto date to issue orders for acquisition of the 
property  under the MRTP Act read with
Section 6
of the LA 
Act.  The letter dated 17.9.2002 is reproduced herein:-
To,
     The Secretary,
     Urban Development Dept.,
     Govt. of Maharashtra,
     Mantralaya,
     Mumbai-400032
     
Sub: Acquisition of land bearing C.S.No.18738 of 
Malabar Hill division reserved for Children Park.
Ref:	i) TPB-4302/572/UD-11 dtd.27.3.02
ii) CHE/ACQ/C/962 dtd. 13.9.2002
     
     Sir,	
     With reference to above, it is to be mentioned 
here that Corporation by their Resolution No. 956 of 
16.9.2002 (copy enclosed) have accorded sanction to 
initiate the acquisition proceedings for the above 
mentioned land reserved for Childrens Park adm.
approximately 4504.52 sq.mt. and also authorized 
the Municipal Commissioner to make application to 
State Govt. as per provision of 126(1) of the 
M.R.&
T.P. Act
1966 as amended upto date to issue 
order for the acquisition of property under reference 
as provided under the provisions of sec. 126(2) (3) 
and (4) of the M.R.&
T.P. Act
1966 as amended upto 
date read with
section 6
of L.A. Act 1894.  The 
application to State Govt. along with the required 
information in the usual proforma in triplicate & three 
copies of plans have already been submitted vide 
this office letter issued u/no. CHE/ACQ/C/962 dtd. 
13.9.2002 (copy enclosed).  This is for information 
and further necessary action.
Yours faithfully,
     
     Sd/-
CHIEF ENGINEER
     (DEVELOPMENT PLAN)
     

Later on the State Government on 20.11.2002 issued a 
notification exercising the power conferred by sub-section (4) 
read with sub-section (2) of Section 126 of the MRTP Act  read 
with
Section 6
of the LA Act.
8.		Having aggrieved by the action of the respondents, 
the appellants filed a writ petition in the High Court of 
Judicature at Bombay which was registered as Writ Petition 
No.353 of 2005 (M/s. S.P. Building Corporation & Anr.  vs.  
State of Maharashtra and Ors.) challenging the proceedings 
initiated by the respondents.  It was contended by the 
appellants that under Section 127 of the MRTP Act, no steps 
having been taken within the period prescribed, the reservation 
is deemed to have lapsed; and secondly, the acquisition 
proceedings initiated under the MRTP Act, are deemed to have 
lapsed  in view of
Section 11A
of the LA Act, the award having 
not been admittedly made within two years from the date of 
publication of the declaration.  The Division Bench of the 
Bombay High Court dismissed the petition on both counts.  It 
was held by the Bombay High Court that the resolution of the 
Improvement Committee passed on 9.9.2002 and the letter 
written by the Chief Engineer dated 13.9.2002 would constitute 
a `step taken by the Municipal Corporation as provided under 
Section 127 of the MRTP Act.
The Division Bench relying on a 
judgment of this Court in the case of
State of Maharashtra 
and Another  v.  Sant Joginder Singh Kishan Singh and 
Others
,  1995 Supp. (2) SCC 475, has held that
Section 11A
of 
the LA Act as amended is not applicable to the proceedings for 
acquisition initiated under the MRTP Act and dismissed the writ 
petition.
9.		The appellants filed this appeal by way of S.L.P. (C) 
No. 11446 of 2005 challenging the order of the Division Bench 
of the Bombay High Court.  This Court by an order dated 
11.7.2005, issued notice and tagged the case along with C.A. 
No. 3703 of 2003 wherein a 2-Judge Bench of this Court had 
doubted the correctness of the decision rendered by this Court 
in
Sant Joginder Singh
Case (supra) on which the Bombay 
High Court has relied, in regard to the applicability of the 
newly inserted provision of
Section 11A
of the LA Act, to the 
acquisition under Chapter VII of the MRTP Act.  Thus, the 
matter has been heard along with C.A. No.3703 of 2003 
wherein the only question raised is in regard to the 
applicability of the new provision of
Section 11A
of the LA Act 
to the acquisition made under the MRTP Act;  whereas, apart 
from the said question, in this case we are also required to 
decide the scope and ambit of Section 127 read with Section 
126 of the MRTP Act for the purposes of de-reservation of the 
land reserved under a development plan.
10.		The question that requires consideration and 
answer in the present case is : Whether the reservation has 
lapsed due to the failure of the planning authority to take 
steps within the period of six months from the date of service 
of the notice of purchase as stipulated by Section 127 of the 
MRTP Act; and also  the question as regards applicability of 
new
Section 11A
of the LA Act to the acquisition of land under 
the MRTP Act.
11.		Under Section 2(19) of the MRTP Act, the planning 
authority means a local authority and includes other 
authorities provided in clauses (a) and (b).  The local authority 
is defined in
Section 2(15)
which for the purposes of this case 
would be the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai 
constituted under the
Bombay Municipal Corporation Act
.
12.		Chapter VII of the MRTP Act deals with land 
acquisition.  Sections 125 to 129 fall in Chapter VII.   Section 
125 provides that any land required, reserved or designated in 
a regional plan, development plan or town planning scheme 
for a public purpose or purposes including plans for any area 
of comprehensive development or for any new town shall be 
deemed to be land needed for a public purpose within the 
meaning of the
LA Act
.   Section 126 provides three modes of 
acquisition of the land included in the town planning scheme 
for the public purpose.  Section 127 provides for lapsing of 
reservation if the land reserved, allotted or designated is not 
acquired by agreement within 10 years from the date on which 
a final regional plan or final development plan comes into force 
or if proceedings for acquisition of land under the MRTP Act or 
under the
LA Act
are not commenced within such period, then 
the owner or any person interested in the land may serve a 
notice.  If within six months from the date of service of such 
notice, the land is not acquired or no steps as aforesaid are 
commenced for its acquisition, the reservation, allotment or 
designation shall be deemed to have lapsed and the land shall 
be deemed to be released from such reservation.  Section 
128(1) confers the power on the State Government to acquire 
the land needed for a public purpose different from any public 
purpose under the scheme, or purpose of  the planning 
authority or development authority or appropriate authority; 
the State Government may, notwithstanding anything 
contained in the MRTP Act, acquire the land under the 
provisions of the
LA Act
.  Section 129(1) empowers the 
Collector after the publication of the declaration under Section 
126(2) to enter on and take possession of the land under 
acquisition after giving a notice of 15 days.
13.     Section 127 falling in Chapter VII requires 
interpretation in the present case.  However, the same cannot 
be understood without reference to Section 126 which has an 
important bearing while interpreting the words used in Section 
127, namely, the land is not acquired or no steps as aforesaid 
are commenced for its acquisition. Therefore, the relevant 
provisions to be considered are Sections 126 and 127 of the 
MRTP Act.   Section 126 of the MRTP Act reads as follows:
126. Acquisition of land required for public 
purposes specified in plans.- (1) When after the 
publication of a draft Regional Plan, a Development 
or any other plan or Town Planning Scheme, any 
land is required or reserved for any of the public 
purposes specified in any plan or scheme under this 
Act at any time the Planning Authority, 
Development Authority, or as the case may be, any 
Appropriate Authority may, except as otherwise 
provided in section 113A, acquire the land,
(a) by agreement by paying an amount agreed 
to, or
(b) in lieu of any such amount, by granting the 
land-owner or the lessee, subject, however, to 
the lessee paying the lessor or depositing with 
the Planning Authority, Development Authority 
or Appropriate Authority, as the case may be, 
for payment to the lessor, an amount 
equivalent to the value of the lessor's interest 
to  be determined by any of the said 
Authorities concerned on the basis of the 
principles laid down in the Land Acquisition 
Act, 1894, Floor Space Index (FSI) or  
Transferable Development Rights (TDR) 
against the area of land surrendered free of 
cost and free from all encumbrances, and also 
further additional Floor Space  Index or 
Transferable Development Rights against the 
development or construction of  the amenity 
on the surrendered land at his cost, as the 
Final Development Control Regulations 
prepared in this behalf provide, or
(c) by making an application to the State  
Government for acquiring such land under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
, 

and the land (together with the amenity, if any, so 
developed or constructed) so acquired by agreement 
or by grant of Floor Space Index or additional Floor 
Space Index or Transferable  Development Rights 
under this section or under the
Land Acquisition 
Act, 1894
, as the case may be, shall vest absolutely 
free from all encumbrances in the Planning 
Authority, Development Authority, or as the case 
may be, any Appropriate Authority.
(2) On receipt of such application, if the State 
Government is  satisfied that the land specified in 
the application is needed for the public purpose  
therein specified, or if the State Government (except 
in cases falling under
section 49
and except as 
provided in section 113A)  itself is of opinion that 
any land included in any such plan is needed for 
any public purpose, it may make a declaration to 
that effect in the Official Gazette, in the manner 
provided in
section 6
of the Land Acquisition Act, 
1894, in respect of the said land. The declaration so 
published shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in the said Act, be deemed to be a 
declaration duly made under the said section:
Provided that, subject to the provisions of sub-
section (4), no such declaration shall be made after 
the expiry of one year from the date of publication of 
the draft Regional Plan, Development Plan or any 
other Plan, or Scheme, as the case may be.
(3) On publication of a declaration under the said
section 6
, the Collector shall proceed to take order 
for the acquisition of the land under the said Act;
and the provisions of that Act shall apply to the 
acquisition of the said land, with the modification 
that the market value of the land shall be, --
(i) where the land is to be acquired for the 
purposes of a new town, the market value 
prevailing on the date of publication of the 
notification constituting or declaring the 
Development Authority for such town;
(ii) where the land is acquired for the purposes 
of a Special Planning Authority, the market 
value prevailing on the date of publication of 
the notification of the area as an undeveloped 
area; and
(iii) in any other case the market value on the 
date of publication of the interim development 
plan, the draft development plan or the plan 
for the area or areas for comprehensive 
development, whichever is earlier, or as the 
case may be, the date or publication  of the 
draft town planning scheme :
Provided that, nothing in this sub-section shall 
affect the date for the purpose of determining the 
market value of land in respect of which 
proceedings for acquisition commenced before the 
commencement of the Maharashtra Regional and 
Town Planning (Second Amendment) Act, 1972:
Provided further that, for the purpose of clause (ii) 
of this sub-section, the market value in respect of 
land included in any undeveloped area notified 
under sub-section (1) of
section 40
prior to the 
commencement of the Maharashtra Regional and 
Town Planning (Second Amendment) Act, 1972, 
shall be the market value prevailing on the date of 
such commencement.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
proviso to sub-section (2) and sub-section (3), if a 
declaration is not made within the period referred to 
in sub-section (2) (or having been made, the 
aforesaid period expired on the commencement of 
the
Maharashtra Regional and Town Planning 
(Amendment) Act, 1993
), the State Government may 
make a fresh declaration for acquiring the land 
under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
, in the 
manner provided by sub-sections (2) and (3) of this 
section, subject to the modification that the market 
value of the land shall be the market value at the 
date of declaration in the Official Gazette made for 
acquiring the land afresh.

Under sub-section (1) of Section 126, after publication of the 
draft regional plan, a development or any other plan or town 
planning scheme, any land required or reserved for any of the 
public purposes specified in any plan or scheme under the 
MRTP Act, may be acquired (a) by agreement between the 
parties by  paying an amount agreed to; or (b) by granting the 
land owner or the lessee, Floor Space Index (FSI) or 
Transferable Development Rights (TDR) against the area of 
land surrendered free of cost and free from all encumbrances 
and also further additional Floor Space Index or Transferable 
Development Rights against the development or construction 
of the amenity on the surrendered land at his cost, as the 
Final Development Control Regulations prepared in this behalf 
provide; or (c) by making an application to the State 
Government for acquiring such land under the
LA Act
.  Sub-
section (2) provides that on receipt of such application or on 
its own motion, the State Government would satisfy itself that 
the land specified in the application, is needed for a public 
purpose and, if it is so found, would make a declaration by 
issuing a notification in the Official Gazette in the manner 
provided in
Section 6
of the LA Act.  Proviso is added to sub-
section (2) whereunder a declaration under
Section 6
of the LA 
Act in the Official Gazette has to be made within one year from 
the date of publication of the draft regional plan, development 
plan or any other plan or scheme, as the case may be.   Sub-
section (3) postulates that on publication of a declaration in 
the Official Gazette under
Section 6
of the LA Act, the Collector 
shall proceed to take orders for the acquisition of the land 
under the
LA Act
and the provisions of that Act shall apply to 
the acquisition of the said land with certain modifications as 
provided in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of sub-section (3) for 
determination of the market value on the basis of  different 
dates.  Sub-section (3) makes it abundantly clear that after  
publication of the declaration in the Official Gazette under
Section 6
of the LA Act, the entire procedure which shall be 
followed will be as provided under the
LA Act
, that is to say, 
from
Section 8
onwards upto
Section 28
of the LA Act which 
deal with acquisition of land under the
LA Act
.
14.		Sub-section (2) of Section 126 provides for one 
years limitation  for publication of the declaration from the 
date of publication of the draft plan or scheme.  Sub-section 
(4), however, empowers the State Government to make a fresh 
declaration under
Section 6
of the LA Act even if the 
prescribed period of one year has expired.  This declaration is 
to be issued by the State Government for acquisition of the 
land without there being any application moved by the 
planning/local authority under clause (c) of Section 126(1).  
Sub-section (4) of Section 126 authorizes the State 
Government to make a declaration for acquisition of the land 
under
Section 6
of the LA Act without any steps taken by the 
planning authority, i.e., Bombay Municipal Corporation.  
Under sub-section (4) of Section 126, the State Government 
can make a fresh declaration if the declaration under sub-
section (2) of Section 126 was not made within the time 
stipulated for acquisition of the land, if it is satisfied that the 
land is required for a public purpose, subject to the 
modification that the market value of the land shall be the 
market value at the date on which the declaration in the 
Official Gazette is made for acquisition of the land afresh.  
Sub-section (4) is the provision whereunder only the State 
Government is authorized and empowered to issue fresh 
declaration for acquiring the land under the
LA Act
.
15.	 	Section 127 of the MRTP Act which requires 
consideration in the present case is a provision which 
provides, as is clear from its heading itself, for lapsing of 
reservation of the lands included in the development plan.  
The development authority for utilization of the land for the 
purpose for which it is included in the plan has to take steps 
and do things within the period stipulated in a particular span 
of time, the land having been reserved curtailing the right of 
the owner of its user.  Section 127 reads as under:
127.  Lapsing of reservations.- If any land 
reserved, allotted or designated for any purpose 
specified in any plan under this Act is not acquired 
by agreement within ten years from the date on 
which a final Regional Plan, or final Development 
Plan comes into force or if proceedings for the 
acquisition of such land under this Act or under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
, are not commenced 
within such period, the owner or any person 
interested in the land may serve notice on the 
Planning Authority, Development Authority or as 
the case may be, Appropriate Authority to that 
effect; and if within six months from the date of the 
service of such notice, the land is not acquired or no 
steps as aforesaid are commenced for its 
acquisition, the reservation, allotment or 
designation shall be deemed to have lapsed, and 
thereupon the land shall be deemed to be released  
from such reservation, allotment or designation and 
shall become available to the owner  for the purpose 
of development as otherwise permissible in the case 
of adjacent  land under the  relevant plan.  
     
Section 127 prescribes two time periods.  First, a period of 10 
years within which the acquisition of the land reserved, 
allotted or designated has to be completed by agreement from 
the date on which a regional plan or development plan comes 
into force,  or the proceedings for acquisition of such land 
under the MRTP Act or under the
LA Act
are commenced.
Secondly, if the first part of Section 127 is not complied with 
or no steps are taken, then the second part of Section 127 will 
come into operation, under which a period of six months is 
provided from the date on which the notice has been served by 
the owner within which the land has to be acquired or the 
steps as aforesaid are to be commenced for its acquisition.    
The six-month period shall commence from the date the owner 
or any person interested in the land serves a notice on the 
planning authority, development authority or appropriate 
authority expressing his intent claiming de-reservation of the 
land. If neither of the things is done, the reservation shall 
lapse.  If there is no notice by the owner or any person 
interested, there is no question of lapsing reservation, 
allotment or designation of the land under the development 
plan.  Second part of Section 127 stipulates that the  
reservation of the land under a development scheme shall 
lapse if the land is not acquired or no steps are taken for 
acquisition of the land within the  period of six months from 
the date of service of the purchase notice.  The word `aforesaid 
in the collocation of the words no steps as aforesaid are 
commenced for its acquisition obviously refers to the steps 
contemplated by Section 126 of the MRTP Act.
16.	  	If no proceedings as provided under Section 127 are 
taken and as a result thereof the reservation of the land 
lapses, the land shall be released from reservation, allotment 
or designation and shall be available to the owner for the 
purpose of development.  The availability of the land to the 
owner for the development would only be for the purpose 
which is permissible in the case of adjacent land under the 
relevant plan.  Thus, even after the release, the owner cannot 
utilize the land in whatever manner he deems fit and proper, 
but its utilisation has to be in conformity with the relevant 
plan for which the adjacent lands are permitted to be utilized.
17.		It is an admitted position that on 16.9.1991 the 
revised development plan was sanctioned and 10 years have 
expired on 15.9.2001 without there being any acquisition or 
steps being taken for acquisition of the land in question.  On 
15.3.2002, the purchase notice under Section 127 was given 
by the appellants which was received by the authorities on 
19.3.2002.  Under the second part of Section 127, the land 
was either required to be acquired or steps in that regard have 
to be commenced by 18.9.2002.  For the first time after the 
service of purchase notice, on 9.9.2002 a proposal was made 
by the Improvement Committee recommending the Municipal 
Corporation for sanction to initiate the acquisition 
proceedings.  On 13.9.2002 without there being any resolution 
by the Municipal Corporation, the Chief Engineer 
(Development Plan) sent an application to the State 
Government for initiating the acquisition proceedings.  For the 
first time on 16.9.2002, a resolution was passed by the 
Municipal Corporation whereby sanction was given to initiate 
the acquisition proceedings of land and the Municipal 
Commissioner was authorised to make an application to the 
State Government and on 17.9.2002 a letter was sent by the 
Chief Engineer (Development Plan) to the Secretary, Urban 
Development Department, Government of Maharashtra for 
initiating acquisition proceedings.   Admittedly, in the present 
case, the land was neither acquired nor were the steps taken 
within 10 years from the date on which the final regional plan 
or final development plan came into force.
18.		Shri Shekhar Naphade, Senior Advocate appearing 
for the State and Shri Bhim Rao Naik, Senior Advocate 
appearing for the Municipal Corporation contended that the 
steps were taken on 17.9.2002 when in pursuance of the 
resolution passed by the Municipal Corporation of Greater 
Mumbai, the Chief Engineer (Development Plan) sent a letter 
to the State of Maharashtra enclosing therewith a copy of 
Resolution No. 956 dated 16.9.2002, requesting that the steps 
be taken for acquisition of the land and this step taken by the 
respondents would constitute `steps for the acquisition of the 
land under clause (c) of Section 126(1) of the MRTP Act, the 
same having been taken on 17.9.2002 when the period of six 
months had not expired, the same to be expired on 18.9.2002 
and, therefore, the provision of de-reservation under Section 
127 would not apply.
19.		It is contended by Shri Soli J. Sorabjee and Shri 
U.U. Lalit, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants, 
that the intent and purpose of Section 127 of the MRTP Act is 
the acquisition of land within six months or the steps are 
taken for acquisition of the land within six months, which 
could only be when a declaration under
Section 6
of the LA Act 
is published in the Official Gazette.  It is submitted by the 
learned senior counsel that the words if within six months 
from the date of the service of such notice, the land is not 
acquired or no steps as aforesaid are commenced for its 
acquisition are not susceptible of a literal construction and 
the words have to be given a meaning which safeguards a 
citizen against arbitrary and irrational executive action which, 
in fact, may not result in acquisition of the land for a long 
period to come.    It cannot be doubted that the period of 10 
years is a long period where the land of the owner is kept in 
reservation.  Section 127 gives an opportunity to the owner for 
de-reservation of the land if no steps are taken for acquisition 
by the authorities within a period of six months in spite of 
service of notice for de-reservation after the period of 10 years 
has expired.
20.		While interpreting the purpose of Section 127, this 
Court in the matter of
Municipal Corporation of Greater 
Bombay v. Dr. Hakimwadi Tenants Association and 
Others
, 1988 (Supp.) SCC 55, has said :
11.    It cannot be doubted that a period of 10 
years is long enough.  The Development or the 
Planning Authority must take recourse to  
acquisition with some amount of promptitude in 
order that the compensation paid to the 
expropriated owner bears a just relation to the real 
value of the land as otherwise, the compensation 
paid for the acquisition would be wholly illusory.
Such fetter on statutory powers is in the interest of 
the general public and the conditions subject to 
which they can be exercised must be strictly 
followed. 

 
The Court also said:
While the contention of learned counsel appearing 
for the appellant that the words `six months from 
the date of service of such notice in
Section 127
of 
the Act were not susceptible of a literal 
construction, must be accepted, it must be borne in 
mind that the period of six months provided by 
Section 127 upon the expiry of which the 
reservation of the land under a Development Plan 
lapses, is a valuable safeguard to the citizen against 
arbitrary and irrational executive action.
Section 
127
of the Act is a fetter upon the power of eminent 
domain.
21.		Giving a plain meaning to the words used in the 
statute would not be resorted to when there is a sense of 
possible injustice.  In such a case, the simple application of 
the words in their primary and unqualified sense is not always 
sufficient and will sometimes fail to carry out the manifest 
intention of law-giver as collected from the statute itself and 
the nature of subject-matter and the mischiefs to be remedied.  
If the plain words lead apparently to do some injustice or 
absurdity and at variance with, or not required by, the scope 
and object of the legislation, it would be necessary to examine 
further and to test, by certain settled rules of interpretation, 
what was the real and true intention of the legislature and 
thereafter apply the words if they are capable of  being so 
applied so as to give effect to that intention. Where the plain 
literal interpretation of statutory provision were to manifestly 
result in injustice never intended by the legislature, the court 
is entitled to modify the language used by the legislature so as 
to achieve the intention of the legislature and to produce a 
rational construction.
22.		Where the legislature has used words in an Act 
which if generally construed, must lead to palpable injustice 
and consequences revolting to the mind of any reasonable 
man, the court will always endeavour to place on such words a 
reasonable limitation, on the ground that the legislature could 
not have intended such consequence to ensue, unless the 
express language in the Act or binding authority prevents 
such limitation being interpolated into the Act.  In construing 
an Act, a construction ought not be put that would work 
injustice, or even hardship or inconvenience, unless it is clear 
that such was the intention of the legislature.  It is also settled 
that where the language of the legislature admits of two 
constructions and if construction in one way would lead to 
obvious injustice, the courts act upon the view that such a 
result could not have been intended, unless the intention had 
been manifested in express words.  Out of the two 
interpretations, that language of the statute should be 
preferred to that interpretation which  would frustrate it.  It is 
a cardinal rule governing the interpretation of the statutes that 
when the language of the legislature admits of two 
constructions, the court should not adopt the construction 
which would lead to an absurdity or obvious injustice.  It is 
equally well settled that within two constructions that 
alternative is to be chosen which would be consistent with the 
smooth working of the system which the statute purported to 
be regulating and that alternative is to be rejected which will 
introduce uncertainty, friction or confusion with the working 
of the system.  [See
Collector of Customs  v. Digvijaysinhji 
Spinning & Weaving Mills Ltd.
(1962) 1 SCR 896, at page 
899 and
His Holiness Kesvananda Bharati  v.  State of 
Kerala
, AIR 1973 SC 1461].
23.		The court must always lean to the interpretation 
which is a reasonable one, and discard the literal 
interpretation which does not fit in with the scheme of the Act 
under consideration.
24.		In series of judgments of this Court, these 
exceptional situations have been provided for.
In
Narashimaha Murthy  v.  Susheelabai
, (1996) 3 SCC 644 
(at page 647), it was held that:
The purpose of law is to prevent  brooding 
sense of injustice. It is not the words of the law but 
the spirit and eternal sense of it that makes the law 
meaningful. 
     
In the case of
American Home Products Corporation v. 
Mac Laboratories Pvt. Ltd. and Another
, AIR 1986 SC 
137 (at page 166, para 66), it was held that:
.. It is a well-known principle of 
interpretation of statutes that a construction should 
not be put upon a statutory provision which would 
lead to manifest absurdity or futility, palpable 
injustice, or absurd inconvenience or anomaly.  
     
Further, in the case of State of Punjab v. Sat Ram Das, 
AIR 1959 Punj. 497,  the Punjab High Court held that:
To avoid absurdity or incongruity, 
grammatical and ordinary sense of the words can, 
in certain circumstances, be avoided.
25.		Many a times, it becomes necessary to look into the 
true intention of the legislature in order to give a proper effect 
to the statutory provisions and in order to achieve the actual 
intended goal behind the legislation.
In the case of
Tirath 
Singh  v.  Bachittar Singh and others
, AIR 1955 SC 830 (at 
page 833, para 7), it was held by the Court that:
Where the language of a statute, in its 
ordinary meaning and grammatical construction, 
leads to a manifest contradiction of the apparent 
purpose of the enactment, or to some inconvenience 
or absurdity, hardship or injustice, presumably not 
intended, a construction may be put upon it which 
modifies the meaning of the words and even the 
structure of the sentence.
The same has been upheld by the Supreme Court in
Commissioner of Income Tax, Bangalore  v.  J.H. Gotla
, 
AIR 1985 SC 1698 and in
Andhra Cotton Mills Ltd.  v.  
Lakshmi Ganesh Cotton Mill
, (1996) 1 ALT 537 (AP).
Similarly, in the case of
State of Rajasthan v. Leela Jain 
and Others
, AIR 1965 SC 1296 (at page 1299, para 11), it was 
held that:
Unless the words are unmeaning or absurd, it 
would not be in accord with any sound principle of 
construction to refuse to give effect to the provisions 
of a statute on the very elusive ground that to give 
them their ordinary meaning leads to consequences 
which are not in accord with the notions of 
propriety or justice
26.		Learned senior counsel appearing on both sides 
have strongly relied on the decision of this Court in
Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Bombay  v.  Dr. Hakimwadi 
Tenants Association and Others
, 1988 (Supp.) SCC 55.  It 
is contended by the learned senior counsel for the appellants 
that the decision squarely covers the proposition of law 
wherein it has been held that the development or the planning 
authority must take recourse to acquisition with some amount 
of promptitude in order that the compensation paid to the 
expropriated owner bears a just relation to the real value of 
the land; and that the period of six months provided by 
Section 127 upon the expiry of which the reservation of the 
land under a development plan lapses, is a valuable safeguard 
to the citizens against the arbitrary and irrational executive 
action.
Section 127
of the Act is a fetter upon the power of 
eminent domain.  On the other hand, the learned senior 
counsel for the State submits that if we read para 11 of the 
above judgment, it is clearly held that the steps for 
commencement of the acquisition obviously refer to the steps 
contemplated by Section 126(1) which means the step taken of 
making an application under clause (c) of Section 126(1) of the 
MRTP Act and has contended  that this Court had already 
observed that after the service of notice from the owner or any 
person interested in the land as provided under Section 127 of 
the MRTP Act, the steps taken within  six months of such 
service,  included any step taken by the appropriate authority 
for the acquisition of land as contemplated under the 
provisions of Section 126 (1) of the MRTP Act. It has been 
further contended that such observation of this Court is 
binding as precedent.
27.		At this juncture, it will be appropriate for us to refer 
some of the judicial pronouncements to illustrate what 
constitutes the binding precedent. This Court in
Additional 
District Magistrate, Jabalpur   v.  Shivakant Shukla
, 
(1976) 2 SCC 521 has observed:
394. The Earl of Halsbury, L.C. said in Quinn v.
Leathem, 1901 AC 495, 506 that the generality of 
the expressions which may be found in a judgment 
are not intended to be expositions of the whole law 
but are governed and qualified by the particular 
facts of the case in which such expressions are to 
be found. This Court in the State of Orissa v.
Sudhansu Sekhar Misra, (1968) 2 SCR 154, 163, 
uttered the caution that it is not a profitable task to 
extract a sentence here and there from a judgment 
and to build upon it because the essence of the 
decision is its ratio and not every observation found 
therein
474. when we are considering the observations of 
a high judicial authority like this Court, the greatest 
possible care must be taken to relate the 
observations of a judge to the precise issues before 
him and to confine such observations, even though 
expressed in broad terms, in the general compass of 
the question before him, unless he makes it clear 
that he intended his remarks to have a wider ambit. 
It is not possible for judges always to express their 
judgments so as to exclude entirely the risk that in 
some subsequent case their language may be 
misapplied and any attempt at such perfection of 
expression can only lead to the opposite result of 
uncertainty and even obscurity as regards the case 
in hand... 

In
Union of India and Others    v.    Dhanwanti Devi and 
Others
, (1996) 6 SCC 44, a three-Judge Bench of this Court 
has observed as follows:
9. It is not everything said by a Judge while 
giving judgment that constitutes a precedent. The 
only thing in a judges decision binding a party is 
the principle upon which the case is decided and for 
this reason it is important to analyse a decision and 
isolate from it the ratio decidendi. According to the 
well-settled theory of precedents, every decision 
contains three basic postulates - (i) findings of 
material facts, direct and inferential. An inferential 
finding of facts is the inference which the Judge 
draws from the direct, or perceptible facts; (ii) 
statements of the principles of law applicable to the 
legal problems disclosed by the facts; and (iii) 
judgment based on the combined effect of the 
above. A decision is only an authority for what it 
actually decides. What is of the essence in a 
decision is its ratio and not every observation found 
therein nor what logically follows from the various 
observations made in the judgment. Every judgment 
must be read as applicable to the particular facts 
proved, or assumed to be proved, since the 
generality of the expressions which may be found 
there is not intended to be exposition of the whole 
law, but governed and qualified by the particular 
facts of the case in which such expressions are to 
be found.
It would, therefore, be not profitable to 
extract a sentence here and there from the 
judgment and to build upon it because the essence 
of the decision is its ratio and not every observation 
found therein. The enunciation of the reason or 
principle on which a question before a court has 
been decided is alone binding as a precedent. The 
concrete decision alone is binding between the 
parties to it, but it is the abstract ratio decidendi, 
ascertained on a consideration of the judgment in 
relation to the subject matter of the decision, which 
alone has the force of law and which, when it is 
clear what it was, is binding. It is only the principle
laid down in
the judgment that is binding law under
Article 141
of the Constitution. A deliberate judicial 
decision arrived at after hearing an argument on a 
question which arises in the case or is put in issue 
may constitute a precedent, no matter for what 
reason, and the precedent by long recognition may 
mature into rule of stare decisis. It is the rule 
deductible from the application of law to the facts 
and circumstances of the case which constitutes its 
ratio decidendi.
10. Therefore, in order to understand and 
appreciate the binding force of a decision it is 
always necessary to see what were the facts in the 
case in which the decision was given and what was 
the point which had to be decided. No judgment can 
be read as if it is a statute. A word or a clause or a 
sentence in the judgment cannot be regarded as a 
full exposition of law. Law cannot afford to be static 
and therefore, Judges are to employ an intelligent 
technique in the use of precedents

Similarly, in Director of Settlements, A.P. and Others      v.
M.R. Apparao and Another, (2002) 4 SCC 638, a Bench 
comprising of three Judges, has observed:
7. But what is binding is the ratio of the decision 
and not any finding of facts. It is the principle found 
out upon a reading of a judgment as a whole, in the 
light of the questions before the Court that forms 
the ratio and not any particular word or 
sentenceA judgment of the Court has to be read in 
the context of questions which arose for 
consideration in the case in which the judgment 
was delivered. An obiter dictum as distinguished 
from a ratio decidendi is an observation by the 
Court on a legal question suggested in a case before 
it but not arising in such manner as to require a 
decision... 

This Court in
Shin-Etsu Chemical Co. Ltd v. Aksh Optifibre 
Ltd. and Another
, (2005) 7 SCC 234 has observed:
69. if the court thinks that an issue does not 
arise, then any observation made with regard to 
such an issue would be purely obiter dictum. It is a 
well-settled proposition that the ratio decidendi of a 
case is the principle of law that decided the dispute 
in the facts of the case and, therefore, a decision 
cannot be relied upon in support of a proposition 
that it did not decide.  [See also: Mittal Engg.
Works (P) Ltd. v. CCE
, (1997) 1 SCC 203 at p. 207 
(para.
8);
Jagdish Lal v. State of Haryana
, (1997) 
6 SCC 538 at p. 560 (para.
17);
Divisional 
Controller, KSRTC v. Mahadeva Shetty
, (2003) 7 
SCC 197 at p. 206 (para. 23).]
28.		We  will now analyse that whether the observations 
of the Court in
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay
Case (supra) as extracted from paragraph 11 of that Judgment 
(supra) constituted binding or authoritative precedent with 
respect to the question of law arising in the present case.
In
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay
Case (supra), the 
planning authority had published a draft Development Plan in 
which land of a trust property was reserved for a recreation 
ground. The Development Plan was finalised and sanctioned 
by the State Government on 6.1.1967. The final development 
scheme came into effect from 7.2.1967. Since no action had 
been taken for acquisition of the land until 1.1.1977, the 
owners thereof, i.e., the trustees, served a purchase notice 
dated 1.7.1977 on Corporation either to acquire the same or 
release it from acquisition, and the same was received on 
4.7.1977.  On 28.7.1977 the Corporations Executive Engineer 
wrote a letter to the trustees asking information regarding the 
ownership of the land and the particulars of the tenants 
thereof.  It was also stated that the relevant date under 
Section 127 of the MRTP Act would be the date upon which 
such information was received. The trustees, by their lawyers 
letter dated 3.8.1977, conveyed that the date of six months 
stipulated by Section 127 had to be computed from the date of 
the receipt from them of the information required and that 
Corporation could not make an inquiry at that stage without 
taking a decision on the material question. The Executive 
Engineer once again wrote to trustees stating that the period 
of six months allowed by Section 127 would commence on 
4.8.1977, i.e., the date when the requisite information was 
furnished. The Corporation passed a resolution dated 
10.1.1978 for the acquisition of the land and made an 
application to the State Government which on being satisfied 
that the land was required for a public purpose issued the 
requisite notification dated 7.4.1978 under
Section 6
of the LA 
Act for acquisition of the land. A petition was filed before the 
High Court to quash the aforementioned notification, which 
was allowed by the Single Judge and subsequently maintained 
by the Division Bench. The contention of the appellant 
Corporation before this Court was that the period of six 
months after the notice by the owner or any person interested 
in the land as specified under section 127, would start from 
date when such person had provided the requisite information 
to the Corporation.
29.
In light of the above-mentioned factual matrix, the 
question of law involved in the
Municipal Corporation of 
Greater Bombay
Case (supra) was as follows:
2. The short point involved in this appeal by 
special leave from a judgment of a Division Bench of 
the Bombay High Court dated June 18, 1986, is 
whether the period of six months specified in
Section 127
of the Act is to be reckoned from the 
date of service of the purchase notice dated July 1, 
1977 by the owner on the Planning Authority i.e. 
the Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay here, 
or the date on which the requisite information of 
particulars is furnished by the owner.
     
The Court has answered the above question as follows:
7. According to the plain reading of
Section 127
of 
the Act, it is manifest that the question whether the 
reservation has lapsed due to the failure of the 
Planning Authority to take any steps within a period 
of six months of the date of service of the notice of 
purchase as stipulated by Section 127, is a mixed 
question of fact and law. It would therefore be 
difficult, if not well nigh impossible, to lay down a 
rule of universal application. It cannot be posited 
that the period of six months would necessarily 
begin to run from the date of service of a purchase 
notice under
Section 127
of the Act. The condition 
pre-requisite for the running of time under Section 
127 is the service of a valid purchase notice. It is 
needless to stress that the Corporation must prima 
facie be satisfied that the notice served was by the 
owner of the affected land or any person interested 
in the land. But, at the same time,
Section 127
of 
the Act does not contemplate an investigation into 
title by the officers of the Planning Authority, nor 
can the officers prevent the running of time if there 
is a valid notice
30.		 Thus, after perusing the judgment in
Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Bombay
Case (supra),  we have 
found that the question for consideration before the Court in 
the
Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay
Case (supra) 
has reference to first step required to be taken by the owner 
after lapse of 10 years period without any step taken by the 
authority for acquisition of land, whereby the owners of the 
land served the notice for dereservation of the land. The Court 
was not called upon to decide the case on the substantial step, 
namely, the step taken by the authority within six months of 
service of notice by the owners for dereservation of their land 
which is second step required to be taken by the authority 
after service of notice. The observations of this Court regarding 
the linking of word aforesaid from the wordings no steps as 
aforesaid are commenced for its acquisition of Section 127 with 
the steps taken by the competent authority for acquisition of 
land as provided under Section 126(1) of the MRTP Act, had 
no direct or substantial nexus either with the factual matrix or 
any of the legal issues raised before it. It is apparent that no 
legal issues, either with respect to interpretation of words no 
steps as aforesaid are commenced for its acquisition as 
stipulated under the provisions of Section 127 or any link of 
these words with steps to be taken on service of notice, were 
contended before the Court. Thus, observations of the Court 
did not relate to any of the legal questions arising in the case 
and, accordingly, cannot be considered as the part of ratio 
decidendi.  Hence, in light of the aforementioned judicial 
pronouncements, which have well settled the proposition that 
only the ratio decidendi can act as the binding or authoritative 
precedent, it is clear that the reliance placed on mere general 
observations or casual expressions of the Court, is not of 
much avail to the respondents.
31.		When we conjointly read Sections 126 and 127 of 
the MRTP Act, it is apparent that the legislative intent is to 
expeditiously acquire the land reserved under the Town 
Planning Scheme and, therefore, various periods have been 
prescribed for acquisition of the owners property.  The intent 
and purpose of the provisions of Sections 126 and 127 has 
been well explained in
Municipal Corporation of Greater 
Bombay
Case (supra).  If the acquisition is left for a time 
immemorial in the hands of the concerned authority by simply 
making an application to the State Government for acquiring 
such land under the
LA Act, 1894
, then the authority will 
simply move such an application and if no such notification is 
issued by the State Government for one year of the publication 
of the draft regional plan under Section 126(2) read with
Section 6
of the LA Act, wait for the notification to be issued by 
the State Government by exercising suo motu power under 
sub-section (4) of Section 126; and till then no declaration 
could be made under Section 127 as regards lapsing of 
reservation and contemplated declaration of land being 
released and available for the land owner for his utilization as 
permitted under Section 127.  Section 127 permitted inaction 
on the part of the acquisition authorities for a period of 10 
years for de-reservation of the land.  Not only that, it gives a 
further time for either to acquire the land or to take steps for 
acquisition of the land within a period of six months from the 
date of service of notice by the land owner for de-reservation.  
The steps towards commencement of the acquisition in such a 
situation would necessarily be the steps for acquisition and 
not a step which may not result into acquisition and merely 
for the purpose of seeking time so that Section 127 does not 
come into operation.  Providing the period of six months after 
the service of notice clearly indicates the intention of the 
legislature of an urgency where nothing has been done in 
regard to the land reserved under the plan for a period of 10 
years and the owner is deprived of the utilization of his land as 
per the user permissible under the plan.  When mandate is 
given in a Section requiring compliance within a particular 
period, the strict compliance is required thereof as 
introduction of this Section is with legislative intent to balance 
the power of the State of eminent domain.  The State 
possessed the power to take or control the property of the 
owner for the benefit of public cause, but when the State so 
acted, it was obliged to compensate the injured upon making 
just compensation.  Compensation provided to the owner is 
the release of the land for keeping the land under reservation 
for 10 years without taking any steps for acquisition of the 
same.  The underlying principle envisaged in Section 127 of 
the MRTP Act is either to utilize the land for the purpose it is 
reserved in the plan in a given time or let the owner utilize the 
land for the purpose it is permissible under the Town Planning 
Scheme.  The step taken under the Section within the time 
stipulated should be towards acquisition of land.  It is a step 
of acquisition of land and not step for acquisition of land.  It is 
trite that failure of authorities to take steps which result in 
actual commencement of acquisition of land cannot be 
permitted to defeat the purpose and object of the scheme of 
acquisition under the MRTPAct by merely moving an 
application requesting the Government to acquire the land, 
which Government may or may not accept.  Any step which 
may or may not culminate in the step for acquisition cannot 
be said to be a step towards acquisition.
32.		It may also be noted that the legislature while 
enacting Section 127 has deliberately used the word `steps (in 
plural and not in singular) which are required to be taken for 
acquisition of the land.   On construction of Section 126 which 
provides for acquisition of the land under the MRTP Act, it is 
apparent that the steps for acquisition of the land would be 
issuance of the declaration under
Section 6
of the LA Act.  
Clause (c) of Section 126(1) merely provides for a mode by 
which the State Government can be requested for the 
acquisition of the land under
Section 6
of the LA Act.  The 
making of an application to the State Government for 
acquisition of the land would not be a step for acquisition of 
the land under reservation.  Sub-section (2) of Section 126 
leaves it open to the State Government either to permit the 
acquisition or not to permit, considering the public purpose for 
which the acquisition is sought for by the authorities.  Thus, 
the steps towards acquisition would really commence when 
the State Government permits the acquisition and as a result 
thereof publishes the declaration under
Section 6
of the LA 
Act.
33.		The MRTP Act does not contain any reference to
Section 4
or
Section 5A
of the LA Act.  The MRTP Act  contains 
the provisions relating to preparation of regional plan, the 
development plan, plans for comprehensive developments, 
town planning schemes and in such plans and in the 
schemes, the land is reserved for public purpose.  The 
reservation of land for a particular purpose under the MRTP 
Act is done through a complex exercise which begins with land 
use map, survey, population studies and several other 
complex factors.  This process replaces the provisions of
Section 4
of the LA Act and the inquiry contemplated under
Section 5A
of the LA Act.  These provisions are purposely 
excluded for the purposes of acquisition under the MRTP Act.    
The acquisition commences with the publication of  
declaration under
Section 6
of the LA Act.  The publication of 
the declaration under sub-sections (2) and (4) of Section 126 
read with
Section 6
of the LA Act is a sine qua non for the 
commencement of any proceedings for acquisition under the 
MRTP Act.  It is
Section 6
declaration which would commence 
the acquisition proceedings under the MRTP Act and would 
culminate into passing of an award as provided in sub-section 
(3) of Section 126 of the MRTP Act.  Thus, unless and until
Section 6
declaration is issued, it cannot be said that the steps 
for acquisition are commenced.
34.		There is another aspect of the matter.  If we read 
Section 126 of the MRTP Act and the words used therein are 
given the verbatim meaning,  then the steps commenced for 
acquisition of the land would not include making of an 
application under Section 126(1)(c) or the declaration which is 
to be made by the State Government under sub-section (2) of 
Section 126 of the MRTP Act.
35.	 	On a conjoint reading of sub-sections (1), (2) and (4) 
of Section 126, we notice that Section 126 provides for 
different steps which are to be taken by the authorities for  
acquisition of the land in different eventualities and within a 
particular time span.  Steps taken for acquisition of the land 
by the authorities under clause (c) of Section 126(1) have to be 
culminated into
Section 6
declaration under the
LA Act
for 
acquisition of the land in the Official Gazette, within a period 
of one year under the proviso to sub-section (2)  of Section
126.  If no such declaration is made within the time 
prescribed, no declaration under
Section 6
of the LA Act could 
be issued under the proviso to sub-section (2) and no further 
steps for acquisition of the land could be taken in pursuance 
of the application moved to the State Government  by the 
planning authority or other authority.  Proviso to sub-section 
(2) of Section 126 prohibits publication of the declaration after 
the expiry of one year from the date of publication of draft 
regional plan, development plan or any other plan or scheme.  
Thus, from the date of publication of the draft regional plan, 
within one year an application has to be moved under clause
(c) of Section 126(1) which should culminate into a declaration 
under
Section 6
of the LA Act.  As per the proviso to sub-
section (2) of Section 126, the maximum period permitted 
between the publication of a draft regional plan and 
declaration by the Government in the Official Gazette under 
Section 126(2) is one year.   In other words, during one year of 
the publication of the draft regional plan, two steps need to be 
completed, namely, (i) application by the appropriate authority 
to the State Government under Section 126(1)(c); and (ii) 
declaration by the State Government on receipt of the 
application mentioned in clause (c) of Section 126(1) on 
satisfaction of the conditions specified under Section 126(2).  
The only exception to this provision has been given under 
Section 126(4).  In the present case, the amended regional 
plan was published in the year 1991.  Thereafter, the steps by 
making an application under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of 
Section 126 for issuance of the declaration of acquisition and 
the declaration itself has to be made within the period of one 
year from the date of the publication of  regional plan, that is, 
within the period of one year from 1991.  The application 
under Section 126(1)(c) could be said to be a step taken for 
acquisition of the land if such application is moved within the 
period of one year from the date of publication of regional 
plan.  The application moved after the expiry of one year could 
not result in the publication of declaration in the manner 
provided under
Section 6
of the LA Act, under sub-section (2) 
of Section 126 of the MRTP Act, there being a prohibition 
under the proviso to issue such declaration after one year. 
Therefore, by no stretch of imagination, the step taken by the 
Municipal Corporation under Section 126(1)(c) of making an 
application could be said to be a step for the commencement 
of acquisition of the land.  After the expiry of one year, it is left 
to the Government concerned under sub-section (4) of Section 
126 to issue declaration under
Section 6
of the LA Act for the 
purposes of acquisition for which no application is required 
under Section 126(1)(c).  Sub-section (4) of Section 126 of the 
MRTP Act would come into operation if the State Government 
is of the view that the land is required to be acquired for any 
public purpose.
36.               The High Court has committed an apparent error 
when it held that the steps taken by the respondent-
Corporation on 9.9.2002 and 13.9.2002 would constitute 
steps as required under Section 126(1)(c) of the MRTP Act.  
What is required under Section 126(1)(c) is that the 
application is to be moved to the State Government for 
acquiring the land under the
LA Act
by the planning/local 
authority.  Passing of a resolution by the Improvement 
Committee recommending that the steps be taken under 
Section 126(1)(c) or making an application by the Chief 
Engineer without there being any authority or resolution 
passed by the Municipal Corporation, could not be taken to be 
steps taken of moving an application before the State 
Government for acquiring the land under the
LA Act
.  The 
High Court has committed an apparent error in relying on 
these two documents for reaching the conclusion that the 
steps for acquisition had been commenced by the Municipal 
Corporation before the expiry of period of six months which 
was to expire on 18.9.2002.  Further, if we look at the letter 
dated 17.9.2002 which, as per the counsel for the respondent-
Corporation, is a request made by the Municipal Corporation 
to the State Government under clause (c) of Section 126(1), we 
cannot agree with the submissions of the respondents.  The 
letter itself shows that the resolution was passed by the 
Municipal Corporation on 16.9.2002 whereby it was informed 
that the sanction had been accorded to initiate the acquisition 
proceedings for the land in question.  The letter also 
mentioned that the authorization had been given to the 
Municipal Commissioner to make an application to the State 
Government as per the provisions of Section 126(1) of the 
MRTP Act.   Under
Section 2(19)
read with
Section 2(15)
with 
Section 126(1)  of the MRTP Act, the application to the State 
Government under clause (c) of Section 126(1) has to be made 
by the planning/local authority, i.e. the  Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Mumbai constituted under the
Bombay 
Municipal Corporation Act
.   The Municipal Corporation had 
passed a resolution delegating authority to Municipal 
Commissioner for making an application to the State 
Government, but the application/letter either dated 13.9.2002 
or 17.9.2002 were made to the State Government by the Chief 
Engineer (Development Plan).  The authority was given by the 
Municipal Corporation to the Municipal Commissioner to 
make an application to the State Government.  No such 
application or letter moved by the Municipal Commissioner 
has been produced before us.  On being asked by this Court, 
as many as six documents have been produced before us by 
the counsel for the Municipal Corporation who has stated 
before us that these documents were also placed before the 
Division Bench of the Bombay High Court.  Therefore, we have 
permitted production of these documents before us.  On a 
minute and careful scrutiny of the documents produced before 
us, we do not find that the application under clause (c) of 
Section 126(1) was moved by the officer authorized by the 
Municipal Corporation, i.e. the Municipal Commissioner, to 
the State Government for acquisition of the land, so that it 
could be said that steps as contemplated were taken for the 
commencement of acquisition proceedings.
37.		In view of our decision on the interpretation and 
applicability of Section 127 of the MRTP Act to the facts of the 
present case, the appellants are entitled to the relief claimed, 
and the other question argued on the applicability of the newly 
inserted
Section 11A
of the LA Act to the acquisition of land 
made under the MRTP Act need not require to be considered 
by us in this case.
38.		For the aforesaid reasons, the impugned judgment 
and order dated 18.3.2005 passed by the Division Bench of 
the Bombay High Court is set aside and this appeal is allowed.  
As no steps have been taken by the Municipal Corporation for 
acquisition of the land within the time period, there is deemed 
de-reservation of the land in question and the appellants are 
permitted to utilise the land as permissible under Section 127 
of the MRTP Act.