[Cites
45
, Cited by
136
]
Supreme Court of India
Swamy Shraddananda @ Murali Manohar ... vs State Of Karnataka on 18 May, 2007
Equivalent citations: AIR 2007 SUPREME COURT 2531, 2007 (12) SCC 288, 2007 AIR SCW 4513, 2007 (5) AIR KAR R 132, 2008 (2) SCC (CRI) 322, (2007) 2 CRILR(RAJ) 728, 2007 ALL MR(CRI) 2622, 2007 (8) SCALE 1, (2007) 8 SCALE 1, (2007) 3 ALLCRIR 2626, 2007 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 728, 2007 CRILR(SC&MP) 728, (2007) 6 KANT LJ 1, (2007) 3 RECCRIR 302, (2007) 4 SUPREME 329
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  454 of 2006

PETITIONER:
Swamy Shraddananda @ Murali Manohar Mishra

RESPONDENT:
State of Karnataka

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 18/05/2007

BENCH:
S.B. Sinha

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T  

S.B. SINHA, J :
1. 	Appellant herein was convicted and sentenced to death for committing 
murder of his wife on or about 28.05.1991 at their residential house situate at 
81, Richmond Road, Bangalore.  The deceased was earlier married to one 
Akbar Khaleeli who was in the diplomatic service in the Government of 
India.  She had four daughters.  The deceased along with her children in the 
year 1983 visited the Maharaja of Rampur.  There she was introduced to the 
appellant.  Appellant at the relevant time was assisting the Rampur royal 
family.  In regard to the management of her landed properties, the deceased 
sought for his assistance.  She had inherited huge properties including House 
No. 81, Richmond Road, Bangalore from her mother.  She had inherited 
some other properties during her marriage.  Some litigations in respect of the 
said properties had been going on.
2. 	Mr. Khaleeli on his assignment as diplomat of Iran went to the said 
country.  The deceased together with her daughters started living at 
Bangalore.  Appellant came there.  He was also staying in the same house.
The deceased desired for a son and she was made to believe by the appellant 
that he was capable of blessing her with a son.  Akbar Khaleeli and the 
deceased separated in the year 1985.  The deceased thereafter married the 
appellant on 17.04.1986.  They started living together at the said house.  She 
had executed a General Power of Attorney and a Will in his favour.    
However, despite her marriage with the appellant, the deceased was 
maintaining her relationship with her parents and daughters.  Mrs. Sabah 
Khaleeli, second daughter of the deceased (PW-5) had all along been in 
touch with her.
3.	It is not in dispute that from 28.05.1991, the deceased was not seen.  
PW-5 had been trying to contact her on phone.  She was informed by the 
appellant that the deceased had gone to Hyderabad.  In June 1991, when 
contacted, she was informed that her mother had gone to Kutch to attend a 
wedding.  A week thereafter it was informed to her that the deceased had 
been lying low owing to some income tax problems.  She, being exasperated 
with the said explanations, came down to Bangalore.  She did not find her 
mother there.  She was told that the deceased being pregnant had gone to 
United States of America for delivery of the child.  She was told to have 
been admitted in Roosevelt Hospital.  She made verifications thereabout 
through her acquaintances and came to know that no such woman had ever 
been admitted to the said hospital.  Appellant being confronted thereto, 
informed her that the deceased had gone to London as she had wanted to 
keep it as a secret.  However, in 1992, when she met the accused at Mumbai, 
noticed the passport of her mother lying in the room of the hotel which 
confirmed that the deceased had not visited USA or London as represented 
to her by the appellant on earlier occasions.
4.	She ultimately informed the Ashok Nagar Police Station by giving a 
written complaint about missing of her mother.  A missing complaint was 
registered on 10.06.1992.  No serious effort, however, was made to find out 
the whereabouts of the deceased.  PW-5 approached the higher authorities 
resulting in the investigation of the matter being entrusted to the Central 
Crime Branch.  Apprehending arrest, Appellant obtained anticipatory bail 
with a condition that he would attend the police between 6 p.m. to 8 p.m. on 
every Monday and shall also make him available to the police.  He applied 
for relaxation of the said condition and by an order dated 3.12.1993, it was 
directed that the appellant shall appear before the police authorities on every 
Monday once in three months.
5. 	The investigation was entrusted to one C. Veeraiaha (PW-37).  He 
suspected the appellant herein.  He was interrogated on 28.03.1994, 
whereupon he made a voluntary statement which was marked as Ex. P-175.  
He stated in great details as to the manner in which he had killed his wife 
and disposed of her dead body.  He also disclosed as to how a wooden box 
of size 2 x 7 x 2 was made, a pit was dug and how the dead body was buried 
there.  He narrated that how with the help of Raju he had put the box into the 
pit covered with mud and on the next day with the help of some masons 
brought by the said Raju kadapa stone slabs were put on the pit and the 
adjacent land and cemented the place.
6.	In the said statement, he stated:
"If I am taken I will show the place where the 
wooden box was prepared and the person who 
prepared it, the persons who transported the box 
and the people who helped in digging out the pit 
and the crow bar, spade, pan used for digging pit, 
the cement bags and the spot where Shakerah is 
buried and I exhume the dead body of the deceased 
and show you.  The statement what all I had earlier 
given to Ashoknagar Police was a false statement 
given intentionally just to escape myself."
7.	An Executive Magistrate Syed Ejaj Ahmad (PW-3) was called for 
exhumation of the dead body.  He asked a doctor to conduct exhumation 
proceeding.  On 30.03.1994, Dr. Nissar Ahmed (PW-14) came to the place 
of occurrence for the said purpose.  Appellant was asked as to whether he 
was ready to show the spot as per his earlier statement.    The entire 
proceeding of exhumation of the dead body was video-graphed.  It took 
place at about 10.30 a.m. on the said day.  Appellant with a chalk piece 
marked the spot.  Coolies accompanying the party as per instructions of the 
appellant himself, dug the earth of the said place whereupon a box was 
noticed.  The plank of the lid of the wooden box was removed.  A bed, a 
nighty, pillow and bed sheets were recovered.  Channaiah who had come 
along with Dr. Nissar Ahmed removed the scalp, skull and hairs of the head 
which were detached from the skull and other bone pieces.  He also removed 
the pieces of the bones.  Another Doctor Shri Thiruvanakkarasu also came 
there.  They joined the bones and fixed the skull and mandible in orderly 
manner.  It was found to be that of a human skeleton.  The mother of the 
deceased Smt. Gauhar Taj Namazie identified a ring which was embedded 
with red stone and two other black rings as belonging to the deceased.  The 
nighty which was recovered was identified to be belonging to the deceased 
by the maid servant who had been working in the house.
8.	The post mortem examination commenced at 4.45 p.m. on 30.03.1994 
which ended at about 6 p.m.
9.	Appellant was, thereafter, charged for commission of murder of his 
wife.  Before the learned Trial Judge, 39 prosecution witnesses were 
examined.  There was no eye-witness to the occurrence.  The prosecution 
was based on circumstantial evidence.
10.	The learned Trial Judge, as noticed hereinbefore, found the appellant 
guilty of commission of offence under
Sections 302
and
201
of the Indian 
Penal Code and sentenced him to death.
11. 	Appellant preferred an appeal before the High Court.  A reference was 
also made by the learned Judge in terms of
Section 366
of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure.
12. 	The circumstances which were found to be existing by the High Court 
for proving commission of the offence are said to be :
"(a)	Motive  Murder for gain
(b)	The deceased Shakereh was last seen alive 
in May 1991 when she was residing at No. 81, 
Richmond Road, Bangalore along with accused 
and his wife.
(c)	Strange conduct of the accused after 28-5-91
(d)	A wooden box (MO.5) was got prepared and 
brought to the house by the accused.
(e)	Discovery of the wooden box containing a 
skeleton and feminine articles buried in the 
backyard of the said house of the accused and the 
deceased in furtherance of information furnished 
by the accused.
(f)	Fixing the identity of the skeleton as that of 
the deceased with the help of skull and the 
admitted undisputed photograph of Mrs. Shakereh 
by photo Super-imposition method.
(g)	Fixing the identity of the skeleton as that of 
the deceased on the basis of DNA finger printing.
(h)	Identifying some of the articles like MOs. 5, 
6, 8, 11 to 17 along with the skeleton in the box as 
belonging to the deceased.
(i)	The last circumstance put forth i.e., the 
attempt of the accused to mislead or to give false 
explanation."
13. 	Before the High Court, a contention was raised that before imposition 
of sentence, the appellant had not been granted adequate opportunity to 
make a representation as was mandatorily required under Sub-section (2) of
Section 235
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.  The High Court gave 
the appellant an opportunity of being heard.  Before the High Court, the 
appellant accepted that he was instrumental in burying the dead body stating:
"The accused submitted that he is innocent and has 
been illegally convicted.  He submitted that as the 
family members of the deceased (parents and 
daughters) had filed number of cases against the 
deceased, she was mentally depressed and was 
taking number of sedative pills/ drugs; that she 
died naturally in May 1991 and as he feared 
adverse consequences, especially repercussions 
from her family members and community people, 
he buried her body in the backyard of his house 
without informing anybody.  He submitted that 
though this fact was not stated by him in the trial 
court, as he could not bear it any more and after 
thinking over the matter for the last few years, he 
has decided to come out with this truth.  He 
submitted that as he is innocent, his conviction be 
set aside and he be acquitted.  So far as the 
sentence is concerned, he submitted that as now he 
is 61 years old and suffering from serious ailments 
like diabetes, hypertension and hernia and as he is 
in custody for the last 11 years, mercy be shown to 
him by reducing the capital punishment, if ever the 
court decides to convict him."
14. 	The High Court, however, affirmed the judgment of conviction and 
sentence.
15. 	Mr. Alok Vagrecha, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
appellant raised the following contentions in support of this appeal:
(i)	A First Information Report having been already lodged by PW-5, a 
second report by the Investigating Officer  PW-37  lodged on 
28.03.1994 (Ex. P-171) was illegal.
(ii)	The purported recovery of the wooden box containing some 
articles and the bones which were not admissible in evidence under
Section 27
of the Indian Evidence Act as the location of the dead 
body was already known, the purported statement made by the 
appellant (Ex. P 175) being wholly inadmissible in evidence, 
consequent recovery of the dead body would also be inadmissible.  
In this connection our attention has been drawn to the fact that the 
appellant was given an opportunity to have the services of a lawyer 
during interrogation.
(iii)	If the prosecution case is true that the appellant had administered 
sedative to the deceased on 28.05.1991 in the afternoon, the courts 
below should have also taken into consideration that in view of the 
statement of the investigating officer that the appellant at about the 
same time on 28.05.1991 was found to be in the company of one 
Rekha Handa, a former Miss India, the prosecution case must be 
held to have not been proved as against the appellant.
(iv)	A Will and General Power of Attorney having already been 
executed by the deceased, the appellant could not have any motive 
to kill her.
(v)	The purported circumstances on the basis whereof the judgment of 
conviction and sentence have been rendered does not complete all 
the links in the chain as there had been (a) no recovery of drug; (b) 
motive had not been proved; and (c) there was no proof that she 
died of poisoning.
(vi)	The purported recovery of drug on 31.03.1994 by the Investigating 
Officer was wholly inadmissible in evidence.
(vii)	The High Court having recorded that the deceased did not meet 
any violent death, the impugned judgment cannot be sustained and 
in any event the death sentence should not have been imposed.
(viii)	The High Court committed a serious illegality in relying upon the 
statement made by the appellant before it as being confession of 
his guilt although the same was meant to be used for the purpose of 
hearing on the question of sentence only.
16. 	Mr. Sanjay R. Hegde, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
State, on the other hand, supported the judgment.  The learned counsel 
would contend that the court while analyzing the evidences brought on 
records should keep in mind the following facts:
(a)	The deceased was a beautiful woman.  She had a husband and four 
daughter
(b)	She was an owner of huge property
(c)	She met her death at the age of 40 years.
(d)	Appellant although could enjoy all the luxuries of life, he had greed 
for more money and, therefore, hatched a plan to murder the deceased 
wherefor he got prepared a wooden box, took advantage of temporary 
absence of the two old servants and at the opportune moment 
administered sedative to the deceased.
(f)	Despite her death, he had been operating the bank account which was 
a joint account and had been acting on the basis of the General Power 
of Attorney.
(g)	He kept to PW-5 at dark although she had been constantly making 
enquiry in regard to the whereabouts of the deceased for one and half 
years.
(h)	The manner in which the dead body was found categorically shows 
the vicious mind of the appellant as the bed-sheet was found on her 
face, her jewelery was found on the top of the body, the deceased had 
nighty on her person and, thus, it was essentially principally a planned 
murder.
17.	We have not doubt that the death of the deceased was homicidal in 
nature.  The identity of the dead body has also been established.  The 
circumstances in which the deceased married the appellant have also not 
been disputed.  Their marriage was proved by PW-8 T.H. 
Lokeshminarayana.  Appellant also did not deny or dispute that he had been 
living with the deceased at all material times at 81, Richmond Road, 
Bangalore.  It has furthermore not been disputed that she had not been seen 
on and from 28.05.1991.
18. 	We have noticed hereinbefore the circumstances which are said to 
have been found by the courts below.  The law in this behalf is now no 
longer res integra.
19.
In
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra
[AIR 1984 SC 
1622], this Court held:
"153. A close analysis of this decision would show that 
the following conditions must be fulfilled before a case 
against an accused can be said to be fully established:
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of 
guilt is to be drawn should be fully established.
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the 
circumstances concerned "must or should" and not "may 
be" established. There is not only a grammatical but a 
legal distinction between "may be proved" and "must be 
or should be proved" as was held by this Court in
Shivaji 
Sahabrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra
where the 
observations were made: [SCC para 19, p. 807: SCC 
(Cri) p. 1047]

"Certainly, it is a primary principle that the 
accused must be and not merely may be guilty 
before a court can convict and the mental distance 
between 'may be' and 'must be' is long and 
divides vague conjectures from sure conclusions."
(2) the facts so established should be consistent only 
with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to 
say, they should not be explainable on any other 
hypothesis except that the accused is guilty,

(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature 
and tendency,

(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis 
except the one to be proved, and

(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as 
not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion 
consistent with the innocence of the accused and must 
show that in all human probability the act must have been 
done by the accused."
20. 	In regard to the circumstantial evidence in a case of death by 
poisoning, this Court opined:
"So far as this matter is concerned, in such cases 
the court must carefully scan the evidence and 
determine the four important circumstances which 
alone can justify a conviction:
(1) there is a clear motive for an accused to 
administer poison to the deceased,  
(2) that the deceased died of poison said to have 
been administered, 
(3) that the accused had the poison in his 
possession,  
(4) that he had an opportunity to administer the 
poison to the deceased."
[See also
Aloke Nath Dutta & Ors. v. State of West Bengal
2006 (13) 
SCALE 467]
21. 	We may proceed to consider the matter keeping in view the 
aforementioned legal principle in mind.
22.	Dr. Nissar Ahamed who examined himself as PW-14 in his evidence 
proved the exhumation of the dead body.  It, as noticed hereinbefore, was 
conducted by the Taluka Magistrate PW-3.  Upon removal of the detached 
skull, mandible, carpal and tarsal, palm and bones from the pit of feet, all the 
said bones were assembled on plastic paper.  A Human skeleton was formed.  
There was a foul smell.  According to him, all the bones were intact.  The 
skeleton was that of a human body.  In the post mortem examination, it was 
found:
"Decomposed and Skeletanised body removed 
from the wooden box described.  The body was 
removed in piece meal from the box as the bones 
were easily coming out from the joints and body 
was assembled in anatomical position which 
consists of skull with black hair measuring 25"
long."
It was further noticed:
"The bones one below the other are: Skull bone 
with mandible, two clavicles, two scapulae, bones 
of upper limbs and lower limbs, vertebral column, 
pelvis and carple and tarsal bones.  The 
decomposed tissue were greish white in colour 
emitting foul smell.  All bones were intact skull 
shows female characteristic feature, articulate well 
with were each other.  Skull suture completely 
obliterated endocrenaly, partially obliterated 
exocreinaly.  All teeth erupted showed attrition.  
The stature was calculated from long bones and 
average taken from the bones.
Right Femur  46 cms.
Right Tibia  39 cms.
Left Humorus  32.5 cms and estimated stature is 
5'4" to 5'6"
Four Pieces of body of sternum fused."
23. 	All the internal organs were found to be decomposed and liquefied.  
He, however, reserved his opinion in regard to the cause of death pending 
chemical analysis.  The doctor preserved skull and mandible for super 
imposition and visera and hair for chemical analysis report and bone marrow 
hair and soft tissues for DNA Fingerprinting.
24. 	PW-14 on the basis of the said FSL report formed his opinion that the 
cause of death cannot be furnished as the percentage/ amount of 
Chlodiazepoxide consumed had not been furnished.  In regard to the effect 
of Chlordizaepoxide on human body, however, his opinion was as under:
"The effect of Chlordiazopoxide on human body 
depends upon the dosage.  They are weight gain, 
as a result of increase appetite, anxiety, nausea, 
vertigo, impaired sexual function, menstrual 
irregularities, skin rashes, agramlocytosis etc."
In regard to the effect of over dose of the said medicine, it was stated:
"Effects of over dose are rare, as the drug has got 
remarkable safety margins.  A few deaths have 
been reported at doses greater than 700 mgs as per 
the literature.  The symptoms are respiratory and 
cardiovascular, dis-function due to the suppression 
of higher centers in the brain."
25. 	PW-14 in his cross-examination opined that the death of the deceased 
was homicidal.  According to him, if the deceased had consumed only one or 
two tablets of Equibrom and her body was put in a box and lid was closed 
suddenly, an unexpected death may occur due to natural causes also.  It is 
not a case where the dead body was not identified to that of the deceased.  
Blood sample of PW-5 was taken.  Blood samples of Mirza Gulam Hussain 
Namazie and Gauhar Taj Begum Namazie had also been taken.  PW-20 
Srimannarayan, Chief Medical Officer of Bowring Hospital, in his evidence, 
spoke about the result of the DNA analysis in regard to taking of the blood 
samples.
26. 	The bones were sent for DNA test to Hyderabad Forensic Science 
Laboratory through Forensic Science Laboratory, Bangalore.  The test was 
conducted by Dr. Laljit Singh, Scientist, who was examined as PW-24.  
According to him, he and Dr. G.V. Rao (PW-17), another scientist in 
Hyderabad together carried the process of DNA isolation and testing from 
Exs. A to D, i.e., from blood of the father, teeth of the deceased, hair of the 
deceased and blood of the mother in two tests being Polymerase Chain 
Reaction (PCR) and HLA DQ typing both the tests confirmed that the 
deceased was the offspring of the said Mirza Gulam Hussain Namazie and 
Gauhar Taj Begum Namazie.
27. 	PW-17 Dr. G.V. Rao categorically stated that in carrying out DNA 
fingerprinting they followed the same procedure as in the case of blood 
samples received earlier which were examined.  He proved the report 
prepared by him and Dr. Laljit Singh on 4.10.1995 which was marked as Ex. 
P-155.
28. 	PW-1 Dr. T.R. Kumari was an Assistant Director of Forensic Science 
Laboratory.  She gave her opinion on 15.09.1994 which was marked as Ex. 
P-125 stating:
"1. Presence of Clonazepam was detected in article 
no. I(a) & I(b).
2. Presence of Alprazolam was detected in article 
No. I(b) & I(f).
3. Presence of Diazepam was detected in article 
No. I(c).
4. Presence of Chlodizepoxide was detected in No. 
I(e), III & IV.
5. No poison was detected in article No. I(h)."
29.	Dr. T.R. Kumari (PW-1) conducted the Photo Superimposition 
Method Test on the skull, which was marked as MO-1 along with the 
admitted photograph of the deceased, which was marked as MO-3.  
According to the said witness, anthropometric characters or land marks of 
the skull and the superimposed admitted photographs matched.  She 
prepared a report, which was marked as Ex.P-2.   Her qualification as an 
expert to conduct the said test is not in doubt.  Even otherwise, she holds a 
Ph.D. degree in Forensic Science.  She has been awarded a medal for her 
research work by the Madras Forensic Society of India.  She has also 
undergone special training in photo superimposition and has submitted a 
number of papers thereon.  Her report as also the report of PW-17 are 
relevant evidences.
30.	The qualification of the expert has not been questioned before us.  The 
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has not raised any 
contention which would point out that the methodology conducted by the 
experts in carrying out the study was in any manner unscientific or raised 
any suspicion as regards the correctness thereof.
31.	It is borne out from the records that even the photographs were 
brought by PW-1 before the trial court.  Identify of the skull vis-`-vis the 
other parts of the body, thus, categorically goes to show that the same was 
that of the deceased, Smt. Shakereh.
32.	It has also not been seriously disputed that the deceased was last seen 
in the company of the company of the appellant.  The fact that she had not 
been seen alive from May, 1991 also stands fully established.
33.	We will hereinafter notice the circumstances which existed in 
establishing the commission of the crime.
34. 	PW-5 Sabah Khaleeli, was the daughter of the deceased through her 
first husband.  She in her deposition categorically stated that she had spoken 
to her mother on 19.04.1991.  She was not available on phone from May, 
1991 onwards.  Gauhar Namazee (PW-25) was the mother of the deceased.  
She in her deposition stated that she had last seen the deceased on 
13.04.1991.  She had not been cross-examined on the said point.  It is also 
not disputed that PW-18 and PW-19, who were husband and wife, were 
engaged by the deceased.  They saw the deceased in the company of the 
appellant in the morning of 28.05.1991, for the last time.  The said witnesses 
were staying in a servant quarter in  the said premises.  PW-18 was working 
as gardener-cum-handyman; whereas PW-19 was working as maid servant, 
since 1988.  They stated in unison that they had seen the deceased  at about 
07.30 A.M. on that day.  According to PW-19, she went to the kitchen to 
prepare tea for the couple and kept the tea cups on the dining table.  She in 
no uncertain terms stated that the cups of tea were taken by the appellant to 
the bed-room where the deceased was reading a newspaper.  PW-19 while 
sweeping the house was called by the deceased and was instructed to clean 
the articles kept in the showcase instead of sweeping.  They, however, 
received a telegram at about 10.00 a.m. whereby they were informed that the 
sister-in-law of PW-19 was sick at Gudisuvarapally in the State of Andhra 
Pradesh.  They sought for leave and some money.  They were permitted to 
leave Bangalore and were asked to collect the requisite amount after some 
time.  They came back to their quarters and started packing their goods.  At 
about 1.30 p.m. they went back to the house.  PW-18, however, was said to 
have been asked by the appellant herein to shift a wooden box kept in the 
guest house to the bed room before leaving.  They together with some others 
took a large wooden box from the guest house and kept the same inside the 
bed room, where they found the deceased sleeping on the bed.  They were 
thereafter paid a sum of Rs.1,200/- towards their salary and additional sum 
of Rs.500/- towards travelling expenses.  They left for their home. They 
came back after a couple of days, but did not find the deceased. The said two 
witnesses in their depositions corroborated each other.
35.	We have noticed hereinbefore that the appellant had applied for grant 
of anticipatory bail in July, 1992 i.e. after the missing complaint was filed by 
PW-5.  In the said application for bail, the appellant himself disclosed that 
the deceased had left for unknown destination in the month of May, 1991, 
allegedly because of  her agitated mental condition.
36.	If it is proved that the deceased died in an unnatural circumstance in 
her bed room, which was occupied only by her and her husband, law 
requires the husband to offer an explanation in this behalf.  We, however, do 
not intend to lay down a general law in this behalf as much   would depend 
upon the facts and circumstances of each case.  Absence of any explanation 
by the husband would lead to an inference which would lead to a 
circumstance against the accused.
37.	We may, however, notice that recently in
Raj Kumar Prasad Tamarkar 
v. State of Bihar & Anr.
[2007 (1) SCALE 19 : JT 2007 (1) SC 239], this 
Court opined :
"Once the prosecution has been able to show that at the 
relevant time, the room and terrace were in exclusive 
occupation of the couple, the burden of proof lay upon 
the respondent to show under what circumstances death 
was caused to his wife.  The onus was on him.  He failed 
to discharge the same."
This legal position would appear from a decision 
of this court in
Nika Ram v. The State of Himachal 
Pradesh
[AIR 1972 SC 2077] wherein it was held:
"It is in the evidence of Girju PW that only the 
accused and Churi deceased resided in the house of 
the accused. To similar effect are the statements of 
Mani Ram (PW 8), who is the uncle of the 
accused, and Bhagat Ram school teacher (PW 16). 
According to Bhagat Ram, he saw the accused and 
the deceased together at their house on the day of 
occurrence. Mani Ram (PW 8) saw the accused at 
his house at 3 p.m., while Poshu Ram, (PW 7) saw 
the accused and the deceased at their house on the 
evening of the day of occurrence. The accused also 
does not deny that he was with the deceased at his 
house on the day of occurrence. The house of the 
accused, according to plan PM, consists of one 
residential room one other small room and a 
varandah. The correctness of that plan is proved by 
A. R. Verma overseer (PW 5). The fact that the 
accused alone was with Churi deceased in the 
house when she was murdered there with the 
Khokhri and the fact that the relations of the 
accused with the deceased, as would be shown 
hereafter, were strained would, in the absence of 
any cogent explanation by him, point to his guilt."
In Trimukh Maroti Kirkan v. State of Maharashtra 
[JT 2006 (9) SC 50], the law is stated in the following 
terms:
"Where an accused is alleged to have committed 
the murder of his wife and the prosecution 
succeeds in leading evidence to show that shortly 
before the commission of crime they were seen 
together or the offence took place in the dwelling 
home where the husband also normally resided, it 
has been consistently held that if the accused does 
not offer any explanation how the wife received 
injuries or offers an explanation which is found to 
be false, it is a strong circumstance which indicates 
that he is responsible for commission of the 
crime"
38.	We have noticed hereinbefore as to why the investigation was taken 
over by the Central Crime Branch.  As the interrogation of the appellant, 
while in custody of the police, revealed the possibility of the deceased 
having been buried in the backyard of her residential house, the 
Investigating Officer requested the Sub-Divisional Magistrate to conduct 
exhumation proceedings, who in turn, authorized the Taluka Executive 
Magistrate (PW-3) to do so.  Confession of the accused was not admissible 
in evidence.  What was admissible only was that part of the confession 
leading to the discovery of fact in terms of
Section 27
of the Indian Evidence 
Act.  The proceedings were conducted in the presence of the accused, which 
were videographed and marked as MO-18.  The learned Trial Judge as also 
the learned Judges of the High Court had the benefit of watching the said 
videograph.  The High Court in its impugned judgment recorded  :
"The videograph and the inquest proceeding 
disclose that a large wooden box was found buried in the 
backyard of the house of the accused and the deceased 
and contained a skeleton.  The videograph recording 
which is not disputed by the accused, clearly discloses 
and shows that it was the accused who was pointing out 
the exact spot to be dug up in the big backyard and in fact 
marked the area with a chalk.  The videograph further 
showed that the backyard flooring was of well laid 
Cuddapah stones property cemented.  In such a situation, 
in our view, nobody except the person who buried the 
box could have the knowledge of its burial."
39.	Discovery of the last remains of the deceased was a relevant fact, 
which was, thus, admissible in evidence.  Appellant had pinpointed the exact 
place which was to be dug up.  He marked the exact area.  He also made an 
oral statement that the box was buried beneath the area so marked, location 
whereof showed that it was a big area, flooring of which had been well 
plastered with cement having Cuddapah stone slabs.  The video showed that 
the slabs had been laid there much earlier and were not of recent origin.
40.
In
Aloke Nath Dutta
(supra), in regard to applicability of
Section 26
and
Section 27
of the Indian Evidence Act, it was stated :
"The policy underlying behind
Sections 25
and
26
is to make it a substantive rule of law that confessions 
whenever and wherever made to the police, or while in 
the custody of the police to any person whomsoever 
unless made in the immediate presence of a magistrate, 
shall be presumed to have been obtained under the 
circumstances mentioned in
Section 24
and, therefore, 
inadmissible, except so far as is provided by
Section 27
of the Act."
41.
Pulukuri Kottayya v. King Emperor
[AIR 1947 PC 67] is an authority 
for the proposition that "fact discovered" envisaged under
Section 27
of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, embraces the place from which the object was 
produced, the knowledge of the accused as to it, but the information given in 
that behalf must relate distinctly to that effect, stating :
"The condition necessary to bring the section into 
operation is that discovery of a fact in consequence of 
information received from a person accused of any 
offence in the custody of a Police Officer must be 
deposed to, and thereupon so much of the information as 
related distinctly to the fact thereby discovered may be 
proved."
It was further observed :
"In their Lordships' view it is fallacious to treat the 
"fact discovered" within the section as equivalent to the 
object produced; the fact discovered embraces the place 
from which the object is produced and the knowledge of 
the accused as to this, and the information given must 
relate distinctly to this fact."
"Information supplied by a person in custody that 
"I will produce a knife concealed in the roof of my 
house" does not lead to the discovery of a knife, knives 
were discovered many years ago.  It leads to the 
discovery of the fact that a knife is concealed in the 
house of the informant to his knowledge, and if the knife 
is proved to have been used in the commission of the 
offence, the fact discovered is very relevant."
42.	An attempt was made by the Bombay High Court to take a different 
view in
Shri Shankar Gopal Patil & Others v. The State of Maharashtra
[2000 (5) Bom. CR 360].
43.	The legal proposition propounded in
Pullukuri Kottaya
(supra) has 
been considered by this Court in
Jaffar Hussain Dastagir v. State of 
Maharashtra
[(1969) 2 SCC 872], Shamshuk Kanwar v. State of U.P. 
[(1995) 4 SCC 430] and State of Maharasthra v. Damu [(2000) 6 SCC 269], 
wherein this Court reiterated it with approval.
44.	The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, in our 
opinion, was not correct to contend that only because the investigating team 
having regard to the purported confession made by the appellant had already 
known that a dead body had been buried in the house,
Section 27
of the 
Evidence Act would not be attracted.  In his statements before the 
investigating officer, he made a confession; but what was admissible in 
evidence his only that part which would come within the purview of
Section 
27
of the Evidence Act and not the rest.  The court while analyzing the 
evidence and appreciating the same cannot take note of confession made 
before the police.
45.	The prosecution case must rest on the other materials brought before 
the court.  It is also not permissible to start with the confession and find 
corroborative evidence thereof and come back to the confession again for the 
purpose of arriving at a conclusion of guilt.
46.	What was, therefore, relevant for the purpose of
Section 27
of the 
Evidence Act was that at the instance of the appellant himself a particular 
place which had been pin pointed by him had been dug and remains of a 
body and other articles were recovered.
47.	The various circumstances leading to the pointing out the guilt of the 
appellant and appellant alone have been enumerated by us hereinbefore.  
From our discussions, it is evident that each of the circumstances had been 
established, the cumulative effect whereof would show that all the links in 
the chain are complete and the conclusion of the guilt is fully established.
48.	We are not oblivious of the fact that there is a material difference 
distance between 'may be' and 'must be' and furthermore in a case of this 
nature the evidence must be considered with more than ordinary care lest the 
shocking nature of crime induce an instinctive reaction against a 
dispassionate judicial scrutiny of the facts and law.  [See
Kashmira Singh v. 
State of Madhya Pradesh
- AIR 1952 SC 159].
49.	The question, however, is as to whether in a case of this nature death 
sentence should be imposed.
In
Aloke Nath Dutta
(supra), this Court had an 
occasion to consider a large number of decisions taking different views in 
regard to the interpretation of the words "rarest of rare cases" as adumbrated 
in
Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab
[(1980) 2 SCC 684].
50.	This Court had also the occasion therein to notice the growing 
demand in the international fora and in particular the second Optional 
Protocol to the International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and the 
Protocol to the American Constitution on Human Rights abolished that death 
penalty should be abolished.
51.	Recently, the Privy Council in Reyes v. R. [(2002) UKPC 11 : 12 
BHRC 219] and Hughes, R. v. (Saint Lucia)  [(2002) UKPC 12], noticing 
the decision of this Court in
Mithu v. State of Punjab
[(1983) 2 SCR 6903], 
opined that the mandatory death punishment is unconstitutional.
[See also 
Fox v. The Queen (2002) 2 AC 284, Bowe v. The Queen (2006) 1 WLR 
1623 and  Coard & Ors. v. The Attorney General (Grenada), (2007) UKPC 
7].
52.	Abolition of death penalty is not being and, in fact, cannot be 
advocated; but what requires serious consideration is as to whether the 
jurisdiction should not be invoked unless there exists an extra-ordinary 
situation to find that it comes within the purview of "rarest of rare" cases.  
The approach of the courts should not be to confine its thought process to 
the identification of a "rare" case.  The expression "rarest of rare" case has 
been evolved by a Constitution Bench of this Court and, thus, demands a 
meaningful application.
53. 	It is interesting to note that Bhagwati, J. in
Bachan Singh v. State of 
Punjab
[(1982) 3 SCC 24], while expressing his dissenting opinion, noticed 
as under :
"This arbitrariness in the imposition of death penalty is 
considerably accentuated by the fragmented Bench 
structure of our courts where Benches are inevitably 
formed with different permutations and combinations 
from time to time and cases relating to the offence of 
murder come up for hearing sometimes before one 
Bench, sometimes before another sometimes before a 
third and so on. Professor Blackshield has in his article 
on Capital Punishment in India published in Volume 21 
ot the Journal of the Indian Law Institute pointed out 
how the practice of Bench formation contributes to 
arbitrariness in the imposition of death penalty. It is well 
known that so far as the Supreme Court is concerned, 
while the number of Judges has increased over the years, 
the number of Judges on Benches which hear capital 
punishment cases has actually decreased. Most cases are 
now heard by two-Judge Benches. Professor Blackshield 
has abstracted 70 cases in which the Supreme Court had 
to choose between life and death while sentencing an 
accused for the offence of murder and analysing these 70 
cases he has pointed out that during the period April 28, 
1972 to March 8, 1976 only 11 Judges of the Supreme 
Court participated in 10 per cent or more of the cases. He 
has listed these 11 Judges in an ascending order of 
leniency based on the proportion for each Judge of plus 
votes (i.e. votes for the death sentence) to total votes and 
pointed out that these statistics show how the judicial 
response to the question of life and death varies from 
judge to judge. It is significant to note that out of 70 
cases analysed by Professor Blackshield, 37 related to the 
period subsequent to the coming into force of Section 
354, sub-section (3) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 
1973. If a similar exercise is performed with reference to 
cases decided by the Supreme Court after March 8, 1976, 
that being the date up to which the survey carried out by 
Professor Blackshield was limited, the analysis will 
reveal the same pattern of incoherence and arbitrariness, 
the decision to kill or not to kill being guided to a large 
extent by the composition of the Bench. Take for 
example
Rajendra Prasad
case decided on February 9, 
1979. In this case, the death sentence imposed on 
Rajendra Prasad was commuted to life imprisonment by 
a majority consisting of Krishna Iyer, J. and Desai, J., 
A.P. Sen, J. dissented and was of the view that the death 
sentence should be confirmed.
Similarly in one of the 
cases before us, namely,
Bachan Singh v. State of 
Punjab
, when it was first heard by a Bench consisting of 
Kailasam and Sarkaria, JJ., Kailasam, J. was definitely of 
the view that the majority decision in Rajendra Prasad 
case9 was wrong and that is why he referred that case to 
the Constitution Bench.
So also in
Dalbir Singh v. State 
of Punjab
, the majority consisting of Krishna Iyer, J. and 
Desai, J. took the view that the death sentence imposed 
on Dalbir Singh should be commuted to life 
imprisonment while A.P. Sen, J. stuck to the original 
view taken by him in Rajendra Prasad case9 and was 
inclined to confirm the death sentence, It will thus be 
seen that the exercise of discretion whether to inflict 
death penalty or not depends to a considerable extent on 
the value system and social philosophy of the Judges 
constituting the Bench"
54.	We are not oblivious of a line of decisions of this Court where the 
doctrine of proportionality has been applied, even in the matter of awarding 
death penalty.  [See
State of Rajasthan v. Kheraj Ram
, (
2003) 8 SCC 224, 
Bablu @ Mubarik Hussain v. State of Rajasthan
, 2006 (
14) SCALE 15 and 
Shivu and Anr. v. R.G. High
Court of Karnataka and Anr. 2007 (3) SCALE 
157]
55.	In this case we need not go into the correctness or otherwise of the 
said view.  Although it is also not necessary to do so, we may notice some 
development of law in this regard.
56.	Criminal Justice Act 1991 of England famously hailed doctrine of 
proportionality as the guiding principle. But since the 1991 legislation, field 
of sentencing has seen much reform and Criminal Justice Act of 2003 
presents a fresh set of sentencing objectives.
Section 142
of the Act 
delineates the following as the purposes of sentencing:
"142    Purposes of sentencing
(1) Any court dealing with an offender in 
respect of his offence must have regard to the 
following purposes of sentencing-
(a) the punishment of offenders,
(b) the reduction of crime (including its reduction 
by deterrence),
(c) the reform and rehabilitation of offenders,
(d) the protection of the public, and
(e) the making of reparation by offenders to 
persons affected by their offences."
57.	In this context it, a reference should also be made of the Halliday 
Report of 2001 (Making Puncishments Work) which has some interesting 
insights to offer on the sentencing structure in England and Wales. In the 
same vein, a White Paper in 2002 has made a case of reforms and suggested 
a shift from the proportionality principle.
58.	In fine, scholarship on sentencing which has been quite diverse in its 
prescriptions certainly has consensus on the point that any decision on 
sentencing aspect would require assessing more than one variables and 
single minded pursuit of any one sentencing ideal would be discounting on 
other equally urgent parameters and objectives.
59.	We do not have a sentencing policy, unlike some other countries.  
England has the concept of "guideline judgments" which is considered as a 
judge managed sentencing model rather than a statute induced one. Section 
354 (3) suggests that Indian law furthers statute induced sentencing guidance 
in part. Therefore it has to be given full colour.
60.	We have no practice of referring such matters to superior courts for 
laying down the guidelines relating to imposition of sentence under various 
situations.  [See The Queen v. Julie McGinley and Michael Monaghan, 
(2003) NICC 1]
61.	In our country, therefore, each case may have to be considered on its 
own merit.
62.	It may be of some interest to note that Furman v. Georgia  [408 U.S. 
238 (1972)] ruled on the requirement for a degree of consistency in the 
application of the death penalty.
Justice Stewart held that:
"The penalty of death differs from all other forms 
of criminal punishment, not in degree, but in kind. 
It is unique in its total irrevocability. It is unique 
in its rejection of rehabilitation of the convict as a 
basic purpose of criminal justice. And it is unique, 
finally, in its absolute renunciation of all that is 
embodied in our concept of humanity.
***			***			***
These death sentences are cruel and unusual in the 
same way that being struck by lightning is cruel 
and unusual. For, of all the people convicted of 
rapes and murders in 1967 and 1968, many just as 
reprehensible as these, the petitioners are among a 
capriciously selected random handful upon whom 
the sentence of death has in fact been imposed."
63.	Justice Brennan while interpreting Eighth Amendment (Amendment 
VIII: (Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor 
cruel and unusual punishments inflicted) of US Constitution observes in 
Furman:
"In determining whether a punishment comports 
with human dignity, we are aided also by a second 
principle inherent in the Clause -- that the State 
must not arbitrarily inflict a severe punishment. 
This principle derives from the notion that the 
State does not respect human dignity when, 
without reason, it inflicts upon some people a 
severe punishment that it does not inflict upon 
others. Indeed, the very words "cruel and unusual 
punishments" imply condemnation of the arbitrary 
infliction of severe punishments."
64.	It is important to refer to Harbans Singh v. Union of India [AIR 1982 
SC 849] at this juncture. In that case three people were sentenced to death by 
the trial court for playing an equal part in jointly murdering a family of four 
persons. The sentence of all the three was confirmed by the High Court. 
Each of them moved to the Supreme Court by different Special Leave 
Petitions before three separate benches. One of the accused's petition was 
dismissed and he was actually executed. Another's petition was allowed and 
his death sentence was commuted to life imprisonment. And the petition of 
the third one was also dismissed. He filed a review petition, which was also 
dismissed, and the Executive refused clemency. He then moved another 
petition before the Supreme Court bringing to light this arbitrariness. The 
Supreme Court recommended the President to commute his sentence. 
Chandrachud J. while lamenting the death of dead accused said:
"The fate of Jeeta Singh has a posthumous moral 
to tell. He cannot profit by the direction which we 
propose to give because he is now beyond the 
process of human tribunals."
65.	Bentham's discourse on determination of minimum punishment and 
maximum punishment serves as a yardstick in this context. Bentham in his 
landmark treatise Principles of Penal Law  propose to establish a proportion 
between crimes and punishments. But he cautions against an oracular 
understanding than an instructive one. We here further go in the details of 
what doctrine of proportionality holds in the realm of sentencing. The first 
rule of proportionality mandates:
"The value of the punishment must not be less in 
any case than what is sufficient to outweigh that of 
the profit of the offence."
While talking of minimum punishment Bentham observes:
"Punishments may be too small or too great; and 
there are reasons for not making them too small, as 
well as not making them too great. The terms 
minimum and maximum may serve to mark the 
two extremes of this question, which require equal 
attention.
With a view of marking out the limits of 
punishment on the side of the first of these 
extremes, we may lay it down as a rule: 
That the value of the punishment must not be less 
in any case than what is sufficient to outweigh that 
of the profit of the offence.
By the profit of the crime, must be understood not 
only pecuniary profit, but every advantage real or 
apparent, which has operated as a motive to the 
commission of the crime."
66.	It is to be appreciated here that statutorily decided minimum sentence 
takes into account the basic value of the crime and suffice to outweigh the 
profit of the offence. The moot question relates to parameters to decide the 
maximum punishment. Setting the trail of caution on the side of 
determination of maximum punishment Bentham posits:
"Punishment, whatever shape it may 
assume, is an evil...
The minimum of punishment is more clearly 
marked than its maximum. What is too little is 
more clearly observed than what is too much. 
What is not sufficient is easily seen, but it is not 
possible so exactly to distinguish an excess. An 
approximation only can be attained. The 
irregularities in the force of temptations, compel 
the legislator to increase his punishments till they 
are not merely sufficient to restrain the ordinary 
desires of men; but also the violence of their 
desires when unusually excited.
The greatest danger lies in an error on the 
minimum side, because in this case the punishment 
is inefficacious; but this error is least likely to 
occur, a slight degree of attention sufficing for its 
escape; and when it does exist, it is at the same 
time clear and manifest, and easy to be remedied. 
An error on the maximum side, on the contrary, is 
that to which legislators and men in general are 
naturally inclinedantipathy, or a want of 
compassion for individuals who are represented as 
dangerous and vile, pushes them onward to an 
undue severity. It is on this side therefore, that we 
should take the most preparations, as on this side 
there has been shown the greatest disposition to 
err."
67.	On the same point Beccaria in his historic work Of Crimes and 
Punishments denounced retributive basis of punishment.
"The aim of punishment can only be to prevent the 
criminal committing new crimes against his 
countrymen, and to keep others from doing 
likewise. Punishments,  therefore, and the method 
of inflicting them, should be chosen in due  
proportion to the crime so as to make the most 
efficacious and lasting impression on  the minds of 
men, and the least painful impressions on the body 
of the criminal.
For a punishment to be efficacious, it is enough 
that the disadvantage of the punishment should 
exceed the advantage anticipated from the crime; 
in which excess should be calculate the certainty of 
punishment and the loss of the expected benefit. 
Everything beyond this, accordingly, is 
superfluous, and therefore tyrannical."
68.	There is a clear and discernible necessity of caution to set the 
maximum punishment in an offence. And also by implication there must be 
intensive and exhaustive inquiry into accused related parameters before 
employing the maximum sentence by a court of law. Therefore discretion to 
the judiciary in this respect (to declare the maximum punishment) is of 
utmost critical and seminal value. Reasons must be detailed setting clearly 
why any punishment other than the maximum punishment will not suffice. 
This is a general and age-old rule of sentencing which has been statutorily 
recognized under section 354(3).
69.	Reference to the decision of other jurisdictions and/or the recent trend 
in the international fora has not been referred to by way of precedents or 
even a persuasive value but the court in this age cannot afford to put down 
blinkers on its window to the outside world.
70.	It is noteworthy to mention here the Law Commission in its Report of 
1967 took the view that capital punishment acted as a deterrent to crime. 
While it conceded that statistics did not prove these so-called deterrent 
effects. It also said that figures did not disprove them either.
71.	Tracing the judicial view on Death Penalty, one can start with the
Jagmohan Singh
case (1973) where it agreed with the Law Commission that 
capital punishment should be retained. But subsequent cases such as those of 
Ediga Anamma (1974) and Rajendra Prasad (1979) saw dissenting voices 
being raised in this court. These led to a hearing of the Bachan Singh (1980) 
case by a Constitutional Bench.
72.
In
Rajendra Prasad v. State of U.P.
[(1979) 3 SCR 646], it was held 
that the special reasons necessary for imposing a death penalty must relate 
not to the crime but to the criminal. It could be awarded only if the security 
of the state and society, public order in the interest of the general public 
compelled that course.
73.	The death penalty was abolished in 1965 in the U.K. Member-states 
of the European Union cannot have the death penalty. In Canada, after the 
abolition of the death penalty in 1976, the homicide rate declined. In 2000, 
there were 542 homicides in Canada  16 fewer than in 1998 and 159 fewer 
than in 1975 (one year prior to the abolition of capital punishment). In 1997, 
the Attorney-General of Massachusetts said: "there is not a shred of credible 
evidence that the death penalty lowers the murder rate. In fact, without the 
death penalty the murder rate in Massachusetts is about half the national 
average."
74.	The South African Constitutional Court unanimously ruled in 1995 
that the death penalty for murder violated the country's Constitution. More 
than 118 countries have abolished the death penalty either in law or practice. 
The second optional protocol to the International Civil Covenant, which 
came into force in 1991, mandates the abolition of the death penalty.
75.	Whatever may be the "merits", "demerits" or "criticism", one cannot 
hope for unjustness in society.  Deterring  or preventive theory may not have 
any application at all in respect of imposition of death sentence.  The law 
itself mandates that for imposing death sentence, special reasons are to be 
assigned.  Imposition of death punishment is an exception in terms of sub-
section (3) of
Section 354
of the Code of Criminal Procedure.  Whereas for 
commission of other offences, one or other theory, justly or otherwise may 
be taken recourse to, a large number of factors are required to be borne in 
mind for awarding death penalty.
76.
In Renuka Bai alias Rinku alias
Ratan and Another v. State of 
Maharashtra
[(2006) 7 SCC 442], Balakrishnan, J. (as the learned Chief 
Justice then was) while imposing a death sentence in a case where the 
appellants had kidnapped seven children and committed their murder in a 
most dastardly manner also noticed:
"36We have carefully considered the whole 
aspect of the case and are also alive to the new 
trends in the sentencing system in criminology"
(Emphasis supplied)
77.	Similarly in
Bhimashya and Ors. v. Smt. Janabi @ Janawwa
[2006 
(14) SCALE 27], Dr. Pasayat, J. took into consideration the overall global 
view imparting death penalty.
78.	This new trend, thus, must be taken into consideration only for 
awarding appropriate punishment.
79.	We may also note that in
Ram Singh v. Sonia & Ors.
[2007 (3) 
SCALE 106] imposition of a death penalty has been upheld in the case 
where the accused had not only put an end to the life of her step brother and 
his whole family which included three tiny tots of 45 days, 2  = years and 4 
years but also her own father, mother and sister in a very diabolic manner so 
as to deprive her father from giving the property to her step brother and his 
family.  It was, in the aforementioned extraordinary situation, held:
"The fact that murders in question were 
committed in such a diabolic manner while the 
victims were sleeping, without any provocation 
whatsoever from the victims' side indicates the 
cold-blooded and premeditated approach of the 
accused to cause death of the victims. The brutality 
of the act is amplified by the grotesque and 
revolting manner in which the helpless victims 
have been murdered which is indicative of the fact 
that the act was diabolic of most superlative degree 
in conception and cruel in execution and that both 
the accused persons are not possessed of the basic 
humanness and completely lack the psyche or 
mind set which can be amenable for any 
reformation"
(Emphasis supplies)
80.	Yet again, another Division Bench of this Court in
Shivu
(supra) has 
upheld the death penalty where the accused was charged with Sections 302 
and 376 read with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code.  In that case, the 
repeated attempts were made by two accused aged 20 and 22 years to 
commit rape on Lakkamma, daughter of one Puttegowda (PW-7).  They 
were caught but only had been admonished.  Yet again, they attempted to 
commit rape on PW-10 who was the daughter of Jayamma (PW-1).  The 
accused persons, however, escaped any punishment even then at the instance 
of village elders and their family members and instead Panchayat of village 
elders was called on each occasion and accused were directed to mend their 
ways.  The court found that emboldened by the escapes from punishment in 
those two incidents, the accused committed rape on the deceased a young 
girl of hardly 18 years and to avoid detection committed heinous and brutal 
act of her murder.
81.	It would, therefore, appear that cases where death penalty is upheld 
are those where murder was committed of a large number of persons or by 
more than one person in a brutal or systematic manner.
82.	Bhagwati, J. in his dissenting opinion in
Bachan Singh
(supra) pointed 
out one;
Aloke Nath Dutta
(supra) has also pointed out other instances.
83.	With utmost respect, I am of the opinion that the doctrine of 
proportionality which is often referred to in the judicial pronouncements in 
regard to the sentencing policy required to be judicially adopted should not 
apply in a case of imposition of capital punishment.  Precedent should not be 
contrary to Parliamentary law; far less the decision of a Constitution bench 
of this Court
84.	We may, however, notice that the question in regard to the death 
penalty again came up for consideration before this Court in
Acharaparambath Pradeepan & Anr. v. State of Kerala
[2006 (
13) SCALE 
600] and Bishnu Prasad Sinha and Anr. v. State of Assam
[2007 (2) SCALE 
42] wherein
Aloke Nath Dutta
(supra) was reiterated.
85.
In
Bishnu Prasad Sinha
(supra), it was observed :
"The question which remains is as to what 
punishment should be awarded.  Ordinarily, this Court, 
having regard to the nature of the offence, would not 
have differed with the opinion of the learned Sessions 
Judge as also the High Court in this behalf, but it must be 
borne in mind that the appellants are convicted only on 
the basis of the circumstantial evidence.  There are 
authorities for the proposition that if the evidence is 
proved by circumstantial evidence, ordinarily, death 
penalty would not be awarded.  Moreover, the appellant 
No.1 showed his remorse and repentance even in his 
statement under
Section 313
of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure.  He accepted his guilt."
(See also
Amarjit Singh v. State of Punjab
,  AIR 2006 SCW 
5712)
86.	We may, however, hasten to add that no universal rule is meant to be 
laid down as even in
Bishnu Prasad Sinha
(supra), the word "ordinarily" has 
been used.  There may be cases and cases where even on circumstantial 
evidence, a death penalty may be imposed.
87.
In
Sahdeo & Ors. vs. State of U.P.
[(2004) 10 SCC 682], this Court 
opined :
"As regards the sentence of death imposed 
on five accused persons by the sessions court, 
which was confirmed by the appellate court, the 
counsel for the appellants, Shri Sushil Kumar 
submitted that in the absence of clear and 
convincing evidence regarding the complicity of 
the accused, these appellants could not be visited 
with the death penalty, while the counsel for the 
State submitted that this is a ghastly incident in 
which eight persons were done to death and the 
death penalty alone is the most appropriate 
punishment to be imposed. Though it is proved 
that there was an unlawful assembly and the 
common object of that unlawful assembly was to 
kill the deceased persons, there is another aspect of 
the matter inasmuch as there is no clear evidence 
by the use of whose fire-arm all the six deceased 
persons died as a result of firing in the bus. It is 
also pertinent to note that the investigating agency 
failed to produce clear and distinct evidence to 
prove the actual overt acts of each of the accused. 
The failure to examine the driver and conductor of 
the bus, the failure to seize the bus and the absence 
of a proper 'mahzar', are all lapses on the part of 
investigating agency. Moreover, the doctor who 
gave evidence before the court was not properly 
cross-examined regarding the nature of the 
injuries. Some more details could have been 
collected as to how the incident might have 
happened inside the bus. These facts are pointed 
out to show that the firing may have been caused 
by the assailants even while they were still 
standing on the footboard of the bus and some of 
the appellants may not, in fact, have had an 
occasion to use the fire-arm, though they fully 
shared the common object of the unlawful 
assembly. Imposition of the death penalty on each 
of the five appellants may not be justified under 
such circumstances. We take this view in view of 
the peculiar circumstances of the case and it should 
not be understood to mean that the accused persons 
are not to be convicted under Section 302 read 
with
Section 149
and the death penalty cannot be 
imposed in the absence of various overt acts by 
individual accused persons. In view of the nature 
and circumstances of the case, we commute the 
death sentence imposed on A-1 Sahdeo, A-4 
Subhash, A-5 Chandraveer, A-7 Satyapal and A-10 
Parvinder to imprisonment for life."
88.
In
Raju vs. State of Haryana
[(2001) 9 SCC 50], it has been opined by 
this Court :
"However, the next question is whether this 
would be a rarest of rare cases where extreme 
punishment of death is required to be imposed. In 
the present case, from the confessional statement 
made by the accused, it would appear that there 
was no intention on the part of the accused to 
commit the murder of the deceased child. He 
caused injury to the deceased by giving two brick 
blows as she stated that she would disclose the 
incident at her house. It is true that learned 
Sessions Judge committed error in recording the 
evidence of SI Shakuntala, PW 15 with regard to 
the confessional statement made to her, but in any 
set of circumstances, the evidence on record 
discloses that the accused was not having an 
intention to commit the murder of the girl who 
accompanied him. On the spur of the moment 
without there being any premeditation, he gave 
two brick blows which caused her death. There is 
nothing on record to indicate that the appellant was 
having any criminal record nor can he be said to be 
a grave danger to the society at large. In these 
circumstances, it would be difficult to hold that the 
case of the appellant would be rarest of rare case 
justifying imposition of death penalty."
89.	It has been a fundamental point in numerous studies in the field of 
Death Penalty jurisprudence that cases where the sole basis of conviction is 
circumstantial evidence, have far greater chances of turning out to be 
wrongful convictions, later on, in comparison to ones which are based on 
fitter sources of proof. Convictions based on seemingly conclusive 
circumstantial evidence should not be presumed as full proof incidences and 
the fact that the same are circumstantial evidence based must be a definite 
factor at the sentencing stage deliberations, considering that capital 
punishment is unique in its total irrevocability. Any characteristic of trial, 
such as conviction solely resting on circumstantial evidence, which 
contributes to the uncertainty in the culpability calculus, must attract 
negative attention while deciding maximum penalty for murder.
90.	One of the older cases in this league dates back to 1874,  Merritt v. 
State, 52 Ga. 82, 85 (1874) where  the Supreme Court of Georgia described 
the applicable law in Georgia as follows:
"By the penal code of this state the punishment of 
murder shall be death, except when the conviction 
is founded solely on circumstantial testimony. 
When the conviction is had solely on 
circumstantial testimony, then it is discretionary 
with the presiding judge to impose the death 
penalty or to sentence the defendant to 
imprisonment in the penitentiary for life, unless the 
jury . . . shall recommend that the defendant be 
imprisoned in the penitentiary for life; in that case 
the presiding judge has no discretion, but is bound 
to commute the punishment from death to 
imprisonment for life in the penitentiary."
91.	Later case of
Jackson v. State
, 74 Ala. 26, 29-30 (1883) followed the 
aforementioned case. [Also see S.M. Phillipps, Famous Cases of 
Circumstantial Evidence with an Introduction on the Theory of Presumptive 
Proof 50-52 (1875)]
92.	In United States v. Quinones, 205 F. Supp. 2d 256, 267 (S.D.N.Y. 
2002) the court remarked:
"Many states that allow the death penalty permit a 
conviction based solely on circumstantial evidence 
only if such evidence excludes to a moral certainty 
every other reasonable inference except guilt."
93.	In the instant case, confession before police was taken as a gospel 
truth. It seems that the judicial mind has a role to play in that behalf in 
imposition of sentence.
94.	Another aspect which needs to be considered as according to the 
Bachan Singh Rule (that sentencing should involve analysis about the nature 
of crime as well as the accused) which require consideration, is the effect of 
two pointers relating to the nature of crime. Firstly, the case does not seem 
to be an instance of what is called a diabolical murder.  We come across 
cases of murdering wife by burning for non-fulfillment of dowry, preceded 
by continuous torture. Simon and Ors. v. State of Karnataka [(2004) 2 SCC 
694] noting the "all murders are cruel" observation in Bachan Singh (supra) 
puts the law on death penalty in perspective as:
"The Constitution Bench said that though all 
murders are cruel but cruelty may vary in its 
degree of culpability and it is only then the 
culpability assumes the proportion of extreme 
depravity that "special reasons" can legitimately be 
said to exist."
95.	Second point relates to planning which went into committing the 
murder. It is agreed that accused deliberately came close to the beautiful and 
wealthy lady. He must have had his intentions and calculations in that 
regard. To that extent intention behind the marriage can be imputed. But to 
infer from that the murder was a pre-planned murder will be going a bit too 
far as he did not know the opportune date when the servant would be  
leaving the house. He could not have known the servants would receive a 
telegram and ask for leave.  Without their leaving the place, the plan, if there 
was any, could not have been executed. This is one weak link in the 
hypothesis that the murder was meticulously planned.
96.	In Kashmir Singh v. State of Himachal Pradesh, [1990 Supp (1) SCC 
133] the Court held:
"There was no infirmity in appraisal of the facts 
and circumstances and the circumstantial evidence 
by the courts below in arriving at the conclusion 
that the accused-appellant has committed the crime 
under
Section 302
IPC. But considering the fact 
that it was not a pre-meditated and cold-blooded 
murder, and also because the appellant appeared 
before the Sessions Judge and made a confessional 
statement, the sentence is converted from death to 
life imprisonment."
97.	Keeping the abovementioned other characteristics of the crime, we 
now delve into whether this instance can be categorized as a "rarest of rare"
murder. The question is whether murder of wife for the purpose of usurping 
property is a rarest of rare crime statistically. It is not to say that rarest of 
rare doctrine only has a statistical dimension i.e. incidence of particular type 
of murder in a given sample; rarest of rare benchmark can also be used in the 
context of other parameters such a brutality, planning, society's reaction et 
al. Facets relating to nature of the crime have already been explained in 
terms of the few parameters mentioned just now. Therefore we attend to the 
incidence aspect. It can not be conclusively said that murder of wife for 
usurping property is a particularly rarest of rare incident. It could, of course, 
be a rare incident.
98.	Also it is to be realized that in criminal cases character of accused is 
immaterial by the mandate of
section 53
and
54
of Indian Evidence Act. The 
same should not factor in the discussions at the sentencing stage.  If that be 
so, bad character of the accused by itself should not be a determinative 
factor.
99.	In fact, Appellant should not have been heard at that stage.  The stage 
of hearing an accused under Section 235(2) of the Code is after the judgment 
of conviction is pronounced and not prior thereto.  Appellant herein made a 
confession before the High Court.  The High Court took the same into 
consideration in the main judgment which could not be done.  He had been 
brought before the High Court only for purpose of fulfilling the requirement 
of sub-section (2) of
Section 235
of the Code of Criminal Procedure.  His 
Statement was taken during midst of hearing.  He knew the implications 
thereof.  Despite the same, he made a categorical statement that he was 
responsible for burring the dead body.  He gave an explanation, which might 
not have found favour with the High Court, but the fact that he had made a 
confession at least accepting a part of the offence could not have been 
ignored at least for the purpose of imposition of punishment.  He is more 
than 64 years' old.  He is in custody for a period of 16 years.  The death 
sentence was awarded to him by the trial court in terms of its judgment dated 
20.05.2005.  In a situation of this nature, we are of the opinion that 
imposition of a life imprisonment for commission of the crime under Section 
302 shall serve the ends of justice.
100.	However, while saying so, we direct that in a case of this nature 'life 
sentence' must be meant to be 'life sentence'.  Such a direction can be given, 
as would appear from some precedents.  {See
Subhash Chander v. Krishan 
Lal and Ors.
[(2001) 4 SCC 458]}.
101.	Yet again in
Ram Anup Singh and Ors. v. State of Bihar
[(2002) 6 
SCC 686], this Court directed that the accused shall remain in jail for a 
period of not less than 20 years.
[See
Prakash Dhawal Khairnar (Patil) v. 
State of Maharashtra
, (2002) 2 SCC 35], Shri Bhagwan v. State of Rajasthan 
[(2001) 6 SCC 296] and Mohd. Munna etc. v. Union of India & Ors. etc.  
[(2005) 7 SCC 417].
102.	However, before parting with this case, we may notice that a prayer 
was made by Smt. Sabhah Khaleeli (daughter of the deceased) that the 
mortal remains of Smt. Shakereh (deceased) including skull are required by 
the family of the deceased for burial and obsequies ceremony.  The High 
Court has issued such a direction.  As the family of the deceased and in 
particular Smt. Sabah Khaleeli (PW-5) desires to perform burial and other 
obsequies ceremonies, we direct that the order of the High Court, in this 
behalf, may be implemented, as expeditiously as possible.
103.	For the reasons aforementioned, the appeal is dismissed, subject to the 
modification in sentence, as directed hereinbefore.