[Cites
13
, Cited by
251
]
Supreme Court of India
Sukhdev Singh vs Union Of India & Ors on 23 April, 2013
Equivalent citations: AIR 2013 SUPREME COURT 2741, 2013 (9) SCC 566, 2013 AIR SCW 3801, 2013 LAB. I. C. 2925, 2013 (4) ABR 1138, 2013 (3) AIR KANT HCR 316, (2013) 2 ESC 337, (2013) 137 FACLR 907, (2013) 4 SERVLR 440, (2013) 6 SCALE 490, (2013) 2 LAB LN 578, (2013) 3 ALL WC 3148, (2013) 3 KER LT 80, (2013) 3 MAD LW 655, (2013) 4 SCT 129, 2013 (5) ADJ 53 NOC, 2013 (4) KCCR SN 412 (SC)
Bench:
Kurian Joseph
,
Madan B. Lokur
,
R.M. Lodha
REPORTABLE
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5892 OF 2006


| SUKHDEV SINGH                                         |...|  APPELLANT(s)    |



|                      Versus                                                   |

| UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                             |...|  RESPONDENT(s)    |

                                 O R D E R
While granting leave on December  12,  2006,  a  two  Judge
       Bench (S.B. Sinha and Markandey  Katju,  JJ.)  felt  that  there  was
       inconsistency in the decisions of this Court in
U.P.  Jal  Nigam  and
       others vs. Prabhat Chandra Jain
and others1,  and
Union of India  and
       another vs. Major Bahadur Singh2
and consequently, opined  that  the
       matter should be heard by a larger Bench.
This is  how  the  matter
       has come up for consideration before us.
2.        The  referral  order  dated  December  12,  2006  reads  as
       follows:
“The appellant herein was  appointed  as  Deputy  Director  of
              Training on  or  about  13.11.1992.  He  attended  a  training
              programme on Computer  Applied  Technology.  He  was  sent  on
              deputation on various occasions in  1997,1998 and yet again in
              2000. Indisputably, remarks in his Annual Confidential Reports
              throughout had been “Outstanding” or “Very good”. He, however,
              in two years i.e. 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 obtained only “Good”
              remark in his Annual Confidential Report. The effect of such a
              downgrading falls for our consideration. The  Union  of  India
              issued a Office Memorandum on 8.2.2002 wherein the Bench  mark
              for promotion was directed to be “Very Good”in terms of clause
3.2 thereof. It is also not in dispute  that   Guidelines  for
              the Departmental Promotion Committees had been issued  by  the
              Union of  India  wherein,  inter  alia,  it  was  directed  as
              follows:
“.....6.2.1(b)   The   DPC   should   assess   the
              suitability of the employees for promotion  on  the  basis  of
              their Service Records and with particular reference to the CRs
              for  five  preceding  years  irrespective  of  the  qualifying
              service  prescribed  in  the  Service/Recruitment  Rules.  The
              'preceding five years' for  the  aforesaid  purpose  shall  be
              decided as per the guidelines contained in the  DoP  &  T  O.M
              No.22011/9/98-Estt.(D), dated 8.9.1998,  which  prescribe  the
              Model Calendar for DPC read with  OM  of  even  number,  dated
              16.6.2000.(If more  than  one  CR  have  been  written  for  a
              particular year, all the CRs for the relevant years  shall  be
              considered together as the CR for one year}.”


                         The question as to whether such a downgradation  of
              Annual Confidential Report would amount to adverse remark  and
              thus it would be required to be communicated or not  fell  for
              consideration before this Court in
U.P. Jal Nigam and Ors. Vs.
              Prabhat Chandra Jain and Ors.
-  (1996)  2  SCC  363  in  the
              following terms:
“ We need to explain these observations of the High  Court.
              The Nigam has rules, whereunder an adverse entry  is  required
              to  be  communicated  to  the  employee  concerned,  but   not
              downgrading of an entry. It has been urged on  behalf  of  the
              Nigam that when the nature of the entry does not  reflect  any
              adverseness that is not required to  be  communicated.  As  we
              view it the extreme illustration given by the High  Court  may
              reflect an adverse element compulsorily communicable,  but  if
              the graded entry is of going a step  down  like  falling  from
              'very good' to 'good' that may not ordinarily  be  an  adverse
              entry since both have a positive grading. All that is required
              by the authority recording confidentials in the  situation  is
              to record reasons for such downgrading on the personal file of
              the officer concerned and inform him of the change in the form
              of an advice. If the variation warranted be  not  permissible,
              then the very purpose of writing annual  confidential  reports
              would be frustrated. Having  achieved  an  optimum  level  the
              employee on his part may slacken in his work, relaxing  secure
              by his one-time achievement.  This  would  be  an  undesirable
              situation. All the same the sting of adverseness must, in  all
              events, not be reflected in  such  variations,  as  otherwise,
              they shall be communicated as such. It may be emphasised  that
              even a  positive  confidential  entry  in  a  given  case  can
              perilously be adverse and to say that an adverse entry  should
              always be qualitatively damaging  may  not  be  true.  In  the
              instant case we have seen the  service  record  of  the  first
              respondent.
No  reason  for  the  change  is  mentioned.  The
              downgrading is reflected by comparison. This  cannot  sustain.
              Having  explained  in  this  manner  the  case  of  the  first
              respondent and the system that should prevail in the Jal Nigam
              we do not find any difficulty in accepting the ultimate result
              arrived at by the High Court.”


                          Several  High   Courts   as   also   the   Central
              Administrative Tribunal in their  various  judgments  followed
              the decision of this Court in
U.P.  Jal  Nigam
(supra),  inter
              alia, to hold that in the event the said adverse  remarks  are
              not communicated causing deprivation to the employee  to  make
              an effective representation  there  against,  thus  should  be
              ignored.
Reference may  be  made  to  2003(1)  ATJ  130,  Smt.
              T.K.Aryaveer Vs.Union of India & Ors, 2005(2)  ATJ,  Page  12,
              2005(1) ATJ 509-A.B. Gupta Vs.  Union  of  India  &  Ors.  and
              2003(2) SCT 514-
Bahadur Singh Vs. Union of India & Ors
.
Our attention,  however,  has  been  drawn  by  the
              learned  Additional  Solicitor  General  appearing   for   the
              respondents to a recent decision of this  Court  in
Union  of
              India & Anr. Vs. Major Bahadur Singh
- (2006) 1 SCC 368  where
              a Division Bench of this Court sought to distinguish  the
U.P.
              Jal Nigam
(supra) stating as follows:
“8.  As  has  been  rightly  submitted  by  learned
              counsel  for  the  appellants
U.P.  Jal  Nigam
case  has  no
              universal application.
The judgment itself shows that  it  was
              intended to be meant only for the employees of  U.P.Jal  Nigam
              only.”


                         With utmost respect, we are of the opinion that the
              judgment of
U.P.Jal Nigam
(supra) cannot held to be  applicable
              only to its own employees. It has laid down a  preposition  of
              law. Its applicability may depend upon the rules  entirely  in
              the field but by it cannot be said that no law has  been  laid
              down therein. We, therefore,  are  of  the  opinion  that  the
              matter should be heard  by a larger Bench.
3.        Subsequent to the above two decisions, in the case  of
Dev
       Dutt vs. Union of India
and others3 , this Court had an  occasion  to
       consider the question about the communication of the entry in the ACR
       of a public servant (other than military service).
A two Judge Bench
       on elaborate and detailed consideration of the matter and also  after
       taking into consideration the decision of  this  Court  in  U.P.  Jal
       Nigam1 and principles of natural justice exposited by this Court from
       time to time particularly in
A.K. Praipak vs. Union of India4
;
Maneka
       Gandhi vs. Union of India5
;
Union of  India  vs.  Tulsi  Ram  Patel6
;
Canara Bank vs. V.K. Awasthy7
and
State of  Maharashtra  vs.  Public
       Concern
for Governance Trust8  concluded that every entry in the  ACR
       of a public service must be communicated to him within  a  reasonable
       period whether it is poor, fair, average, good or  very  good  entry.
       This is what this Court in paragraphs 17 & 18 of the  report  in  Dev
       Dutt3 at page 733:
“In our opinion, every entry in the A.C.R. of a public  servant
             must be communicated to him within a reasonable period, whether
             it is a poor, fair, average, good or very good entry.  This  is
             because non-communication of such an entry may adversely affect
             the employee in two ways : (1) Had the entry been  communicated
             to him he would know about  the  assessment  of  his  work  and
             conduct by his superiors, which would enable him to improve his
             work in future (2) He would have an  opportunity  of  making  a
             representation against the entry if he feels it is unjustified,
             and pray for its upgradation.  Hence  non-communication  of  an
             entry is arbitrary, and it has been held  by  the  Constitution
             Bench decision of this Court in
Maneka  Gandhi  vs.  Union  of
             India
(supra) that arbitrariness violates
Article  14
of  the
             Constitution.
Thus it is not only when there is a benchmark but in all  cases
            that an entry (whether it is poor, fair, average, good or  very
            good) must be communicated to a public servant, otherwise there
            is violation of the principle of fairness, which is the soul of
            natural  justice.  Even  an   outstanding   entry   should   be
            communicated since that would boost the morale of the  employee
            and make him work harder.”
4.        Then in paragraph 22 at page 734 of the report, this  Court
       made the following weighty observations:
“It may be mentioned that communication of entries  and  giving
             opportunity to represent against them is particularly important
             on higher posts which are  in  a  pyramidical  structure  where
             often the principle of elimination is followed in selection for
             promotion, and even a single entry can destroy the career of an
             officer which has otherwise been outstanding  throughout.  This
             often results in grave injustice  and  heart-burning,  and  may
             shatter the morale of many good officers who are superseded due
             to this arbitrariness, while officers of inferior merit may  be
             promoted.”
5.        In paragraphs 37 &  41  of  the  report,  this  Court  then
       observed as follows:
“We further hold that when the entry is  communicated  to  him
              the  public  servant  should  have   a   right   to   make   a
              representation against the entry to the  concerned  authority,
              and the concerned authority must decide the representation  in
              a fair manner and within a reasonable  period.  We  also  hold
              that the representation must be decided by an authority higher
              than the one who gave the entry, otherwise the  likelihood  is
              that the representation will  be  summarily  rejected  without
              adequate consideration as it would be an appeal from Caesar to
              Caesar.  All  this  would  be  conducive   to   fairness   and
              transparency in public administration,  and  would  result  in
              fairness to  public  servants.  The  State  must  be  a  model
              employer, and must act fairly towards its employees. Only then
              would good governance be possible.
In our opinion, non-communication of entries  in  the  Annual
              Confidential Report of a public servant,  whether  he  is  in
              civil, judicial, police or any other service (other than  the
              military), certainly has civil consequences  because  it  may
              affect his chances for promotion or get  other  benefits  (as
              already discussed above). Hence, such non-communication would
              be arbitrary, and as such violative  of
Article  14
of  the
              Constitution.”
6.        We are in complete agreement with the  view  in  Dev  Dutt3
       particularly paragraphs 17, 18, 22, 37 &  41  as  quoted  above.   We
       approve the same.
7.        A three Judge Bench of this Court in
Abhijit Ghosh Dastidar
       vs. Union of India
and others9  followed Dev Dutt3.  In  paragraph  8
       of  the  Report,  this  Court  with  reference  to  the  case   under
       consideration held as under:
“Coming to the second aspect,  that  though   the  benchmark
               “very good” is required for being considered  for  promotion
               admittedly the entry of “good” was not communicated  to  the
               appellant.   The  entry   of   'good'   should   have   been
               communicated to him as he was  having  “very  good”  in  the
               previous year.  In those circumstances, in our opinion, non-
               communication of entries in the  ACR  of  a  public  servant
               whether he is  in  civil,  judicial,  police  or  any  other
               service  (other  than  the  armed  forces),  it  has   civil
               consequences because it may affect his chances for promotion
               or get other benefits.  Hence, such non-communication  would
               be arbitrary and as such violative  of
Article  14
of  the
               Constitution.  The same view  has  been  reiterated  in  the
               above  referred  decision  relied  on  by   the   appellant.
               Therefore, the entries “good”  if  at  all  granted  to  the
               appellant,  the  same  should  not  have  been  taken   into
               consideration for being  considered  for  promotion  to  the
               higher grade.  The respondent has no case that the appellant
               had ever been informed of the nature of the grading given to
               him.”
8.        In our opinion, the view taken in Dev Dutt that every entry
       in ACR of a public servant must be communicated to him/her  within  a
       reasonable period is legally sound and helps in  achieving  threefold
       objectives. First, the communication of every entry in the ACR  to  a
       public servant helps him/her to work harder  and  achieve  more  that
       helps him in improving his work and give better results.  Second  and
       equally important, on being made aware of the entry in the  ACR,  the
       public servant may feel dissatisfied with the same.  Communication of
       the entry enables him/her to make representation for  upgradation  of
       the remarks entered in the ACR.  Third, communication of every  entry
       in the ACR brings transparency in recording the remarks relating to a
       public servant and  the   system  becomes  more   conforming  to  the
       principles of natural justice.   We,  accordingly,  hold  that  every
       entry in ACR – poor, fair, average, good  or  very  good  –  must  be
       communicated to  him/her within a reasonable period.
9.        The decisions of this Court  in
Satya  Narain  Shukla  vs.
       Union of India
and others10  and
K.M.  Mishra  vs.  Central  Bank  of
       India
and others11  and the other decisions of this  Court  taking  a
       contrary view are declared  to  be  not  laying  down   a  good  law.
11.       Insofar as the present case is concerned, we  are  informed
       that the appellant  has  already  been  promoted.  In  view  thereof,
       nothing more is required to be done. Civil Appeal is disposed of with
       no order as to costs.  However, it will be open to the  appellant  to
       make a representation to the concerned authorities for  retrospective
       promotion  in view of the legal position stated by  us.   If  such  a
       representation is made by the appellant, the same shall be considered
       by the concerned authorities appropriately in  accordance  with  law.
11        I.A. No. 3 of 2011 for intervention is rejected.   It  will
       be open to the applicant to pursue his  legal  remedy  in  accordance
       with law.
......................J.
                                       (R.M. LODHA)






                                          ......................J.
                                  (MADAN B. LOKUR)






                                          ......................J.
                                          (KURIAN JOSEPH)
   NEW DELHI
   APRIL 23, 2013.
ITEM NO.102               COURT NO.4             SECTION IV


            S U P R E M E   C O U R T   O F   I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
                    CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 5892 OF 2006


SUKHDEV SINGH                                     Appellant (s)

                 VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                             Respondent(s)
(With appln(s) for Intervention/Impleadment and office report )


Date: 23/04/2013  This Appeal was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE R.M. LODHA
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MADAN B. LOKUR
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KURIAN JOSEPH


For Appellant(s)
                      Mr. Ansar Ahmad Chaudhary,Adv.
For Respondent(s)        Mr. Mohan Parasaran, SG
                         Mr. D.L. Chidananda, Adv.
Mr. Asgha G. Nair, Adv.
Mr. S.N. Terdal, Adv.
Mr. Harinder Mohan Singh ,Adv
                         Ms. Shabana, Adv.
UPON hearing counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R

                 Civil Appeal is dismissed with no order as to  costs.  I.A.
      No. 3 of 2011 is rejected.
Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.
|(Pardeep Kumar)                        | |(Renu Diwan)                          |
|Court Master                           | |Court Master                          |
[SIGNED REPORTABLE  ORDER IS PLACED ON THE FILE]


       1  (1996)2 SCC 363
       2  (2006)1 SCC 368
3         (2008)8 SCC 725
4         (1969)2 SCC 262
5         (1978)1 SCC 248
6         (1985)3 SCC 398
7         (2005)6 SCC 321
8         (2007)3 SCC 587
9         (2009)16 SCC 146
1        0         (2006) 9 SCC 69
1        1         (2008) 9 SCC 120