[Cites
3
, Cited by
115
]
Supreme Court of India
Aspi Jal And Anr vs Khushroo Rustom Dadyburjor on 5 April, 2013
Equivalent citations: AIR 2013 SUPREME COURT 1712, 2013 (4) SCC 333, 2013 AIR SCW 2128, 2013 (3) ABR 767, (2013) 3 MPLJ 585, (2013) 119 REVDEC 688, (2013) 3 MAD LW 290, (2013) 2 RECCIVR 976, (2013) 3 ICC 245, (2013) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 105, (2013) 3 JCR 488 (SC), (2013) 1 CLR 1043 (SC), (2013) 3 CIVLJ 831, (2013) 4 ANDHLD 62, (2013) 5 SCALE 366, (2013) 125 ALLINDCAS 13 (SC), (2013) 2 ALL RENTCAS 211, (2013) 2 CURCC 117, (2013) 3 ALLMR 444 (SC), (2013) 2 CAL LJ 65, (2013) 5 MAH LJ 147, AIR 2013 SC (CIV) 1273, (2013) 98 ALL LR 235, 2013 (2) KLT SN 46 (SC), 2013 (3) KCCR SN 284 (SC), (2013) 4 BOM CR 298
Bench:
V. Gopala Gowda
,
Chandramauli Kr. Prasad
REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2908 OF 2013
                (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No. 14808 of 2012)




Aspi Jal & Anr.                                … Appellants

                                   VERSUS



Khushroo Rustom Dadyburjor           …Respondent



                               J U D G M E N T
The  plaintiffs-petitioners,  aggrieved  by  the  order   dated   9th
February, 2012 passed by the Bombay High Court in Writ Petition  No.7653  of
2011, affirming the order dated 6th July, 2011 passed by the Court of  Small
Causes at Mumbai, in R.A.E Suit No.173/256 of 2010  whereby  it  has  stayed
the proceedings in R.A.E. No.173/256 of 2010 till  the  decision  in  R.A.E.
Suit No.1103/1976 of  2004  and  R.A.E.  Suit  No.1104/1977  of  2004,  have
preferred this Special Leave Petition under
Article 136
of the  Constitution
of India.
Leave granted.
The plaintiffs claim to be the owner of the building known as “  Hanoo
Manor” situate at Dadyseth 2nd Cross Lane in Chawpatty area of the  city  of
Mumbai. According to the plaintiffs,  in  one  of  the  flats  of  the  said
building  admeasuring  1856.75  sq.ft.   situate  on   the   second   floor,
defendant’s father, Rustom Dady Burjor (since  deceased)was  inducted  as  a
tenant on a monthly rent of  Rs.355/-.  The  plaintiffs  filed  a  suit  for
eviction from the tenanted premises against the defendant being R.A.E.  Suit
No.1103/1976 of 2004(hereinafter to be referred  to  as  the  “First  Suit”)
before the Small Causes Court on 6th November, 2004 on the  ground  of  bona
fide  requirement  for  self  occupation  and   acquisition   of   alternate
accommodation by the defendant.  The  plaintiffs  thereafter  filed  another
suit being R.A.E. Suit No.1104/1977 of 2004 (hereinafter to be  referred  to
as the “Second Suit”) on  the  same  day  in  the  Small  Causes  Court  for
eviction of the defendant on  the  ground  of  non-user  for  several  years
before the institution of the suit. The plaintiffs during  the  pendency  of
the aforesaid two suits, chose to file yet another suit bearing R.A.E.  Suit
No. 173/256 of 2010 (hereinafter to be referred to as the “Third  Suit”)  on
22nd February, 2010 for eviction of the defendant on the ground of  non-user
for a continuous period of not less than six  months  immediately  prior  to
the institution of the suit.
The defendant filed an application on 29th September,  2010  for  stay
of hearing of the third suit till final disposal of  the  first  and  second
suits. The defendant made the aforesaid prayer inter alia stating  that  the
parties in all the three suits are same as also the issues. It  was  further
averred  that the subject matter of all these suits are one  and  the  same.
According to the defendant, since the matter in issue in the third  suit  is
substantially in issue in the earlier two suits,  the  trial  of  the  third
suit is liable to be stayed until the hearing  and  final  disposal  of  the
previously instituted first and second suits.  The  plaintiffs  filed  reply
objecting to the defendant’s prayer for stay of the third  suit  inter  alia
on the ground  that the causes of action being  different,  the  application
filed by the defendant for stay of the third suit is  fit  to  be  rejected.
The Court of Small Causes  by its order dated 6th  July,  2011,  acceded  to
the prayer of the defendant and stayed the third suit  till  final  decision
in the earlier two suits. While  doing  so,  the  trial  court  observed  as
follows:
“ 13.  On bare reading of the pleading in both suits, it clearly
         appears that both suits are filed on  the  same  ground  i.e.  non
         user. As, I discussed earlier one test  of  the  applicability  of
         Section 10 to a particular case is whether on the  final  decision
         being reached in the previous suit, such decision would operate as
         res-judicata in the subsequent suit. The object of the section  is
         to prevent courts of concurrent jurisdiction  from  simultaneously
         trying two parallel suits in respect of the same matter in  issue.
         Complete identity  of  the  subject-matter  is  not  necessary  to
         attract the application of S.10  and  if  a  matter  directly  and
         substantially in issue in a previously  instituted  suit  is  also
         directly and substantially in issue in a later  suit,  then  under
         S.10 the later suit shall be stayed.”






      Ultimately, the trial court came to the following conclusion and while
staying the suit proceeded to observe as follows:
“15. .. .. But, in the present case, it is  crystal  clear  from
         pleading that matter in  issue  in  both  suits  is  directly  and
         substantially identical. Therefore, this is a fit case  to  invoke
Section 10
of the Code of Civil Procedure.”




      The plaintiffs assailed the aforesaid order by way of a petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution of India before the Bombay High  Court.  The
High Court concurred with the findings  and  the  conclusion  of  the  trial
court and dismissed the writ petition inter alia, observing as follows:
“  9.  …  Admittedly,  the  Petitioner  has  filed  R.A.E.  Suit
        No.1104/1977 of 2004 and R.A.E. Suit No. 173/256  of  2010  on  the
        ground of nonuser, though  the  period  is  different.  But,  after
        perusing the plaints, it is crystal clear that  issue  involved  in
        both the suits are similar. Therefore, in view of
Section 10
of the
        Civil Procedure Code and judgment  in  the  matter  of  Challapalli
        Sugar Pvt. Ltd. (Supra),  it  is  necessary,  in  the  interest  of
        justice, subsequent suit filed by the Petitioner, i.e. R.A.E.  Suit
        No.173/256 of 2010 to be stayed and the same is done by  the  Trial
        Court by giving detailed reasons. Therefore,  I  do  not  find  any
        substance in the present Petition to interfere in the well reasoned
        order passed by the Trial  Court dated 6th July, 2011.”




      Mr.Shyam Divan, Senior counsel appearing on behalf of  the  appellants
submits that in the second suit, the plaintiffs have sought eviction on  the
ground of non-user of the suit premises  for  several  years  prior  to  the
filing of the suits but in the third suit it has specifically  been  averred
that “the defendant and his family has not been in  use  and  occupation  of
the  suit  premises  for  a  continuous  period  of  more  than  six  months
immediately prior  to  the  institution  of  this  suit  without  reasonable
cause”. Thus, according to Mr. Divan, the matter in issue in the third  suit
is non-user of the suit premises prior  to  six  months  from  the  date  of
institution of the said suit. He points out that the plaintiffs may fail  in
the earlier two suits by not establishing  the  non-user   of  the  tenanted
premises for a period of six  months  prior  to  the  institution  of  those
suits, yet, they can succeed in the third suit by proving the  non-user   of
the suit premises by the defendants for six months prior to the  institution
of that suit. According to him, the matter in issue in the third suit  being
substantially different than the first two suits, the provisions of
Section
10
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter to be  referred  to  as
the “Code”) is not attracted and hence, the trial  court  erred  in  staying
the third suit till the disposal of the first two suits.
Mr. Harish N.  Salve,  Senior  counsel  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
defendant, however, submits that the matter  in  issue  in  both  the  suits
being non-user of the tenanted premises by the defendant,  the  trial  court
rightly held that the provisions of
Section 10
of the Code is attracted  and
on that premise, stayed the third suit.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to  the  rival  submissions
and we find substance in the submission of Mr. Divan.
Section 10
of the Code  which is relevant for  the  purpose  reads  as
follows:
“ 10. Stay of suit.- No Court shall proceed with the trial of  any
         suit  in  which  the  matter  in  issue  is  also   directly   and
         substantially  in issue in a previously  instituted  suit  between
         the same parties, or between parties under whom  they  or  any  of
         them claim litigating under the same  title  where  such  suit  is
         pending  in  the  same  or  any  other  Court  in   India   having
         jurisdiction to grant  the relief claimed, or in any Court  beyond
         the limits of  India  established  or  continued  by  the  Central
         Government and having like jurisdiction,  or  before  the  Supreme
         Court.
Explanation.- The pendency of a suit in  a  foreign  Court
         does not preclude the Courts in India from trying a  suit  founded
         on the same cause of action.”




      From a plain reading of the aforesaid provision, it  is  evident  that
where a suit is instituted in a  Court  to  which  provisions  of  the  Code
apply,  it shall not proceed with the trial of another  suit  in  which  the
matter in issue is also directly and substantially in issue in a  previously
instituted  suit  between  the  same  parties.   For  application   of   the
provisions of
Section 10
of the Code, it is further required that the  Court
in which the previous suit is pending  is  competent  to  grant  the  relief
claimed. The use of negative expression in
Section 10
, i.e. “no court  shall
proceed with the trial of any suit” makes the provision  mandatory  and  the
Court in which the  subsequent  suit  has  been  filed  is  prohibited  from
proceeding with the trial of that  suit  if  the  conditions  laid  down  in
Section 10
of the Code are satisfied. The basic purpose and  the  underlying
object of
Section 10
of the Code is to prevent   the  Courts  of  concurrent
jurisdiction from simultaneously  entertaining  and  adjudicating  upon  two
parallel litigations in respect  of  same  cause  of  action,  same  subject
matter and the same relief.  This is to  pin  down   the  plaintiff  to  one
litigation so as to avoid  the possibility of contradictory verdicts by  two
courts in respect of the same relief and is aimed to protect  the  defendant
from multiplicity of  proceeding.  The  view  which  we  have  taken   finds
support from a decision of  this  Court  in  National  Institute  of  Mental
Health & Neuro Sciences vrs. C.Parameshwara, (2005) 2 SCC 256  in  which  it
has been held as follows:
“ 8.  The object underlying
Section 10
is  to  prevent  courts  of
         concurrent jurisdiction from simultaneously  trying  two  parallel
         suits  in  respect  of  the  same  matter  in  issue.  The  object
         underlying
Section 10
is to avoid two parallel trials on the same
         issue by two courts and to avoid recording of conflicting findings
          on issues which  are  directly  and  substantially  in  issue  in
         previously instituted suit. The language  of
Section  10
suggests
         that it is referable to a suit instituted in the civil  court  and
         it cannot apply to proceedings of other  nature  instituted  under
         any other statute. The object of
Section 10
is to  prevent  courts
         of concurrent jurisdiction from simultaneously trying two parallel
         suits between the same parties in respect of the  same  matter  in
         issue. The fundamental test to attract
Section 10
is,  whether  on
         final decision being reached in the previous suit,  such  decision
         would operate as res-judicata in the subsequent suit.
Section  10
applies only in cases where the whole  of  the  subject-matter  in
         both the suits is identical. The key words in
Section 10
are  “the
         matter in issue is directly and substantially  in  issue”  in  the
         previous instituted suit.  The words “directly  and  substantially
         in  issue”  are  used    in   contradistinction   to   the   words
         “incidentally or collaterally in  issue”.  Therefore,
Section  10
would apply only if there is identity of the  matter in  issue  in
         both the suits, meaning thereby, that the whole  of  the  subject-
         matter in both the proceedings is identical.”



      In the present case, the parties in all the three suits  are  one  and
the same and the court in which the first two  suits  have  been  instituted
is competent to grant  the relief  claimed  in  the  third  suit.  The  only
question which invites our adjudication is as  to  whether  “the  matter  in
issue is also directly and substantially in issue  in previously  instituted
suits”. The key words in
Section 10
are “the matter  in  issue  is  directly
and substantially in issue in the previously instituted suit”. The test  for
applicability of
Section 10
of the Code  is  whether  on  a  final  decision
being reached  in  the  previously  instituted  suit,  such  decision  would
operate as res-judicata in the subsequent suit. To put  it  differently  one
may ask, can the plaintiff get the same relief in the  subsequent  suit,  if
the earlier suit has been dismissed? In our opinion, if  the  answer  is  in
affirmative, the subsequent suit is  not  fit  to  be  stayed.  However,  we
hasten to add then when the  matter  in  controversy  is  the  same,  it  is
immaterial what further relief is claimed in the subsequent suit.
As observed earlier, for application of
Section 10
of the  Code,   the
matter in issue in both the suits have to be directly and  substantially  in
issue in the previous suit but  the  question  is    what   “the  matter  in
issue” exactly means? As in the present case, many of the matters  in  issue
are common, including the issue as to whether the  plaintiffs  are  entitled
to recovery of possession of the  suit  premises,  but  for  application  of
Section 10
of the Code, the entire subject-matter  of the two suits must  be
the same.  This provision will not apply where few of the matters  in  issue
are  common  and  will  apply  only  when  the  entire  subject  matter   in
controversy is same. In other words, the matter in issue is  not  equivalent
to any of the questions in issue. As stated earlier,  the  eviction  in  the
third suit has been sought on the ground of non-user for  six  months  prior
to the institution of that suit. It has also been  sought   in  the  earlier
two suits on the same ground  of  non-user   but  for  a  different  period.
Though the ground of eviction in the two suits was similar,  the  same  were
based on different causes.  The  plaintiffs  may  or  may  not  be  able  to
establish the ground of non-user in the  earlier  two  suits,  but  if  they
establish the ground of non-user for a period of six  months  prior  to  the
institution of  the  third  suit  that  may  entitle  them  the  decree  for
eviction. Therefore,  in our opinion, the provisions of
Section  10
of  the
Code is not attracted in the facts and circumstances of the case.  Reference
in this connection can be made to a decision of this Court in  Dunlop  India
Limited vrs. A.A.Rahna & Anr. (2011) 5 SCC 778 in which it has been held  as
follows:
“35. The arguments of  Shri  Nariman  that  the  second  set  of  rent
         control petitions should have been  dismissed  as  barred  by  res
         judicata  because  the  issue  raised  therein  was  directly  and
         substantially similar to the one raised in the first set  of  rent
         control petitions does not merit acceptance for the simple  reason
         that while in the first set  of  petitions,  the  respondents  had
         sought eviction on the ground that the  appellant  had  ceased  to
         occupy  the  premises  from  June  1998,  in  the  second  set  of
         petitions, the period of non-occupation commenced  from  September
         2001 and continued till the filing of the eviction petitions. That
         apart, the evidence produced in the first set of petitions was not
         found acceptable by the appellate  authority  because  till   2-8-
         1999, the premises were found kept open and alive  for  operation,
         The appellate authority  also  found  that  in  spite  of  extreme
         financial crisis, the management had kept  the  business  premises
         open for operation till 1999. In the second round,  the  appellant
         did not adduce any evidence  worth  the  name  to  show  that  the
         premises were kept open or used from September 2001  onwards.  The
         Rent Controller took cognizance of the notice fixed on  the  front
         shutter of the building  by  A.K.Agarwal  on  1-10-2001  that  the
         Company is a sick  industrial  company  under  the  1985  Act  and
         operation has been suspended  with  effect  from        1-10-2001;
         that no activity had been done in the premises with effect from 1-
         10-2001 and no evidence was produced to  show  attendance  of  the
         staff, payment of salary to the employees, payment of  electricity
         bills from September, 2001 or that any commercial transaction  was
         done from the suit premises. It is, thus, evident that even though
         the ground of eviction in the two sets of petitions  was  similar,
         the same were based on different causes. Therefore,  the  evidence
         produced by the parties in the second round was rightly treated as
         sufficient by the Rent Control Court and the  appellate  authority
         for recording a finding that the appellant had  ceased  to  occupy
         the  suit  premises  continuously  for  six  months  without   any
         reasonable cause.”

                                     (Underlining ours)


      In view of what we have observed earlier, the  orders  passed  by  the
trial court as affirmed by the High  Court  are  vulnerable  and  therefore,
cannot be allowed to stand.
Mr. Divan prays that direction may be issued to the  trial  court  to
hear all the  suits  together.  We  restrain  ourselves  from  issuing  such
direction but give liberty to the parties if they so choose to make  such  a
prayer before the trial court. Needless to state that in case such a  prayer
is made, the trial court shall consider the same in accordance with law.
In the result, the appeal is allowed and the  impugned  order  of  the
trial court as affirmed by the High Court  is  set  aside  but  without  any
order as to costs.
………………..............................J.
                                    [CHANDRAMAULI KR. PRASAD]







           ……………….............................J.
                                    [V. GOPALA GOWDA]


NEW DELHI
APRIL 05, 2013.
-----------------------
12