[Cites
34
, Cited by
12
]
Supreme Court of India
International Amusement Limited vs India Trade Promotion Organization & ... on 17 December, 2014
Equivalent citations: AIR 2015 SUPREME COURT 749, 2015 AIR SCW 247, 2015 (1) ADR 805, (2015) 5 MAD LW 175, (2015) 2 ANDHLD 159, (2015) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 325, (2015) 1 ALL WC 1041, (2015) 2 JLJR 225, (2015) 110 ALL LR 33, (2015) 1 RECCIVR 413, (2015) 2 ICC 314, (2015) 3 PAT LJR 156, (2015) 1 RENTLR 309, (2015) 2 CAL LJ 168, (2015) 119 CUT LT 363, 2015 (148) AIC (SOC) 12 (SC)
Author:
V.Gopala Gowda
Bench:
C. Nagappan
,
V. Gopala Gowda
REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.11474 OF 2014
                 (Arising Out of SLP (C) No. 13982 of 2007)

International Amusement Limited    .........APPELLANT

                                     Vs.

India Trade Promotion
Organisation & Anr.             .........RESPONDENTS

                                    With
                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.11475 OF 2014
                 (Arising Out of SLP (C) No. 13983 of 2007)

                               J U D G M E N T
V.GOPALA GOWDA, J.
Leave granted.
These appeals are directed by the  appellant  against  the  common  impugned
judgment and order dated 16.07.2007 passed in writ petition (c) No. 2015  of
2001 and C.M. (M) No.553/2007 by the High Court  of  Delhi,  urging  various
facts and legal grounds and raising  two substantial questions of law  which
read thus:-
Whether  the  arbitration  proceedings  can   be   continued   between   the
International Amusement Limited and the India Trade Promotion Organisation?
b) Whether the Estate Officer appointed as Arbitrator is the correct  forum?
Necessary brief facts are stated hereunder with a view to find  out  whether
the  questions  of  law  framed  in  these  appeals  would  arise  for   our
consideration.
The appellant herein was running an amusement park in  Pragati  Maidan,  New
Delhi since the year 1984, which was well known as  "Appu  Ghar".  The  land
for the purpose was initially allotted  to  the  appellant  by  India  Trade
Promotion Organisation (for short 'the ITPO) on licence basis as  the  lease
between the Central Government and the ITPO was still pending  and  as  such
permanent allotment of  the  land  could  not  be  made  in  favour  of  the
appellant. Only as an administrative measure, the  license  agreements  were
entered into between the appellant and the ITPO. The appellant claimed  that
it was the permanent allottee of the land for running the amusement park  on
the  similar  lines  as  were  allotted   in   favour   of   the   Statutory
Corporations/Instrumentalities of the State and Central Government.  It  was
only on the assurance of the Land  &  Development  Office  (for  short  "the
L&DO"), Ministry of Urban Development and ITPO that the appellant made  huge
amount of investment for establishing and  running  "Appu  Ghar".  The  last
agreement entered into between the parties was on  6.11.1995.  In  the  said
agreement, arbitration clauses 27  and  28   were  incorporated,  which  are
extracted hereunder :-
"27. The licensed premises are public premises  as  defined  in  the
Public
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971
and fall within  the
jurisdiction of the Estate Officer, Pragati Maidan.
28.      In case of any dispute arising out of or in  connection  with  this
agreement the disputes shall be referred to  the  sole  arbitration  of  the
Chairman,  India  Trade  Promotion  Organisation  or   his   nominee   whose
decision/award shall be  final,  conclusive  and  binding  on  the  parties.
Application for reference to arbitration  shall  be  made  by  either  party
within two months of arising of the dispute."
The case of the appellant is that it being a permanent allottee of the  land
at Pragati Maidan, it had made huge investments for opening Water  Park,  in
order to provide additional amusement facilities to  the  public  at  large.
The ITPO being aware of the permanent status of the appellant in respect  of
the land as well as the factum of huge investments made by it upon the  same
towards establishing the Water Park, called upon  the  appellant  to  vacate
the premises vide letter dated 02.09.1999. The appellant has raised  various
disputes, claims and counter claims against the ITPO.
Immediately after the notice was received by the appellant, it  submitted  a
detailed representation to ITPO with a request to renew  the  lease  of  the
land  for  further  period.  Being  unsuccessful,  the  appellant  commenced
proceedings under the
Arbitration and  Conciliation  Act,  1996
(for  short
"the
Arbitration Act
") invoking its right under clause 28 of  the  agreement
referred to supra. The arbitration notice dated  11.11.1999  was  issued  to
the ITPO invoking the provisions of  clause  28  of  the  aforesaid  licence
agreement and filed an application under
Section 8
of  the  Arbitration  Act
before the Estate Officer for  referring  the  matter  for  arbitration.  On
18.11.1999 ITPO issued notice of eviction under
Section  4A
of  the  Public
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants)  Act,  1971  (for  short  "the
P.P. Act") to the appellant to evict  from  the  land  of  its  unauthorised
occupation. The application for  arbitration  filed  by  the  appellant  was
rejected by the Estate Officer vide his order dated 28.3.2000 on the  ground
that the Estate Officer exercises his jurisdiction  as  provided  under  the
provisions of the P.P. Act. It was further stated that  it  is  an  admitted
case that the premises in Pragati Maidan for running Appu Ghar was given  to
the appellant on licence basis and on  expiry  of  the  licence  period  the
appellant becomes an unauthorised  occupant as defined  under  Section  2(g)
of the P.P. Act and therefore, it was required to vacate  the  premises  and
hand over the same to ITPO, hence, the appellant cannot  take  up  the  plea
that it was a permanent allottee of the premises involved in this  case  and
that there was no dispute  at  all  between  the  parties,  which  could  be
agitated as raised by the appellant.
Being aggrieved by the order of Estate Officer,  the  appellant  filed  W.P.
(C) No.1425 of 2000 before the Delhi High Court questioning the  correctness
of the order passed by him. Thereafter, on 08.05.2000, the  appellant  filed
an application being A.A. No.111/2000 under
Section 11(6)
and  petition  OMP
No.63/2000 under
Section 9
of the Arbitration Act before the  Chief  Justice
of Delhi High Court. The learned single Judge, who is  the  nominee  of  the
learned  Chief  Justice,  vide  his  order  dated  23.01.2001  allowed   the
application by appointing an arbitrator for deciding  the  disputes  between
the parties through the process of arbitration.
Aggrieved by the said order, the ITPO filed Writ  Petition  (C)  No.2015  of
2001 before  the  Division  Bench  of  Delhi  High  Court,  challenging  the
correctness of the order of  appointment  of  the  arbitrator  by  the  High
Court. On 12.04.2001, the  High  Court  stayed  the  arbitration  proceeding
which has been in force till the disposal of the writ petition.
During the pendency of the above matter, some part of "Appu Ghar"  land  was
required by Delhi Metro Rail Corporation for construction of Pragati  Maidan
Metro  Station  which  was  handed  over  by  the  appellant  to  the  ITPO.
Thereafter, the land of Appu Ghar was resumed by the L&DO and the  same  was
allotted to the Supreme Court Registry for its expansion plan.
The High Court vide its common order dated 16.7.2007 allowed  Writ  Petition
(C)No. 2015 of 2001 filed by the ITPO holding that  the  matters  enumerated
under Section 15 of the P.P. Act  cannot  be  referred  to  arbitration  for
adjudication for arbitrator. The application C.M. (M) No. 553 of 2007  filed
by the appellant was also dismissed. Hence, these appeals.
It is contended by Mrs. Pratibha M. Singh, the learned  senior  counsel  for
the appellant that the legal position prevailing with respect to
Section  16
of the Arbitration Act, was that any directions  qua-jurisdiction  ought  to
be raised before the Arbitrator and the same  cannot  be  adjudicated  under
Section 11
of the Arbitration Act by the Judge who is  a  designate  of  the
Chief Justice under
Sections 11(6)
and
11(7)
of the Arbitration Act as  per
the law laid  down  by  this  Court  in  its  judgments  in  Konkan  Railway
Corporation.
Ltd. and Ors. v. Mehul Construction Co.
[1]  and
Konkan  Railway
Corpn. Ltd. and Anr. v. Rani Construction Pvt. Ltd.
[2]
Further  reliance  was  placed  by  the  learned  senior  counsel  upon  the
Constitution Bench decision of this Court in SBP & Co. v. Patel  Engineering
Limited and Anr.[3], wherein this  Court  has  succinctly  held  that  power
under
Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration Act is not  an  administrative  power
of either the Chief Justice of  the  High  Court  or  his  designate  but  a
judicial power.
The said position of law was re-affirmed  and  re-emphasized
by this Court in
Maharshi Dayanand University and Anr. v.  Anand  Coop.  L/C
Society Ltd. and Anr.
[4] and  again  in  the  case  of
S.N.  Prasad,  Hitek
Industries (Bihar) Ltd. v. Monnet Finance Ltd. and  Ors.
[5]  in  support  of
the above said proposition of  law.
Further  reliance  was  placed  by  the
learned senior counsel on behalf of appellant on  another  judgment  in  the
case of Andhra Pradesh Tourism Development Corpn. Ltd.  and  Anr.  v.  Pampa
Hotels Ltd.[6]
It is further contended by the learned senior counsel that under Section  15
of the  P.P. Act, the bar of  jurisdiction  applies  only  to  a  Court  and
placed reliance on the judgments in the cases of
Kamal Pushp Enterprises  v.
D.R. Construction Company
[7],
Firm Ashok Traders  &  Anr.  v.  Gurumukh  Das
Saluja & Ors.
[8] and
Ashoka Marketing Ltd. & Anr. v. Punjab National Bank  &
Ors.
[9]
Without prejudice  to  the  above  legal  contentions,  the  learned  senior
counsel also contended that though in general, licences may be  governed  by
the P.P. Act, in  the  case  on  hand,  the  agreement  and  the  nature  of
relationship between the parties was not that of a  licensee  and  licensor,
as it is evident from the  various  documents  produced  on  record  by  the
appellant. There are several documents spanning from  1980s  to  1997  which
reflect that the Government's intention was always to  raise  the  appellant
as permanent  allottee  of  the  land.  However,  for  various  reasons  and
subsequent events, the permanent allotment of land was not made despite  the
huge investments made by the appellant  and  the  appellant  was  forced  to
vacate the premises. It was under these circumstances,  the  Government  was
conscious of the different nature of the relationship  of  parties  and  the
arbitration clause was incorporated in the license agreement.
On the other hand, Mr. Ravi Sikri, the learned senior counsel  appearing  on
behalf of the ITPO and Mrs. M. Diwan, learned counsel on behalf of Union  of
India rebutted the above said contentions urged on behalf of  the  appellant
contending that arbitration clause 28 in the agreement does  not  deal  with
the arbitration under the provisions of the
Arbitration  Act
.  The  learned
senior counsel contended that the Division Bench of Delhi High  Court  after
examining the provisions of
Section 5
and in the light of
Section  2(3)
of
the Arbitration Act, held that
Section  2(3)
protects  the  existing  laws,
both common law as well as statutory law, under which some  disputes  cannot
be made subject matter  of  arbitration.  Further,  it  is  urged  that  the
Division Bench of the High Court has rightly held that
Section 15
read  with
Sections 5 and 7 of the P.P. Act,  confers  exclusive  jurisdiction  on  the
Estate Officer appointed under Section 3 of the P.P. Act, to deal  with  the
application that is filed by the ITPO to evict unauthorised  occupants  from
the public premises and pay the damages as provided under Sections 5  and  7
of the P.P. Act respectively. Further, Section 15 of the P.P. Act  bars  and
prohibits any court from entertaining any suit or  proceeding  for  eviction
from the premises etc. as provided under clauses (a) to (e)  of
Section  15
and that the general power of the Court under
Section  9
of  the  Code  of
Civil Procedure, 1908 to entertain suit or proceedings is  therefore  ousted
if a dispute raised by the appellant falls in clauses (a) to (e) of  Section
15 of the P.P. Act. It was further contended that the Division Bench of  the
High Court rightly held that the provisions of Sections 5 and 7 of the  P.P.
Act empower the Estate Officer appointed under Section 3  of  the  P.P.  Act
to deal with applications that will be  filed  by  the  respondent-ITPO  for
eviction of unauthorised occupation and for payment of rent and  damages  in
respect of the public premises against the unauthorised occupants.  Sections
5 and 7 of the P.P. Act conferred exclusive  jurisdiction  upon  the  Estate
Officer and makes it very  clear  that  he  alone  has  sole  and  exclusive
jurisdiction to decide such applications of  the  ITPO  in  respect  of  the
dispute regarding public premises. The said jurisdiction conferred upon  the
Estate Officer by the statute cannot be taken away  by  a  contract  between
the parties by incorporating arbitration clause in  the  agreement  or  made
subject matter of any dispute in relation to the public premises which  will
be in occupation of the licensee  for  reference  before  an  arbitrator  to
arbitrate the same. It cannot be waiver of statutory provisions of the  P.P.
Act. The contract between the parties must be  within  the  legal  framework
and parties cannot contract out of the statute. Further,  it  was  contended
that the Estate Officer having exclusive jurisdiction is not arbitrable  and
parties by a contract cannot agree to refer the matters in respect of  which
jurisdiction has been conferred upon  the  Estate  Officer.  Therefore,  the
arbitrability of claims of the appellant covered under Sections 5 and  7  of
the P.P. Act, is excluded.
To arrive at the said  conclusion,  the  Division
Bench of the High Court rightly
placed reliance upon
the Constitution  Bench
judgment of this Court  in  the  case  of
Ashoka  Marketing  Ltd.
(supra),
wherein the legal question that arose was as to  whether  the
Rent  Control
Act,1995
, which is also a
Special Act
will override the  provisions  of  the
P.P. Act. After  interpreting  the  relevant  provisions  of  the  Act,  the
Constitution Bench of this Court
in
the above case
has held  that  the  P.P.
Act, is a special statute relating to  eviction  of  unauthorised  occupants
from public premises and therefore, the same  will  prevail  over  the
Rent
Control Act
. In the said case it was held that the 1971 enactment  did  away
with the option of the parties and conferred exclusive jurisdiction  on  the
Estate  Officer  in  relation  to  the  public  premises.  The   power   and
jurisdiction of  a  civil  court  to  adjudicate  matters  enumerated  under
Section 15 of P.P. Act was withdrawn.
Further,  reliance  was  placed  by  the  learned  senior  counsel  for  the
respondents upon the judgment of this Court in
Haryana  Telecom  Limited  v.
Sterlite Industries (India) Limited
[10], wherein, this  Court  has  referred
to the provisions of the
Companies Act
and held that  power  to  wind  up  a
company is conferred on the Company Court. The said power cannot be  subject
matter of arbitration.
In view of the  above  rival  legal  contentions  urged  on  behalf  of  the
parties, to answer  the  aforesaid  substantial  questions  of  law,  it  is
necessary for us to examine arbitration clause 28 of the  license  agreement
dated 06.11.1995 entered between the parties, which has  been  extracted  in
the earlier portion of this judgment.
This Court must accept the contention  of  the  learned  senior  counsel  on
behalf of the ITPO that the said clause in the licence agreement is  not  an
arbitration agreement between the parties for the reasons discussed below.
The three Judge Bench decision of this  Court  (of  which  two  of  us  were
members) in
P. Dasaratharama Reddy Complex  v.  Government  of  Karnataka  &
Anr.
[11], while examining a similar  clause  of  an  arbitration  agreement,
after careful consideration  and interpretation  of  the  clause,  has  held
that in all the matters of dispute arising out of  the  agreement  regarding
quality of materials and work, etc., the decision of the Board of  Directors
of the Nagarika Yogbakashema Mathu Gruha Nirmana Sahakara Sangha,  shall  be
final and binding on the part  of  the  Contractor.
Further,  the  case  of
Mysore Construction Company v. Karnataka Power Corporation Ltd.  &  Ors.
[12]
was discussed in
P. Dasaratharama Reddy
(supra) by this Court, at  para  14,
wherein, the Designated Judge has referred to the passage from  Russell,  on
Arbitration (19th Edition, page 59) and the other judgments  of  this  Court
in
K.K. Modi v. K.N. Modi and Ors.
, Chief Conservator of  Forests,  Rewa  v.
Ratan Singh Hans[13],
Rukmanibai  Gupta  v.  The  Collector
,
Jabalpur[14],
State of Uttar Pradesh v. Tipper  Chand
[15],
State  of  Orissa  v.  Damodar
Das
[16],
Bharat  Bhushan  Bansal  v.   Uttar   Pradesh   Small   Industries
Corporation  Ltd.,  Kanpur
[17]  and  observed  that  the  decisions  in  the
abovementioned cases make it clear by laying down the  conditions,  when  an
agreement or a clause in the agreement can be construed  as  an  arbitration
agreement between the parties.
Further, at paragraph 16 of
P. Dasaratharama Reddy
(supra), the  distinction
between an expert determination and  arbitration  between  the  parties  has
been spelt out as per Russell, on Arbitration (21st Edn.) in  the  following
words:-
"16......Many cases have been fought over whether a contract's  chosen  form
of dispute resolution is expert determination  or  arbitration.  This  is  a
matter of construction of the contract, which involves an objective  enquiry
into the intentions of the parties. First, there are the  express  words  of
the disputes clause. If  specific  words  such  as  'arbitrator',  'Arbitral
Tribunal', 'arbitration' or  the  formula  'as  an  expert  and  not  as  an
arbitrator' are used to describe the manner in which  the  dispute  resolver
is  to  act,  they  are  likely  to  be  persuasive  although   not   always
conclusive.... Where there is no express wording, the court  will  refer  to
certain guidelines. Of these, the most important used to be,  whether  there
was an 'issue' between the parties such as the value of an  asset  on  which
they had not taken defined  positions,  in  which  case  the  procedure  was
[pic]held to be expert determination; or a 'formulated dispute' between  the
parties where defined positions had been taken, in which case the  procedure
was held to be an arbitration. This imprecise concept is still being  relied
on. It is unsatisfactory  because  some  parties  to  contract  deliberately
choose expert determination for dispute resolution. The  next  guideline  is
the judicial function of an Arbitral Tribunal as opposed  to  the  expertise
of the expert.... An Arbitral  Tribunal  arrives  at  its  decision  on  the
evidence and submissions of the parties and must apply the  law  or  if  the
parties agree, on other  consideration;  an  expert,  unless  it  is  agreed
otherwise, makes his own enquiries, applies his own  expertise  and  decides
on his own expert opinion...."
It was further held that a  clause  substantially  similar  to  the  clauses
referred to in
P. Dasaratharama Reddy
(supra) was interpreted by  the  three
Judge Bench of this Court in the
State of  Uttar  Pradesh  v.  Tipper  Chand
(supra) wherein paras 2 and 3 of
the said judgment
contain the  reasons  for
holding that  the  clause  in  the  agreement  cannot  be  construed  as  an
arbitration clause.
At para 18 in
P.  Dasaratharama  Reddy
(supra),  the  case  of
State  of
Maharashtra v. Ranjeet Construction
[18] has been  discussed  wherein  a  two
Judge Bench of this Court interpreted clause 30  of  the  agreement  entered
into between the parties, which is almost identical  to  the  clauses  under
consideration, relying upon the judgment in the
Tipper  Chand
(supra),  and
held that clause 30 cannot  be  relied  upon  by  the  parties  for  seeking
reference of any dispute to an Arbitrator arising out of the contract.
At para 17 in the
P. Dasaratharama Reddy Complex
case (supra), the  case  of
State of Orissa v. Damodar Das
(supra) has also been examined,  wherein  the
three Judge Bench of this  Court  interpreted  clause  21  of  the  contract
entered into between the parties.
In the said case, this Court  referred  to
clause 25 of the agreement, relied upon the judgment in
State  of  U.P.  v.
Tipper Chand
(supra) and held that the said  clause  cannot  be  interpreted
for  resolution  of  the  dispute  by  an  Arbitrator,  the  case  fell  for
consideration of this Court in the case of
State of Uttar Pradesh v.  Tipper
Chand
(supra) which was relied upon in the said case is  extracted  at  para
20 of the
P. Dasaratharama Reddy
case (supra) as under:-
"20......(10)...... A reading of the above  clause  in  the  contract  as  a
conjoint whole, would give us an indication that during the progress of  the
work or after the completion or the  sooner  determination  thereof  of  the
contract, the Public Health  Engineer  has  been  empowered  to  decide  all
questions  relating  to  the  meaning  of  the   specifications,   drawings,
instructions hereinbefore mentioned and as to the quality of workmanship  or
material used on the work or as to any other question, claim, right,  matter
or thing whatsoever in any way arising out of, or relating to, the  contract
drawings,  specifications,  estimates,   instructions,   orders   or   those
conditions or otherwise concerning the works or the execution or failure  to
execute the same has been entrusted to the Public Health  Engineer  and  his
decision shall be final. In other words, he is nominated only to decide  the
questions  arising  in  the  quality  of  the  work  or  any  other  matters
enumerated hereinbefore and  his  decision  shall  be  final  and  bind  the
contractor. A clause in the contract cannot be split into two  parts  so  as
to consider one part to give rise to difference or dispute and another  part
relating to execution of work, its workmanship, etc. It is settled now  that
a clause in the contract must be  read  as  a  whole.  If  the  construction
suggested by the respondent is given effect then the decision of the  Public
Health Engineer would become final and it is not even necessary to  have  it
made rule  of  the  court  under  the
Arbitration  Act
.  It  [pic]would  be
hazardous to the claim of a contractor to give  such  instruction  and  give
power to the Public Health Engineer to make any dispute  final  and  binding
on the contractor. A careful reading of the clause  in  the  contract  would
give us an indication that  the  Public  Health  Engineer  is  empowered  to
decide all the questions enumerated  therein  other  than  any  disputes  or
differences that have arisen between the contractor and the Government.  But
for Clause  25,  there  is  no  other  contract  to  refer  any  dispute  or
difference     to     an      arbitrator      named      or      otherwise."
Further, at paragraph 21 of the case of
P. Dasaratharama Reddy
(supra)  the
case of
K.K. Modi v. K.N. Modi
(supra) fell for consideration, wherein  this
Court interpreted clause 9 of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  that  was
signed by the two groups of Modi family. The relevant portion from
the  said
judgment
with regard to interpretation of Clause  9  of  the  Memorandum  of
Understanding between the parties is extracted below:-
"9.  Implementation  will  be  done  in  consultation  with  the   financial
institutions.  For  all  disputes,  clarifications,  etc.  in   respect   of
implementation of  this  agreement,  the  same  shall  be  referred  to  the
Chairman, IFCI or his nominees whose decisions will be final and binding  on
both the groups."
Further, in the decision of P. Dasaratharama Reddy at para  30  referred  to
the case of
Mallikarjun v. Gulbarga University
[19] wherein it was held  that
the decision of the Superintending Engineer of Gulbarga  Circle  was  final,
conclusive and binding on all parties to the  contract  upon  all  questions
relating to the meaning of the specifications, designs etc. whether  arising
during the progress of the work  or  after  the  completion  or  abandonment
thereof in case of dispute arising between the contractor and  the  Gulbarga
University.
The case of
Punjab State v.  Dina  Nath
[20]  was  also  referred
supporting the same view in the case of
P. Dasaratharama Reddy
(supra).
In view of the aforesaid decisions and the law
laid down by
this  Court  in
catena of cases referred to supra which are reiterated in  the  case  of
P.
Dasaratharama Reddy
(supra) we are of the view that the  clause  28  in  the
agreement which is referred to in the case on hand  is  not  an  arbitration
clause. Therefore, the appointment of an Arbitrator by the  nominee  of  the
Chief Justice has been rightly set aside in the  impugned  judgment  by  the
Division Bench of the Delhi High Court. The law
laid down by
this  Court  in
the above referred judgments, after interpretation of  relevant  arbitration
clauses in the agreement in those cases, are aptly applicable  to  the  fact
situation on hand and we answer the questions of law framed  by  this  Court
against the appellant and in favour of the ITPO and Union of India.
The other proceedings involved in this case, if  any,  pending  under
the provisions of the P.P. Act before the Estate Officer, the same shall  be
continued by him.
Accordingly, the civil appeals are dismissed as there is no merit  for
consideration to interfere with the impugned judgment and order. No costs.
.....................................................................J.

                      [V. GOPALA GOWDA]


     .....................................................................J.
            [C. NAGAPPAN]

New Delhi,                                          December 17, 2014



ITEM NO.1A-For JUDGMENT      COURT NO.11               SECTION XIV

               S U P R E M E  C O U R T  O F  I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

C.A. No. ......../2014 arising from SLP (C) No(s).  13982/2007

INTERNATIONAL AMUSEMENT LIMITED                    Petitioner(s)
                                VERSUS
INDIA TRADE PROMOTION ORGANIZATION & ANR           Respondent(s)

WITH
C.A. No. ......../2014 arising from SLP(C) No. 13983/2007

Date : 17/12/2014 These appeals were called on for pronouncement of
JUDGMENT today.
For Petitioner(s)    Mr. Abhinav Mukerji,Adv.

For Respondent(s)       Mr. A.K. Pandey, Adv.
                        Mr. K.V. Upadhyay, Adv.

                     Ms. Madhu Sikri,Adv.

                        Mr. Vishnu B. Saharya, Adv.
                        Mr. Viresh B. Saharya, Adv.
                     M/s Saharya & Co.

                     M/s. S. Narain & Co.

                     Ms. Sushma Suri,Adv.
Hon'ble Mr. Justice V.Gopala Gowda pronounced the  judgment  of  the
Bench comprising His Lordship and Hon'ble Mr. Justice C. Nagappan.
Leave granted.
The appeals are dismissed in  terms  of  the  signed  reportable
judgment.
(VINOD KR.JHA)                              (MALA KUMARI SHARMA)
         COURT    MASTER                                    COURT     MASTER
(Signed Reportable judgment is placed on the file)
-----------------------
[1]    (2000) 7 SCC 201
[2]    (2002) 2 SCC 388
[3]    (2005) 8 SCC 618
[4]    (2007) 5 SCC 295
[5]    (2011) 1 SCC 320

[6]    (2010) 5 SCC 425

[7]    (2000) 6 SCC 659
[8]    (2004) 3 SCC 155
[9]    (1990) 4 SCC 406
[10]   (1999) 5 SCC 688

[11]   (2014) 2 SCC 201

[12]    ILR 2000 KAR 4953

[13]   AIR 1967 SC 166
[14]    (1980) 4 SCC 556

[15]   (1980) 2 SCC 341
[16]   (1996) 2 SCC 216
[17]   (1992) 2 SCC 166

[18]   AIR 1986 Bom 76

[19]   (2004) 1 SCC 372

[20]   (2007) 5 SCC 28