[Cites
133
, Cited by
110
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Bihar vs The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle ... on 10 May, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 2521, 2019 LAB IC 2773, 2020 (1) AJR 241, (2019) 2 ESC 558, (2019) 2 PAT LJR 454, (2019) 2 SERVLJ 278, (2019) 3 SCT 245, (2019) 5 MAD LJ 560, (2019) 8 SCALE 124, 2019 (9) ADJ 58 NOC, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 2467, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 273
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
                                                 1
         State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
         Munger & Ors.


                                                                          REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4862 OF 2019
                          (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.20 OF 2018)


                         STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.                              …Appellants

                                                  VERSUS

                         THE BIHAR SECONDARY TEACHERS STRUGGLE
                         COMMITTEE, MUNGER & ORS.                         …Respondents
                                                   WITH

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4872 OF 2019
                (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.708 OF 2018)

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4867 OF 2019
                (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.238 OF 2018)

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4866 OF 2019
                (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.242 OF 2018)

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4864 OF 2019
                (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.169 OF 2018)

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4865 OF 2019
                (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.162 OF 2018)

Signature Not Verified
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4869 OF 2019
                (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.254 OF 2018)
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2019.05.10
17:06:17 IST
Reason:

                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4863 OF 2019
                (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.164 OF 2018)
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
                                        2
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors.




                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4868 OF 2019
  (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.251 OF 2018)

                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4870 OF 2019
  (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.240 OF 2018)

                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4871 OF 2019
  (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.572 OF 2018)



                                  JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.      Leave granted.
2.      These appeals are directed against common judgment and order

    dated 31.10.2017 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Patna in Civil

    Writ Jurisdiction Case No.21199 of 2013 and all connected matters.
3.      In   1981,   all   non-Government    Secondary    Schools    were

    nationalized and the management was taken over by State of Bihar.
Consequently, all teaching and non-teaching staff were given salaries and

    emoluments at the Government scales. With the schemes like Sarva

    Shiksha Abhiyan, introduction of
Article 21A
in the Constitution and

    coming into force of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsion

    Education Act, 2009 (‘
RTE Act
’, for short), the State was required to
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
3
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
induct large number of teachers in order to meet the required obligations.
These teachers employed at Panchayat, Nagar Panchayat and Municipal

    levels were not given same salaries and emoluments like the teachers who

    were paid at the Government scales. The petitions seeking same salaries

    and emoluments on the principle of “equal pay for equal work” filed by

    the latter category of teachers, were allowed by the High Court. The view

    taken by the High Court is presently under challenge at the instance of the

    State.
4.       By the Bihar non-Government Secondary Schools (Taking over of

    Management and Control) Act, 1981 (‘1981 Act’, for short), management

    and control of non-Government Secondary Schools were taken over by

    the State. In terms of
Section 3
, all non-Government Secondary Schools

    other than Minority Secondary Schools based on religion or language and

    Centrally sponsored, autonomous and proprietary schools were taken over

    by the State Government w.e.f. 02.10.1980. Consequently, every Head

    Master, Teacher and other employees of such school became employees of

    the State Government, with Management and Control of all the

    nationalized schools vesting in the Director of Education of State

    Government (In charge of Secondary education).
Section 10
dealt with

    establishment of School Service Board which was entrusted with the
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
4
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
power of appointment of Teachers, Head Masters in nationalized schools

    and the Board would make recommendations for appointment of teachers

    and for appointment or promotion of Head Masters of nationalized

    secondary schools.       The District Secondary Education Fund was

    constituted under
Section 11
and the application of the fund under
Section

    12
would inter alia be for payment of salaries and allowances of the Head

    Master, Teachers and other staff of the secondary schools.
5.      Bihar Nationalized Secondary Schools (Service Conditions)

    Rules, 1983 were framed by the State Government in exercise of powers

    conferred under
Sections 9
&
15
of the 1981 Act. Under these Rules the

    service conditions were prescribed for Head Master, Teachers of superior

    category, teachers of inferior category and teachers of junior category as

    well as in respect of non-teaching employees such as clerks, peons etc.

    These Rules prescribed minimum qualifications for each of those

    categories. The Rules also dealt with subjects such as procedure for

    appointment, permission, and disciplinary action. Rule 6 dealt with cadre

    of teachers and was to the following effect:
“6. Cadre of teachers:-
1. There shall be Dist. Cadre of junior category teachers,
              of whose controlling officer shall be Dist. Education
              Officer.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
5
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
2. There shall be Commissionaire Cadre of the teachers
              of inferior and superior category of whose controlling
              officer shall be Regional Director.
3. There shall be State Cadre of Headmaster whose
              controlling officer shall be Director.”
6.      By the Constitution (73rd amendment) Act, 1992 Part IX

    (containing
Articles 243
, 243A
to 243-O) was inserted in the Constitution.
Article 243B
mandates that in every State there shall be constituted

    Panchayats at the village, intermediate and district levels in accordance

    with Part IX of the Constitution
Article 243G
is to the following effect:-
“243G Powers, authority and responsibilities of
              Panchayats. – Subject to the provisions of this
              Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law,
              endow the Panchayats with such powers and authority as
              may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions
              of self-government and such law may contain provisions
              for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon
              Panchayats at the appropriate level, subject to such
              conditions as may be specified therein, with respect to –
(a) the preparation of plans for economic development
              and social justice;
(b) The implementation of schemes for economic
              development and social justice as may be entrusted to
              them including those in relation to the matters listed in the
              Eleventh Schedule.”


           One of the matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule under Serial

    No.17 is “Education, including primary and secondary schools”.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
6
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
7.      By the Constitution (74th Amendment Act, 1992) Part IXA

    (containing
Articles 243P
to 243Z, 243ZA to 243ZG) was inserted in the

    Constitution. In terms of
Article 243Q
there shall be constituted in every

    State, a Nagar panchayat for a transitional area, a municipal council for a

    small urban area and a municipal corporation for a larger urban area in

    accordance with the provisions of said Part IXA of the Constitution.
Article 243W
dealing with powers, authority and responsibilities of

    Municipalities etc. is as under:
“243W. Powers, authority and responsibilities of
              Municipalities, etc. – Subject to the provisions of this
              Constitution, the Legislature of a State may, by law,
              endow –

              “(a) The Municipalities with such powers and authority as
              may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions
              of self-government and such law may contain provisions
              for the devolution of powers and responsibilities upon
              Municipalities, subject to such conditions as may be
              specified therein, with respect to –
(i) the preparation of plans for economic development
              and social justice;
(ii) the performance of functions and the implementation
              of schemes as may be entrusted to them including those in
              relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule;
(b) the Committees with such powers and authority as
              may be necessary to enable them to carry out the
              responsibility conferred upon them including those in
              relation to the matters listed in the Twelfth Schedule.”


            One of the matters mentioned in the Twelfth Schedule at Serial

    No.13 states, “Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects”.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
7
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
8.      By the Constitution (86th
Amendment Act, 2002
) which came into

    effect on 01.04.2010,
Article 21A
dealing with right to education was

    inserted in the Constitution. Said
Article 21A
reads as under:-
“21A. Right to education. – The State shall provide free
              and compulsory education to all children of the age of six
              to fourteen years in such manner as the State may, by law,
              determine.”
9.      By Bihar Act 25 of 2006, 1981 Act was amended.
Section 2
of the

    Amending Act was as under:
“Amendment of
Section 10
of the Act, 1981 (Bihar Act 33,
              1982) – The Words “The recommendation for the
              appointment to Posts of teachers in nationalized Schools
              shall be sent to the Director, Secondary Education
              Department by the Bihar Staff Selection Commission used
              in
Section 10
as substituted by Bihar Act 14, 2004 are
              hereby deleted.”


            The role of the Director in matters concerning appointments to the

    posts of teachers in nationalised schools was thus done away with.
10.     In May 2006, two draft Notes for approval of the Cabinet were

    prepared. The Notes dealt with issues like requirements to increase the

    number of teachers to reach the national level of teacher to students’ ratio

    and to meet the goals set by the provisions of
Article 21A
of the

    Constitution. Some of the relevant portions of the Notes were:-
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
8
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
“As per the provisions of
Article 21A
of the Constitution
              of India, imparting of free Education to the childrens’ of
              age group of 6-14 has become their fundamental rights.
              This is the responsibility of the State to provide quality
              education keeping in mind the equality and social justice.
              At present in Government schools ratio of teachers and
              student is1:62. Whereas as per the national Educational
              policy and in light of standard fixed at national level, for
              the purposes of imparting quality education, this ratio
              should be 1:40. There are 64:391 posts vacant for the
              trained teachers and around 24 Lakhs childrens are not
              even registered in the schools. Due to lack of teachers,
              school and classes childrens in huge numbers are
              compelled to leave the school even prior to completing
              their education up to 8 years. This year there is scheme
              for consolidated development of 15000 new primary
              schools and around 24,000 existing schools. At present
              education is being imparted to the childrens at “Shiksha
              Kendras” with the help of instructors. It is thought in light
              of equality and social justice that they be also provide
              education in fully developed schools with the help of
              teachers.”

              “9. In new rules basic changes are being made in salary
              of the trained teachers and in their appointment procedure.
              They will be provided fixed salary of Rs.5000/- per month
              and on the basis of their evaluation, in a situation of them
              being successful, in each three years, an increment of
              Rs.500/- per month shall be given. Appointment shall be
              decentralized. At the Block levels, it shall be provided
              under the panchayati Raj arrangements on the basis of
              merit list.
In Gramin area they shall be called as “Panchayat
              teachers” and in Urban area they will be called “Nagar
              teachers”.
It is expected that in this new scheme of things and on
              fixed salary/stipend generally locals will be appointed on
              the post of teachers and amount which shall be saved
              consequent to expenses of providing of present full salary,
              could be available for the purposes of extension of
              primary education and for the purposes of enhancement of
              its quality.
10. New rule shall not have any effect in salary of the
              teachers and in terms and condition of their appointments
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
9
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
made earlier. But their vacant posts shall be omitted and
              same number of posts shall be created under the new
              arrangements/Rules and appointment on it shall be made
              under the new rules. Same arrangement/procedure shall
              follow in the vacancies falling in future.
Under these provisions, Panchayat Raj institutions are
              being provided with the power of appointment of new
              teachers, payment of salary and other terms and conditions
              of service as per the proposed new Rules of appointment.
              Movable/Immovable Property of the schools, training of
              teachers, construction of building of school, construction
              of syllabus of study/study material, construction of book,
              evaluation etc all the works shall be under the state
              Government like in past.”
                                     … …          …

              “5. Difficulties in previous appointment procedure:- In
              the centralized examination test as adopted earlier has
              following difficulties in selection and appointment of
              teachers.
i.     Previous experience shows that in
                           organizing and evaluating of such
                           examinations so many hurdles are faced
                           and in entire appointment process, it takes
                           a lot of time.
ii.    If selection is done in a centralized way,
                           there is possibility of participation of
                           candidates from other states too and a
                           practical difficulty would come in,
                           verification of eligibility certificates etc.


                    iii.   After centralized selection process, a
                           practical difficulty would be faced in
                           transfer and posting etc and candidates
                           would also suffer.
6. Proposed process of employment:- While considering
              the above said facts/aspects, proposal is that procedure of
              appointment of Secondary and higher Secondary teachers
              is decentralized and in light of 73rd and 74th amendment of
              the Constitution of India, its responsibility be given to the
              Panchayati Raj Sansthan’s/bodies.             Movable and
              immovable property of school, Training of teachers,
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
10
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
construction of school building, syllabus/study materials,
              construction of study materials, evaluation etc, shall be
              under the control of state Government like in past.”

                                    … …           …
               “8. Under the above said process, if payment is made at
              the rate of Rs.6000/- per teacher (Six thousand only)
              financial implication would be Rs.89,82,72,000/- (Eighty
              nine crores eighty two lakhs seventy two thousand only)
              which would be required to be incurred. If appointment is
              made on all these posts under the present procedure, total
              amount of Rs.160,83,56,016 (rupees one hundred sixty
              crores eighty three lakhs fifty six thousand sixteen rupees
              only) is estimated required to be spent. In this manner if
              appointment of teachers of secondary schools are done
              under the new proposed Rules, total amount of
              Rs.71,00,84,016 (Seventy one crores, eighty four thousand
              sixteen rupees only) shall be saved. From this saved
              amount, on fixed salary total 10,000 posts of teachers
              could be created. From these created posts, for the
              purposes of extension of secondary education in the state,
              following schemes shall be floated by the Department of
              Human Resources Development.”
11.     Thereafter, Bihar Panchayat Elementary Teachers (Employment

    and Service Conditions) Rules, 2006 came into effect on 01.07.2006. The

    opening recitals of said Rules stated:
“In the exercise of the powers conferred by provision of
Article 243-G (11th schedule section no.17)
of the
              Constitution of India and Article-47 and 48 read with
Article 146
of
Bihar Panchayat Raj Act
-2006, the State
              Government is pleased to make the following rules for
              employment of teachers in the Elementary schools of rural
              areas of the state.
Rules:
The Elementary education for the children between 6-14
              years of age, has become their fundamental Right under
              the
Article 21(A)
of the Constitution of India. For this it
              has become necessary to adopt the comprehensive
              programmes for improvement and expansion of
              Elementary education (system). It is required to open
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
11
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
thousands of new elementary schools and employment of
              teachers in large number. It has also become necessary to
              handover the responsibility of elementary Education to
              Panchayat Raj Institutions considering their important
              roles in Elementary Education in the light of 73 rd and 74th
              amendments of the constitution. Consequently, to achieve
              the above goal, this rule is being made for the employment
              of teachers in elementary schools.”
              Rules 3 and 4 of said Rules were to the following effect:
              “3. Grade of Panchayat Elementary Teacher- There will
              be two grades of Panchayat Elementary Teachers:-
(A) Block Teacher (Those teachers including physical
              Education Teachers employed at block level.)

              (B) “Panchayat Teachers”        (Teachers    employed       at
              Panchayat level).
4. Employment of Panchayat Elementary Teachers-
(1) Block Teachers will be employed in Middle schools
              by Panchayat samiti and Panchayat teachers will be
              employed in primary schools by Gram Panchayat.
(2) Category wise panel at both above mentioned level
              will be prepared separately for trained and untrained
              candidates. At first trained teachers will be employed.
              Thereafter if posts remain vacant, untrained teachers may
              be employed. Thereafter if posts remain vacant, untrained
              teachers may be employed and arrangement will be made
              for imparting two years teachers training to them.
(3) In reserved category if higher secondary/intermediate
              passed candidates would not be available, secondary
              examination (Matriculation) passed candidates may be
              employed. But it will be necessary for them to acquire
              prescribed qualification within maximum six years.”


            Rule 9 dealt with “process of employment” and stated that the

    vacant posts would be advertised within the block/panchayat, whereafter
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
12
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
application forms from interested candidates would be received by Block

    Education Extension Officer for Block Teachers and by the Secretary of

    Gram Panchayats from Panchayat Teachers. Sub-Rule 7 of Rule 9 dealt

    with constitution and approval of Committee for preparation of panel as

    under:-
“7. Constitution and Approval of Committee for
              preparation of panel:
Panel will be prepared on the basis of application forms
              obtained by the following Committee:
(A) For Block teacher and physical Teacher:-
(i) Pramukh of Panchayat samiti-Chairman
(ii) Executive Officer panchayat Samiti - Member.
(iii) One member elected by education committee of
                    Panchayat Samiti. (if parmukhe is male member, the
                    elected member Executive shall be a female)
(iv) Block Education Extension Officer – Member
                    Secretary

              (B) For Panchayat teacher:
(i)    Mukhiya of Gram Panchayat – Chairman
(ii)   One member elected by
Education Committee of
                     Gram Panchayat
case Mukhiya is a male, the elected
                     member will be female -Member.
(iii) The member of Panchayat samiti whose area covers
                    most of the area Panchayat – Member
(iv) One teacher from the secondary school either from
                   to the panchayat nearer to the panchayat nominated
                   by the D.E.O. – Member.
(v)    Secretary Gram Panchayat – Member Secretary.
But the term of the elected members of both the
                     above committees will of one year.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
13
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Note: - In case of (non-existence) non-constituent of
                    the Education Committee of panchayat samiti and
                    Gram panchayat, one member of panchayat
                    samiti/gram Panchyat nominated by the Block
                    Education Extension officer, will be a member of the
                    Committee.
(vi) After preparation, the panel will be published or
                   make available to the public one-week time will be
                   given for their objection/grievances. Resolving the
                   grievances obtained, panel will be finalised.
(vii) Panel prepared for employment of Block teachers
                    and panchayat teacher will be approved by
                    panchayat samiti and Gram panchayat respectively.
(viii) Selected members will be employed in their willing
                     schools through counselling by the above
                     committees in descending order of the preference
                     mentioned in Anusuchi-II from the panel prepared
                     on the basis of merit.
(ix) Employment letter will be given to the selected
                   candidate (Anusuchi-III)
(x)   Their joining will be accepted on the basis of their
                    consent letter.”


            In terms of Rule 12, trained Block Teachers and Panchayat

    Teachers as well as untrained Block Teachers and Panchayat Teachers

    were to be employed on fixed pay and the trained Block Teachers and

    Panchayat Teachers would be entitled to an increase in their fixed pay by

    Rs.500/- every three years, while untrained block teachers and panchayat

    teachers would be entitled to increment of Rs.300/- every three years.
Under Rule 13 the posts were non-transferable.           Under Rule 20 dealing

    with Repeal and Savings it was stated that Panchayat Shiksha Mitras
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
14
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
employed under previous circulars, orders, instructions were deemed to be

    employed as panchayat teachers under these Rules.
12.     On 11.07.2006, two sets of Rules were framed by the State. First,

    dealing with subject of appointment of teachers in Government

    Nationalized Secondary Schools in the Urban Areas of the States while

    the second set dealt with the subject of appointment of teachers in

    Government Nationalized Secondary Schools in Rural areas of the State.
The opening recitals in respect of both the sets of Rules were identical and

    were to the following effect:-
“The State Government has taken a policy decision for the
              expansion and strengthening of the Secondary and Higher
              Secondary Schools of the state. At present, it is necessary
              to fill up a large number of vacancies of the teachers.
              Apart from this, more schools and teachers are also
              needed. It has been decided to organize + 2 level of higher
              secondary schools under 10 + 2 + 3 pattern in accordance
              with the National Education Policy, 1986/1992. As per the
              73rd and 74th Amendment of the Constitution, the
              Government has decided, to decentralize the appointment
              of the teachers of the Secondary and Higher Secondary
              Schools and to entrust the responsibility of the
              appointment of teachers of Secondary Schools to the
              Panchayati Raj Institutions. These rules are being made to
              achieve this aim under special planning for the
              appointment of teachers in the Secondary Schools.”


    A)      The First set of Rules were called the Bihar Municipal Body

    Secondary and Higher Secondary Teachers (Employment and Service

    Conditions) Rules 2006.       Rule 4 dealt with the subject of eligibility for
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
15
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
appointment to the posts of Municipal Secondary Teachers under Part A

    while Part B dealt with similar issues as regards Municipal Higher

    Secondary Teachers. The procedure for employment was dealt with in

    Rule 6, according to which the information of subject-wise vacant posts of

    teachers in Government Nationalized Secondary Schools situated in

    Municipal areas would be advertised in that area. Sub-Rule (6) of Rule 6

    dealt with Constitution of Committees for preparation of panels in respect

    of Municipal Panchayat/Municipal board and for Municipal Corporations

    as under:
“Constitution of Committee for the preparation of panel and its
                approval-
On the basis of received applications, the following committee
                shall prepare the panel:
(a)   Committee for Municipal Panchayat/Municipal Board
1. Chairman of Municipal Panchayat             President
                   /Municipal Board
2. One selected Member of Education            Member
                   Committee of Municipal panchayat/
                   Municipal board (In case of male
                   president, the selected member shall be
                   female)
3. Executive Officer of Municipal               Member
                   Panchayat/ Municipal Board
                 4 Concerned      Sub-divisional                Member
                 . Officer                                      Secretary


                If Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe are not there in the
                aforesaid committee, then the District Welfare Officer shall be
                the additional member of the Committee.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
16
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
But the tenure of the member selected by the Education
               Committee of Municipal Panchayat/Municipal Board shall be of
               1 year.
Note: - In case of non-constitution of the education committee
               of Municipal Panchayat/Municipal Board, one officer of the
               district level shall be nominated by the executive officer of the
               Municipal Panchayat/Municipal Board.
(b) Committee for the Municipal Corporation
1.    Mayor of Municipal Corporation             President
2.    One selected member of Education           Member
                     Committee of Municipal Corporation
                     (In case of male president, the selected
                     member shall be female)
3.    Executive Officer of Municipal             Member
                     Corporation
               4     Concerned District Education Officer       Member

                                                                Secretary

               If Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe are not there in the
               aforesaid committee, then the District Welfare Officer shall be
               the additional member of the Committee.
But the tenure of the member selected by the Education
               Committee of Municipal Corporation shall be of 1 year.
               Note: In case of non-constitution of the education committee of
               Municipal Corporation an officer of the district level shall be
               nominated by the Chief Officer of the Municipal Corporation.”


         In terms of Rule 8, Municipal Secondary Teachers, trained and

    untrained, would be entitled to fixed salary every month and also increase

    of Rs.600 per month and Rs.500 per month respectively on completion of

    3 years.       Similarly, salary of Municipal Higher Secondary Teachers,

    trained and untrained, was also a fixed salary with increase of Rs.700 per

    month and Rs.600 per month for trained and untrained categories on
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
17
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
competition of 3 years. Under Rule 10, the posts of Municipal Secondary

    and Higher Secondary Teachers were normally not transferable, but after

    completion of three years, the teachers could avail the facility of

    maximum two transfers within the jurisdiction of the Municipal Body.
Rule 16(2) was to the following effect:-
These Rules shall not affect the salary and service
              conditions of the teachers of Government, Nationalised
              Secondary and Higher Secondary Schools appointed under
              the provisions of the previous Rules.”


    B)      The Second set of Rules were called the Bihar District Board

    Secondary and Higher Secondary Teachers (Employment and Service

    Conditions) Rules, 2006. Rule 4 dealt with the subject of eligibility for

    appointment to the posts of District Board Secondary Teachers under Part-
A while Part-B dealt with similar issues as regards District Board Higher

    Secondary Teachers. The procedure for employment was dealt with in

    Rule 6, according to which the information of subject-wise vacant posts in

    Government nationalized secondary schools situated in the District Board

    areas would be advertised in the District. Sub-Rule (6) of said Rule 6

    dealt with constitution of Committees for the preparation of panels in

    respect of District Boards as under:-
“vi. Constitution of Committee for the preparation of panel and
              its approval-
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
18
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
On the basis of received applications, the following Committee
              shall prepare the panel:
a    Chairman of District Board                  President
              b    One selected Member of Education            Member
                   Committee of District Board
                   (In case of male President, the selected
                   member shall be female)
              C    Deputy Development Commissioner             Member
              d    District Education Officer                  Member
                                                               Secretary
If Scheduled Caste/ Scheduled Tribes are not there in the
              aforesaid committee, then the District Welfare Officer shall be
              the additional member of the committee.
              But the tenure of the member selected by the Education
              Committee of District Board shall be of 1 year.
              Note:- In case of non-constitution of the education committee of
              District Board, one officer of the district level shall be
              nominated by the Deputy Development Commissioner.”


         In terms of Rule 8, District Secondary Teachers, trained and

    untrained, would be entitled to fixed salary every month and also an

    increase of Rs.600/- per month and Rs.500/- per month respectively on

    completion of three years. Similarly, the District Board Higher Secondary

    Teachers, trained and untrained, would also be entitled to a fixed salary

    with increase of Rs.700/- per month and Rs.600/- per month respectively

    for trained and untrained categories on completion of three years. Under

    Rule 10, the posts of District Board Secondary and District Board Higher

    Secondary Teachers were normally non-transferable, but on completion of

    three years, the teachers could avail the facility of maximum two transfers

    within the jurisdiction of the District Board. Rule 16(2) was as under:-
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
19
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
“These Rules shall not affect the salary and service
              conditions of the teachers of Government, Nationalised
              Secondary and Higher Secondary Schools appointed under
              the provisions of the previous Rules.”
13.     Thus, three sets of Rules came into effect in July, 2006. Bihar

    Panchayat Elementary Teachers (Employment and Service Conditions)

    Rules, 2006 dealing with elementary teachers come into force on

    01.07.2006; Bihar Municipal Body Secondary and Higher Education

    Teachers (Employment and Service Conditions) Rules, 2006 dealing with

    teachers employed in secondary and higher secondary teachers in urban

    areas came into effect on 11.7.2006. Bihar District Board Secondary

    Higher Secondary Teachers (Employment and Service Conditions) Rules,

    2006 dealing with secondary and higher secondary teachers in rural areas

    also came into effect on 11.7.2006. These three sets of Rules, for facility,

    are hereinafter referred to as ‘2006 Rules’ and the teachers appointed in

    terms of said Rules, again for facility, are referred to as ‘Niyojit Teachers’,

    which expression appears in all official circulars and resolutions.
After the framing of Rules of 2006, the appointments to the posts of

    teachers in urban as well as rural areas in respect of nationalized schools

    in the State were made on the basis of said Rules of 2006. The service

    conditions and emoluments payable to those teachers were governed

    under the provisions of the respective sets of 2006 Rules as aforesaid.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
20
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
The emoluments payable to those teachers were, however, lower than the

    emoluments paid to all the teachers who were appointed before said Rules

    of 2006 had come into force. Thus, there were two categories of teachers,

    the first being those teachers who upon nationalization continued or were

    appointed in all Government schools before 2006 and the second category

    was all the teachers appointed under 2006 Rules. The First category i.e.

    regular Government Teachers were entitled to a pay-scale and certain

    emoluments, whereas the Second category of teachers were appointed by

    Local Authorities on a fixed salary.
It was, however, the policy decision of the State that post 2006

    there would not be any fresh regular appointments in the First category

    and all regular appointments post 2006 would be only in terms of 2006

    Rules i.e. in the Second category. There is, however, an exception under

    which certain teachers were appointed under the First category even after

    2006 which will be dealt with hereafter. Barring such exception, the

    policy decision had been that no fresh appointments be made in the First

    category and that the First category would be treated as a dying or

    vanishing cadre.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
21
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
14.
The RTE Act
enacted by the Parliament to provide for free and

    compulsory education to all children in the age bracket of 6 to 14 years,

    came into force on 01.04.2010.
A.
Sections 2 (a)
, (f) and (n) which define terms ‘appropriate

    Government’, ‘elementary education’ and ‘school’ are as under:-
“2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise
              requires, -
(a) “appropriate Government” means –
(i)    In relation to a school established, owned or
                          controlled by the Central Government, or the
                          administrator of the Union territory, having no
                          legislature, the Central Government;
(ii)   In relation to a school, other than the school referred
                          to in sub-clause (i), established within the territory
                          of –

                          (A)     A State, the State Government;
(B)      A Union Territory having legislature, the
                                  Government of that Union territory;
…    … …

                   (f)    “elementary education” means the education from
                          first class to eighth class;
                                            …… …
(n) “school” means any recognised school imparting
                        elementary education and includes –
(i)    a school established, owned or controlled by the
                           appropriate Government or a local authority;
(ii)   an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole
                          or part of its expenses from the appropriate
                          Government or the local authority;
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
22
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
(iii) a school belonging to specified category; and
(iv)   an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or
                           grants to meet its expenses from the appropriate
                           Government or the local authority;”
B.      Chapter III of the Act
deals with “Duties of Appropriate

    Government, Local Authority and Parents” and
Sections 6
and
7
appearing in this Chapter are as under:-
“6. Duty of appropriate Government and local
              authority to establish school. – For carrying out the
              provisions of this Act, the appropriate Government and the
              local authority shall establish, within such area or limits of
              neighbourhood, as may be prescribed, a school, where it is
              not so established, within a period of three years from the
              commencement of this Act.
7. Sharing of financial and other responsibilities. – (1)
              The Central Government and the State Governments shall
              have concurrent responsibility for providing funds for
              carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Central Government shall prepare the estimates of
              capital and recurring expenditure for the implementation
              of the provisions of the Act.
(3) The Central Government shall provide to the State
              Governments, as grants-in-aid of revenues, such
              percentage of expenditure referred to in sub-section (2) as
              it may determine, from time to time, in consultation with
              the State Governments.
(4) The Central Government may make a request to the
              President to make a reference to the Finance Commission
              under sub-clause (d) of clause (3) of
article 280
to
              examine the need for additional resources to be provided
              to any State Government so that the said State
              Government may provide its share of funds for carrying
              out the provisions of the Act.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (4),
              the State Government shall, taking into consideration the
              sums provided by the Central Government to a State
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
23
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Government under sub-section (3), and its other resources,
              be responsible to provide funds for implementation of the
              provisions of the Act.
(6) The Central Government shall-
(a) develop a framework of national curriculum with
                   the help of academic authority specified under
Section 29
;
(b) develop and enforce standards for training of
                   teachers;
(c) provide technical support and resources to the
                   State Government for promoting innovations,
                   researches, planning and capacity building.”


    C.      Chapter IV deals with “Responsibilities of Schools and Teachers”

    and
Sections 23
and
25
deal with issues such as qualifications and

    conditions of service of teachers as well as Pupil-Teacher Ratio as under:
“23. Qualifications for appointment and terms and
              conditions of service of teachers. –
              (1) Any person possessing such minimum qualifications,
              as
laid down by
an academic authority, authorised by the
              Central Government, by notification, shall be eligible for
              appointment as a teacher.
(2) Where a State does not have adequate institutions
              offering courses or training in teacher education, or
              teachers possessing minimum qualifications as laid down
              under sub-section (1) are not available in sufficient
              numbers, the Central Government may, if it deems
              necessary, by notification, relax the minimum
              qualifications required for appointment as a teacher, for
              such period, not exceeding five years, as may be specified
              in that notification:
Provided that a teacher who, at the commencement of this
              Act, does not possess minimum qualifications as laid
              down under sub-section (1), shall acquire such minimum
              qualifications within a period of five years.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
24
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Provided further that every teacher appointed or in
              position as on the 31st March, 2015, who does not possess
              minimum qualifications as laid down under sub-section
              (1), shall acquire such minimum qualifications within a
              period of four years from the date of commencement of
              the
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
              (Amendment) Act, 2017
.
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the terms
              and conditions of service of, teacher shall be such as may
              be prescribed.
… …         …
25. Pupil-Teacher Ratio. – (1) Within three years from
              the date of commencement of this Act, the appropriate
              Government and the local authority shall ensure that the
              Pupil-Teacher Ratio, as specified in the Schedule, is
              maintained in each school.
(2) For the purpose of maintaining the Pupil-Teacher Ratio
              under sub-section (1), no teacher posted in a school shall
              be made to serve in any other school or office or deployed
              for any non-educational purpose, other than those
              specified in
section 27
.”


      D.
Section 35
empowers the Central Government to issue directions

      while
Section 38
empowers appropriate Government to make rules. In

      exercise of powers conferred by
Section 38
of the RTE Act, the Central

      Government made “The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory

      Education Rules, 2010” (hereinafter referred to as “2010 Rules”), which

      came into effect on 8.4.2010. Part VI of 2010 Rules deals with topic

      ‘Teachers’ and Rule 20 appearing in said Part VI is as under:-
“20. Salary and allowances and conditions of service of
              teachers. – (1) The Central Government or the appropriate
              Government or the local authority, as the case may be,
              shall notify terms and conditions of service and salary and
              allowances of teachers of schools owned and managed by
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
25
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
them in order to create a professional and permanent cadre
              of teachers.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to sub-rule (1), the
              terms and conditions of service shall take into account the
              following, namely:-
(a) accountability of teachers to the School Management
              Committee;
(b) provisions enabling long-term stake of teachers in the
              teaching profession.
(3) The scales of pay and allowances, medical facilities,
              pension, gratuity, provident fund, and other prescribed
              benefits of teachers shall be at par for similar qualification,
              work and experience.”
15.   In exercise of powers conferred by
Section 38
of the RTE Act, State

      of Bihar made, The Bihar State Free and Compulsory Education of

      Children Rules, 2011. The concept of neighbourhood was dealt with in

      Rule 2(1)(k) and Rule 4 speaking about establishment of a primary school

      within 1 km of all habitations was as under:-
“4. (1) the areas or limits of neighbourhood within which
              a school has to be established by the State Government
              shall be as under –
(a) A primary school has to be established within a
              limit of 1(one) km. of all habitations, where number of
              children between the ages of 6-14 years are at least 40
              (forty):
(b) An elementary school has to be established
              within a limit of 3 (three) km. of any habitation:
              (2) wherever required, the State Government shall upgrade
              a primary school to elementary school.
              (3) In places with difficult terrain, risk of floods,
              landslides, erosion, lack of roads and in general, danger
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
26
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
for young children in the approach from their homes to the
              school, the State Government or the local authority may
              consider to locate the school in such a manner as to avoid
              such dangers, by relaxing the limits specified under sub
              rule (1) of rule 4.
(4) For children from very small habitations as identified
              by the State Government/Local Authority, where no school
              exists within the area or limits of neighbourhood specified
              under Sub-Rule (1) above, the State Government/Local
              Authority shall make adequate arrangements, such as free
              transportation, residential facilities and other facilities, for
              providing elementary education.
(5) In areas with high population density, the State
              Government/local authority may consider establishment of
              more than one neighbourhood school, having regard to the
              number of Children in the age group of 6-14 years in such
              areas.
(6) The Local Authority shall identify the neighbourhood
              school(s) where children can easily be admitted and made
              such information public for each habitation within its
              jurisdiction.
(7) In respect of children with disabilities, which prevent
              them from accessing the school the State
              Government/Local Authority will endeavour to make
              appropriate and safe transportation arrangements for them
              to attend school and complete elementary education.
              (8) The State Government/Local Authority shall ensure
              that access of children to the School is not hindered by
              social and cultural factors.”


         Part 6 of the Rules dealt with “minimum qualifications of teachers for

    the purpose of sub section (1) of
Section 23
of the Act and Rule 17 was as

    under:-
“Salary, allowances and conditions of service of
              teachers for the purpose of sub-Section (3) of
Section
              23
of the Act
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
27
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
17. (1) The State Government shall notify salary,
              allowances and conditions of service for creation of a
              professional and permanent cadre of teachers.
(2) Following points shall be taken into
              consideration without prejudice for sub-rule (1) and
              especially for the determination of conditions of service:-
(a) The teachers should be accountable to the school
              education committee constituted under
Section 21
of the
              Act.
(b) The provision of creation of favourable
              conditions for teachers to stay in teaching profession for
              long period.”
16.     Soon     thereafter     Bihar     Panchayat       Elementary    Teachers

    (Employment and Services Conditions) Rules, 2012 came into force on

    03.04.2012. The terms Primary School, Middle School and Elementary

    School by defining Rules 2 (i)(ii)(iii) respectively as under:-
“(i) “Primary school” means the government or
              government taken-over schools where at present education
              is provided upto class-V level.
(ii) “Middle school” means government/government
              taken over schools where at present education is provided
              upto class VIII level.
(iii)“Elementary school” means government/
              government taken over primary and Middle schools.”


          Rule 5 prescribed minimum qualifications for employment in respect

    of teachers for classes I to V and classes VI to VIII. Rule 15 dealt with

    consolidated pay of the teachers as under:-
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
28
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
“15. Service Conditions of Niyojit teachers.-(a) Consolidated
              Pay.-(i) the Panchayat elementary teachers will get the
              consolidated pay as follows:-
   Trained teachers (basic grade)           -7000/- per month
                 Untrained teachers (basic grade)         -6000/- per month
                 Trained teachers (Graduate grade)        -8000/-per month
                 Untrained teachers (Graduate grade)      -7500/- per month
                 Trained teachers (H.M. Middle School)   -14000/- per month
(ii) The instructors will get 4000/- consolidated pay per
              month.
(iii) If in future, the state government takes a decision to
              revise their consolidated pay, they will get the pay accordingly.
(iv) No other allowances like dearness allowance, house
              rent allowance, medical allowances, transport allowance etc.
              will be given to the Panchayat elementary teachers and
              instructors employed under these rules.”


           Sub rule (b) then dealt with pay increase and stated that the

    evaluation (“efficiency test”) of Niyojit Teachers as directed by the

    Government according to Employment Rules, 2006 would be undertaken

    and based on evaluation, the trained teachers securing 45% in general

    category and 40% in reserved category would get an increase of Rs.500 in

    their consolidated pay while untrained teachers wold get increase of

    Rs.300/- in their fixed pay after three years.
Sub rule (f) dealt with “Promotion” and clause 3 thereafter stated that

    the promotion to the post of headmaster in fixed pay of middle schools

    would be given from the seniority list of graduate trained teachers and from
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
29
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
the seniority list of teachers having at least 5 years of minimum satisfactory

    service in graduate grade at block level.
Similar provisions for teachers working in urban areas were made by

    the Bihar Nagar Elementary Teachers (Employment and Service

    Conditions) Rules, 2012.
17.     Though after the enforcement of 2006 Rules, the regular cadre of

    Government Teachers was to be taken as a dying or vanishing cadre and

    fresh appointments were to be made only in terms of 2006 Rules on fixed

    pay and power appointment was vested with Panchayati Raj Institutions,

    there was an exception and some Assistant Teachers in regular pay scale as

    Government Teachers in secondary schools came to be appointed in the

    year 2013 in following circumstances.
Sometime in December 2003, an advertisement was issued by the

    State to fill up the posts of Assistant teachers.          However, certain

    irregularities were found in the preparation of panels during selection

    process.   Therefore, orders were issued for cancellation of panels. A

    challenge was raised by some candidates and the High Court directed the

    State to recalculate the vacancies and to go ahead with the process of

    selection. Special Leave Petition No.22882 of 2004 filed in this Court by
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
30
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
the State was withdrawn.             Thereafter, the State attempted to fill the

    vacancies in terms of 2006 Rules which led to the filing of Contempt

    Petition No.297 of 2007 in this Court. By order dated 9.12.2009, this Court

    directed the State Government to fill up 34540 posts of Assistant teachers

    as per advertisement published in December 2003 as one time appointment.
The Bihar Special Primary Teachers Appointment Rules, 2010 were

    therefore framed. These Rules were to deal with exceptional situation

    which was styled as “One Time Appointment.”                       Accordingly, 34540

    teachers were appointed in 2013 as Government Teachers on regular pay

    scales. The developments including the difficulty expressed by the State in

    accommodating teachers because of change in policy were dealt with by

    this Court in
Nand Kishore Ojha v. Anjani Kumar Singh1
as under:-
“1. Contempt Petition (C) No. 297 of 2007, filed in SLP
                 (C) No. 22882 of 2004, arose out of an alleged breach of
                 undertaking said to have been given on 18-1-2006 by the
                 State of Bihar and the order passed on the basis thereof on
                 23-1-2006 by this Court in
State of Bihar v. Nand Kishor
                 Ojha
(2014 11 SCC 404) As we have indicated in our
                 order dated 9-1-2009, a number of writ petitions had been
                 filed against the State of Bihar, raising issues relating to
                 recruitment of teachers in primary schools. At one stage, it
                 was brought to our notice that on account of changes in
                 the policy, trained teachers who were in place at the time
                 when the undertakings were given, could not be
                 accommodated. Accordingly, we had passed orders
                 directing that the trained teachers who at one time were
                 less than the number of vacant posts, should be given
                 appointment in the vacancies that were available.
1(2014)   11 SCC 405
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
31
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Subsequently, however, there was some discrepancy as to
              the number of vacancies available as against the number
              of teachers to be accommodated. Accordingly, we adopted
              a figure from an advertisement which had been published
              for recruitment of primary school teachers and took the
              number of available vacancies to be 34,540.
2. We had directed that the said vacancies be filled up with
              the said number of trained teachers as a one-time measure
              to give effect to the undertakings which had been given on
              18-1-2006 and 23-1-2006. Accordingly, without issuing a
              rule of contempt, we had directed that the said vacancies
              be filled up from amongst the trained teachers who are
              available in order of seniority. Subsequently, however, it
              came to light that the number of candidates available were
              much more than the number of vacancies and there were
              also serious doubts raised about the eligibility of some of
              the candidates and some of the institutions from which
              they alleged to have received their training.”


          As a result, 34,540 primary school teachers came to be appointed in

    the year 2012-13. These teachers though appointed after 2006 were not

    appointed in terms of 2006 Rules but Special Recruitment Rules called

    2013 Rules were formulated.
18.     An association of teachers called Parivartankari Prarambhik

    Shikshak Sangh approached the High Court by filing Civil Writ

    Jurisdiction Case No.7089 of 2013 contending that the Panchayat

    elementary teachers were entitled, under the principle of “equal pay for

    equal work”, to same pay-scales which were being given to the teachers

    appointed under the State Government. The matter was contested and the
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
32
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Single Judge of the High Court dismissed said Writ Petition by his

    judgment and order dated 5.4.2013. It was observed:-
“Here is a case where the State as a matter of policy came
              up with a scheme of mass employment at grass root level
              at the Panchayats to ensure that sufficient teachers are
              available at the local level so that children who have no
              ready access to education also have such opportunity. In
              the aforesaid background, as far as the State exchequer is
              concerned, the policy/scheme was in accordance with the
              burden it could bear for such recruitment under which the
              members of the petitioner’s society have been appointed.
              That being the case, it is entirely at the discretion of the
              State Government to decide the service conditions
              including pay-scale for persons appointed under the
              aforesaid Rules. The Court would not substitute is own
              views or force the State to make payment from the public
              exchequer as it is the State which is also accountable for
              such expenditure and has to justify such payment.
If the State Government has framed a policy/scheme for
              evolving a way of balancing between the requirement of
              teachers and the financial liability together with
              devolution of power to the Panchayats, the Court would
              not interfere and disturb the equilibrium.”
19.     Around this time, several other writ petitions were filed, being

    aggrieved by the differential treatment, where the Niyojit Teachers

    appointed under Rules of 2006 were not been given the same pay-scales

    and were differentially treated.       These petitions highlighted denial of

    concept of “equal pay for equal work” and challenged the validity of

    relevant provisions of 2006 Rules. The matters were taken up by the

    Division Bench of the High Court, the lead matter being CWJC 21199 of

    2013 filed by the Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee, Munger.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
33
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
20.     In response, the stand of the State was that there were differences

    between two categories of teachers. In supplementary counter affidavit

    filed by the Director, Secondary Education, the difference was projected

    as under:-
“13. That the comparative difference between the aforesaid two
            categories of teachers is more apparent from the tabular chart
            prepared hereinafter:-
Sl.   Head     Earlier     District Niyojit Teacher
            No.            Cadre Teacher
1.    Cadre    District/Division    Respective        Panchayat,
                                                Block, Nagar Panchayat,
                                                Nagar Parishad, Nagar
                                                Nigam or Zila Parishad, as
                                                the case may be.
2.    Status   Employee of State Employee of respective
                           Government           institution of Panchayati
                                                Raj        Institution/Urban
                                                Local bodies/Zila Parishad
3.    Nature   Dying/diminishing To continue
                  of       cadre
                  Cadre
4.    Nomen Assistant Teacher     Panchayat
                  clatur                      Teacher/Prakhand Teacher/
                  e of                        Nagar         Teacher/Zila
                  post                        Parishad      Madhyamic
                                              Teacher/Nagar    Parishad
                                              Madhyamic Teacher/Zila
                                              Parishad          Uchhtar
                                              Madhyamic Teacher/Nagar
                                              Parishad          Uchttar
                                              Madhyamic Teacher
5.    Appoi    District           Respective    PRI’s/Urban
                  nting    Superintendent of Local Bodies/Zila Parishad
                  Autho    Education      now
                  rity     District Education
                           Officer/Director,
                           Secondary
                           Education
6.    Mode     BPSC based on Based on Marks obtained
                  of       competitive        in academic course and
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
34
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Recru examination/Erstw training course
                   itment hile     Vidyalaya
                          Seva Board
7.    Rules   Bihar Elementary Bihar              Panchayat
                          Schools Teachers Elementary          Teachers
                          Appointment        (Employment and Service
                          Rules, 1991 as Conditions) Rules, 2012;
amended       AND Bihar Nagar Elementary
                          Bihar Secondary Teachers (Employment and
                          Schools Teachers Service Conditions) Rules,
                          Appointment        2012; Bihar District Board
                          Rules.             Secondary and Higher
                                             Secondary         Teachers
                                             (Employment and Service
                                             Conditions) Rules, 2006;
Bihar Municipal Body
                                             Secondary and Higher
                                             Secondary         Teachers
                                             (Employment and Service
                                             Conditions) Rules 2006; as
                                             amended.
            8     Status The said relevant It is in existence
                   of     Rules has already
                   appoi repealed.
                   ntmen
                   t
                   Rules
            9.    No. of Upto      2006   in After 2006 in Primary &
                   teache Primary         & Secondary about 4.4 lakhs
                   rs     Secondary about
                          1,30,000
            10.   Appell RDDE/Director,      District         Appellate
                   ate    Secondary          Authority/State Appellate
                   Autho Education           Authority.
                   rity
21.   During the pendency of these matters, a Resolution was passed by

      the State Government on 11.08.2015, under which the Niyojit Teachers

      were granted a pay-scale instead of fixed salary that was contemplated

      under 2006 Rules. The Resolution also indicated number of primary

      teachers, secondary teachers and higher secondary teachers as well as
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
35
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
librarians that were appointed and the pay-scale that was given to those

      teachers. The tabular chart given in the Resolution was as under:-
“2.1 Primary Teacher
              Sl.   Post              No. of     Pay-scale   Grade
              No.                    Vacancies                pay
              1           2              3           4         5
1.    Primary           62031        5200-       5
                    Teacher                        20200
                    (Untrained)
2.    Primary           245344       5200-       0
                    Teacher                        20200
                    (Trained)
3.    Primary           14000        5200-       0
                    Teacher                        20200
                    (Graduate
                    untrained)
4.    Primary           22739        5200-      2400
                    Teacher                        20200
                    (Graduate
                    trained)
                    Total             344114
                    Teachers
                    (inclusive
                    of number
                    of teachers
                    to        be
                    appointed
                    in future as
                    against the
                    declared
                    vacancies)


              2.2 Secondary Teacher/Librarian
              Sl.   Post              No. of     Pay-scale   Grade
              No.                    Vacancies                pay
              1          2               3           4         5
1.    Secondary          4463        5200-       0
                    Teacher                        20200
                    (Untrained)
2.    Secondary         25038        5200-      2400
                    Teacher                        20200
                    (Trained)
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
36
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
3.    Librarian          1900            5200-         0
                                                       20200
4.    Higher             3058            5200-         0
                    Secondary                          20200
                    Teacher
                    (10+2)
                    (untrained)
5.    Higher             26774           5200-       2800
                    Secondary                          20200
                    Teacher
                    (10+2)
                    (trained)
                    Total              61233
                    Teachers
                    (inclusive
                    of numbers
                    of teachers
                    to        be
                    appointed
                    in future as
                    against the
                    declared
                    vacancies)


         Para 2.5 of the Resolution was as under:-
“2.5 The benefit of Dearness Allowances; Medical Allowances;
              House Rent Allowances and Annual Increment, as announced
              for State Govt. Employee from time to time, will be extended to
              Niyojit Trained, Untrained |Primary, Secondary, Higher
              Secondary Teachers and Librarians.”

           The Resolution further prescribed the minimum basic pay-scale for

    trained primary, secondary and higher secondary teachers as well as the

    librarians from 1.7.2015. Additionally, the Resolution stated that amounts

    of Rs.2,000/- for trained teachers, Rs.2,400/- for secondary trained

    teachers and librarians and Rs.2,800/- for higher secondary trained

    teachers would be payable as Grade Pay. Similarly, in cases of untrained
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
37
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
teachers it was stipulated that with effect from 1.7.2015 there would be

    rise of at least 20% in their emoluments and they would also be entitled to

    Special Allowance.        The Resolution further stated that the revised

    emoluments would entail financial impact as under:-
Particulars of additional financial impact
            Sl.    Grade     Number of          Total           Total       Total
            No.                 Niyojit     emoluments emoluments        additional
                               Teachers      payable in     being paid    financial
                                  who       terms of the     presently     impact
                                 would        pay-scale                  (figure in
                                benefit                                    crores)
            1 Primary           344114         6693.23        4173.21     2520.04
                Teacher
            2 Secondary          61233         1259.30         830.85     428.45
                Teachers,
                Higher
                Secondary
                Teachers
                and
                Librarians
                Total           405347         7952.55        5004.06    2948.49
22.     When the matters were taken up for consideration by the Division

    Bench, it was submitted on behalf of the Writ Petitioners that both

    categories of teachers i.e. Government Teachers and Niyojit Teachers

    were imparting instructions in the same nationalized schools and yet there

    was considerable difference in the emoluments paid to Niyojit Teachers;
that both the categories of teachers were discharging same responsibility

    and were teaching the same syllabus and there was no difference in the

    performance of their duties and responsibilities; that the distinction made
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
38
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
between these two categories was completely unreasonable and that on

    the basis of constitutional principle of “equal pay for equal work” Niyojit

    Teachers were entitled to same salary, pay-scales and emoluments as were

    payable to the Government Teachers in nationalised schools.         Strong

    reliance was placed on the decision of this Court in
State of Punjab and

    others vs. Jagjit Singh
and others2 and particularly on paras 42 and 44

    thereof.
While defending the action on part of the State, the learned

    Advocate General submitted inter alia that the Writ Petitioners were

    appointed under the provisions of 2006 Rules and as such, they could not

    challenge the validity of the Rules under which they were appointed; that

    the teachers appointed before 2006 were appointed by the Director on the

    recommendations of Vidyalaya Seva Board/Bihar Public Service

    Commission/Subordinate Service Selection Board whereas Niyojit

    Teachers were appointed under completely different sets of Rules; that the

    teachers appointed prior to 2006 was a dying or a vanishing cadre and

    there were no fresh appointments in that category; thus the Niyojit

    Teachers could not claim any parity on the basis of “equal pay for equal

    work”.
2(2017)   1 SCC 148
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
39
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
At the conclusion of the hearing, written submissions were also

    filed on behalf of the State to the following effect:-
“1. That in the instant matter argument proceedings are
              completed and order reserved on 09.10.2017, the instant
              written submission is being filed with a view to
              supplement the contentions raised in the earlier affidavits
              in respect of claim raised by the petitioners in this case.
2. That it is stated that at present 3,19,703 teachers in
              Elementary Education and 37,529 teachers in Secondary
              & Higher Secondary Education are working under
              Panchayati Raj institutions and Urban Local Bodies and
              the State Government provides grants-in-aid to the local
              bodies for the payment of salary to such teachers and at
              present the estimated budgetary expenditure is about
              Rs.8924.48 Crores per annum.
3. That if the teachers appointed by the local bodies are
              allowed salary at par with teachers of dying cadre of State
              Government, the estimated budget will come to
              Rs.18853.96 crores, for which additional budgetary
              allocation of Rs.9929.48 crores will be required.
4. That it is relevant to mention here that there are large
              number of vacancies of teachers from Elementary level to
              Higher Secondary level which are likely to be filled up in
              due course. As per available information, 1,71,775 vacant
              posts of teachers in Elementary Education and 38000
              vacant posts in Secondary/Higher Secondary Education
              exist and this way, an additional amount of Rs.6144.02
              crores would be required to meet salary for payment of
              future recruitments.
5. That in view of aforementioned discussions, it would
              be evident that an additional budgetary allocation of
              Rs.16073.50 crores would be required to meet the
              expenses likely to be incurred in payment of salary to the
              working teachers as well as teachers likely to be recruited
              in near future under local bodies in addition to the present
              estimated budgetary expenditure of Rs.8924.84 crores,
              which would be apparent from the chart annexed herewith.
A photocopy of composite chart is annexed herewith an is
              marked as Annexure-R in this written submission.
6. That it is relevant to point out here that at present the
              total budgetary provision on education by the State
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
40
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Government is Rs.25251 crores which is about 16% of
               total budgetary provision of the State Government and if
               the prayer of the petitioner of these bunch of writ
               applications would be allowed, the fiscal condition of the
               State would get adversely affected and further, it would
               also affect all other duties and functions including welfare
               programme of the State Government.
7. That in view of the aforementioned facts, the
               deponent humbly submits that while deciding the issue in
               question, the aforesaid fact needs to be considered by this
               Hon’ble Court.
23.     All the Writ Petitions were allowed by the High Court by its judgment

    and order dated 31.10.2017. During the course of said judgment, following

    issues were framed:-
“(i) Whether Rules 6 and 8 of Rules 2006 are consistent
                    with
Article 14
of the Constitution of India or it is
                    violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution.
(ii)     Whether the Niyojit Teachers are entitled to equal
                        pay for equal work at par with the teachers
                        appointed in the nationalised school prior to coming
                        into force 2006 Rules or not?
(iii)        Whether the writ petitioners are entitled to a
                        direction for fixation of their pay at par with their
                        counterparts teachers appointed in the nationalised
                        school prior to framing of 2006 Rules or not?”
24.     It was observed that there was no pleading that the Niyojit

    Teachers appointed after 2006 were, in any manner, inferior in

    qualification or training and that there was no material to suggest that they

    were discharging different duties and responsibilities in the same

    institution.       It was found that the admitted position was that both
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
41
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
categories of teachers were discharging similar duties of imparting

    instructions in same schools and were having necessary qualifications as

    were possessed by the teachers appointed before 2006. The High Court

    placed reliance on the decisions of this Court in Jagjit Singh2 and Jaipal

    and others vs. State of Haryana and others3 and found that the action on

    part of the State in denying the pay-scales to Niyojit Teachers was

    arbitrary and unreasonable. It was concluded as under:-
“58. Thus materials on the record are clinching on the
                point that the Niyojit Teachers are regular teachers
                working in the nationalised school under the control of the
                State Government. The State Government has adopted two
                different pay-scales one for the Niyojit Shikshak and the other
                for the teachers known as regular teachers appointed prior
                to framing of 2006 Rules. Such discrimination in the pay-
                scale on the basis of artificial distinction is unreasonable.”
25.       During the course of its discussion, it was also observed as under:-
“46. I also find that the poor scale to the Niyojit Shikshak
                has adversely affected the academic atmosphere in the
                state of Bihar. The ill paid teachers without having any
                promotional prospects cannot be expected to deliver the
                best. The settled principle of personal management is that
                incentive and prospect boost the moral of man force in
                service. The better salary and prospect in the career is
                catalyst for the best performance, the teachers in such
                schools drawing less than the class 4 employee are not
                good to the institution and the society. It is a matter to
                introspect and the State Government must rise to the
                situation and undo the injustice by making payment at par
                with the other regular teaches to the Niyojit teachers. It
                appears that the poor payment to the teachers appointed
                under 2006 Rules has adversely affected the recruitment of

      3 AIR   1988 SC 1504
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
42
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
the best and most competent teachers and probably that is
                 one of reasons that there is mushrooming of coaching
                 Institutes where the students are more attracted then
                 regular teaching in the school. The Court cannot ignore
                 the ground reality.”


         Finally, the High Court directed, inter alia,

                 “(ii) The petitioners are entitled to “equal pay for equal
                 work”
(iii) The respondents are directed to fix their pay-scale
                 like regular teachers of the nationalised school with effect
                 from the initial date of appointment notionally and actual
                 payment with effect from 8.12.2009, the date of filing of
                 CWJC No.17176 of 2009, in view of the fact that such
                 grant of relief from the date of filing of the writ
                 application was approved by the Apex Court in the case of
State of Haryana vs. Charanjit Singh
4 discussed in the
                 judgment of Jagjit Singh’s2 case (supra) and I have held
                 that Rule 8 is inoperative, in effective, inapplicable from
                 the date of inception as it is arbitrary and unconstitutional
                 and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution so far as the
                 Niyojit Shikshak are concerned.
(iv) The respondents are also directed to revise the pay-
                 scale of the petitioners according to the principles of pay
                 revision under recommendation of the 7th Pay Revision to
                 the Niyojit Shikshak like other regular employees after
                 granting equal pay for equal work notionally from the date
                 of their appointment and actual payment with effect from
                 the date of filing of 1 st of the batch of writ petitions, i.e.
                 8.12.2009.
(v) Such exercise must be completed within a period of
                 three months from today and monetary benefits admissible
                 to the Niyojit Shikshak must be paid to them within a
                 further period of three months.”




    4 (2006)   9 SCC 321
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
43
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
26.     State of Bihar, being aggrieved, has challenged the aforesaid

    decision of the High Court in these appeals. On 29.01.2018 this Court

    passed the following order:-
“The question raised in this batch of petitions is whether
              there must be parity in the teachers recruited by the local
              bodies and teachers recruited by the State Government.
              According to the stand of the State Government, the
              teachers recruited by the State Government prior to 2006
              are a dieing cadre. There are about 50,000 teachers in the
              category of teachers recruited by the State Government as
              against approximately 3,50,000 teachers in the category of
              the teachers recruited by the local bodies. It is submitted
              that there is thus, only one permanent category i.e. those
              recruited by local bodies. The salary paid to the second
              category is roughly Rs.20,000/- as against the salary of
              Rs.56,000/- on an average paid to the teachers recruited by
              the State Government as of now.
… …          …
              Even though, on principle, there has to be parity in the
              salary of the teachers, whether recruited by the State
              Government or by the local bodies. If any filters,
              consistent with the law, are required to be employed for
              giving the parity, the same can be done. However,
              question is of applicability of such principle where
              category of teachers in first category is declared a dieing
              cadre. Secondly, we need to consider whether it is
              practical to fasten the State Government with the liability
              for the arrears. The stand of the State is that in future there
              will be only one category i.e. teachers recruited by the
              local bodies. Even in such situation, there has to be
              rational in the pay package of the teachers recruited by the
              local bodies.
In doing so, the amount paid by the Central
              Government ought to be utilised by the State Government
              and the State government may consider the view-point of
              the respondents and come out with a proposal which may
              be reasonable. It may constitute an Expert Committee of
              at least 3 officers in the rank of Chief Secretary. The said
              Committee will also be free to interact and consider the
              view-point of the concerned teachers as well as any other
              stakeholders, in case any suggestion is received by it.
              Such suggestion may be addressed/given to the Chief
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
44
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Secretary which in turn can be considered by the Expert
              Committee.
We accordingly adjourn the matter to 15th March,
              2018 for further consideration.
We consider it necessary to request Mr. P.S.
              Narasimha, learned Additional Solicitor General, to assist
              the Court to place the view-point of the Central
              Government before the Court.
Status quo, as on today, be maintained in the
              meantime.”
27.     Accordingly, an Expert Committee consisting of Chief Secretary-
Bihar, Principal Secretary-General Administration Department and

    Principal Secretary-Water Resources Department was constituted. The

    Committee set out the background facts as under:-
“… … …The Committee perused the Rules relating to
              niyojan of teachers under the Panchayati Raj Institutions
              as well as Municipal Bodies which was promulgated in the
              year 2006 and was amended from time to time. In view of
              provisions under rule-20 of the Bihar Panchayat Primary
              Teachers (appointment & Service conditions) Rules, 2006,
              the earlier contractual appointees on the post of Panchayat
              Shiksha Mitra were adjusted/absorbed as panchayat/block
              teachers w.e.f. 01.07.2006. Panchayat Shiksha Mitra were
              appointed on contractual basis for a period of 11 months
              on a fixed remuneration of Rs.1500/- per month from the
              year 2002-03 in the rural areas. The total number of such
              contractual appointees was 1,04,114 on 01.07.2006, who
              were adjusted/absorbed on the post of panchayat/block
              teacher and were paid a fixed pay of Rs.5000/- per month
              in case they were trained and Rs.4000/- per month in case
              they were untrained.
In the said rules, 2006 it was also provided that after
              every three years there shall be an increment of Rs.500/-
              in case of trained and Rs.300/- in case of untrained on the
              basis of their evaluation as prescribed.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
45
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
The Rules, 2006 was amended in the year 2009
              wherein provision for Evaluation Test was made and it
              was provided that after qualifying in the said test, the
              increment in pay shall be granted. It was further provided
              that maximum three attempts would be given for
              qualifying in the said test failing which they shall be
              terminated by their respective employer.         The said
              evaluation test was only for the purpose of increment in
              pay and not for grant of pay-scale, equivalency or
              certification, if any.
6. In view of provisions under Article-21A of the
              Constitution of India, the education to the children of age
              group 6-14 has been made a fundamental right and in the
              light of
Right of Children to Free & Compulsory
              Education Act, 2009
which came into force w.e.f.
              01.04.2010, the National Council for Teachers Education
              (NCTE) has been notified as the academic authority by the
              Central Govt. The NCTE has fixed the minimum
              eligibility criteria for appointment on the post of primary
              teachers and in that background, Bihar Panchayat Primary
              Teachers (appointment & Service conditions) Rules, 2012
              has been framed wherein the minimum eligibility criteria
              for appointment has been fixed that a candidate should be
              qualified in Teachers Eligibility Test conducted by the
              Central or State Govt. Thus, the Teachers Eligibility Test
              is merely an eligibility to make an application for his/her
              selection. In other words, no person can be appointed on
              the post of a teacher unless he successfully passes through
              the requisite selection process.
7. Similarly, rules for selection on the post of teacher in
              Secondary & Higher Secondary Schools were also
              promulgated. Selection/appointment in the primary &
              secondary segment was made after 2006 by the Gram
              Panchayat & Municipal bodies and no provision for any
              examination/test was made in the said selection process.
8. For appointment on the post of primary teacher, prior
              to 2006 Rules, rules were also framed in 2003 wherein it
              was provided that recommendation shall be made for such
              appointment after conducting preliminary & mains
              examination by the Staff Selection Commission, Bihar.
9. Similarly, for appointment on the post of Secondary
              Teacher, prior to 2006 Rules, rules were also framed in
              2004 wherein it was also provided that recommendation
              shall be made for such appointment after conducting
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
46
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
preliminary & mains examination by the Staff Selection
              Commission, Bihar.”


         It, thereafter, considered the current situation after the Resolution

    dated 11.8.2015 and implementation of the recommendations of 7th Pay

    Commission. The Committee went on to observe:-
“18. It may be noted that in the elementary schools there
              are about 3,19,703 niyojit teachers whereas; in the
              secondary/higher secondary schools there are about
              38,715 niyojit teachers (including librarians). Out of those
              teachers working in the elementary schools, 2,65,000
              teachers are covered under the Sarv Shiksha Abhiyan. For
              payment of salary to the teachers covered under the Sarv
              Shiksha Abhiyan, the percentage of share of Central
              Government and State Government is 60% and 40%
              respectively.
…           …               …
22. … … 1. It is financially impractical to act upon
              suggestions received for implementation of order of the
              Hon’ble High Court dated 31.10.2017 relating to grant of
              pay scale to the niyojit teachers notionally from the date of
              their initial joining and actual benefits from 08.12.2009 at
              par with that of Assistant Teachers appointed by the State
              Government, for the reasons that if the said order is
              implemented, the State Government would be liable to pay
              an amount of about Rs.52000/- crores in terms of arrears
              to such teachers, which would not be possible from the
              financial resources of the State Government.”


      The Committee, then, suggested:-
“Taking into account the financial resources of the State
              Government and procedure adopted for niyojan of such
              teachers, upgraded pay structure can be granted to such
              niyojit teachers (including teachers who have qualified in
              the Teachers Eligibility Test) after going through a
              filtration process. The basis of filtration process should be
              a special examination conducted for the said purpose.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
47
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Two separate chances shall be given for appearing in the
                 special examination.”


           It was further suggested that upgraded pay structure could be

    granted to such Niyojit Teachers who succeeded in special examination

    conducted for said purpose and thus, teachers who pass such special

    examination be covered under the upgraded pay structure with an

    increment of 20% in their pay.
28.        An affidavit in reply was, thereafter, filed on behalf of the

    Ministry of Human Resource Development, Union of India. It was stated

    that Sarva Shiksha Abhiyhan (SSA) and Rastriya Madhyamik Shiksha

    Abhiyan (RMSA) were operational from the financial years 2000-2001

    and 2009-2010 respectively till 2017-2018 and that both the programmes

    were Centrally Sponsored Schemes under which funding was shared

    between Central and State Governments.                 These programmes were

    conceived to achieve Universal Elementary Education.                     It was then

    stated:-
“23. To summarise, it is submitted that the Sarva Shiksha
                 Abhiyan (SSA), the erstwhile Centrally Sponsored
                 Scheme was being implemented since 2001-02 in
                 partnership with the State Governments and Union
                 Territory Administrations for universalising elementary
                 education across the country. Its overall goals included
                 universal access and retention, bridging of gender and
                 social category gaps in education and enhancement of
                 learning levels of children. Subsequent to the enactment
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
48
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
of the
RTE Act, 2009
by Parliament, the SSA norms were
              revised to harmonise with RTE provisions. Funds under
              SSA are provided for more than 40 interventions such as
              opening of new schools, residential school facilities,
              additional class rooms, provisioning for teachers, periodic
              teacher training etc. The SSA Framework also provides
              support for additional teachers to maintain Pupil Teacher
              Ratio (PTR) in schools and teachers for new elementary
              schools opened under SSA programme. Part of the funds
              required for such positions approved and filled-up under
              the SSA programme were met by the Central and State
              Governments. Since the recruitment and other service
              matters of these teachers are under the domain of State
              Govts. and UTs, the salary and pay fixation for these
              teachers was done by the respective States and UTs.
24. That the Chapter-III point 21 of the Financial
              Management and Procurement (FMP) Manual under the
              heading “Appointment of teachers” provided that SSA
              would be an addition to States and UTs and the States and
              UTs would have their own norms for recruitment of
              teachers and payments of salary to new recruits. The
              States will be free to follow their own norms as long as
              these are consistent with the norms prescribed by NCTE
              and Assistance will not be available for filling up existing
              vacancies that have arisen on account of attrition. A true
              typed copy of the FMP Manual of SSA is attached and
              marked herewith as ANNEXURE-8.
New Scheme – Samagra Shiksha
25. The Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), Rashtriya
              Madhyamiik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) and Centrally
              Sponsored Scheme on Teacher Education (CSSTE) were
              the three major flagship school education development
              programmes of the Ministry of Human Resource
              Development (MHRD), Government of India being
              implemented in partnership with State/UTs since 2000-01,
              2009-10 and 1987 respectively. While the SSA covered
              the elementary level (grades I-VIII), the RMSA covered
              grades IX-X, whereas CSSTE aims to provide
              infrastructural and institutional support to Government
              Teacher Education Institutions (TEIs) to enhance the
              quality of teachers. The approval of these schemes was
              upto the end of 12th five year plan in 2016-17. These were
              extended for a period of one year i.e. 2017-18, pending
              their Evaluation and further approval.       Although, the
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
49
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Central Sponsored Schemes of SSA, RMSA and TE have
              significantly contributed towards the government’s efforts
              to provide access to education in the country, their scope
              and coverage remained segmented and did not provide for
              any intervention for the pre-school level and only very
              limited support for senior secondary levels. Also, there
              was a need to focus on the improvement of quality of
              education and learning out comes of students. Further,
              independent evaluations of the Schemes instituted at the
              end of the 12th five year plan, had also suggested increased
              convergence and integration between the Schemes through
              a single school education development programme
              covering grades I-X/XII. Therefore, it has been decided to
              formulate a single scheme for School Education by
              merging the different school education development
              schemes and programmes like the SSA, RMSA and
              CSSTE into an overarching programme with the broader
              goal of improving school effectiveness measured in terms
              of equal opportunities for schooling and equitable learning
              outcomes. The draft guidelines for the new scheme were
              circulated among the States and UTs for their comments
              vide letter No.2-16/2017-EE.3 dated 22nd January, 2018
              and also discussed in the National Workshop of all States
              and UTs held on 30th January 2018. The new scheme –
              ‘Samagra Shiksha’ – has been approved by the Cabinet on
              28th March, 2018 and it came into the effect from 1 st April,
              2018.
26. The vision of the scheme is to ensure inclusive and
              equitable quality education from pre-school to senior
              secondary stage in accordance with the sustainable
              Development Goal (SDG) for Education. The major
              objectives of the scheme are provision of quality education
              and enhancing learning outcomes of students; Bridging
              Social and Gender Gaps in School Education; Ensuring
              equity and inclusion at all levels of school education;
              Ensuring minimum standards in schooling provisions;
              Promoting Vocationalisation of Education; Support States
              in implementation of
Right of Children to Free and
              Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009
; and
              Strengthening and Upgradation of State Councils of
              Educational Research and Training (SCERTs/State
              Institutes of Education (SIEs) and District Institutes of
              Education and Training (DIETs) as nodal agencies for
              teacher training.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
50
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
27. The Samagra Shiksha envisages the ‘school’ as a
              continuum from pre-school, primary, upper primary,
              secondary to senior secondary levels. This will smoothen
              the transition across the various levels of school education
              and aid in promoting universal access to children to
              complete school education. The major interventions
              across all levels of school education, under the scheme
              are: (i) Universal access including infrastructure
              development and retention; (ii) Gender and Equity; (iii)
              Inclusive Education; (iv) Enhancement of Quality; (v)
              Financial Support for Teachers Salary; (vi) Digital
              Initiatives; (vii) RTE entitlements including uniforms, text
              books, etc; (viii) Pre-school Education; (ix) Vocational
              Education; (x) Sports and Physical Education; (xi)
              Strengthening of Teacher Education and Training; (xii)
              Monitoring; and (xiii) Programme Management.
28. The Budget for all the three schemes is being merged
              into a single Budget provision. This will be the Central
              share to be provided to the States and UTs with the
              existing fund sharing pattern of 60:40 for all the States,
              with the exception that the pattern will be 90:10 for North-
              Eastern and three Himalayan States and 100% for Union
              Territories without Legislature.
29. In order to focus on improvement of educational
              indicators and quality of education, part of the funds will
              be allocated amongst the States and UTs based on an index
              of requirements/performance. The use of funds would be
              governed by approved interventions within the ceilings
              decided by the empowered committee of the department
              i.e., the Project Approval Board headed by Secretary,
              Department of School Education & Literacy. A single
              Utilisation Certificate would be required from the State
              streamlining the merged Schemes. Further, it was noticed
              that in the erstwhile schemes of SSA and RMSA, the
              support for teacher salary was as per the State notified
              salary structures which showed a wide variation.
              Therefore, to maintain uniformity in central support for
              teacher salary for all States/Uts and provide funds for
              quality enhancement, the ceiling limits for support for
              teacher salaries have been laid down under the integrated
              scheme. Thus, while the teachers will continue to be
              governed by the Terms and Conditions of the respective
              States/Uts, the support under the Integrated Scheme would
              be the same across all States and Uts in the Country. The
              focus of the scheme is to support States in taking
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
51
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
initiatives to improve the learning outcomes, strengthen
               teacher training institutions, enhanced capacity building of
               teachers and use of digital technology for effective
               outcomes. The norms for salary of teachers has been
               attached and marked herewith as ANNEXURE-9.”
29.     The affidavit then gave details of the funds allocated to the

    States/UTs under the SSA from the year 2014-15 to 2017-18 in a tabular

    chart as under:-
Status of Four year Central Releases under SSA
          S.                 2014-15     2015-16     2016-17     2017-18
          No. BE                 28258      22000    22500 crore     23500
                                  crore      crore                    crore
              RE                 24380    22015.10 22500 crore     23593.86
                                 Crore       crore                    crore
                                                                 (Rs. In lakh)
              State          Central     Central     Central     Central
                             Releases    Releases    Releases    Releases
          1   Andaman &          147.21     359.46       479.14     1945.53
              Nicobar
          2   Andhra          154566.67 66810.81       63302.18    70431.00
              Pradesh
          3   Arunachal        33607.82   18179.44     19956.64    23022.07
              Pradesh
          4   Assam            97782.19 100464.64 87652.30        123584.00
          5   Bihar           216336.05 251557.32 270688.45       255797.00
          6   Chandigarh        3893.53    3521.81      3333.56     9265.50
          7   Chhattisgarh     92705.30   62219.70     59262.77    67412.85
          8   Dadar &            911.74     594.91      1068.37     5476.54
              Nagar Haveli
          9   Daman &             72.77      78.38       300.00     1038.57
              Diu
          10 Delhi              6223.74    7293.80      8306.20    10976.90
          11 Goa                1310.39     813.58       869.11      862.60
          12 Gujarat           78476.49   61563.84     77740.52    65046.00
          13 Haryana           42110.65   34501.21     32000.88    36355.00
          14 HP                12547.30 12139.13       12825.46    30874.00
          15 J & K             51276.52 129980.54 107250.05       153797.98
          16 Jharkhand         75775.18 55863.31       50945.73    58984.54
          17 Karnataka         66213.52 41759.34       54495.51    54882.00
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
52
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
18    Kerala        21844.02 12858.86    11316.74               13680.00
          19    Lakshadweep      58.83     139.55    239.87                406.52
          20    Madhya       149094.92 160197.86 154455.08               173814.00
                Pradesh
          21 Maharashtra      58288.54   41225.28  60369.65               64232.00
          22 Manipur          21465.81   18355.46   4405.31               18377.00
          23 Meghalaya        20404.52   16627.04  20067.01               33579.51
          24 Mizoram          14739.70    9437.51  10934.31               12000.34
          25 Nagaland         20568.74    8739.53  10725.35               11717.00
          26 Puducherry         100.00     583.14    304.68                 622.73
          27 Punjab           36215.98   30003.22  30002.69               31665.00
          28 Rajasthan       248041.55 193462.08 182578.48               198973.00
          29 Sikkim            4526.78    4054.36   3479.24                5684.35
          30 Telangana        81406.78   21776.01  41776.09               44244.72
          31 Tamil Nadu      135819.79 82111.73    82111.30               86644.00
          32 Tripura          19800.14   16956.75  19190.95               20220.38
          33 UP              449867.53 505434.32 505433.98               424980.68
          34 Uttarakhand      22880.57   22588.40  25268.98               62499.00
          35 West Bengal      97240.30   84679.41  82185.33               89657.00
          Central Releases  2403016.41 2159013.36 2165744.89            2349361.32
          Total
30.        The affidavit then considered the financial implications if the

    directions issued by the High Court in the present case were to be

    implemented in all States/UTs. It was stated:-
“31. That consequent to the interim order of this Hon’ble Court
                 dated 27th March, 2018 in the present Petition, the Department
                 of School Education & Literacy, Ministry of Human Resource
                 Development, Government of India has attempted to estimate
                 the financial implication of the impugned judgment across the
                 States. The department has collected information from all 36
                 States and UTs regarding number of teachers sanctioned under
                 the erstwhile schemes of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA),
                 Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan (RMSA) and number of
                 teachers available under the State cadres at elementary and
                 secondary level. The information was collected disaggregated
                 for Permanent Teachers, Contractual Teachers and Teachers
                 appointed by Local Bodies under SSA, RMSA and State Cadre.
                 Information on average monthly salary for each category of
                 teachers was also collected.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
53
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
32. That the Financial implication of the impugned judgment has
              been estimated based on the number of teachers reported by
              States for the year 2017-18 under the above mentioned three
              categories and their average monthly salary. In case the Local
              Body appointed teachers/Contractual Teachers are given salary
              at par with the regular teachers of State cadre, it is estimated that
              financial implication will be a minimum of Rs.Thirty Six
              Thousand Nine Hundred Ninety Eight Crores (Rs.36998 crores)
              per year. This estimation does not include perks and other
              benefits which are applicable as per the extant rules of the
              respective States/UTs, which will further add to the cost. A true
              typed copy of the Estimation sheet is annexed and marked
              herewith as ANNEXURE-11”


        Annexure 11 to the affidavit was as under:-
S.                State              Tentative requirement of
              No.                                  additional Salary funding
              1      Andaman & Nicobar                         4.87
              2      Andhra Pradesh                           57.82
              3      Arunachal Pradesh                       183.16
              4      Assam                                   316.94
              5      Bihar                                 10460.70
              6      Chandigarh                               17.83
              7      Chhattisgarh                           5867.79
              8      D & N Haveli                             19.76
              9      Daman & Diu                               4.75
              10     Delhi                                    56.66
              11     Goa                                       7.82
              12     Gujarat                                    .78
              13     Haryana                                 267.77
              14     HP                                      463.56
              15     Jammu & Kashmir                         117.83
              16     Jharkhand                              3861.98
17     Karnataka                                   0
18     Kerala                                   31.54
              19     Lakshadweep                               2.34
              20     Madhya Pradesh                         2971.13
              21     Maharashtra                             157.49
              22     Manipur                                   NA
              23     Meghalaya                               288.09
              24     Mizoram                                 102.64
              25     Nagaland                                 90.03
              26     Odisha                                  429.19
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
54
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
27    Puducherry                         .98
              28    Punjab                           147.04
29    Rajasthan                           0
30    Sikkim                           131.68
31    Tamil Nadu                          0
32    Telangana                           0
33    Tripura                          103.31
              34    Uttar Pradesh                   8448.78
              35    Uttarakhand                       67.74
              36    West Bengal                       2316
                    Total Fund required            36998.00
31.     When the matters were taken up for hearing, the submissions for

    the State Government were made by Shri Dinesh Dwivedi, Shri Rakesh

    Dwivedi and Shri Shyam Divan, learned Senior Advocates.
A)      Shri Dinesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Advocate submitted that the

    teachers appointed before 2006 and the Niyojit Teachers appointed in terms

    of 2006 Rules stood on a different footing and the distinction made by the

    State Government on that basis was quite natural and rational. It was the

    decision of the State Government not to make any further appointments in

    the category of State Government Teachers and as such, those appointed

    before 2006 were part of a dying or vanishing cadre. The reliance on pay-
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
55
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
scales of such dying or vanishing cadre and to apply them to more than

    four lakh teachers appointed in terms of 2006 Rules would not only be an

    incorrect and imperfect idea but would also entail tremendous economic

    burden on the State. In such matters, the economic capacity has always

    been considered by this Court to be a relevant circumstance.          In his

    submission, the distinction between those appointed prior to 2006 forming

    a dying cadre and those appointed in terms of 2006 Rules, who were

    appointed at local or block levels, was a valid classification. He relied

    upon judgments of this Court in i) Tarsem Lal Gautam and anotherr. vs.

    State Bank of Patiala and others5, ii) V. Markendeya and others vs. State

    of Andhra Pradesh and others.6, iii) Dharwad Distt.
P.W.D. Literate Daily

    Wage Employees Association and others vs. State of Karnataka
and

    others7, iv) Secretary, Finance Department and others vs. West Bengal

    Registration Service Association
and others8, v) State of U.P. and others vs.

    Ministerial Karamchari Sangh9
, vi) State of Haryana and another vs.

    Haryana Civil Secretariat Personal Staff Association 10 and        vii) S.C.

    Chandra and others vs. State of Jharkhand and others11.
5 (1989) 1 SCC 182
    6 (1989) 3 SCC 191
    7 (1990) 2 SCC 396
    8 1993 Supp (1) SCC   153
    9 (1998) 1 SCC 422
    10 (2002) 6 SCC 72
    11 (2007) 8 SCC 279
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
56
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
B)      Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Advocate submitted that with

    the insertion of
Article 21A
in the Constitution and Right to Free and

    Compulsory Education of Children being a Fundamental Right, the State

    was required to spread educational opportunities and establish schools in

    remotest areas. The State had never been averse to granting pay-scales

    which could be more remunerative but initially the emphasis had to be on

    spread of education within the constraints of its resources. He submitted

    that as a part of the Constitutional obligation of providing free and

    compulsory education, the State has set up 21261 new primary schools,

    upgraded 19617 primary schools to middle school level and also upgraded

    3129 middle schools to secondary or senior secondary level and that the

    State has presently been spending 20% of its budget on education. Since

    the first and foremost objective was to achieve spread of education, with

    the passage of time, the State has consciously been improving the

    emoluments which were initially granted to Niyojit Teachers. He further

    submitted that in terms of provisions of the Act it is the responsibility of the

    State to spread education in every neighbourhood and in every nook and

    corner of the State.        He submitted that the policy of roll out of

    universalisation and spread of education was carefully crafted keeping in

    mind the capacity of the State. First task having been achieved, the State is
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
57
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
now gearing up for improving the quality of education and in that pursuit

    the State would certainly make the service conditions more remunerative to

    attract better talent and render its constitutional obligation with greater

    emphasis, but to compare the present scales with that of a dying or

    vanishing cadre was completely unjustified. He relied upon decisions of

    this Court in i) Official Liquidator vs. Dayanand and others
12, ii) State of

    Punjab and another vs. Surjit Singh and others
13, iii) Steel Authority of

    India Limited and others vs. Dibyendu Bhattacharya
14, iv) Gopal Chawala

    and others vs.      State of Madhya Pradesh
and others15 and v) M.M.L.

    Aurora and others vs. Union of India
and others16.
Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Advocate also gave a Note, the

    relevant part of which was as under:-
“After change of government in Bihar in November 2005, it was
                found that 12% (23,15,362) children between the ages of 6-14
                years were out of school. Due to the pro-active stance of the
                State of Bihar and implementation of the Right to Education Act
                and the mandate of 73rd and 74th Amendments read with 11th and
                12th Schedule, thisstands reduced to less than 1% (2,01,806)
                children today.
In order to rectify this and extend the reach of education (both
                rural and urban) within its meagre resources, State of Bihar took
                a policy decision and resolved to recruit new teachers through
                its Panchayati Raj Institutions. New Rules were enacted and all
                recruitments to the post of teachers at all levels of school
12   (2008) 10 SCC 1
    13   (2009) 9 SCC 514
    14   (2011) 11 SCC 122
    15   (2014) 13 SCC 792
    16   1995 Supp (1) SCC 279
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
58
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
education were made through this mode only. Old method of
              recruitment was abolished and the cadre of existing Assistant
              Teachers became a Dying Cadre, as per chart below:
School         Regular      Regular Teachers (at present)
                             Teachers
                             in 2006
              Elementary     1,04,259                  57293
                                          By its order dated 13.10.2011 in
                                          a Contempt Petition, Bihar was
                                          compelled to appoint 34,540
                                          Assistant Teachers on the basis
                                          of a merit list prepared by this
                                          Hon’ble Court (reported as 2014
                                          (11) SCC 405.
32,327 were appointed and
                                          dispute was raised in respect of
                                          2213. 6170 out of them have
                                          retired and 26157 still remain in
                                          service.
(31136+26157 = 57293)
              Secondary      18458        7800
After Right to Education Act, 2009, Union Govt. declared Sarva
              Shiksha Abhiyan as the main instrument to implement the
              provisions of the
Right of Children to Free & Compulsory
              Education Act, 2009
and consequently, the same was renamed as
              SSA-RTE. Niyojit Teachers (respondents) are governed by new
              Rules framed under the 73rd and 74th Constitution Amendment.
              RTE provides for sharing of resources between Centre and
              States for implementation of the Act.
Population of the State of Bihar is 10.41 crores. After 2005, it
              has opened 21261 new Primary Schools and Upgraded 19617
              Primary Schools to Middle School under Sarva Shiksha
              Abhiyan. 3129 Middle Schools were upgraded to Secondary or
              Senior Secondary School, which on date is as follows:
Primary Schools                        42614
                  Middle Schools                         29149
                  Secondary/Senior Secondary             5615
Impugned judgment has treated the matter as a simple service
              dispute. It has failed to appreciate the larger objective sought to
              be achieved, financial capacity of the State, financial impact on
              the Union of India and the State of Bihar, balancing competing
              interests of the regular and niyojit teachers, its financial
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
59
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
ramification for other States in the implementation of Right to
              Education Act and Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, its implication for all
              the other employees either working on contract or under
              different Schemes of the Center or the State and such like social
              objectives.”


    C)      Shri Shyam Divan, learned Senior Advocate submitted that the

    concept of “equal pay for equal work” was alien to this case and the case

    involved complex policy issues. He submitted that the matter must be

    considered from the standpoint of the approach adopted by the State

    Government and all the constitutional options that were open to the State.
On one hand it was the goal set out under
Article 21A
which was sought to

    be effectuated by the spread the education and on the other hand, the idea

    was devolution of powers to Panchayats in terms of Parts IX and IXA of

    the Constitution. The peculiar situation in Bihar was that at least 12% of

    the children were not being educated at all. This was essentially because of

    inadequate number of schools and inadequate number of teachers. This

    was sought to be remedied by appointment of one lakh Shiksha Mitras

    initially to cater to rural areas. The challenge to bring those 12% children

    who were outside the schools into the stream of education itself required

    tremendous efforts and consequent constraints on budgetary allocations. It

    is in this background that the attempts on the part of the State must be seen.
The State not only absorbed those Shiksha Mitras but also recruited more
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
60
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
than 3.50 lakh Niyojit Teachers. It was his submission that the attempts

    and advances so made by the State could neither be called exploitative nor

    was dignity of any individual teacher compromised in any manner. The

    developments since 2006 are indicative that the State has substantially been

    improving the pay-scales and emoluments available to the Niyojit Teachers.
He further submitted that the changes in Education System brought about

    in the State of Bihar post 2006 and the substantial spread in education had

    also improved enrolment of girl students and helped achieve reduction in

    Total Fertility Rate. He submitted a Note as under:-
“1. Improvement in Girls Enrolment & Education

                    The enrolments of girls increased significantly from 57.75
              Lac (43.47% of total enrolment) in 2005-06 to 101.37 Lac
              (50.69% of total enrolment) in 2016-17 in elementary classes (1-
              VIII) of Government schools. Similarly, enrolments of girls
              considerably increase from 4.24 Lac in 2006-07 to 14.41 Lac in
              2016-17 in secondary classes (IX-X) of government schools.
The details are as under:-
Elementary Classes (I to VIII)
                Year       Total      Girls Enrolment            % Increase
                         Enrolment
              2005-06    13282932          5775325                 43.47%
              2016-17    19995608         10137266                 50.69%
                              Secondary Classes (IX-X)
              2006-07     1158904           424790                 36.65%
              2016-17     2865460          1441176                 50.29%


              The result of 10th and 12th Board also support the arguments and
              the status of passed out girls from 2006 to 2017 of 10 th and 12th
              Board is as follows:-
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
61
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Year             10th board                 12th board
                 Total     Girls     % App. Total      Girls                 % App.
                 Appeared Appeared          Appeared App.
                 Student                    Student
         2005      560376    186613  33.30%   314802     99238               31.52%
         2006      599104    207705  34.67%   339604    110579               32.56%
         2007      688508    255463  37.10%   460609    170117               36.93%
         2008      769244    294514  38.29%   508332    194456               38.25%
         2009      901965    362506  40.19%   583209    234116               40.14%
         2010      974393    403226  41.38%   607718    246830               40.62%
         2011      931332    399328  42.88%   702069    283384               40.36%
         2012     1262026    565228  44.79%   812315    328391               40.43%
         2013     1364023    604247  44.30%   820590    323514               39.42%
         2014     1338268    610388  45.61%   996954    414533               41.58%
         2015     1424423    653307  45.86% 1219315 480491                   39.41%
         2016     1577840    725169  45.96% 1152826 484110                   41.99%
         2017     1763471    866283  49.12% 1257342 556084                   44.23%
2.     Reduction in Total Fertility Rate (TFR)

                     As per Sample Registration System (Registrar General of
                India), the Total Fertility Rate (TFR) of Bihar has been reduced
                significantly from 4.3 in 2005 to 3.3 in 2016. This is directly
                related to educational standard of girls, who are potential
                mother. This can be seen from the report of sample Registration
                System (SRS) for the year 2016 for the State of Bihar (copy
                enclosed as Annexure A) and report of NITI Aayog (copy
                enclosed as Annexure-B) which is as follows:
Education Level         Total Fertility Rate (TFR)
                             Illiterate                       4.2
                     Without formal education                 3.9
                         Below Primary                        3.9
                             Primary                          3.3
                              Middle                          3.0
                             Class-X                          2.7
                            Class-XII                         2.2
                        Graduate & above                      2.1
                          State Average                       3.3
                        National Average                      2.3

                Source: - Sample Registration System (SRS) published
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
62
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Annually (Registrar General of India)
3.     Breakup of Out of School Children (6-14 years)

                                Out of School Children (6-14 years)
                       Year             Total          Girls          SC
                      2005-06         2315362        1128110        588491
                      2017-18          201806         94974          55297


      Following chart was also placed on record indicating Literacy Rate in

State of Bihar in last seven decades:-
Year                Total            Male          Female
                             India       Bihar   India Bihar   India Bihar
                 1951        18.33       13.49   27.16 22.68   8.66    4.22
                 1961        28.30       21.95   40.40 35.85   15.35 8.11
                 1971        34.45       23.17   46.96 35.86   21.97 9.86
                 1981        43.57       32.32   56.38 47.11   29.76 16.61
                 1991        52.21       37.49   64.13 51.37   39.29 21.99
                 2001        64.83       47.53   75.26 60.32   53.70 33.57
                 2011        73.04       61.80   80.14 71.20   64.60 51.50
It is evident from above table that the decadal growth in female
                 literacy in Bihar between 2001 and 2011 was 18%, which was
                 highest in India. For this State Literacy Mission Authority
                 (Govt. of India) gave award to the Principal Secretary,
                 Department of Education, Govt. of Bihar in 2012.”



            Shri Divan relied upon decisions of this Court in Bidi Supply

     Company vs. The Union of India and others 17, The State of Gujarat and

     another vs. Shri Ambica Mills Limited, Ahmedabad and another18, The

     Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, West Bengal                  vs.
17   1956 SCR 267
     18   (1974) 4 SCC 656
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
63
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Girish Kumar Navalakha and others19,
H.H. Shri Swamiji of Shri Amar

    Mutt and others vs.          Commissioner, Hindu Religious and Charitable

    Endowments Department
and others20, Col.
A.S. Iyer and others vs. V.

    Balasubramanyam
and others21,
Javed Niaz Beg and another vs. Union of

    India
and another22,
Malpe Vishwanath Acharya and others vs. State of

    Maharashtra
and another23,
Javed and others vs. State of Haryana
and

    others24,
State of Maharashtra and others vs. Jalgaon Municipal Council
and others25,
Sooraram Pratap Reddy and others vs. District Collector,

    Ranga Reddy District
and others26 and
Shivashakti Sugars Limited vs.

    Shree Renuka Sugar Limited
and others27.
32.      Responding to the observations of the High Court in the Judgment

    under appeal and queries raised by this Court during the course of hearing

    whether the emoluments received by Niyojit Teachers were lesser than the

    salaries of non-teaching staff in schools, following details were furnished

    by the State in a tabular chart.
“(1) What are the salaries of non-teaching staff in schools?
19   (1975) 4 SCC 754
    20   (1979) 4 SCC 642
    21   (1980) 1 SCC 634
    22   1980 Supp SCC 155
    23   (1998) 2 SCC 1
    24   (2003) 8 SCC 369
    25   (2003) 9 SCC 731
    26   (2008) 9 SCC 552
    27   (2017) 7 SCC 729
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
64
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
There are posts of clerk and peon only under non-teaching
              staff category in secondary/senior secondary schools. There are
              no posts of non-teaching staff in Primary Schools (Class I-V)
              and Middle Schools (Class I-VIII).
Comparison of salary of Peon, Clerk and Niyojit Teachers

                    A.    On initial appointment
                                                               (Amount in Rs.)


         Descri Peon      Clerk     Primary     Primary     Secondary    Senior
         ption (Worki     (Workin   Niyojit     Niyojit     Niyojit      Secondary
                ng        g under   Teachers    Teachers    Teachers     (10+2)
                under     State     (Trained)   (Graduate   (Trained)    Niyojit
                State     Govt.)                Trained)                 Teachers
                Govt.                                                    (Trained)
          Basic   18000    19900      13370       13370        13370       13370
         D.A. @   1260     1393        936         936          936         936
           7%
          HRA      720      796        535         535          535         535
         @ 4%
         Medica   1000     1000       1000        1000          1000        1000
            l
          Gross   20980    23089      15841       15841        15841       15841
         salary
              Note: No Grade Pay for Teacher for first two years of their
              Services.
B. After completion of two years of service


         Descri Peon       Clerk      Primary     Primary      Secondary   Senior
         ption (Workin     (Working   Niyojit     Niyojit      Niyojit     Secondary
                g under    under      Teachers    Teachers     Teachers    (10+2)
                State      State      (Trained)   (Graduate    (Trained)   Niyojit
                Govt.      Govt.)                 - Trained)               Teachers
                                                                           (Trained)
          Basic   19100     21100       19650       20740        20740        21820
          D.A.     1337     1477         1376        1452         1452         1527
         @ 7%
HRA      764        844        786         830           830           873
@ 4%
         Medic    1000       1000        1000       1000          1000           1000
           al
         Gross    22201     24421       22812       24022        24022         25220
         salary
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
65
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
C.     After completion of two years of service with 20%
            proposed enhancement of salary as per recommendation of
            three persons committee constituted by the Hon’ble Supreme
            Court.
Descri Peon          Clerk           Primary        Primary Secondar          Senior
          ption (Working       (Working        Niyojit        Niyojit y Niyojit         Secondary
                 under         under           Teachers       Teachers Teachers         (10+2)
                 State         State           (Trained)      (Graduate (Trained)       Niyojit
                 Govt.         Govt.)                         Trained)                  Teachers
                                                                                        (Trained)
           Basic   19100          21100         23610          24930            24930      26240
           D.A.     1337          1477           1653           1745             1745       1837
          @ 7%
           HRA       764              844           944            997           997       1050
          @ 4%
          Medic     1000           1000             1000           1000          1000      1000
            al
          Gross    22201          24421         27207          28672            28672      30127
          salary
33.      The State also placed on record, increases in emoluments granted to

    Niyojit Teachers at various stages, as under:-
Increases in Salary of Elementary Niyojit Teachers (Trained)
               – At a Glance
          Description      Initial      Present       Increase %                    Remarks
                           fixed        Gross         in        Increase
                           Salary       Salary        Amount
                           per          per           of Salary
                           Month        Month*        (In Rs.)
                           (in rs.)     (In Rs.)
          Recruited in       1500         25564            24064          1604      Pay     Scale
          2003                                                                      w.e.f.
Shiksha Mitra                                                             01.07.2015 &
          (Trained)                                                                 increment of
          Recruited in      5000            24843          19843          397       2.57 times in
          2006 –                                                                    the basic pay
          Panchayat/                                                                w.e.f.
          Prakhand/                                                                 01.04.2017 as
          Nagar                                                                     per
          Shikshak                                                                  recommendat
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
66
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
(Trained)                                                    ion of 7th Pay
         Recruited in     7000        24134      17134       245      Commission
         2010 –
         Panchayat
         /Prakhand/
         Nagar
         Shikshak
         (Trained)
         Recruited in    10000        22812      12812       128
         2013 –
         Panchayat/
         Prakhand/
         Nagar
         Shikshak
         (Trained)
*Note – Gross Salary includes Dearness Allowances (DA),
               House Rent Allowances (HRA) & Medical Allowances.
After proposed enhancement of salary by 20%, as per
               recommendation of three persons committee constituted by
               Hon’ble Supreme Court.
Description           Present Revised       DA     HRA      Medical    Proposed
                             Basic   Basic **      (7%)                       Gross
                                                                              Salary
       Recruited in 2003 –    22130      26590     1861    1064      1000      30515.00
       Shiksha Mitra
       (Trained)
       Recruited in 2006 –    21480      25810     1807    1032      1000         29649
       Panchayat/prakhand/
       Nagar Shikshak
       (Trained)
       Recruited in 2010 –    20850      25050     1754    1002      1000         28806
       panchayat/Prakhand/
       Nagar Shikshak
       (Trained)
       Recruited in 2013 –    19650      23610     1653    944       1000         27207
       panchayat/Prakhand/
       Nagar Shikshak
       (Trained)
**Note – As per recommendation of three persons committee
               constituted by Hon’ble Supreme Court, those Niyojit teachers,
               who pass the special examination, would be covered under the
               upgraded pay structure, as per the category mentioned as against
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
67
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
their designation in the proposed pay-matrix, with an increment
                of 20% in their pay of the pre-upgraded scale, which are being
                paid w.e.f. 01.01.2016.”
34.       Shri K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India, advanced

    submissions on behalf of Union of India. It was submitted that though the

    teachers appointed prior to 2006 and Niyojit Teachers were working in the

    same schools and carrying on similar functions, they formed separate

    cadres and came from different streams. The learned Attorney General

    relied upon decisions of this Court in
State of Punjab vs. Joginder Singh28
and in
Zabar Singh and others vs. the State of Haryana
and others29 and

    more particularly paragraphs 25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37 and 42

    of said decision.     According to the learned Attorney General, if there are

    two different or dissimilar groups there can be disparity. He submitted that

    for employees of the State Government it was a matter of status while

    Niyojit Teachers were recruited through completely different source. In his

    submission for doctrine of “equal pay for equal work” to be invoked there

    has to be wholesale identicality and if there be any distinction in matters

    including mode of recruitment, the doctrine could not be made applicable.
He also relied upon decisions of this Court in Kishori Mohanlal Bakshi vs.




    28   1963 Suppl. 2 SCR 169
    29   (1972) 2 SCC 275
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
68
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Union of India & Ors.30 and Randhir Singh vs.        Union of India
and

    others31,
State of Haryana and others vs. Jasmer Singh and others
32,
State

    of U.P. and others vs. Ministerial Karamchari Sangh9, Orissa University of

    Agriculture
and
Technology and another vs.          Manoj K Mohanty
33,
Government of W. B. vs. Tarun K. Roy and others
34,
State of Haryana and

    others vs. Charanjit Singh and Others4
and
S.C. Chandra and others vs.

    State of Jharkhand
and others11. It was submitted by him that the spread of

    education as was sought to be achieved in terms of the mandate of the
RTE

    Act
required the resources of the State to be utilised to the maximum and

    in such executive functions and policy matters the Court ought not to

    interfere.
He relied upon decision of this Court in
Indian Drugs &

    Pharmaceuticals Limited Vs. Workmen, Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals

    Limited35
and also invited attention to paragraphs 23 onwards from the

    affidavit of the Union of India as well as the estimation of additional

    financial burden as quoted hereinabove. It was submitted that the direction

    passed by the High Court would result in complete budgetary mismatch

    and tremendous burden on the State.
30   AIR 1962 SC 1139
    31   (1982) 1 SCC 618
    32   (1996) 11 SCC 77
    33   (2003) 5 SCC 188
    34   (2004) 1 SCC 347
    35   (2007) 1 SCC 408
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
69
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
35.     In response to certain questions raised by the Court during the

    course of hearing, the learned Attorney General submitted that education

    being a concurrent list topic, the recruitment and other service conditions

    of teachers including the matters concerning salary and pay fixation were

    within the domain of the concerned State Government; that the provisions

    of the Act did not prescribe the percentage share of grant-in-aid by Central

    Government and that there was no obligation on part of the Central

    Government to provide 60% of the State’s education budget or estimates;
that no funds were sought by the State of Bihar to address the issues of

    disparity in salary of teachers and that State of Bihar was getting second

    highest funds under ‘Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan’. With respect to applicability

    of Rule 20(3) of 2010 Rules, the learned Attorney General submitted that

    said Rule was applicable only to Union Territories without Legislatures,

    Kendriya Vidyalayas, Navodaya Vidyalayas and the States and Union

    Territories with Legislatures were expected to have their own Rules and

    State of Bihar had published its own set of Rules in 2011.
36.     The submissions on behalf of Niyojit Teachers and their

    organizations who appeared as respondents and intervenors were led by

    Mr. Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Advocate on behalf of Bihar Rajya

    Prarambhik Shikshak Sangh. The submissions of the other learned counsel
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
70
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
who followed him are dealt with in the order that they appeared and

    argued. It was submitted by Mr. Sibal:-
(i) Niyojit Teachers were working in same schools, the management

         and control of which, was taken over by the State. The Niyojit

         Teachers were imparting education in same schools and discharging

         same functions as were being discharged by the Government

         Teachers.
(ii)
RTE Act
contemplated schools owned by the appropriate

         Government and those which are owned by the local authorities. In

         the present case all the schools in question were owned by the State.
(iii) Under
Section 6
of the RTE Act the appropriate Government was

         obliged to carry out the provisions of the Act within a period of three

         years.
(iv)
Section 7
of the RTE Act put the responsibility on the Central

         Government as well as the State Government concurrently for

         carrying out the provisions of the Act.
(v)    The Union Government had actually collected Education Cess

         and as such the budgetary constraints could never be an argument to

         defeat the rights of Niyojit Teachers.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
71
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
(vi) As a matter of law, financial difficulty would be no ground to

          oppose the rightful demands of Niyojit Teachers for equal pay for

          equal work which has always been held to be a constitutional

          obligation.
(vii) In fact, the obligation to raise money was on the State and it

          cannot be heard to raise a plea of budgetary constraint.
(viii)   Rule 7 of 2010 Rules obliged the Central Government to

          prepare annual estimates of capital and recurring expenditure for

          carrying out the provisions of the Act for a period of 5 years. Raising

          of resources was integral to the functioning of and carrying out the

          obligations under the
RTE Act
.
He distinguished the decisions cited by the learned counsel appearing

     for State of Bihar and relied upon decisions of this Court in
Dhirendra

     Chamoli and Another vs. State of U.P
36.,
Bhagwan Dass and others vs.

     State of Haryana
and others37, Jaipal and others. vs. State of Haryana and

     others3, State of Punjab & others. vs. Jagjit Singh and others. 2.       He

     submitted that education has always been at the core and of immense

     importance for advancement of a society and the State having failed to

     discharge its duty in ensuring non-discriminatory treatment to its teachers,
     36 (1986) 1 SCC 637
37     (1987) 4 SCC 634
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
72
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
the Court may set to malaise right. He submitted that the drift of the

     submissions advanced by the State as well as the Union of India would

     mean that there ought not to be cadre of quality teachers.
37.    Mr. C.A. Sundaram, learned Senior Advocate appeared for certain

     associations of teachers and submitted that it was not open to the State to

     plead and argue financial burden or difficulty in carrying out responsibility

     enjoined by the provisions of the constitution and particularly
Article 21A
of the Constitution. It was his submission that effectively Niyojit Teachers

     were made to carry the burden and pay for the constitutional goals which

     the States was obliged to achieve.        He emphasized that nature of

     responsibility, qualifications, experience and duties discharged by Niyojit

     Teachers were at par with the Government Teachers that both the

     categories were discharging their functions and imparting education in

     same schools and as such there could be no distinction. He relied upon

     decisions of this Court in
Ashoka Kumar Thakur vs. Union of India
and

     others.38, Society for
Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan vs. Union of

     India and Another39
, Karnataka State Private College Stop-Gap Lecturers

     Association vs. State of Karnataka and Others40, Baseeruddin M. Madari


38     (2008) 6 SCC 1
     39 (2012) 6 SCC 1
     40 (1992) 2 SCC 29
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
73
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
and others. vs.
State of Karnataka and Others41, State of Uttar Pradesh

    and another vs. Anand Kumar Yadav
and others42
38.     Mr. Vijay Hansaria, learned Advocate submitted that
Article 21A
was inserted by the 86th Constitutional Amendment Act on 12th December,

    2002 but came into force on 01.04.2010. After enactment of the
RTE Act
on 26.08.2009, two notifications were issued on 16.02.2010. Under the

    first notification, the provisions of
Article 21A
were directed to come into

    force on 01.04.2010 while under the second notification the provisions of

    the
RTE Act
were directed to come into force on 01.04.2010. These

    developments indicate that though the Constitutional Amendment Act was

    passed in the year 2002, period of almost 8 years was given to the States to

    gear themselves up and cope up with the obligations which were to be

    discharged in terms of
Article 21A
read with the provisions of
RTE Act
.
He emphasised that the idea of free and compulsory education first

    germinated in the decision in
Unni Krishnan, J.P. and others vs. State of

    Andhra Pradesh
and others43, which was later recommended in 165 th Law

    Commission Report. The States thus had enough time at their disposal to

    equip themselves adequately to cope up with the obligations as aforesaid.
41 1995 Supp (4) SCC 111
    42 (2018) 13 SCC 560
    43(1993) 1 SCC 645
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
74
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
He further submitted that under various enactments namely
National Food

    Security Act, 2013
,
Juvenile Justice Act, 2015
,
Mahatma Gandhi National

    Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005
.
Child and Adolescent Labour

    (Prevention and Regulation) Act, 1986
, separate funds are constituted and

    if budgetary constraints is the reason, a mandamus on the lines that was

    issued by this Court in
M.C. Mehta vs. State of T.N.
and others44, could be

    issued. He also invited attention of the Court to the report of the Controller

    and Auditor General which indicated that substantial sums were collected

    as primary education cess and higher and secondary education cess. The

    information in that behalf available in para 2.3.3 of the Report of CAG for

    the year 2016-17 was as under:
“2.3.3 Secondary and Higher Education Cess
                The Secondary and Higher Education Cess (SHEC) was
                introduced in the
Finance Act, 2007
, to fulfil the commitment of
                Secondary and Higher Education.
Scrutiny of the Union Finance Accounts for the period 2006-07
                to 2016-17 revealed that a total collection of SHEC of ₹ 83,497
                core has been made and is being credited in the CFI without
                creating any reserve fund in Public Account.
Unlike the creation of Prarambhik Siksha Kosh in the case of
                primary/elementary education cess, for the SHEC neither a Fund
                was designated to deposit the proceeds of SHEC nor were
                schemes identified on which the cess proceeds were to be spent.
                Consequently, the commitment of furthering Secondary and
                Higher Education Cess as envisaged in the
Finance Act
was not
                transparently ascertainable.
44(1996)   6 SCC 756 para 29
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
75
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
The matter of non-creation of Fund and non-dentification of
                schemes was raised in previous years’ Report but the trend is
                persistent.”

              He also relied upon decision of this Court in
Secretary, State of

    Karnataka and others vs. Umadevi
(3) and others45 (para 55).
39.       Mr. Salman Khurshid, learned Senior Advocate submitted that the

    content of Right under
Article 21A
of the Constitution would be

    meaningless unless the role of a teacher was not considered in proper

    perspective. For a child to be given good quality education, the teachers

    must be well qualified and ensured decent wages. In his submission that

    would be the true import of Rule 20(3) of 2010 Rules and it was the

    responsibility of a State to garner resources. He relied upon extracts from a

    book46 and particularly paragraphs 5 and 6 captioned “Public Expenditure

    and Education Policy”. The relevant extract which was relied upon was:-
“While the development of low-cost schooling facilities has
                helped to expand the reach of elementary education in spite of
                widespread budgetary crises at the state level, gaping
                inadequacies remain (both in quantitative and qualitative terms)
                in the schooling infrastructure, as the findings mentioned in the
                preceding section indicate. Further, the trend towards increasing
                reliance on second-track education facilities has some troubling
                features. At least three serious issues arise in this context,
                related respectively to quality, equity and sustainability.
The quality issue is concerned with the fact that teacher
                qualifications and infrastructural facilities are often poorer in

    45   (2006) 4 SCC 1
    46   [“India – Development and Participation” by Jean Dreze and Amartya Sen]
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
76
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
second-track schooling facilities than in regular schools. In
              some cases there are also compensating features, especially
              greater accountability (e.g. due to better work incentives or
              closer community involvement), but the question remains
              whether these facilities can really be expected to deliver
              education of acceptable quality.
The equity issue follows from that concern: if ‘second-track’
              means ‘second-rate’, the expansion of alternative schooling
              facilities involves a real danger of diluting the right of
              underprivileged children to quality education. While these
              facilities might help them in the short term, this might be done at
              the risk of perpetuating the deep inequities of India’s schooling
              system, whereby children of different social backgrounds have
              vastly different educational opportunities (not only in terms of
              the divide between government and private schools but now also
              within the framework of government schools.”
40.     Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija, learned Senior Advocate placed

    comparative chart of salary and emoluments drawn by Niyojit Teachers as

    against Government Teachers at various levels. She submitted that the

    introduction of
Article 21A
in the Constitution was not an exercise done

    overnight but considerable thought process had gone into, in making such

    Right a reality. Even after the introduction of
Article 21A
, substantial

    period of eight years was afforded to the States to equip themselves on

    every front. In her submission,
Sections 23
and
25
of the Act ensure

    qualitative and quantitative aspects and if both the aspects are taken

    together it would be inevitable that the teachers must be in adequate

    numbers and also must have decent wages. According to her, there were

    three sets of guarantees available to Niyojit Teachers. First, under Article
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
77
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
41 of the Constitution, the second under
Article 14
of the Constitution and

    the third under the provisions of the
RTE Act
, on the basis of which the

    Niyojit Teachers could rightfully claim parity in salary and emoluments.
She relied upon the Report of the Finance Commission47, the relevant

    portion being:-
“12.19… ….The MHRD estimations have assumed a
                  minimum salary of Rs.5000 per month for primary
                  teachers and Rs.7000 per month for upper primary
                  teachers. There is no uniform pattern in the manner of
                  appointment and pay scales of SSA teachers across states.
                  In some states such teachers are appointed by the State
                  Government on regular pay scales, whereas in many
                  others, such teachers are appointed by local governments
                  on local body pay scales or on contract.               The
                  implementation of the Sixth Central Pay Commission
                  (
CPC
) would, in any event, create an upward pressure on
                  teachers’ salaries, whatever the mode of appointment. We
                  have, therefore, assumed an increase of 30 per cent over
                  the base year, in view of the fact that the bulk of these
                  teachers are located in rural areas. We have also provided
                  for an annual increase of 6% on these salaries, in
                  conformity with our assumption of the post-
CPC
yearly
                  increase in salaries of government servants. Similarly,
                  while SSA does not provide for any annual increase in the
                  quantum of funds on account of inflation, we have
                  provided for an annual increase of 5 per cent across all
                  non-salary components of the scheme.
12.20       The SSA began with a matching fund
                  requirement of 15 per cent from states in 2001-02. Till
                  2006-07, the matching fund requirement was 25 per cent.
                  It has increased progressively to 35 per cent in 2007-08
                  and 2008-09 and to 40 per cent in 2009-10. It is expected
                  to go up to 45 per cent in 2010-11 and to 50 per cent in
                  2011-12, the terminal year of the Eleventh Five Year Plan.
                  We assume that the same ratio will continue in the

      4713th   Finance Commission, for 2010-15 published in 2009
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
78
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
remaining years of the award period. Various states have
              expressed difficulties in providing this matching share,
              especially since the size of their annual plans has
              increased over the years.
12.21        We are of the view that, in the given
              circumstances augmenting the resources of the states to
              cater to this need will be the most appropriate way to
              provide grants for the elementary education sector. This
              will also provide some fiscal space to the states to meet a
              part of the additional resources required to implement the
RTE Act
. We have also considered the fact that given the
              resource scarcity faced by the states as a result of the
              economic slowdown, several states have not been able to
              provide for their share of 40 per cent in 2009-10. In fact,
              we estimate that due to the adverse fallout of the economic
              downturn, the states may not be able to provide more than
              35 per cent from their resources over the current year and
              the next year. Hence, we recommend for the award
              period, a grant of 15 per cent of the estimated SSA
              expenditure of each state. This amount will cover the
              difference between the targeted state share of 50 per cent
              by the terminal year of the Eleventh Plan and the
              contribution required to be made in 2008-09, i.e. 35 per
              cent of the individual states’ SSA share.
12.22        The north-eastern states are required to
              provide only 10 per cent from their resources as their share
              for SSA. However, as the MHRD has pointed out in a
              supplementary memorandum, several of these states have
              not been able to provide even this amount, leading to
              slowdown in implementation of SSA. In order to alleviate
              the fiscal constraints of these states we recommend a grant
              amounting to the difference between the average amount
              contributed by each state in the years 2007-08 and 2008-
              09 and the amount they need to contribute (on the basis of
              a 10 per cent share) in each of the five years of the award
              period, subject to a minimum of Rs.5 crore per year. The
              requirement of the north-eastern states, calculated on this
              basis, is Rs.367 crore over a period of five years.
12.23       The recommended grant for elementary
              education for all these states, in aggregate, works out to
              Rs.24,068 crore. The state-wise and year wise allocations
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
79
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
are given in Annex 12.1. In order to ensure that these
                grants do not substitute for the current expenditure of
                states, we stipulate that the expenditure (plan + non plan)
                under elementary education, i.e. major head 2202, sub-
                major head-01, exclusive of the grants recommended
                herein, should grow by at least 8 per cent, the assumed
                growth rate in our projections of the non-salary component
                of the social sector during the award period, annually,
                during 2010-15.”


             Ms. Makhija then submitted that there had been three categories of

    teachers in the State, first category being that of regular teachers who are

    getting salary and emoluments at government pay scale. The second

    category was that of Shiksha Mitras who were inducted under Central

    Schemes since 2002. The third category of teachers are those who were

    inducted in terms of 2006 Rules. The second category as stated above,

    now stands merged in the last category and are collectively known as

    Niyojit Teachers. She relied upon decisions in
State of Gujarat and

    Another vs. Raman Lal Keshav Lal Soni and Others
48,
State of U.P. and

    Others vs. Chandra Prakash Pandey and Others49
,
Shayara Bano vs.

    Union of India and Others50
,
E. P Royappa vs. State of Tamil Nadu and

    Another51
.
48   (1983) 2 SCC 33
    49   (2001) 4 SCC 78 para 10
    50   (2017) 9 SCC 1
    51   (1974) 4 SCC 3 para 85
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
80
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Ms. Makhija also submitted that the distinction drawn by the learned

    Attorney General was artificial and without any nexus to the object. She

    further submitted that the State cannot let disparity continue and

    perpetuate inequality.
41.       Mr. P. Chidambaram, learned Senior Advocate stressed on the

    content of the right under
Article 21A
and submitted that the emphasis

    must be on good quality education. He submitted that under
Section 26
of

    the RTE Act, the vacancy position of teachers could not be more than 10%

    and as such the teachers had to be appointed in adequate numbers to

    match the Pupil-Teacher ratio as prescribed and it would not be proper on

    part of the State to put up an excuse of budgetary constraints. He further

    stated that under
Section 28
of the Act, a teacher would not be allowed to

    engage himself in private teaching activity.     He relied upon
State of

    Punjab and Others vs. Jagjit Singh and Others2
,
Hussainara Khatoon and

    Others (IV) vs. Home Secretary, State of Bihar
, Patna52, Khatri and

    Others (II) vs. State of Bihar and Others 53,
Ashoka Kumar Thakur vs.

    Union of India and Others38
and
Brij Mohan Lal vs. Union of India
and




    52   (1980) 1 SCC 98 para 10
    53   (1981) 1 SCC 627 para 5
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
81
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Others54. Lastly, he urged that the right under
Article 21A
ought to be

    made meaningful.
42.       Dr. A. M. Singhvi, learned Senior Advocate appeared on behalf of

    Bihar Madhyamik Shikshan Sangh representing those teaching classes IX

    onwards. According to him, the total liability in terms of the decision

    rendered by the High Court in the present matter was in the range or

    Rs.9283.69 Crores out of which the share allocable to the Central

    Government would be Rs.4599.07 crores and that of the State

    Government would be Rs.4684.63 crores. In a Note presented by him, the

    aspect that Niyojit Teachers were performing same/similar duties and

    responsibilities was highlighted as under:-
“i) It is admitted fact that these Niyojit teachers are
                discharging same/similar duty and responsibility as
                discharged by the Regular teachers of Pre-2006 Rules.
                The impugned order has dealt it in detail and returned
                important finding on this issue in favour of these teachers
                at more than one place.
ii) These Niyojit teachers are imparting education to the
                same students, with same syllabus in the same school apart
                form doing the same evaluation work in secondary and +2
                examination conducted by the Bihar School Examination
                Board. At the time of evaluation, they are treated at par
                with and paid the same remuneration like the teachers
                appointed prior to 2006 Rules.
iii) Moreover, these Niyojit teachers are also engaged by
                the State like Regular teachers in duties like duty for
                preparation of census (economic survey), Election duty

    54   (2012) 6 SCC 502 paras 137 to 144
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
82
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
from preparation of voter list till counting of votes.
              Interestingly, while informing the Election Commission
              with regard to deploying these teachers on election duty,
              the State treats these Niyojit teachers as Regular teachers.
iv) These teachers like regular teachers are also engaged
              in imparting Special training namely ‘Diploma in
              Elementary Training’ provided by National Institute of
              Open Schooling (NIOS) Board, under Union of India,
              which is an on-going programme, wherein in a selected
              school of each district, Study Centre is opened to impart
              training. In these programmes these Niyojit teachers work
              as Coordinator, Assistant Co-ordinator, resource persons
              and Supervisors. Importantly, sometimes, when the
              minimum            required       qualification       like
              MA/M.SC/B.Ed./M.Ed. is not found in the regular teacher,
              then Niyojit teachers with such qualifications are made
              Co-ordinator in place of regular teachers in that Study
              Centre.
v) Many of these Niyojit teachers are chosen as Master
              Trainers, who are responsible for imparting training to
              both category of teachers i.e. Niyojit Teachers and Regular
              Teachers. Pertinently, this training is conducted/organised
              by State Council of Educational Research and Training,
              Government of Bihar (SCERT similar to NCERT).
vi) Furthermore, such in-service training is part of a
              continuous process which includes preparation of
              Syllabus, Curriculum and innovative teaching method as
              well as these Niyojit teachers are also given responsibility
              of writing text books for students form class I to class XII
              under the command of SCERT.
vii) These Niyojit teachers are also engaged in setting of
              question papers, moderating, evaluating the answer sheets
              etc., at par with the regular teachers on equal
              remuneration.
viii) Responsibility of Acting Principals in substantial
              number of the Secondary and Higher Secondary schools
              are performed by these Niyojit teachers. Kindly see list of
              secondary and higher secondary schools wherein these
              Niyojit teachers are working as Acting Principal, however,
              receiving the salary of Niyojit teachers.”
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
83
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
It was his submission that the cases decided by this Court on the

    touchstone of
Article 14
of the Constitution consistently show that if

    functionally the duties performed by the class seeking parity are same or

    identical, unless required qualifications were higher, the equality doctrine

    must apply and in such cases the source of employment would be

    irrelevant. He also relied upon the statistics to show that as many as 1459

    Niyojit Teachers were acting as Head Masters in Higher Secondary

    Schools in the State. By way of an example, he further submitted details

    from Anugrah Kanya S.S.S, Gaya in which six Government Teachers and

    three non-teaching staff were on the roles while 22 Niyojit Teachers were

    working in the same school. All Government Teachers and the non-
teaching staff were drawing pay higher than what was paid to each of

    those Niyojit Teachers.
He also submitted that with effect from 3rd July, 2012, under the

    Rules framed by State of Bihar, it was obligatory for every teacher

    teaching classes IX onwards to have TET qualification and all Niyojit

    Teachers teaching such classes were equipped with said qualification.
Responding to the submission that the category of Government Teachers

    who was taken to be a dying or finishing cadre, he submitted that no such

    policy was discernible from any statutory provision.       He relied upon
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
84
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
decisions of this Court in
State of Gujarat and Another vs. Raman Lal

    Keshav Lal Soni and Others48
and
Arindam Chattopadhyay and Others vs.

    State of West Bengal and Others55
.
43.       Mr. C. S. Vaidyanathan, learned Senior Advocate also representing

    teachers teaching classes IX onwards submitted that two issues had been

    raised on behalf of the State whether there could be equality with a dying

    or vanishing cadre and whether on the grounds of financial constraints the

    State was justified in not affording same pay and emoluments to Niyojit

    Teachers.       He reiterated that both the categories of teachers were

    performing same or similar functions.               He relied upon an Article

    “Perceptions on Getting Children to Schools –
Before and After RTE

    Act
”56.
44.       Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned Senior Advocate appeared on behalf of

    Secondary and Higher Secondary teachers teaching classes IXth onwards.
He also stressed the point that there was complete functional equality in

    every respect as regards duties and responsibilities between Government

    Teachers on one hand and Niyojit Teachers on the other. It was his

    submission that though under 2006 Rules, Panchayats and Municipal


    55   (2013) 4 SCC 152 para 5 and 13
    56   By Shantha Sinha, Department of Political Science, University of Hyderabad
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
85
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Bodies were entrusted with the task of selecting teachers, in reality the

     Committees constituted for the purpose comprised of all government

     officials and the State Government was in real and effective control of the

     situation.    He relied upon the decisions of this Court in Bihar State

     Government Secondary School Teachers Association vs. Bihar Education

     Service Association and others57 particularly on para 50.
45.       Shri Ananda Nandan, learned Advocate appeared on behalf of

     Niyojit Teachers who were appointed after 2012. It was submitted by him

     that such teachers who were duly qualified and had passed TET

     examination alone be considered to be entitled to parity with Government

     Teachers and those who did not have the requisite qualifications and had

     not passed TET examination ought not to be afforded same treatment. In

     his submission that would be the true import of the idea of making quality

     education available to the children in terms of the
RTE Act
. He also relied

     upon decision of this Court in
State of Uttar Pradesh and others vs. Shiv

     Kumar Pathak
and others58.
46.       Mr. V. Shekhar, learned Senior Advocate appeared on behalf of

     some primary school teachers and Parivartankaari Teachers Maha Sangh.
He relied upon the decisions of this Court in Municipal Council, Ratlam

57 (2012)   13 SCC 33
58 (2018)   12 SCC 595
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
86
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
vs.     Shri Vardichand and others59,
Secretary and Mahatama Gandhi

     Mission and another vs. Bhartiya Kamgar Sena
and others60(paragraphs

     82 to 90 and 95).
47.       Mr. Prashant Bhushan, learned Advocate appearing for some of

     the primary teachers submitted that those teachers having TET

     qualifications, were regularly selected by local authorities and though, the

     method of recruitment may be different, they were doing the same work

     as was being discharged by other Government Teachers.                 Their

     qualifications were identical and in terms of mandate of Rule 20(3) of

     2010 Rules, they were entitled to pay and allowances at par with the

     Government Teachers.
48.       Mr. Rajiv Dhawan, learned Senior Advocate appearing for certain

     secondary and primary teachers submitted that the statutory provisions

     including 2006 Rules clearly showed the all-pervasive role of the State

     Government which had created these artificial distinctions and categories

     and the Panchayats were simply implementing what the State had decided.
In his submission the basic issues were whether there could be any

     discretion unto the State in matters concerning constitutional mandate and

     whether financial constraints could be taken as a valid excuse.           He

59 (1980)   4 SCC 162
60 (2017)   4 SCC 449
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
87
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
reiterated the submission that under
Section 7
of the RTE Act there was a

     concurrent financial responsibility on the State Government as well as the

     Central Government. Adverting to the draft Notes which were placed

     before the Cabinet on 25.06.2006, he submitted that the entire mechanics

     was about financial arrangement and there was nothing such as financial

     constraints upon the State.    He relied upon decisions of this Court in
Mohini Jain vs. State of Karnataka
and others61,
Unni Krishnan, J.P. and

     others vs. State of Andhra Pradesh and others
43 and
State of Himachal

     Pradesh vs. H.P. State Recognised & Aided Schools Managing Committees
and others62
49.     Mr. Sanjay Hegde, learned Senior Advocate appearing for some of

     the primary teachers submitted that as it is the income of a teacher has

     always been a limited one and the attempt on part of the State was to

     restrict it further.   Relying on Workmen represented by
Secretary vs.

     Reptakos Brett
. & Co. Limited and another 63 it was submitted that the

     teachers must be ensured living wages and that the Niyojit Teachers were

     entitled to the salary and emoluments as were made available to

     Government Teachers. He also relied upon decisions of this Court in

61      (1992) 3 SCC 666
     62 (1995) 4 SCC 507
     63 (1992) 1 SCC 290
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
88
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
Municipal Council, Ratlam vs.        Shri Vardichand and others 59 and
Chandigarh Administration and others vs. Rajni Vali
and others64.
50.      Mr. B.P. Verma, learned Senior Advocate appeared on behalf of

    certain teachers seeking impleadment and relied upon the decision of this

    Court in
Secretary, State of Karnataka and others vs. Umadevi
(3) and

    others45 (para 55), while Mr. V.N. Sinha, learned Senior Advocate for some

    primary and secondary teachers as well as librarians relied upon a decision

    of this Court in
Maneka Gandhi vs. Union of India
and another65 to

    submit that there ought to be reasonableness in every action of the State.
Adopting the submissions made by all the other learned counsel, it was

    submitted by them that Niyojit Teachers were entitled to same salaries and

    emoluments as were given to Government Teachers.
51.      In rejoinder, it was submitted by Mr. Dinesh Dwivedi, learned

    Senior Advocate that a conscious decision was taken not to make any

    further appointments in the cadre of Government Teachers and but for one-
time appointment which was done pursuant to orders passed by the High

    Court and this Court, the strength of Government Teachers would have

    been considerably lower.    The State could as well have abolished all the

    posts held by Government Teachers after giving them requisite

    64   (2000) 2 SCC 42
    65   (1978) 1 SCC 248
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
89
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
compensation and in the process could have ensured one single cadre of

    Niyojit Teachers. The attempt to compare a huge body of Niyojit Teachers

    which was more than 4.50 lakhs and seek parity with a group which was a

    dying or vanishing cadre was not correct. He submitted that there was no

    basis to claim that the quality of education would be compromised if

    Niyojit Teachers were not paid same salary as was given to Government

    Teachers. The decisions of this Court in
State of Punjab vs. Joginder

    Singh28
and in
Zabar Singh and others vs. State of Haryana
and others29,
S.C. Chandra and others vs. State of Jharkhand
and others11,
State of

    Haryana vs. Charanjit Singh4
and
State of Haryana and another vs. Tilak

    Raj
and others66 were heavily relied upon by Mr. Dwivedi.
It was

    submitted that the decision in
State of Punjab and others vs. Jagjit Singh
and others2 did not notice the earlier decisions of this Court in
State of

    Punjab vs. Joginder Singh28
and in
Zabar Singh and others vs. State of

    Haryana
and others29.
It was submitted that the decision in
State of Punjab

    vs. Joginder Singh28
had clearly laid down that the principle of ‘equal pay

    for equal work’ was not deducible from
Article 14
of the Constitution.
Reliance was also placed on
Section 2(n)
of the RTE Act and the

    expression ‘controlled by the appropriate government or a local body’ to

    submit that it was sufficient indication that new kind of service could be
    66   (2003) 6 SCC 123
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
90
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
put in place by the appropriate government. He submitted that the Right

    under
Article 21A
of the Constitution was child-centric and a claim could

    not be based by the Niyojit Teachers on the basis of such Right to claim

    parity as was sought to be done. Reliance was placed on the decisions of

    this Court in
All India Bank Employees’ Association vs. National Industrial

    Tribunal
and others67, Society for
Unaided Private Schools of Rajasthan vs.

    Union of India
and another39.
52.       Mr. Shyam Divan, learned Senior Advocate, in rejoinder, relied

    upon the judgment of Constitution Bench of this Court in
Navtej Singh

    Johar and others vs. Union of India
through Secretary, Ministry of Law

    and Justice68 and paragraphs 95, 96, 104, 110, 118 and 119 thereof. In his

    submission, progressive realisation of rights would require certain amount

    of balancing and adjustment. If the matter was to be considered from the

    standpoint of child, the school system ought to be of such order which

    helps realisation of such Right but, at the same time there ought not to be

    any negative impact on the dignity of any other individual. Considering

    these two ideas, if the endeavour adopted by the State was to subserve

    goals set by
Article 21A
, the attempts in that behalf would be perfectly

    constitutional as long as dignity of any other individual was not

    67   (1962) 3 SCR 269 = AIR 1962 SC 171
    68   (2018) 10 SCC 1
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
91
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
compromised. According to him, the two competing visions which were

    pressed into service in the present matter were (i) on behalf of Niyojit

    Teachers which visualised perspective from the standpoint of individual

    teachers which was “me first” approach, whereas, what the State was

    emphasising was community right and to achieve and to subserve the

    societal needs which could be categorised as “we first” approach. Both

    could be valid visions but while considering which choice would be the

    most appropriate one, it would require policy decisions which, by very

    nature could be complex. The policy decisions on the point would be

    completely linked to social issues and economy and health of the society.
These issues as well as vision in that behalf ought to be left to the State.
He further submitted that the various factual details presented by the State

    would show great impact of its policies and the tremendous strides the

    State had undertaken in that behalf. He relied upon decisions of this Court

    in
Acharya Maharajshri Narendra Prasadji Anandprasadji Maharaj and

    others vs. The State of Gujarat
and others69(
para 31), Assam Sanmilita

    Mahasangha and others vs. Union of India
and others70 (
para 33) and

    Subramanian Swamy vs. Union of India, Ministry of Law
and others71.
69   (1975) 1 SCC 11
    70   (2015) 3 SCC 1
    71   (2016) 7 SCC 221
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
92
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
53.     With the permission of the Court, Mr. Sibal, Mr. Sundaram, Mr.

    Vijay Hansaria and Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned Senior Advocates responded

    to the submissions made in rejoinder.      It was submitted that the very

    premise that the schools were managed by local authorities was wrong;
they were taken over and owned by the State. It was submitted that the

    concept of ‘equal pay for equal work’ was a fundamental doctrine though

    may not strictly be a Fundamental Right. Mr. Hansaria submitted a list of

    at least 40 cases where doctrine of ‘equal pay for equal work’ was adopted

    without noticing the decisions of this Court in
State of Punjab vs. Joginder

    Singh28
and in
Zabar Singh and others vs. State of Haryana
and others29.
It was also submitted that as against the funds which were made

    available for various Central Schemes, about Rs.1802 crores were lying

    unspent and as such the budgetary constraints could not be an argument.
By extending schools and educational facilities to every nook and corner of

    the State or in every neighbourhood the State was not doing any charity but

    was discharging its constitutional obligations and as such, budgetary

    constraints could never be a ground.
54.     Having heard the learned counsel extensively, who took us through

    all the relevant material on record and placed before us various contours of
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
93
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
the issues before us, the basic questions that arise for our consideration

    are:-
a)      Whether the Niyojit Teachers are right in their submission

                    that they are entitled to and were rightly granted ‘equal pay

                    for equal work’; and
b)      Whether the State is justified in its approach and is right in

                    claiming that the distinction made by it was correct and

                    fair.
These questions, according to us, go to the root of the matter.
While answering these questions, we may also consider various facets to

    the issues as presented by various counsel, including the effect of the

    provisions of the
RTE Act
.
55.          According to the learned counsel appearing for the State, the matter

    has to be seen in the backdrop of what the State was confronted with

    around the year 2001-2002 and what it has, over the last few years, been

    able to achieve as a result of steps taken by the State including the

    appointment of Niyojit Teachers and creation of a separate cadre of Niyojit

    Teachers. According to the State, on one hand it had decided to let the

    original cadre of Government Teachers to be a cadre without any fresh
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
94
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
appointments and thus let it be a dying or vanishing cadre, while on the

    other hand it had decided that substantial number of teachers be appointed

    at Panchayat levels.
56.     At the outset we must note that though the 86 th Constitution

    Amendment Act was passed in the year 2002, the Article was brought into

    force on 1.4.2010 i.e. at least after eight years. It is also a matter of record

    that the
RTE Act
which was, all the while in contemplation, was enacted in

    the year 2009 and was also brought into force on 1.4.2010.                 The

    developments in that behalf including the historical background leading to

    the introduction of
Article 21A
and the enactment of the
RTE Act
were

    dealt with in extenso in paragraphs 441 to 461 in the opinion of Bhandari, J

    in
Ashoka Kumar Thakur vs. Union of India38
.        We, therefore, have to see

    how the State had conducted itself and whether the steps taken by the State

    were in order to discharge its obligations.
In the year 2002 itself, Scheme known as Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan

    was introduced at the Central level. In terms of the Scheme, the facilities

    of education and infrastructure were required to be spread through the

    length and breadth of the respective States. The steps taken in that behalf,

    specially in the present matter, indicate that sometime in 2002 more than
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
95
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
one lakh Shiksha Mitras were appointed by the State. These Shiksha

    Mitras were not part of the regular cadre of Government Teachers, were

    not appointed through the regular process of selection and their services

    were engaged on a fixed salary. These Shiksha Mitras, who were outside

    the regular cadre of teachers, were entrusted with the job of manning

    schools in the remotest corners of the State. Sometime in 2006, certain

    decisions were taken by the Cabinet of Ministers, Government of Bihar.
The control in respect of appointment of teachers in all nationalized

    schools and other aspects, which were hithertobefore with the State

    Government, were given over to various Panchayat Raj institutions. This

    was in conformity with
Articles 243G
read with Serial No. 17 of the

    Eleventh Schedule in respect of Panchayats at the village, intermediate and

    at district levels and also in terms of
Article 243W
read with Serial No.13

    of the Twelfth Schedule in respect of Nagar Panchayats, Municipal

    Councils or Municipal Corporations. The decisions taken by the Cabinet

    were in accord with the constitutional mandate of enabling Panchayat Raj

    Systems on one hand while on the other, the decision also raised the

    number of teachers substantially so that national parameters on

    student:teacher ratio could be achieved by the State. The statistics placed

    on record show that about 12% children in the State who were outside the
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
96
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
schools had to be brought within the stream of education. The decision

    discernible from the Cabinet Notes was to achieve these objectives. After

    the decision of the Cabinet, the idea was translated in an appropriate

    statutory regime and new set of Rules viz. 2016 Rules were put in place. A

    decision was taken that there would be no further appointments in the

    cadre of existing teachers viz. Government Teachers and a completely new

    cadre of teachers named Niyojit Teachers was created. The erstwhile

    Shiksha Mitras were absorbed in this new cadre of Niyojit Teacher and

    fresh employments were made at Panchayat/Block levels so that teachers

    in sufficient numbers could be appointed. The developments indicate that

    presently about four lakh such teachers have been appointed and the

    statistics presented by the State, which are reflected in detail in abovenoted

    paragraph 31, show the advances made by the State in that behalf. It was

    submitted that the State could thus achieve substantial improvement in the

    enrolment of students and the results have also seen appreciable rise in

    literacy rate in the last decade in respect of the State.
57.     We are thus having a situation where the decisions taken by the

    State as submitted on its behalf, were guided by public interest and societal

    commitment. The idea to achieve spread of education to the maximum

    level was attained and in the process the State had, to a great extent, tried
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
97
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
to meet with the obligations that it was required to discharge under the

    provisions of
Article 21A
read with the
RTE Act
. What has however been

    projected on behalf of Niyojit Teachers is that while achieving these

    objectives, the State ought not to have discriminated against the Niyojit

    Teachers and should have extended fair treatment to them by ensuring

    ‘equal pay for equal work’. The arguments on behalf of State are that the

    first objective that had to be accomplished was to have the reach and

    spread of education to every nook and corner of the State and to satisfy the

    requirements of having schools and facilities in every neighbourhood as

    contemplated by the provisions of the
RTE Act
; and having achieved that

    objective, the State is now seeking to improve the service conditions and

    emoluments of the Niyojit Teachers. What therefore emerges is whether

    the actions on part of the State were justified or whether the Niyojit

    Teachers are right in their submission that they are entitled to ‘equal pay

    for equal work’.
58.     Before we consider the rival submissions in connection with this

    issue, it must be mentioned that the cadre of Government Teachers with

    which parity or equality has been sought is a dying or a vanishing cadre. A

    conscious decision was taken by the State not to make any appointments in

    this cadre of Government Teachers and post 2006, with the exception as
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
98
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
narrated hereinabove in paragraph 17, all appointments in the State have

    been in terms of and under the provisions of 2006 Rules.         The statistics

    also show that presently there are about 57,293 elementary teachers in the

    cadre of Government Teachers and 7,800 Government Teachers at the

    secondary level which means there are about 66,000 government teachers

    in the State as against nearly 4 lakh Niyojit Teachers in the State. It is this

    group of 4 lakhs which is seeking parity with a number which is less than

    1/5th and by very nature which is a dying and vanishing cadre. Out of

    those 66,000 more than 31,000 were those who came to be appointed as

    one-time exception. Leaving aside that issue, the fact remains that it is a

    larger body of more than 4 lakhs which is seeking parity with a dying or a

    vanishing cadre.
59.     In order to consider the applicability of the doctrine of ‘equal pay

    for equal work’, one of the fundamental aspects to be considered is nature

    of duties.   As was rightly submitted by Mr. Kabil Sibal and Dr. A.M.

    Singhvi, learned Senior Advocates, the nature of duties performed by

    Niyojit Teachers are certainly same or similar to those performed by the

    Government Teachers. As a matter of fact, both the sets of teachers are

    teaching in the same school and teaching same syllabus. The pointers

    placed by Dr. Singhvi in his submission as well as the example given by
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
99
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
him evidently show that there is no distinction or difference as regards

    nature of duties performed and responsibilities discharged by the Niyojit

    Teachers.    Some of the Niyojit Teachers have also been acting as

    Headmasters. However, the Rules in question viz. 2006 Rules clearly

    indicate that the method of recruitment of Niyojit Teachers was completely

    different from the one under which Government Teachers were recruited.
The Selection Committee contemplated under the provisions of 2006 Rules

    comprised of officials at the Panchayat or Block levels. The selection was

    also at local levels and not through Bihar Public Service Commission or

    Schools Selection Board. The distinction brought out in that behalf by the

    State in para 13 of its supplementary counter affidavit filed in the High

    Court clearly shows the difference in mode of recruitment. It is thus clear

    that the mode of recruitment and the standards of selection were different

    but the nature of duties performed by the Niyojit Teachers have been

    absolutely identical.   Could there be a distinction between these two

    streams of teachers. We may, therefore, at this stage see the development

    of the doctrine of ‘equal pay for equal work’ and whether it admits of any

    qualifications or exceptions.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
100
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
60.        In Kishori Mohanlal Bakshi vs. Union of India72 the Income Tax

    Officers were divided into two categories and Class-I Income Tax Officers

    alone were entitled to be considered for promotion to the posts of

    Commissioners and Assistant Commissioners. There could be no such

    direct promotion from amongst officers who were Income Tax Officers

    Class-II. The submission that this was violative of
Article 16(1)
of the

    Constitution was rejected.              Further submission was that both the

    categories were doing same kind of work but their pay-scales were

    different and as such the doctrine of ‘equal pay for equal work’ stood

    violated.     While considering said submission, the Constitution Bench

    stated:-
“3. The only other contention raised is that there is
                 discrimination between class I and Class I Officers
                 inasmuch as though they do the same kind of work their
                 pay-scales are different. This, it is said, violates
article 14
of the Constitution. If this contention had any validity,
                 there could be no incremental scales of pay fixed
                 dependent on the duration of an officer’s service. The
                 abstract doctrine of equal pay for equal work has nothing
                 to do with
article 14.
The contention that
article 14
of the
                 constitution has been violated therefore also fails.”
61.      Almost 20 years later, the doctrine of ‘equal pay for equal work’

      was accepted by this Court in
Randhir Singh vs. Union of India
and

      others31. A Bench of three Judges stated that though the principle of


    72   AIR 1962 SC 1139
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
101
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
‘equal pay for equal work’ had not expressly been declared by the

      Constitution to be a Fundamental Right, it was certainly a constitutional

      goal. The discussion was as under:-
“7. Our attention was drawn to Binoy Kumar Mukerjee v.
              Union of India ILR (1973) 1 Del 427 and Makhan Singh v.
              Union of India ILR (1975) 1 Del 227, where reference was
              made to the observations of this Court in
Kishori
              Mohanlal Bakshi v. Union of India
AIR 1962 SC 1139
              describing the principle of “equal pay for equal work” as
              an abstract doctrine which had nothing to do with Article
14. We shall presently point out how the principle, “equal
              pay for equal work”, is not an abstract doctrine but one of
              substance.
Kishori Mohanlal Bakshi v. Union
of lndia
              AIR 1962 SC 1139 is not itself of any real assistance to us
              since what was decided there was that there could be
              different scales of pay for different grades of a service. It
              is well known that there can be and there are different
              grades in a service, with varying qualifications for entry
              into a particular grade, the higher grade often being a
              promotional avenue for officers of the lower grade. The
              higher qualifications for the higher grade, which may be
              either academic qualifications or experience based on
              length of service, reasonably sustain the classification of
              the officers into two grades with different scales of pay.
The principle of “equal pay for equal work” would be an
              abstract doctrine not attracting
Article 14
if sought to be
              applied to them.
8. It is true that the principle of “equal pay for equal work”
              is not expressly declared by our Constitution to be a
              fundamental right. But it certainly is a constitutional goal.
Article 39(d)
of the Constitution proclaims “equal pay for
              equal work for both men and women” as a directive
              principle of State Policy. “Equal pay for equal work for
              both men and women” means equal pay for equal work for
              everyone and as between the sexes. directive principles, as
              has been pointed out in some of the judgments of this
              Court have to be read into the fundamental rights as a
              matter of interpretation.
Article 14
of the Constitution
              enjoins the State not to deny any person equality before
              the law or the equal protection of the laws and
Article 16
declares that there shall be equality of opportunity for all
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
102
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment
              to any office under the State. These equality clauses of the
              Constitution must mean something to everyone. To the
              vast majority of the people the equality clauses of the
              Constitution would mean nothing if they are unconcerned
              with the work they do and the pay they get. To them the
              equality clauses will have some substance if equal work
              means equal pay. Whether the special procedure
              prescribed by a statute for trying alleged robber-barons
              and smuggler kings or for dealing with tax evaders is
              discriminatory, whether a particular governmental policy
              in the matter of grant of licences or permits confers
              unfettered discretion on the Executive, whether the take-
              over of the empires of industrial tycoons is arbitrary and
              unconstitutional and other questions of like nature, leave
              the millions of people of this country untouched.
              Questions concerning wages and the like, mundane they
              may be, are yet matters of vital concern to them and it is
              there, if at all that the equality clauses of the Constitution
              have any significance to them. The Preamble to the
              Constitution declares the solemn resolution of the people
              of India to constitute India into a Sovereign Socialist
              Democratic Republic. Again the word “socialist” must
              mean something. Even if it does not mean ‘to each
              according to his need’, it must at least mean “equal pay for
              equal work”. “The principle of “equal pay for equal work”
              is expressly recognized by all socialist systems of law,
              e.g., Section 59 of the Hungarian Labour Code, para 2 of
              Section 111 of the Czechoslovak Code, Section 67 of the
              Bulgarian Code, Section 40 of the Code of the German
              Democratic Republic, para 2 of
Section 33
of the
              Rumanian Code. Indeed this principle has been
              incorporated in several western Labour Codes too.
Under
              provisions in
Section 31
(g. No. 2d) of Book I of the
              French Code du Travail, and according to Argentinian law,
              this principle must be applied to female workers in all
              collective bargaining agreements. In accordance with
Section 3
of the Grundgesetz of the German Federal
              Republic, and Clause 7, Section 123 of the Mexican
              Constitution, the principle is given universal significance”
              (vide International Labour Law by Istvan Szaszy, p. 265).
              The Preamble to the Constitution of the International
              Labour Organisation recognises the principle of ‘equal
              remuneration for work of equal value’ as constituting one
              of the means of achieving the improvement of conditions
              “involving such injustice, hardship and privation to large
              numbers of people as to produce unrest so great that the
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
103
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
peace and harmony of the world are imperilled”.
              Construing
Articles 14
and
16
in the light of the Preamble
              and
Article 39 (d)
, we are of the view that the principle
              “equal pay for equal work” is deducible from those
              Articles and may be properly applied to cases of unequal
              scales of pay based on no classification or irrational
              classification though those drawing the different scales of
              pay do identical work under the same employer.
9. There cannot be the slightest doubt that the drivers
              in the Delhi Police Force perform the same functions and
              duties as other drivers in service of the Delhi
              Administration and the Central Government. If anything,
              by reason of their investiture with the “powers, functions
              and privileges of a police officer”, their duties and
              responsibilities are more arduous. In answer to the
              allegation in the petition that the driver-constables of the
              Delhi Police Force perform no less arduous duties than
              drivers in other departments, it was admitted by the
              respondents in their counter that the duties of the driver-
              constables of the Delhi Police Force were onerous. What
              then is the reason for giving them a lower scale of pay
              than others? There is none. The only answer of the
              respondents is that the drivers of the Delhi Police Force
              and the other drivers belong to different departments and
              that the principle of “equal pay for equal work” is not a
              principle which the courts may recognise and act upon. We
              have shown that the answer is unsound. The clarification
              is irrational. We, therefore, allow the writ petition and
              direct the respondents to fix the scale of pay of the
              petitioner and the driver-constables of the Delhi Police
              Force at least on a par with that of the drivers of the
              Railway Protection Force. The scale of pay shall be
              effective from January 1, 1973, the date from which the
              recommendations of the Pay Commission were given
              effect.”
62.   Post Randhir Singh31, there have been number of decisions

      rendered by this Court and instead of looking into and considering every

      single decision on the point, we may consider those decisions which

      themselves had taken into account all the earlier decisions and then
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
104
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
considered if there are any limitations or qualifications to the doctrine of

      ‘equal pay for equal work’.
63.   In State of Haryana and others vs. Charanjit Singh and others 4 a

      Bench of three Judges of this Court, speaking through Variava, J.
observed as under:-
“19. Having considered the authorities and the
               submissions we are of the view that the authorities in the
               cases of Jasmer Singh (1996) 11 SCC 77, Tilak Raj (2003)
               6 SCC 123, Orissa University of Agriculture &
               Technology (2003) 5 SCC 188 and Tarun K. Roy (2004) 1
               SCC 347 lay down the correct law. Undoubtedly, the
               doctrine of “equal pay for equal work” is not an abstract
               doctrine and is capable of being enforced in a court of law.
But equal pay must be for equal work of equal value. The
               principle of “equal pay for equal work” has no mechanical
               application in every case.
Article 14
permits reasonable
               classification based on qualities or characteristics of
               persons recruited and grouped together, as against those
               who were left out. Of course, the qualities or
               characteristics must have a reasonable relation to the
               object sought to be achieved. In service matters, merit or
               experience can be a proper basis for classification for the
               purposes of pay in order to promote efficiency in
               administration. A higher pay scale to avoid stagnation or
               resultant frustration for lack of promotional avenues is
               also an acceptable reason for pay differentiation. The very
               fact that the person has not gone through the process of
               recruitment may itself, in certain cases, make a difference.
               If the educational qualifications are different, then also the
               doctrine may have no application. Even though persons
               may do the same work, their quality of work may differ.
Where persons are selected by a Selection Committee on
               the basis of merit with due regard to seniority a higher pay
               scale granted to such persons who are evaluated by the
               competent authority cannot be challenged. A classification
               based on difference in educational qualifications justifies a
               difference in pay scales. A mere nomenclature designating
               a person as say a carpenter or a craftsman is not enough to
               come to the conclusion that he is doing the same work as
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
105
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
another carpenter or craftsman in regular service. The
              quality of work which is produced may be different and
              even the nature of work assigned may be different. It is not
              just a comparison of physical activity. The application of
              the principle of “equal pay for equal work” requires
              consideration of various dimensions of a given job. The
              accuracy required and the dexterity that the job may entail
              may differ from job to job. It cannot be judged by the mere
              volume of work. There may be qualitative difference as
              regards reliability and responsibility. Functions may be the
              same but the responsibilities make a difference. Thus
              normally the applicability of this principle must be left to
              be evaluated and determined by an expert body. These are
              not matters where a writ court can lightly interfere.
              Normally a party claiming equal pay for equal work
              should be required to raise a dispute in this regard. In any
              event, the party who claims equal pay for equal work has
              to make necessary averments and prove that all things are
              equal. Thus, before any direction can be issued by a court,
              the court must first see that there are necessary averments
              and there is a proof. If the High Court is, on basis of
              material placed before it, convinced that there was equal
              work of equal quality and all other relevant factors are
              fulfilled it may direct payment of equal pay from the date
              of the filing of the respective writ petition. In all these
              cases, we find that the High Court has blindly proceeded
              on the basis that the doctrine of equal pay for equal work
              applies without examining any relevant factors.”
64.
In
SC Chandra and others vs. State of Jharkhand and others
11

    Markandey Katju, J. in his concurring opinion observed as under:-
“33. It may be mentioned that granting pay scales is a
              purely executive function and hence the court should not
              interfere with the same. It may have a cascading effect
              creating all kinds of problems for the Government and
              authorities. Hence, the court should exercise judicial
              restraint and not interfere in such executive function vide
              Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. Workmen
              (2007)1 SCC 408.
…        …      …
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
106
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
35. In our opinion fixing pay scales by courts by applying
              the principle of equal pay for equal work upsets the high
              constitutional principle of separation of powers between
              the three organs of the State. Realising this, this Court has
              in recent years avoided applying the principle of equal pay
              for equal work, unless there is complete and wholesale
              identity between the two groups (and there too the matter
              should be sent for examination by an Expert Committee
              appointed by the Government instead of the court itself
              granting higher pay).
36. It is well settled by the Supreme Court that only
              because the nature of work is the same, irrespective of
              educational qualification, mode of appointment,
              experience and other relevant factors, the principle of
              equal pay for equal work cannot apply vide
Govt. of W.B.
              v. Tarun K. Roy
(2004) 1 SCC 347.
37. Similarly, in
State of Haryana v. Haryana Civil
              Secretariat Personal Staff Assn.
(2002) 6 SCC 72the
              principle of equal pay for equal work was considered in
              great detail. In paras 9 and 10 of
the said judgment
the
              Supreme Court observed that equation of posts and salary
              is a complex matter which should be left to an expert body.
              The courts must realise that the job is both a difficult and
              time consuming task which even experts having the
              assistance of staff with requisite expertise have found it
              difficult to undertake. Fixation of pay and determination of
              parity is a complex matter which is for the executive to
              discharge.
Granting of pay parity by the court may result
              in a cascading effect and reaction which can have adverse
              consequences vide
Union of India v. Pradip Kumar Dey
(2000) 8 SCC 580.”
65.     In Official Liquidator vs. Dayanand and others 12 Singhvi, J.
speaking for a Bench of three Judges observed as under:-
“94. The principle of equal pay for equal work for men
              and women embodied in
Article 39(d)
was first considered
              in
Kishori Mohanlal Bakshi v. Union of India
AIR 1962
              SC 1139 and it was held that the said principle is not
              capable of being enforced in a court of law.
After 36 years,
              the issue was again considered in
Randhir Singh v. Union
              of India
(1982) 1 SCC 618, and it was unequivocally ruled
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
107
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
that the principle of equal pay for equal work is not an
              abstract doctrine and can be enforced by reading it into the
              doctrine of equality enshrined in
Articles 14
and
16
of the
              Constitution of India.
95. The ratio of
Randhir Singh v. Union of India
(1982) 1
              SCC 618 was reiterated and applied in several cases—
Dhirendra Chamoli v. State of U.P.
(1986) 1 SCC 637,
              Surinder Singh v. CPWD (
1986) 1 SCC 639, Daily Rated
              Casual Labour v. Union of India
(1988) 1 SCC 122,
              Dharwad Distt.
PWD Literate Daily Wage Employees
              Assn. v. State of Karnataka (1990)2 SCC 396 and Jaipal v.
State of Haryana (1988) 3 SCC 354 and it was held that
              even a daily-wage employee who is performing duties
              similar to regular employees is entitled to the same pay.
              However, in Federation of All India Customs and Central
              Excise Stenographers v. Union of India (1988) 3 SCC 91,
              Mewa Ram Kanojia v. AIIMS (1989)2 SCC 235, V.
              Markendeya v. State of A.P (1989) 3 SCC 191, Harbans
              Lal v. State of H.P.(
1989) 4 SCC 459, State of U.P. v. J.P.
              Chaurasia
(
1989) 1 SCC 121, Grih Kalyan Kendra
              Workers’ Union v. Union of India
(1991)1 SCC 619, GDA
              v. Vikram Chaudhary(
1995) 5 SCC 210, State of Haryana
              v. Jasmer Singh
(
1996) 11 SCC 77, State of Haryana v.
              Surinder Kumar
(
1997) 3 SCC 633, Union of India v. K.V.
              Baby
(
1998) 9 SCC 252, State of Orissa v. Balaram Sahu
(
2003) 1 SCC 250, Utkal University v. Jyotirmayee Nayak
(
2003) 4 SCC 760 , State of Haryana v. Tilak Raj
(
2003) 6
              SCC 123, Union of India v. Tarit Ranjan Das
(
2003) 11
              SCC 658 , Apangshu Mohan Lodh v. State of Tripura
(
2004) 1 SCC 119, State of Haryana v. Charanjit Singh
(
2006) 9 SCC 321, Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. v. Dan
              Bahadur Singh
(
2007) 6 SCC 207, Kendriya Vidyalaya
              Sangathan v. L.V. Subramanyeswara
(
2007) 5 SCC 326
              and Canteen Mazdoor Sabha v. Metallurgical & Engg.
              Consultants (India) Ltd.
(2007) 7 SCC 710, the Court
              consciously and repeatedly deviated from the ruling of
Randhir Singh v. Union of India
(1982) 1 SCC 618 and
              held that similarity in the designation or quantum of work
              are not determinative of equality in the matter of pay
              scales and that before entertaining and accepting the claim
              based on the principle of equal pay for equal work, the
              Court must consider the factors like the source and mode
              of recruitment/appointment, the qualifications, the nature
              of work, the value judgment, responsibilities, reliability,
              experience, confidentiality, functional need, etc.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
108
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
…      …     …
99.
In
Canteen Mazdoor Sabha v. Metallurgical & Engg.
                Consultants (India) Ltd
(2007) 7 SCC 710 another two-
                Judge Bench held that simply because some employees of
                a contractor of the alleged head employer are performing
                the task or duties similar to the employees of the head
                employer, it will not entitle such employees to claim
                parity.
100. As mentioned earlier, the respondents were
                employed/engaged by the Official Liquidators pursuant to
                the sanction accorded by the Court under Rule 308 of the
                1959 Rules and they are paid salaries and allowances from
                the company fund. They were neither appointed against
                sanctioned posts nor were they paid out from the
                Consolidated Fund of India. Therefore, the mere fact that
                they were doing work similar to the regular employees of
                the Offices of the Official Liquidators cannot be treated as
                sufficient for applying the principle of equal pay for equal
                work. Any such direction will compel the Government to
                sanction additional posts in the Offices of the Official
                Liquidators so as to facilitate payment of salaries and
                allowances to the company-paid staff in the regular pay
                scale from the Consolidated Fund of India and in view of
                our finding that the policy decision taken by the
                Government of India to reduce the number of posts meant
                for direct recruitment does not suffer from any legal or
                constitutional infirmity, it is not possible to entertain the
                plea of the respondents for payment of salaries and
                allowances in the regular pay scales and other monetary
                benefits on a par with regular employees by applying the
                principle of equal pay for equal work.”
66.
In
State of Punjab and another vs. Surjit Singh and others
13

    Sinha, J. considered all the relevant decisions on the point and stated as

    under:-
“8. Before us, the learned counsel urged that on analysis of
                the decisions rendered by this Court, the following legal
                positions emerge. We would deal with them in seriatim
                and as put forward by the learned counsel:
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
109
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
(1) Mode and manner of selection can be a ground
                 of classification.
In
S.C. Chandra v. State of
                 Jharkhand
(2007) 8 SCC 279 it has been held:
(SCC pp. 290-91, paras 27 & 30)
                 “27. Thus, in
State of Haryana v. Tilak Raj
(2003) 6
                 SCC 123 it was held that the principle can only
                 apply if there is complete and wholesale identity
                 between the two groups. Even if the employees in
                 the two groups are doing identical work they
                 cannot be granted equal pay if there is no complete
                 and wholesale identity e.g. a daily-rated employee
                 may be doing the same work as a regular employee,
                 yet he cannot be granted the same pay scale.
                 Similarly, two groups of employees may be doing
                 the same work, yet they may be given different pay
                 scales if the educational qualifications are different.
                 Also, pay scale can be different if the nature of jobs,
                 responsibilities, experience, method of recruitment,
                 etc. are different.
*      *       *
30.
In
State of U.P. v. Ministerial Karamchari
                 Sangh
(1998) 1 SCC 422 the Supreme Court
                 observed that even if persons holding the same post
                 are performing similar work but if the mode of
                 recruitment, qualification, promotion, etc. are
                 different it would be sufficient for fixing different
                 pay scale. Where the mode of recruitment,
                 qualification and promotion are totally different in
                 the two categories of posts, there cannot be any
                 application of the principle of equal pay for equal
                 work.”
                                                 (emphasis in original)

                 In a given case, mode of selection may be
                 considered as one of the factors which may make a
                 difference.
(See
State of Haryana v. Charanjit
                 Singh
(2006) 9 SCC 321, SCC para 15.)

                 (2) A daily wager working for a long time should be
                 granted pay on the basis of the minimum of a pay
                 scale.
Reliance in this behalf has been placed on
State of Karnataka v. Umadevi
(3)(2006) 4 SCC 1.
It was furthermore urged that this Court should
                 follow the principle
laid down by
the Constitution
                 Bench in Umadevi as such a relief had been granted
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
110
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
by it in respect of daily wagers of the Commercial
                 Taxes Department. The learned counsel submitted
                 that this Court lately, although made a distinction
                 between a direction to regularise the employees
                 who had been working for some time, but keeping
                 in view the constitutional mandate contained in
Article 39-A
of the Constitution of India directed
                 grant of a salary on a scale of pay, particularly in
                 cases where the conduct of the State had been found
                 to be unreasonable, unjust and prejudiced.
…    …      …
17. We must also place on record the fact that in different
              phases of development of law by this Court, relying on or
              on the basis of the said principle, a clear cleavage of
              opinion has emerged. Whereas in the 1970s and 1980s,
              this Court liberally applied the said principle without
              insisting on clear pleadings or proof that the persons
              similarly situated with others are equal in all respects; of
              late also; this Court has been speaking in different voices
              as would be evident from the following. This has been
              noticed specifically by a Division Bench of this Court in
S.C. Chandra v. State of Jharkhand
(2007) 8 SCC 279,
              wherein it was held: (SCC p. 289, para 21)

                 “21. Learned counsel for the appellants have relied
                 on
Article 39(d)
of the Constitution.
Article 39(d)
does not mean that all the teachers working in the
                 school should be equated with the clerks in BCCL
                 or the Government of Jharkhand for application of
                 the principle of equal pay for equal work. There
                 should be total identity between both groups i.e. the
                 teachers of the school on the one hand and the
                 clerks in BCCL, and as such the teachers cannot be
                 equated with the clerks of the State Government or
                 of BCCL.
The question of application of
Article
                 39(d)
of the Constitution has recently been
                 interpreted by this Court in
State of Haryana v.
                 Charanjit Singh
(2006) 9 SCC 321 wherein Their
                 Lordships have put the entire controversy to rest
                 and held that the principle, ‘equal pay for equal
                 work’ must satisfy the test that the incumbents are
                 performing equal and identical work as discharged
                 by employees against whom the equal pay is
                 claimed. Their Lordships have reviewed all the
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
111
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
cases bearing on the subject and after a detailed
                 discussion have finally put the controversy to rest
                 that the persons who claimed the parity should
                 satisfy the court that the conditions are identical and
                 equal and same duties are being discharged by
                 them. Though a number of cases were cited for our
                 consideration but no useful purpose will be served
                 as in Charanjit Singh(2006) 9 SCC 321 all these
                 cases have been reviewed by this Court. More so,
                 when we have already held that the appellants are
                 not the employees of BCCL, there is no question
                 seeking any parity of pay with that of the clerks of
                 BCCL.”
18. Katju, J. in his separate but concurrent judgment
              opined as under: (S.C. Chandra case (2007) 8 SCC 279,
              SCC pp. 290 & 293-94, paras 26 & 35)

                 “26. Fixation of pay scale is a delicate mechanism
                 which requires various considerations including
                 financial capacity, responsibility, educational
                 qualification, mode of appointment, etc. and it has a
                 cascading effect. Hence, in subsequent decisions of
                 this Court the principle of equal pay for equal work
                 has been considerably watered down, and it has
                 hardly ever been applied by this Court in recent
                 years.
*        *      *
35. In our opinion fixing pay scales by courts by
                 applying the principle of equal pay for equal work
                 upsets the high constitutional principle of separation
                 of powers between the three organs of the State.
                 Realising this, this Court has in recent years
                 avoided applying the principle of equal pay for
                 equal work, unless there is complete and wholesale
                 identity between the two groups (and there too the
                 matter should be sent for examination by an expert
                 committee appointed by the Government instead of
                 the court itself granting higher pay).”
19. The Bench in S.C. Chandra case (2007) 8 SCC 279 in
              arriving at the said finding specifically relied upon a three-
              Judge Bench decision of this Court in Charanjit
              Singh(2006) 9 SCC 321, wherein it was held: (
Charanjit
              Singh
case, SCC pp. 329-30 & 334-36, paras 9, 17, 19 &
22)
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
112
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
“9.
In
State of Haryana v. Tilak Raj
(2003) 6 SCC
                 123 it has been held that the principle of equal pay
                 for equal work is not always easy to apply. It has
                 been held that there are inherent difficulties in
                 comparing and evaluating the work of different
                 persons in different organisations or even in the
                 same organisation. It has been held that this is a
                 concept which requires, for its applicability,
                 complete and wholesale identity between a group of
                 employees claiming identical pay scales and the
                 other group of employees who have already earned
                 such pay scales. It has been held that the problem
                 about equal pay cannot be translated into a
                 mathematical formula. It was further held as
                 follows: (SCC p. 127, para 11)

                 ‘11. A scale of pay is attached to a definite post and
                 in case of a daily wager, he holds no posts. The
                 respondent workers cannot be held to hold any
                 posts to claim even any comparison with the regular
                 and permanent staff for any or all purposes
                 including a claim for equal pay and allowances. To
                 claim a relief on the basis of equality, it is for the
                 claimants to substantiate a clear-cut basis of
                 equivalence and a resultant hostile discrimination
                 before becoming eligible to claim rights on a par
                 with the other group vis-à-vis an alleged
                 discrimination. No material was placed before the
                 High Court as to the nature of the duties of either
                 categories and it is not possible to hold that the
                 principle of “equal pay for equal work” is an
                 abstract one.’
                                   *        *       *
17.
In
Bhagwan Dass v. State of Haryana
(1987) 4
                 SCC 634 this Court held that if the duties and
                 functions of the temporary appointees and regular
                 employees are similar, there cannot be
                 discrimination in pay merely on the ground of
                 difference in modes of selection. It was held that the
                 burden of proving similarity in the nature of work
                 was on the aggrieved worker. We are unable to
                 agree with the view that there cannot be
                 discrimination in pay on the ground of differences
                 in modes of selection.
As has been correctly
laid
                 down in
Jasmer Singh
case (1996) 11 SCC 77
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
113
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
persons selected by a Selection Committee on the
                 basis of merit with due regard to seniority can be
                 granted a higher pay scale as they have been
                 evaluated by the competent authority and in such
                 cases payment of a higher pay scale cannot be
                 challenged.
Jasmer Singh
case has been noted with
                 approval in
Tarun K. Roy
case (2004) 1 SC 347.
19. Having considered the authorities and the
                 submissions we are of the view that the authorities
                 in Jasmer Singh (1996) 1 SC 77, Tilak Raj (2003) 6
                 SCC 123, Orissa University of Agriculture &
                 Technology (2003) 5 SCC 188 and Tarun K. Roy
                 (2004) 1 SCC 347 lay down the correct law.
Undoubtedly, the doctrine of ‘equal pay for equal
                 work’ is not an abstract doctrine and is capable of
                 being enforced in a court of law. But equal pay
                 must be for equal work of equal value. The
                 principle of ‘equal pay for equal work’ has no
                 mechanical application in every case.
Article 14
permits reasonable classification based on qualities
                 or characteristics of persons recruited and grouped
                 together, as against those who were left out. Of
                 course, the qualities or characteristics must have a
                 reasonable relation to the object sought to be
                 achieved. In service matters, merit or experience
                 can be a proper basis for classification for the
                 purposes of pay in order to promote efficiency in
                 administration. A higher pay scale to avoid
                 stagnation or resultant frustration for lack of
                 promotional avenues is also an acceptable reason
                 for pay differentiation. The very fact that the person
                 has not gone through the process of recruitment
                 may itself, in certain cases, make a difference. If the
                 educational qualifications are different, then also
                 the doctrine may have no application. Even though
                 persons may do the same work, their quality of
                 work may differ.
Where persons are selected by a
                 Selection Committee on the basis of merit with due
                 regard to seniority a higher pay scale granted to
                 such persons who are evaluated by the competent
                 authority cannot be challenged. A classification
                 based on difference in educational qualifications
                 justifies a difference in pay scales. A mere
                 nomenclature designating a person as say a
                 carpenter or a craftsman is not enough to come to
                 the conclusion that he is doing the same work as
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
114
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
another carpenter or craftsman in regular service.
                 The quality of work which is produced may be
                 different and even the nature of work assigned may
                 be different. It is not just a comparison of physical
                 activity. The application of the principle of ‘equal
                 pay for equal work’ requires consideration of
                 various dimensions of a given job. The accuracy
                 required and the dexterity that the job may entail
                 may differ from job to job. It cannot be judged by
                 the mere volume of work. There may be qualitative
                 difference as regards reliability and responsibility.
                 Functions may be the same but the responsibilities
                 make a difference. Thus normally the applicability
                 of this principle must be left to be evaluated and
                 determined by an expert body. These are not matters
                 where a writ court can lightly interfere. Normally a
                 party claiming equal pay for equal work should be
                 required to raise a dispute in this regard. In any
                 event, the party who claims equal pay for equal
                 work has to make necessary averments and prove
                 that all things are equal. Thus, before any direction
                 can be issued by a court, the court must first see that
                 there are necessary averments and there is a proof.
                 If the High Court is, on basis of material placed
                 before it, convinced that there was equal work of
                 equal quality and all other relevant factors are
                 fulfilled it may direct payment of equal pay from
                 the date of the filing of the respective writ petition.
                 In all these cases, we find that the High Court has
                 blindly proceeded on the basis that the doctrine of
                 equal pay for equal work applies without examining
                 any relevant factors.
*        *      *
22. One other fact which must be noted is that Civil
                 Appeals Nos. 6648, 6647, 6572 and 6570 of 2002
                 do not deal with casual or daily-rated workers.
                 These are cases of persons employed on contract.
                 To such persons the principle of equal pay for equal
                 work has no application. The Full Bench judgment
                 dealt only with daily-rated and casual workers.
                 Where a person is employed under a contract, it is
                 the contract which will govern the terms and
                 conditions of service.
In
State of Haryana v.
                 Surinder Kumar
(1997) 3 SCC 633 persons
                 employed on contract basis claimed equal pay as
                 regular workers on the footing that their posts were
                 interchangeable. It was held that these persons had
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
115
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
no right to the regular posts until they are duly
                 selected and appointed. It was held that they were
                 not entitled to the same pay as regular employees
                 by claiming that they are discharging the same
                 duties. It was held that the very object of selection
                 is to test the eligibility and then to make
                 appointment in accordance with the rules. It was
                 held that the respondents had not been recruited in
                 accordance with the rules prescribed for
                 recruitment.”

                                    … …         …
24. It is no longer in doubt or dispute that grant of the
              benefit of the doctrine of “equal pay for equal work”
              depends upon a large number of factors including equal
              work, equal value, source and manner of appointment,
              equal identity of group and wholesale or complete identity.
              This Court, even recently, in
Union of India v.
              Mahajabeen Akhtar
(2008) 1 SCC 368, categorically held
              as under: (SCC pp. 376-77, paras 19 & 24)

                 “19. The question came to be considered in a large
                 number of decisions of this Court wherein it
                 unhesitatingly came to the conclusion that a large
                 number       of    factors,   namely,      educational
                 qualifications, nature of duty, nature of
                 responsibility, nature of method of recruitment, etc.
                 will be relevant for determining equivalence in the
                 matter of fixation of scale of pay. (See Finance
                 Deptt.
v. W.B. Registration Service Assn.1993 Supp
                 (1) SCC 153, State of U.P. v. J.P. Chaurasia (1989)
                 1 SCC 121, Union of India v. Pradip Kumar Dey
                 (2000)8 SCC 580 and State of Haryana v. Haryana
                 Civil Secretariat Personal Staff Assn. (2002) 6 SCC
72)
                                    *        *      *
24. On the facts obtaining in this case, therefore, we
                 are of the opinion that the doctrine of equal pay for
                 equal work has no application. The matter may have
                 been different, had the scales of pay been
                 determined on the basis of educational
                 qualification, nature of duties and other relevant
                 factors. We are also not oblivious of the fact that
                 ordinarily the scales of pay of employees working
                 in different departments should be treated to be on a
                 par and the same scale of pay shall be
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
116
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
recommended. The respondent did not opt for her
                 services to be placed on deputation. She opted to
                 stay in the government service as a surplus. She was
                 placed in list as Librarian in National Gallery of
                 Modern Art. She was designated as Assistant
                 Librarian and Information Assistant. Her pay scale
                 was determined at Rs 6500-10,500 which was the
                 revised scale of pay. Her case has admittedly not
                 been considered by the Fifth Pay Revision
                 Commission. If a scale of pay in a higher category
                 has been refixed keeping in view the educational
                 qualifications and other relevant factors by an
                 expert body, no exception thereto can be taken.
                 Concededly it was for the Union of India to assign
                 good reasons for placing her in a different scale of
                 pay.
It has been done. We have noticed hereinbefore
                 that not only the essential educational qualifications
                 are different but the nature of duties is also
                 different.
Article 39(d)
as also
Article 14
of the
                 Constitution of India must be applied, inter alia, on
                 the premise that equality clause should be invoked
                 in respect of the people who are similarly situated
                 in all respects.”

                 How the said principle is to be applied in different
                 fact situation is the only question. Whereas this
                 Court refused to apply the said principle as the
                 petitioners therein did not have the requisite
                 qualification; in
Union of India v. Dineshan K.K
(2008) 1 SCC 586, the application of the rule was
                 advocated to be left to an expert body, stating:
(
Dineshan K.K.
case) SCC pp. 592-93, para 16)

                    “16.
Yet again in a recent decision in State of
                    Haryana v. Charanjit Singh(2006) 9 SCC
                    321 a Bench of three learned Judges, while
                    affirming the view taken by this Court in
                    State of Haryana v. Jasmer Singh (1996) 11
                    SCC 77, Tilak Raj (2003) 6 SCC 123, Orissa
                    University of Agriculture & Technology v.
Manoj K. Mohanty (2003) 5 SCC 188 and
                    Govt. of W.B. v. Tarun K. Roy
(2004) 1 SCC
                    347 has reiterated that the doctrine of equal
                    pay for equal work is not an abstract doctrine
                    and is capable of being enforced in a court of
                    law. Inter alia, observing that equal pay must
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
117
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
be for equal work of equal value and that the
                     principle of equal pay for equal work has no
                     mathematical application in every case, it has
                     been held that
Article 14
permits reasonable
                     classification based on qualities or
                     characteristics of persons recruited and
                     grouped together, as against those who are
                     left out. Of course, the qualities or
                     characteristics must have a reasonable
                     relation to the object sought to be achieved.
                     Enumerating a number of factors which may
                     not warrant application of the principle of
                     equal pay for equal work, it has been held
                     that since the said principle requires
                     consideration of various dimensions of a
                     given job, normally the applicability of this
                     principle must be left to be evaluated and
                     determined by an expert body and the court
                     should not interfere till it is satisfied that the
                     necessary material on the basis whereof the
                     claim is made is available on record with
                     necessary proof and that there is equal work
                     of equal quality and all other relevant factors
                     are fulfilled.”
25. It may be that in Charanjit Singh (2006) 9 SCC 321,
              Variava, J., speaking for the three-Judge Bench, has used
              the word “may” in regard to the source of recruitment but
              the same has to be considered as a relevant factor as the
              operative part of the judgment shows. Charanjit Singh,
              therefore, does not militate against the other decisions of
              this Court where the mode and manner of appointment has
              been considered to be a relevant factor for the purpose of
              invocation of the said doctrine. We are bound by the
              aforementioned three-Judge Bench decision.”
67.
In
Steel Authority of India Limited and others vs. Dibyendu

    Bhattacharya14 Dr. Chauhan, J.
stated:
“23. This Court while deciding a similar issue in
State of
              W.B. v. W.B. Minimum Wages Inspectors Assn.
(2010) 5
              SCC 225, held as under: (SCC p. 232, paras 18-20)
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
118
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
“18. … The evaluation of duties and
                   responsibilities    of   different    posts    and
                   determination of the pay scales applicable to such
                   posts and determination of parity in duties and
                   responsibilities are complex executive functions,
                   to be carried out by expert bodies. Granting parity
                   in pay scale depends upon comparative job
                   evaluation and equation of posts.
19. The principle ‘equal pay for equal work’ is not
                   a fundamental right but a constitutional goal. It is
                   dependent on various factors such as educational
                   qualifications, nature of the jobs, duties to be
                   performed, responsibilities to be discharged,
                   experience, method of recruitment, etc.
                   Comparison merely based on designation of posts
                   is misconceived. Courts should approach such
                   matters with restraint and interfere only if they are
                   satisfied that the decision of the Government is
                   patently irrational, unjust and prejudicial to any
                   particular section of employees.
20. The burden to prove disparity is on the
                   employees claiming parity….”

                                      …       …       …
30. In view of the above, the law on the issue can be
              summarised to the effect that parity of pay can be claimed
              by invoking the provisions of
Articles 14
and
39(d)
of the
              Constitution of India by establishing that the eligibility,
              mode of selection/recruitment, nature and quality of work
              and duties and effort, reliability, confidentiality, dexterity,
              functional need and responsibilities and status of both the
              posts are identical. The functions may be the same but the
              skills and responsibilities may be really and substantially
              different. The other post may not require any higher
              qualification, seniority or other like factors. Granting
              parity in pay scales depends upon the comparative
              evaluation of job and equation of posts. The person
              claiming parity, must plead necessary averments and prove
              that all things are equal between the posts concerned. Such
              a complex issue cannot be adjudicated by evaluating the
              affidavits filed by the parties.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
119
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
31. The onus to establish the discrimination by the
                  employer lies on the person claiming the parity of pay. The
                  Expert Committee has to decide such issues, as the
                  fixation of pay scales, etc. falls within the exclusive
                  domain of the executive. So long as the value judgment of
                  those who are responsible for administration i.e. service
                  conditions, etc. is found to be bona fide, reasonable, and
                  on intelligible criteria which has a rational nexus of
                  objective of differentiation, such differentiation will not
                  amount to discrimination. It is not prohibited in law to
                  have two grades of posts in the same cadre. Thus, the
                  nomenclature of a post may not be the sole determinative
                  factor. The courts in exercise of their limited power of
                  judicial review can only examine whether the decision of
                  the State authorities is rational and just or prejudicial to a
                  particular set of employees. The court has to keep in mind
                  that a mere difference in service conditions does not
                  amount to discrimination. Unless there is complete and
                  wholesale/wholesome identity between the two posts they
                  should not be treated as equivalent and the court should
                  avoid applying the principle of equal pay for equal work”.
68.     Analysis of the decisions
referred to above
shows that this Court

    has accepted following limitations or qualifications to the applicability of

    the doctrine of ‘equal pay for equal work’:-
i)         The doctrine of ‘equal pay for equal work’ is not
                       an abstract doctrine.
ii)        The principle of ‘equal pay for equal work’ has no
                       mechanical application in every case.
iii)       The very fact that the person has not gone through
                       the process of recruitment may itself, in certain
                       cases, makes a difference.
iv)        The application of the principle of ‘equal pay for
                       equal work’ requires consideration of various
                       dimensions of a given job.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
120
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
v)     Thus normally the applicability of this principle
                   must be left to be evaluated and determined by an
                   expert body. These are not matters where a writ
                   court can lightly interfere.
vi)    Granting pay scales is a purely executive function
                   and hence the court should not interfere with the
                   same. It may have a cascading effect creating all
                   kinds of problems for the Government and
                   authorities.
vii)   Equation of posts and salary is a complex matter
                   which should be left to an expert body.
viii) Granting of pay parity by the court may result in a
                   cascading effect and reaction which can have
                   adverse consequences.
ix)    Before entertaining and accepting the claim based
                   on the principle of equal pay for equal work, the
                   Court must consider the factors like the source and
                   mode of recruitment/appointment.
x)     In a given case, mode of selection may be
                   considered as one of the factors which may make a
                   difference.
69.     The latest decision on which heavy reliance was placed on behalf

    of Niyojit Teachers is the one rendered by a Bench of two Judges in
State

    of Punjab and others vs. Jagjit Singh and others
2. The issues that arose

    for consideration were set out in para 5 as under:-
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
121
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
“5. The issue which arises for our consideration is:
whether temporarily engaged employees (daily-wage
              employees, ad hoc appointees, employees appointed on
              casual basis, contractual employees and the like), are
              entitled to minimum of the regular pay scale, along with
              dearness allowance (as revised from time to time) on
              account of their performing the same duties which are
              discharged by those engaged on regular basis, against
              sanctioned posts? The Full Bench (
Avtar Singh vs. State
              of Punjab
, 2011 SCC Online P & H 15326) of the High
              Court, while adjudicating upon the above controversy had
              concluded, that such like temporary employees were not
              entitled to the minimum of the regular pay scale, merely
              for reason, that the activities carried on by daily wagers
              and the regular employees were similar. However, it
              carved out two exceptions, and extended the minimum of
              the regular pay to such employees.
The exceptions
              recorded by the Full Bench of the High Court in the
              impugned judgment are extracted hereunder: (
Avtar Singh
case, SCC OnLine P&H para 37)

                  “(1) A daily wager, ad hoc or contractual
                  appointee against the regular sanctioned posts, if
                  appointed after undergoing a selection process
                  based upon fairness and equality of opportunity
                  to all other eligible candidates, shall be entitled to
                  minimum of the regular pay scale from the date
                  of engagement.
(2) But if daily wagers, ad hoc or contractual
                  appointees are not appointed against regular
                  sanctioned posts and their services are availed
                  continuously, with notional breaks, by the State
                  Government or its instrumentalities for a
                  sufficient long period i.e. for 10 years, such daily
                  wagers, ad hoc or contractual appointees shall be
                  entitled to minimum of the regular pay scale
                  without any allowances on the assumption that
                  work of perennial nature is available and having
                  worked for such long period of time, an equitable
                  right is created in such category of persons. Their
                  claim for regularisation, if any, may have to be
                  considered separately in terms of legally
                  permissible scheme.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
122
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
(3) In the event, a claim is made for minimum
                  pay scale after more than three years and two
                  months of completion of 10 years of continuous
                  working, a daily wager, ad hoc or contractual
                  employee shall be entitled to arrears for a period
                  of three years and two months.”
70.     While considering the aforesaid issue this Court had noted all the

    decisions on the point of pay parity from
Randhir Singh vs. Union of

    India31
and then in para 42 arrived at conclusions. The limitations or

    qualifications to the application of doctrine of ‘equal pay for equal work’

    were also considered in para 42 and from para 43 onwards, Claim for pay

    parity raised by temporary employees (differently designated as work-
charge, daily-wage, casual, ad hoc, contractual and the like) was also

    considered. After discussion on the point, the matter was concluded thus:-
“57. There is no room for any doubt that the principle of
              “equal pay for equal work” has emerged from an
              interpretation of different provisions of the Constitution.
              The principle has been expounded through a large number
              of judgments rendered by this Court, and constitutes law
              declared by this Court. The same is binding on all the
              courts in India under
Article 141
of the Constitution of
              India. The parameters of the principle have been
              summarised by us in para 42 hereinabove. The principle of
              “equal pay for equal work” has also been extended to
              temporary employees (differently described as work-
              charge, daily wage, casual, ad hoc, contractual, and the
              like). The legal position, relating to temporary employees
              has been summarised by us, in para 44 hereinabove. The
              above legal position which has been repeatedly declared,
              is being reiterated by us yet again.”
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
123
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
71.     The qualifications to the applicability of the doctrine of ‘equal pay

    for equal work’ which have long been recognised and acknowledged in

    the decisions
referred to above
are well established. The decision in

    Jagjit Singh2 again reiterated some of those qualifications.          These

    limitations or qualifications have not been diluted but stand re-inforced.
72.     We may, at this stage, deal with the submission advanced on

    behalf of the State that the decision in Jagjit Singh did not take into

    account the earlier decisions rendered by this Court in
State of Punjab vs.

    Joginder Singh28
and
Zabar Singh vs. The State of Haryana29 and others
.
In the first case, Respondent Joginder Singh was working as a

    teacher in a District Board High School in Hoshiarpur before 1.10.1957.
By reason of government decision taken in September, 1957, which came

    into effect on 1.10.1957 all teachers like Respondent Joginder Singh,

    employed in District Board and Municipal Board Schools, became State

    employees. Before such decision was taken, the State had decided to have

    two categories of teachers working in the State service. 15% of the total

    strength of teachers were put in a middle scale of a salary scale while the

    rest of 85% were put in a lower scale. The former, thus, had better

    chances of promotion to further levels. After taking over the schools run

    by    District   Board   and   Municipal    Boards,    which    was   called
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
124
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
‘provincialization’ the teachers like Respondent Joginder Singh, though

    became State employees, were part of cadre of provincialized teachers

    which was distinct from the cadre of State teachers. A decision was also

    taken not to make any further appointments in the provincialized cadre

    and thus said cadre was to be a dying or vanishing cadre. It was also

    decided that the provincialized cadre would stand bifurcated on the same

    pattern of 15:85 as was done in the State cadre but any retirements in the

    provincialized cadre would not result in fresh appointments in that cadre

    but the appropriate number would get added to the State cadre and fresh

    appointments would be made only in the State cadre. It must be noted

    that the employees in both the cadres were given the same pay-scale but

    their chances of promotion were completely different. The submission

    that with the passage of time, the strength of provincialized cadre would

    keep reducing and as such, the chances of promotion and being part of

    15% group would keep diminishing and as such the employees in

    provincialized cadre would be put to prejudice was accepted by the High

    Court. It was observed by this Court in
State of Punjab vs. Joginder

    Singh28
as under:-
“22. It now remains to consider a point which was raised
              that the State cannot constitute two Services consisting of
              employees doing the same work but with different scales
              of pay or subject to different conditions of service and that
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
125
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
the constitution of such services would be violative of
Article 14.
Underlying this submission are two postulates:
(1) equal work must receive equal pay, and (2) if there be
              equality in pay and work there have to be equal conditions
              of service. So far as the first proposition is concerned it
              has been definitely ruled out by this Court in
Kishori
              Mohanlal v. Union of India
(1962 SC AIR 1139) Das
              Gupta, J. speaking for the Court said:
“The only other contention raised is that there is
                  discrimination between Class I and Class II
                  officers inasmuch as though they do the same
                  kind of work their pay scales are different. This,
                  it is said, violates
Article 14
of the Constitution.
                  If this contention had any validity, there could
                  be no incremental scales of pay fixed dependent
                  on the duration of an officer’s service. The
                  abstract doctrine of equal pay for equal work
                  has nothing to do with
Article 14.
The
                  contention that
Article 14
of the Constitution
                  has been violated, therefore, also fails.”

              The second also, is, in our opinion, unsound. If, for
              instance, an existing service is recruited on the basis of a
              certain qualification, the creation of another service for
              doing the same work, it might be in the same way but with
              better prospects of promotion cannot be said to be
              unconstitutional, and the fact that the rules framed permit
              free transfers of personnel of the two groups to places held
              by the other would not make any difference. We are not
              basing this answer on any theory that if a government
              servant enters into any contract regulating the conditions
              of his service he cannot call in aid the constitutional
              guarantees because he is bound by his contract. But this
              conclusion, rests on different and wider public grounds
              viz.
that the government which is carrying on the
              administration has necessarily to have a choice in the
              constitution of the services to man the administration and
              that the limitations imposed by the constitution are not
              such as to preclude the creation of such services. Besides,
              there might, for instance, be a temporary recruitment to
              meet an exigency or an emergency which is not expected
              to last for any appreciable period of time. To deny to the
              Government the power to recruit temporary staff drawing
              the same pay and doing the same work as other permanent
              incumbents within the cadre strength but governed by
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
126
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
different rules and conditions of service, it might be
              including promotions, would be to impose restraints on the
              manner of administration which we believe was not
              intended by the Constitution. For the purpose of the
              decision of this appeal the question here discussed is
              rather academic but we are expressing ourselves on it in
              view of the arguments addressed to us.
23. Besides the disparity in the chances of promotion
              between teachers of the provincialised and the State Cadre
              created by Rule 3 of the impugned rules, the learned
              Judges of the High Court have held that there was a
              further disparity by reason of the teachers of the State
              Cadre being borne on a Divisional list, while under the
              rules the inter se seniority and promotions of
              “provincialised” teachers was determined districtwise. It
              was pointed out by the learned Solicitor-General for the
              appellant that the State Cadre was kept on a Divisional
              basis because of the very small number of the members of
              that Service, whereas it was found administratively
              inconvenient to have a similar geographical classification
              of members of the provincialised service and for that
              reason and no other, districtwise seniority, promotion and
              transfers was laid down for provincialised teachers.
Learned counsel for the respondent did not rely on this
              reasoning of the learned Judges of the High Court in
              deciding the case now under appeal. We therefore do not
              consider it necessary to make any further reference to it.
24. As we have stated already, the two services started as
              independent Services. The qualifications prescribed for
              entry into each were different, the method of recruitment
              and the machinery for the same were also different and the
              general qualifications possessed by and large by the
              members of each class being different, they started as two
              distinct classes. If the Government Order of September 27,
              1957 did not integrate them into a single service, it would
              follow that the two remained as they started as two distinct
              services. If they were distinct services, there was no
              question of inter se seniority between members of the two
              services, nor of any comparison between the two in the
              matter of promotion for founding an argument based upon
Article 14
or
Article 16(1).
They started dissimilarly and
              they continued dissimilarly and any dissimilarity in their
              treatment would not be a denial of equal opportunity, for it
              is common ground that within each group there is no
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
127
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
denial of that freedom guaranteed by the two articles. The
              foundation therefore of the judgment of the learned Judges
              of the High Court that the impugned rules created two
              classes out of what was formerly a single class and
              introduced elements of discrimination between the two,
              has no factual basis if, as we hold the order of September
              27, 1957 did not effectuate a complete integration of the
              two Services. On this view it would follow that the
              impugned rules cannot be struck down as violative of the
              Constitution.
25. Before concluding it is necessary to point out that, as
              explained earlier, the source of the prejudice caused by the
              impugned rules to the “provincialised” teachers lies not in
              the fact that the two cadres were kept separate but on
              account of the fact that the “provincialised” cadre was
              intended to be gradually extinguished. The real question
              for consideration would therefore be whether there was
              anything unconstitutional in the Government decision in
              the matter. In other words, had the respondent and his
              class any fundamental right to have their cadre strength
              maintained undiminished? This is capable of being
              answered only in the negative. If their cadre strength
              became diminished, the proportion thereof who could be
              in the grade viz. 15% of the total strength being
              predetermined, there must necessarily be a progressive
              reduction in the number of selection posts. In other words
              a mere reduction of the cadre strength would bring about
              that result and unless the respondent could establish that
              the Government were bound in Law to fill up all vacancies
              in the provincialised cadre by fresh recruitment to that
              cadre and thus keep its strength at the level at which it was
              on October 1, 1957, he should fail. It is manifest that such
              a contention is obviously untenable.”
73.
In the second decision it was contended that the decision of the

    Constitution Bench in Joginder Singh’s case required reconsideration and

    as such a Bench of seven Judges was constituted which dealt with the

    matter in
Zabar Singh and others vs. The State of Haryana
and others29.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
128
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
The discussion in paragraphs 27 to 30, 32 to 33 and 35, 36 and 40 was as

    under:-
“27. The position which emerges from the aforesaid
              analysis is that prior to October 1, 1957, the two categories
              of teachers, those serving in the local bodies schools and
              those in government schools were distinct. Though the
              minimum qualifications and scales of pay might have been
              uniform, there were differences in other matters such as
              methods of recruitment, retiral benefits, rules for
              determining seniority, etc. It is also clear that whereas a
              government school teacher was liable to be transferred to
              any place throughout the Commissioner’s division, a local
              body teacher could only be transferred within the
              territorial limits of that body. Appointments in Local
              Bodies schools, no doubt, were made by Inspectors
              appointed by government, but they could do so only in
              consultation with the Chairman or President of such a
              body. That was the position also in regard to disciplinary
              matters. Further, although the prescribed minimum
              qualifications were the same, in point of fact 50% or more
              of the Local Bodies teachers were non-matriculates and
              quite a number of such non-matriculate teachers were also
              without the qualification of Basic Training as against a
              few non-matriculates and none without such Basic
              Training in the Government schools. In any event the mere
              fact that minimum qualifications and scales of pay were
              the same could not mean, in view of other dissimilar
              conditions of service, that the two categories of teachers
              formed one class. Indeed, Mr Tarkunde conceded, as is
              even otherwise clear, that prior to October 1, 1957,
              teachers in local bodies and in government schools did not
              form one class.
28. So far as the position on October 1, 1957, is
              concerned, as already noticed, the Government schools
              teachers were and continued to be governed by the Rules
              of 1955, which, no doubt, came into force with effect from
              May 30, 1957 and which prescribed the minimum
              qualifications as Matriculation in addition to Basic
              Training. Government school teachers who, under the
              1937-Rules, were recruited by the Director of Public
              Instruction, were since 1954 selected by the Selection
              Board after their initial pay had been raised from Rs 47½
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
129
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
to Rs 50 per month. The Local Bodies teachers, on the
              other hand, were recruited by Inspectors in consultation
              with the Presidents or Chairmen of those bodies till July
              1957 when fresh appointments in vacancies falling in
              those schools were stopped. Under the new Rules of 1955,
              Government provided for a selection grade for 15% posts.
              In fact, such a grade was given to them even before 1955-
              Rules were framed and the new rules merely continued
              that benefit. Broadly speaking, the position on October 1,
              1957, was that the two categories of teachers formed
              distinct classes. Though they were performing similar
              duties, they could not be said to form one integrated class.
29. The question then is, whether in spite of the
              Government school teachers and the provincialised
              teachers forming two distinct classes on October 1, 1957,
              they were, during the period between that date and
              February 13, 1961, integrated into one class, which was
              split up into two cadres by those Rules? It would perhaps
              appear from the statement of the Education Minister made
              at the Press Conference on the eve of provincialisation that
              Government had in the beginning the idea of bringing
              about integration between the two types of teachers. But
              no such concrete decision was ever taken. A few dates at
              this stage may clarify the position. As aforesaid, the
              decision to provincialise the local bodies schools was
              taken on July 19, 1957. In pursuance of that decision.
              Government on August 2, 1957, placed a ban against any
              fresh recruitment of teachers in the Local Bodies schools.
              On September 27, 1957, the Governor sanctioned the
              scheme of provincialisation and at the same time
              sanctioned 20,000 and odd new posts to absorb the
              existing staff of the provincialised schools. Simultaneously
              with the provincialisation, the Government on October 1,
              1957, gave the same scales of pay to the provincialised
              teachers as were available to government schools teachers.
              The problem, however, was how to fix and adjust the
              provincialised teachers in government service and fix their
              inter se seniority as also their seniority vis-a-vis the
              government schools teachers.
30. It is fairly clear from the memorandum published
              along with 1961-Rules that Government was seeking to
              discover a proper formula to solve these questions. This
              process was, it appears, going on since November 23,
              1959, when alternative proposals were framed for
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
130
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
discussion and those proposals were communicated to the
              recognised associations of the teachers. Since no agreed
              consensus was forthcoming from the teachers themselves,
              Government formed its own decisions as formulated by
              the Secretary, Education Department in his letter of
              January 27, 1960, to the Director of Public Instruction.
              These decisions were made around three basic principles:
(i) that the two cadres will continue to be separate as
              before; (ii) that the provincialised cadre would be a
              diminishing cadre; and (iii) following upon (i) and (ii),
              vacancies arising as a result of promotions, retirements,
              resignations, etc., in the provincialised cadre should be
              transferred to the State cadre so that ultimately after about
              thirty years the provincialised cadre would vanish
              altogether leaving the State cadre alone in the field. These
              events leave no doubt that at no time after October 1,
              1957, any decision for integrating the two categories of
              teachers was taken although after October 1, 1957, new
              teachers were appointed and posted in both the
              provincialised as well as government schools who carried
              out the same duties and were given the same scales of pay
              as the provincialised teachers. But such new teachers had
              to be deemed to have been appointed in the State cadre by
              reason of the two principles decided upon by the
              Government, (i) the diminishing character of the
              provincialised cadre, and (ii) that cadre having been frozen
              from even before October 1, 1957. Thus, the two
              categories continued to be separate and were never
              integrated. The Government schools teachers and those
              appointed after October 1, 1957, were governed by 1955-
Rules while the provincialised teachers continued to be
              presumably governed by the District Boards’ Rules until
              new rules were framed for them by Government. Thus the
              Rules of 1961 could not be said to have split up the
              teachers, who formed one integrated cadre into two new
              cadres. These Rules had to be made as the inter-seniority
              among provincialised teachers appointed by different local
              bodies in different districts had to be determined and their
              position in the service had to be adjusted. The Rules were
              framed on the principles formulated in the decisions taken
              by Government on July 27, 1960.
…           …               …
32. It will be observed that though the provincialised
              teachers were given the same scales of pay as the teachers
              in the State cadre, the Rules provided that unlike the latter
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
131
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
they could be transferred only within the District where
              they were serving. Those who were already confirmed
              prior to the provincialisation were also deemed to be
              confirmed under these Rules. That meant that for purposes
              of their seniority their entire service, including service
              before such confirmation would be taken into account,
              except that inter se seniority of those promoted to the
              selection grade was to be determined from the date of their
              confirmation in that grade.
33. Thus, although the teachers in both the cadres were
              given the same scales of pay and did the same kind of
              work and those appointed after October 1, 1957, were
              posted and worked in the same provincialised schools as
              teachers in the provincialised cadre, the fact was that the
              State cadre teachers were and continued to be governed by
              1955-Rules while the provincialised teachers were
              governed by 1961-Rules. This fact, coupled with the fact
              that one was a district and the other a divisional cadre,
              meant that the two cadres continued to be separate cadres
              as before. The principal effect of the new Rules, however,
              was that the number of posts in the cadre would gradually
              diminish and together with that the total number of posts
              in the selection grade, despite the percentage of fifteen
              remaining intact. But that was the inevitable result of the
              freezing of the cadre, on the one hand, and its being a
              diminishing cadre on the other. The State cadre became
              correspondingly an expanding cadre, the total number of
              posts for all the schools, Government and provincialised,
              remaining more or less constant.
…       …       …
35. The controversy thus really turns on the question
              whether Government was bound to integrate the two
              categories of teachers into one and not to continue them as
              separate cadres as before, and whether its refusal to do so
              meant violation either of
Article 14
or
Article 16.
It is true
              that notwithstanding this Court upholding the validity of
              the 1961-Rules in
Punjab v. Joginder
, the then
              Government of Punjab in 1965 adopted a uniform running
              scale for both the cadres of Rs 60-Rs 175 with a common
              15% for higher grade posts. But that decision has nothing
              to do with the question of the validity of 1961-Rules, and
              if those Rules were valid, with the validity of the decision
              of the new State of Haryana to implement those Rules
              instead of the common running scale adopted by Punjab
              State.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
132
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
36. The principles on which discrimination and breach of
Articles 14
and
16
can be said to result have been by now
              so well settled that we do not think it necessary to repeat
              them here once again. As already seen, ever since 1937
              and even before, the two categories of teachers have
              always remained distinct, governed by different sets of
              rules, recruited by different authorities and having,
              otherwise than in the matters of pay-scales and
              qualifications, different conditions of service. This
              position remained as late as February 13, 1961. On that
              day whereas the State cadre teachers were governed by
              1955-Rules, rules had yet to be framed for the
              provincialized teachers. The two cadres thus being
              separate, Government was not bound to bring about an
              integrated cadre especially in view of its decision of
              making the provincialized cadre a diminishing one and
              bringing about ultimately through that principle one cadre
              only in the field in a phased manner. If through historical
              reasons the teachers had remained in two separate
              categories, the classification of the provincialized teachers
              into a separate cadre could not be said to infringe
Article
              14
or
Article 16.
It was also not incumbent on the
              Government to frame the 1961-Rules uniformly applicable
              to both the categories of teachers, firstly, because a rule-
              framing authority need not legislate for all the categories
              and can select for which category to legislate (See
Sakhawat Ali v. State of Orissa
(1955) 1 SCR 1004 ;
Madhubhai Amathalal Gandhi v. Union of India
(
1961) 1
              SCR 191 and Vivian Joseph Ferreira v. Municipal
              Corporation of Greater Bombay
(1972) 1 SCC 70) and
              secondly, because it had already come to a decision of
              gradually diminishing the provincialized cadre so that
              ultimately only the State cadre would remain in the
              service. That was one way of solving the intricate
              difficulty of inter-seniority. There can be no doubt that if
              there are two categories of employees, it is within
              Government’s power to recruit in one and not recruit in the
              other. There is no right in a government employee to
              compel it to make fresh appointments in the cadre to
              which he belongs. It cannot also be disputed that
              Government had the power to make rules with
              retrospective effect, and therefore, could provide therein
              that appointments made between October 1, 1957 and
              February 13, 1961, shall be treated as appointments in the
              State cadre. That had to be done for the simple reason that
              the provincialized cadre was already frozen even before
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
133
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
October 1, 1957 and Government had decided not to make
                 fresh appointments in that cadre since that cadre was to be
                 a diminishing one.
… …          …
40. Regarding Respondents 37 to 96, all of them were
                 appointed after provincialisation. They are junior in
                 service than the petitioners and some others in the
                 provincialised cadre. But their case is not comparable, for,
                 they were appointed under 1955-Rules and through the
                 recruitment authorities prescribed under those rules i.e. the
                 Selection Board. Obviously, they could not be appointed
                 in the provincialised cadre as that had been frozen even
                 before October 1, 1957. They may have been posted in the
                 provincialised schools but that cannot mean that they were
                 appointed in that cadre. Their appointment being in a
                 separate cadre, it is impossible to say that they were
                 similarly situated. By reason of their recruitment in the
                 State cadre, their conditions of service, including their
                 promotional chances and their seniority would be
                 governed by 1955-Rules and would only be comparable to
                 those in that cadre only.”
74.     Heavy reliance was placed on the aforesaid decisions by the

    learned Attorney General and the learned counsel who appeared for the

    State. It was submitted that though the teachers in provincialized cadre

    and the State cadre were doing similar duties and discharging identical

    responsibilities and though, they were as a matter of fact drawing similar

    pay and emoluments, the services were considered to be distinct and

    different.     The feature that one of the cadres was to be a dying or

    vanishing cadre was also present in those cases. It was accepted by this

    Court that the State was within its Rights to let a particular service or

    cadre be a dying or vanishing cadre and keep making appointments in
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
134
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
other service while maintaining distinct identities of both the services,

    even when the teachers coming from the both the cadres were doing

    identical jobs.   Though, strictly speaking, those two matters did not

    involve concept of ‘equal pay for equal work’, these cases do point that

    the State can validly make such distinction or differentiation. The learned

    Attorney General and the learned counsel appearing for the State were,

    therefore, justified in placing reliance on these two decisions. It is also

    evident that the subsequent judgments have not noted the decisions of this

    Court in Joginder Singh28 and Zabar Singh29. For the purposes of present

    discussion, we will proceed on the basis that even when the teachers from

    both the cadres were discharging similar duties and responsibilities, the

    decision of the State government to maintain different identities of these

    two cadres was not found objectionable by this Court and further there

    could be inter se distinctions between these two cadres. It is true that both

    the cadres were enjoying same pay structure but the submission that the

    chances of promotion ought to be similar was not accepted by the Court.
75.     We must also consider observations of this Court in paragraph 12

    in its decision in
Secretary, Finance Department and others vs. West

    Bengal Registration Service Association
and others8, which bring out how

    a ‘pay structure’ is evolved. The relevant portion of said paragraph was:-
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
135
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
12. … … Ordinarily a pay structure is evolved keeping in
              mind several factors, e.g., (i) method of recruitment, (ii)
              level at which recruitment is made, (iii) the hierarchy of
              service     in    a    given    cadre,     (iv)     minimum
              educational/technical qualifications required, (v) avenues
              of promotion, (vi) the nature of duties and responsibilities,
(vii) the horizontal and vertical relativities with similar
              jobs, (viii) public dealings, (ix) satisfaction level, (x)
              employer’s capacity to pay, etc. We have referred to these
              matters in some detail only to emphasise that several
              factors have to be kept in view while evolving a pay
              structure and the horizontal and vertical relativities have to
              be carefully balanced keeping in mind the hierarchical
              arrangements, avenues for promotion, etc. Such a carefully
              evolved pay structure ought not to be ordinarily disturbed
              as it may upset the balance and cause avoidable ripples in
              other cadres as well. … …”
76. We, therefore, have to proceed on the following basic premise:-
a)   It was open to the State to have two distinct cadres namely that of

           ‘Government Teachers’ and ‘Niyojit Teachers’ with Government

           Teachers being a dying or vanishing cadre. The incidents of these

           two cadres could be different. The idea by itself would not be

           discriminatory.
b)   The pay structure given to the Niyojit Teachers was definitely lower

           than what was given to Government Teachers but the number of

           Government Teachers was considerably lower than the number of

           Niyojit Teachers.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
136
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
As stated above, presently there are just about 66,000

           Government Teachers in the State as against nearly 4 lakh Niyojit

           Teachers. There is scope for further appointment of about 1 lakh

           teachers which could mean that as against 5 lakh teachers the

           number of State Teachers would progressively be going down.
c)   The parity that is claimed is by the larger group with the lesser

           group as stated above which itself is a dying or a vanishing cadre.
d)   The mode of recruitment of Niyojit Teachers is completely different

           from that of the Government Teachers as stated above.
77.     If a pay structure is normally to be evolved keeping in mind factors

    such as “method of recruitment” and “employer’s capacity to pay” and if

    the limitations or qualifications to the applicability of the doctrine of ‘equal

    pay for equal work’ admit inter alia the distinction on the ground of

    process of recruitment, the stand taken on behalf of the State Government

    is not unreasonable or irrational. Going by the facts indicated above and

    the statistics presented by the State Government, it was an enormous task

    of having the spread and reach of education in the remotest corners.
Furthermore, the literacy rate of the State which was lagging far behind the

    national average was also a matter which required attention. The advances
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
137
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
made by the State on these fronts are quite evident. All this was possible

    through rational use of resources. How best to use or utilise the resources

    and what emphasis be given to which factors are all policy matters and in

    our considered view the State had not faltered on any count. As
laid down

    by
this Court in the decisions in Joginder Singh28 and Zabar Singh29, the

    State was justified in having two different streams or cadres. The attempt

    in making over the process of selection to Panchayati Raj Institutions and

    letting the cadre of State Teachers to be a dying or vanishing cadre were

    part of the same mechanics of achieving the spread of education. These

    issues were all part of an integrated policy and if by process of judicial

    intervention any directions are issued to make available same salaries and

    emoluments to Niyojit Teachers, it could create tremendous imbalance and

    cause great strain on budgetary resources.
78.     It is true that the budgetary constraints or financial implications can

    never be a ground if there is violation of Fundamental Rights of a citizen.
Similarly, while construing the provisions of the
RTE Act
and the Rules

    framed thereunder, that interpretation ought to be accepted which would

    make the Right available under
Article 21A
a reality. As the text of the

    Article shows the provision is essentially child-centric. There cannot be

    two views as regards the point that Free and Compulsory Education ought
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
138
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
to be quality education. However, such premise cannot lead to the further

    conclusion that in order to have quality education, Niyojit Teachers ought

    to be paid emoluments at the same level as are applicable to the State

    Teachers. The modalities in which expert teachers can be found, whether

    by giving them better scales and/or by insisting on threshold ability which

    could be tested through examinations such as TET Examination are for the

    Executive to consider.
79.     In our considered view, there has been no violation of the Rights of

    the Niyojit Teachers nor has there been any discrimination against them.
We do not find that the efforts on part of the State Government could be

    labelled as unfair or discriminatory. Consequently, the submissions as to

    how the funds could and ought to be generated and what would be the

    burden on the State Government and the Central Government, do not arise

    for consideration.
In our view, great strides have been made by the State in the last

    decade. It has galvanised itself into action and not only achieved the

    objectives of having schools in every neighbourhood but has also

    succeeded in increasing the literacy rate. It has also succeeded in having

    more girl children in the stream of education and consequently the TFR, as

    indicated above, has also improved to a great extent. If these are the
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
139
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
benefits or rewards which the society stands to gain and achieve, the State

    ought to be given appropriate free play. The tabular charts placed on

    record by the State also show continuous improvements made by the State

    in the packages made available to the Niyojit Teachers. Said attempts also

    show that the State is moving in the right direction and the gap which is

    presently existing between the Government Teachers and the Niyojit

    Teachers would progressively get diminished.          Considering the large

    number of Niyojit Teachers as against the Government Teachers, the steps

    taken by the State as evident from various tabular charts presented by it are

    in the right direction. At this juncture, any directions as have been passed

    by the High Court, may break even tempo which the State has consistently

    been able to achieve.
80.     At the same time, the submission that at the initial stage the Niyojit

    Teachers are given such emoluments which are lesser than peons and

    clerks in the same school is a matter which requires attention. It is true that

    after having put in two years of service, the emoluments made available to

    Niyojit Teachers show some improvements but the disparity at the initial

    stage is more than evident. The State may certainly be entitled to devise a

    pay structure for Niyojit Teachers and the courts may not interfere in

    policy matters but, if there is an imbalance of the nature as presented
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
140
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
before this Court, the matter raises concern. The teachers must be entitled

    to decent emoluments. In the chart referred to in para 32(c) above, after

    two years of service with proposed enhancement as per recommendations

    of the three member Committee the scales payable to Niyojit Teachers

    would show some increase as against those in respect of peons and clerks.
The State may consider raising the scales of Niyojit Teachers at least to the

    level suggested by the Committee, without insisting on any test or

    examination advised by the Committee. Those who clear such test or

    examination, may be given even better scales. This is only a suggestion

    which may be considered by the State.
81.     In the circumstances, we allow these appeals preferred by the State,

    set aside the judgment and order under appeal and dismiss the Writ

    Petitions preferred on behalf of Niyojit Teachers.
82.     In the end, we must express our sincere gratitude for the assistance

    rendered by all the learned counsel who appeared in the matters. We are

    grateful to all the learned counsel.
Civil Appeal No…… of 2019 @ SLP(C)No.20 of 2018 etc.
141
State of Bihar and Ors. vs. The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle Committee,
Munger & Ors
.
83.     These appeals are allowed in aforesaid terms. No order as to costs.
………………………….J.
                                                     (Abhay Manohar Sapre)



                                                    ………………………….J.
                                                       (Uday Umesh Lalit)
    New Delhi;
May 10, 2019.
REPORTABLE

        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

        CIVIL APPEAL No. 4862 OF 2019
      (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.20 of 2018)




The State of Bihar & Ors.               ….Appellant(s)




                    VERSUS


The Bihar Secondary Teachers Struggle
Committee, Munger & Ors.              ….Respondent(s)


                       WITH

          CIVIL APPEAL No.4872 OF 2019
      (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.708 of 2018)
          CIVIL APPEAL No.4867 OF 2019
      (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.238 of 2018)
          CIVIL APPEAL No.4866 OF 2019
      (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.242 of 2018)
          CIVIL APPEAL No.4864 OF 2019
      (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.169 of 2018)
          CIVIL APPEAL No.4865 OF 2019
      (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.162 of 2018)
         CIVIL APPEAL No.4869 OF 2019
      (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.254 of 2018)
1
CIVIL APPEAL No.4863 OF 2019
      (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.164 of 2018)
         CIVIL APPEAL No.4868 OF 2019
      (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.251 of 2018)
         CIVIL APPEAL No.4870 OF 2019
      (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.240 of 2018)
                         AND
          CIVIL APPEAL No.4871 OF 2019
      (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No.572 of 2018)


                JUDGMENT

Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.    I have had the advantage of going through an

elaborate, well considered and scholarly drafted

judgment proposed by my esteemed brother Justice

Uday Umesh Lalit.
2.    I entirely agree with the reasoning and the

conclusion, which my erudite brother has drawn,

which are based on remarkably articulate process of

reasoning. However, having regard to the nature of

the controversy involved in these appeals, which

was   ably   argued   by   senior   lawyers   in   their
2
respective submissions, I wish to add a few words of

mine.
3.   This case reminds me of the apt observations

made by an eminent Judge of this Court, Vivian

Bose J., in his concurring opinion in the case of
Bidi Supply Co. vs. Union of India & Ors.
, AIR

1956 SC 479. The learned Judge made these

observations while examining the object and the

scope of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
4.   In his immaculately and distinctive style of

writing, the learned Judge made the observations in

paras 15 and 16, which read as under:
“15. With the utmost respect all this seems
     to me to break down on a precise analysis,
     for even among equals a large discretion is
     left to judges in the matter of punishment,
     and to the police and to the State whether to
     prosecute or not and to a host of officials
     whether to grant or withhold a permit or a
     licence. In the end, having talked learnedly
     round and around the article we are no wiser
     than when we started and in the end come
     back to its simple phrasing—

           “The State shall not deny to any
           person equality before the law or
3
the equal protection of the laws
      within the territory of India.”
16. The truth is that it is impossible to be
precise, for we are dealing with intangibles
and though the results are clear it is
impossible to pin the thought down to any
precise analysis.
Article 14
sets out, to my
mind, an attitude of mind, a way of life,
rather than a precise rule of law. It embodies
a general awareness in the consciousness of
the people at large of something that exists
and which is very real but which cannot be
pinned down to any precise analysis of fact
save to say in a given case that it falls this
side of the line or that, and because of that
decisions on the same point will vary as
conditions vary, one conclusion in one part
of the country and another somewhere else;
one decision today and another tomorrow
when the basis of society has altered and the
structure of current social thinking is
different. It is not the law that alters but the
changing conditions of the times and
Article
14
narrows down to a question of fact which
must be determined by the highest Judges in
the land as each case arises. (See on this
point Lord Sumner’s line of reasoning in
Bowman vs. Secular Society Ltd., 1917 AC
406. Always there is in these cases a clash of
conflicting claims and it is the core of the
judicial    process     to    arrive    at    an
accommodation between them. Anybody can
decide a question if only a single principle is
in issue. The heart of the difficulty is that
there is hardly any question that comes
before the Courts that does not entail more
than one so­called principle. As Judge
Leonard Hand of the United States Court of
Appeals said of the American Constitution.”
4
5.    The aforesaid observations of Justice Vivian

Bose, therefore, should always be kept in mind

while deciding the question of the nature arising in

every case including the one at hand.
6.   As rightly held by brother Lalit J., the issue

involved in these appeals is answered by two

decisions of the Constitution Bench of this Court,

namely,
State of Punjab vs. Joginder Singh
,

1963 Suppl(2) SCR 169 and Zabar Singh & Ors. vs

State of Haryana and Ors. (1972 ) 2 SCC 275.
7.   In my view also, the issue, which is subject

matter of these appeals, has to be decided keeping

in view the law laid down by this Court in the

aforementioned two decisions of the Constitution

Bench.
8.   I may, at this stage, refer to a decision in
N.

Meera Rani vs. Govt. of Tamil Nadu & Anr.
, AIR

1989 SC 2027.
In this case, it was argued that the
5
question involved in the appeal is governed by the

decision of the Constitution Bench in
Rameshwar

Shaw vs. District Magistrate, Burdwan
, AIR 1964

SC 334. It is pertinent to mention that the same

question was also decided by this Court but it was

decided    subsequent      to   the   decision   of   the

Constitution Bench in many other cases. The later

decisions on the same question were, however,

rendered by the Benches comprised of lesser

number of the Judges.
9.   Justice J.S. Verma (as His lordship then was),

speaking for Three Judge Bench, held that the

question involved in the appeal before them has to

be, therefore, decided in the light of law
laid down

by
the Constitution Bench because firstly, it is a

decision   rendered   by    the   Constitution   Bench;
Secondly, it is prior in point of time; and thirdly, the

law
laid down in
later decisions has to be read in
6
the light of the law
laid down by
the Constitution

Bench. This is what His Lordship said in para 13:
“13. We may now refer to the decisions on
      the basis of which this point is to be decided.
      The starting point is the decision of a
      Constitution Bench in Rameshwar Shaw v.
      District Magistrate, Burdwan, AIR 1964 SC
334. All subsequent decisions which are cited
      have to be read in the light of this
      Constitution Bench decision since they are
      decisions by Benches comprising of lesser
      number of Judges. It is obvious that none of
      these subsequent decisions could have
      intended taking a view contrary to that of
      the Constitution Bench in Rameshwar Shaw
      case.”
10.     Keeping in view the law
laid down in
N.

Meera Rani
(supra), I am of the view that the

question involved in these appeals needs to be

decided in the light of the law
laid down by
two

decisions of the Constitution Bench rendered in
Joginder Singh
(supra) and
Zabar Singh
(supra).
11.   Though     the    learned     counsel     for     the

respondents made sincere attempts on their part in

contending that the law
laid down in
Joginder
7
Singh
(supra) and
Zabar Singh
(supra) has no

application to the question involved in these appeals

because the facts involved therein are not similar to

the facts involved in these appeals, we are afraid, we

cannot accept this submission.
In my opinion, it is

not so.
12.   Brother Lalit,J.   has dealt with this question

elaborately in paras 72 to 74 of his opinion. I

respectfully concur with his reasoning contained

therein.
13.    I am also, therefore, of the view that the

appeals deserve to be allowed and are accordingly

allowed. The impugned judgment is set aside and

the writ petitions filed by the respondents before the

High Court are dismissed.
.………...................................J.
                          [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]

New Delhi;
May 10, 2019
8