[Cites
11
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Maharashtra Archery Association vs Rahul Mehra on 1 May, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2348
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
Ajay Rastogi
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
1


                                                                          REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.             OF 2019
                                  (Arising out of SLP(C) Diary No.29577/2017)

                         Maharashtra Archery Association              …..Appellant(s)

                                                   :Versus:

                         Rahul Mehra and Ors.                        ....Respondent(s)
                                                     WITH

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.                  OF 2019
                                 (Arising out of SLP(C) Diary No.28788/2017)

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.                OF 2019
                                  (Arising out of SLP(C) Diary No.29202/2017)




                                                JUDGMENT
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   The respondent No.1 has filed a public interest litigation

                         before the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi, being Writ
Signature Not Verified
Petition (Civil) No.195 of 2010, raising issues of transparency
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2019.05.01
17:32:20 IST
Reason:
in governance and functioning of the Archery Association of
2
India (for short the “AAI”). Several interim orders came to be

passed in the said writ petition which are not relevant for

answering the controversy in the present proceedings. The

present special leave petitions emanate from the order dated

10th August, 2017 passed by the High Court in C.M. No.10461

of 2017 filed by respondent No.1 (writ petitioner) inter alia for

appointment of Administrator/Returning Officer including to

conduct elections of AAI in compliance with the High Court’s

order dated 15th December, 2016, as well as stay of notice

dated 2nd March, 2017 of the AAI, calling for an emergency

meeting of the General Council on 15 th March, 2017 and, in

the alternative, to stay the outcome of such meeting if held, till

the Court appoints an Administrator/Returning Officer.                The

High Court after hearing the parties passed the following

order:
“20. In the circumstances, the Court deems it appropriate
     that the affairs of the Archery Association of India (AAI) be
     brought under the supervision of an Administrator till its
     Constitution is amended and elections are held in terms of
     this Court’s order dated 15.12.2016. The Court also deems it
     appropriate that for the present, the affairs and elections of
     AAI be conducted by a person of public eminence with
     significant experience in sports affairs and administration
3
and elections. We are of the opinion that Mr. S.Y. Quraishi,
Former Chief Election Commissioner of India, who has also
served as Secretary in the Ministry of Youth Affairs and
Sports, Government of India would be a suitable person to
be appointed as the Administrator­cum­Returning Officer for
discharge of the following functions:
(i)    To resolve the issue of disaffiliation of such
members/units of AAI as on 15.12.2016, within a month
from today by giving them two weeks’ notice and if their
membership can be regularized in terms of the ‘unamended’
Constitution, it shall be so regularized;
(ii)   the Electoral College of the AAI shall be prepared and
elections shall be held in six weeks thereafter. This elected
body shall carry out the amendments to the Constitution to
bring it in conformity with the National Sports Code.
(iii)  Thereafter, a fresh round of elections, shall be carried
out as per the amended Constitution and in terms of the
National Sports Code, to ensure that age and tenure
restrictions and due representation of the sports persons are
strictly complied with. The entire exercise shall be carried
out within a period of 4 months from today.
(iv)   The AAI shall make available to the Administrator an
appropriate office space and facilities for the discharge of the
aforesaid directions and make available such staff and
personnel as the Administrator may express the need for.
Alternatively, the Administrator may appoint such personnel
to assist him in the aforesaid matter and expenses towards
the same shall be borne by the AAI.
(v)    Till the elections are conducted and results declared in
consonance of the National Sports Code and in compliance
with the preceding directions, the AAI shall not make any
new financial commitments except with the prior approval of
the Administrator. Routine expenses of AAI too shall be
defrayed, with the due prior approval of the Administrator.
21. The applicant and the AAI shall seek consent of Mr.
S.Y. Quraishi, of his acceptance of the aforementioned
responsibility.
22. The Court would consider fixing an honorarium for the
Administrator’s assignment at a later date.
23. The application is disposed off in the above terms.”
4
3.   This decision is assailed by way of an appeal [arising out

of SLP(C) Diary No.29577/2017] filed by Maharashtra Archery

Association (for short “MAA”), appeal [arising out of SLP(C)

Diary No.28788/2017] filed by the Archery Association of

India (for short “AAI”), and the appeal [arising out of SLP(C)

Diary   No.29202/2017]     filed   by   Kerala   State   Archery

Association (for short “KSAA”). When these special leave

petitions came up for hearing on 18 th September, 2017, the

Court recorded the submission of the appellant(s) that the

constitution of AAI stood amended in accordance with the

National Sports Development Code of India, 2011 (for short

“the Sports Code”). The counsel appearing for Union of India

prayed for time to verify the said position. Later, this Court

directed the Ministry of Sports to file an affidavit regarding

compliance, on or before 26th October, 2017. Eventually, the

affidavit of the competent officer of the Ministry of Youth

Affairs and Sports, Government of India, came to be filed. It is

not necessary for us to dilate on the contents of the said

affidavit. For, the matters were heard on 4th December, 2017
5
whence, after hearing the parties, the Court proceeded to pass

the following order:
“Heard Mr. Sunil Gupta, learned senior counsel and Mr.
     Salwan, learned counsel for the petitioners; Mr. Narasimha,
     learned Additional Solicitor General for the Union of India
     and Mr. Rahul Mehra, respondent appearing in person. It is
     submitted by Mr. Narasimha, learned Additional Solicitor
     General that though certain amendments have been carried
     out in the constitution, yet they are not in consonance with
     the National Sports Development Code, 2011 (NSDCI) of the
     MYAS. In the affidavit filed by the Union of India, certain
     deviations have been pointed out. They read as follows :
‘i. The NSDCI provides that the election of office bearer
         of an NSF shall be conducted in accordance with the
         Model Election Bye­laws of the NSDCI, copy whereof is
         annexed herewith and marked ANNEXURE R/3 [PAGE
         12 TO 51]. As per the provisions of the said election bye­
         laws, the Office Bearer and Members of the Managing
         Committee shall be elected by secret ballot. However,
         the Constitution of the AAI provides that election of
         office bearers of the AAI shall be held as per the rules
         and regulations which may be adopted by the General
         Council, and there is no mention in the Constitution of
         the AAI that such election shall be held by secret ballot.
ii. As per the principles underlying the NSDCI, an
         affiliated member of a National Sports Federation (NSF),
         i.e., a full member of the NSF, should be represented by
         two delegates in the General Council (by whatever name
         called). The Constitution of AAI shows each State
         Association has been given representation of three
         delegates in the General Council i.e. one representative
         over and above the minimum of two representatives.

         iii. The NSDCI provides that an NSF shall give affiliation
         as a full member to a State Association if such State
         Association has at least 50% of the district units
         functioning in that State as per Para 3.10 and Para 3.19
         of Annexure­II of the Code. But no such stipulation is
         found in the eligibility conditions for affiliation of State
         Associations as members of the AAI.
6
iv. The Constitution of AAI also makes a provision that
    up to three persons may be bestowed the title of
    Honorary Life President of AAI, without voting rights, in
    recognition of the services rendered by past Presidents
    of AAI. The NSDCI is silent on the matter.’

Mr. Gupta, learned senior counsel and Mr. Salwan, learned
counsel for the petitioners fairly stated that the amendment
shall be carried out keeping in view the said deviations
within a week hence.
In view of the aforesaid, it is directed that
amendment shall be incorporated by treating it as an
order of the Court. After the constitution comes into
force, election shall be held under the supervision of Mr.
S.Y. Quraishi who has been appointed as the
Administrator by the High Court, within four weeks
therefrom. Mr. Quraishi is requested to see that the
election takes place in accordance with the amended
constitution which stands amended by incorporation by
virtue of order passed by this Court, as agreed to by
learned counsel for the parties.
The amended constitution shall be filed before this
Court and a copy whereof be supplied to Mr. Narasimha,
learned Additional Solicitor General and Mr Rahul
Mehra, respondent­in­person. But the filing of the
amended constitution will not postpone the election, as
directed hereinabove. To elaborate, amendment shall be
incorporated stating the same as an order of the Court
within a week hence and thereafter Mr. Quraishi shall
proceed to hold the election in accordance with the
constitution which will come into existence by virtue of
the order passed today.
Mr. Quraishi shall be at liberty to see that the
constitution of the Association is strictly in accordance
with the Code and thereafter proceed with the election.
If he has any reservation, he is at liberty to move this
Court.
List after eight weeks.”
                                           (emphasis supplied)
7
4.   As a matter of fact, the contentious issues regarding the

relevant amendment carried out to the Constitution of AAI

stood resolved in terms of this order. Further, this Court

issued certain peremptory directions to the Administrator to

ensure compliance thereof within the timeline specified in the

order. The appeals could have been disposed of in terms of

the said order itself, but the same were kept pending with a

sanguine hope that the directions given therein would be

complied with within the time­frame specified in the order and

that the compliance report would be submitted by the

Administrator in that regard. The appellant (AAI) filed an

application before this Court on 11 th December, 2017, being

I.A. No.135882 of 2017 and placed on record the final

amended Constitution in terms of the order of this Court dated

4th December, 2017. The appellant (AAI) then filed a separate

I.A. No.132436 of 2018 on 13 th September, 2018, seeking

directions to hold elections as per the Court approved

Constitution.
8
5.      The Administrator, Mr. S.Y. Quraishi, appointed by the

High Court finally filed a compliance report in the Registry of

this    Court   on    24th    September,        2018,     being       document

No.139081/2018         in    appeal      arising    from     SLP(C)      Diary

No.29577/2017, together with the new Constitution (for short

“Administrator’s Constitution”). Be it noted that, admittedly,

the Constitution filed by the Administrator contained several

other     amendments         than       the     permitted        or   approved

amendments in terms of the order of this Court dated 4 th

December, 2017. It is also not in dispute that no formal

application has been moved by the Administrator (appointed

by the High Court) before this Court seeking liberty to amend

the Constitution beyond the amendments referred to in the

order of this Court dated 4th December, 2017.                     Further, no

direction    was     sought    from      this     Court     to    permit   the

Administrator to conduct elections on the basis of the

amendments incorporated by him in the new Constitution.

The grievance of the appellants is that this amended
9
Administrator’s Constitution was not even circulated to the

constituent members until it came to be filed in this Court.
6.   Thus, the grievance of the appellant(s) is that the

Administrator had carried out amendments beyond what was

permitted and approved by this Court in terms of the order

dated 4th December, 2017, that too without any discussion

with the members and stakeholders. That Constitution

however, came to be notified for the first time on 4 th October,

2018, through e­mail to the members ­ State Association(s)

along with a notice for election for the office bearers of AAI to

be conducted by the Administrator on 22nd December 2018, at

11.00 A.M.
7.   The appellant (AAI) immediately rushed to this Court by

way of I.A. No.15611 of 2018, seeking directions to the

Administrator to conduct elections in conformity with the

Court approved Constitution and seeking further directions to

the Union of India to restore recognition of the AAI which was

de­recognised on 17th December, 2012. That application was

moved for passing suitable directions by this Court on 19 th
10
November, 2018, when the Court, after hearing the parties,

passed the following order:
“Since the election programme has already commenced in
     terms of notice dated 4th October, 2018, the same should
     proceed as per law uninterrupted.
We clarify that the result of the election will be subject
     to the outcome of this application.
The grievance made in this application inter alia about
     improper amendments to the Constitution can be considered
     at a later stage.
List this application in the second week of February, 2019.”
                                                   (emphasis supplied)
8.   Resultantly, the election process was concluded in

accordance with the Administrator’s Constitution and not as

per the amended Constitution in terms of the order of this

Court   dated       4th   December,    2017.       As   a    result,   the

representatives of the appellant Association(s) could not

contest the election due to the restrictions prescribed in the

Administrator’s Constitution.
9.   The Union of India has also filed a separate application

being I.A. No.15103/2019 on 24th January, 2019, raising

objections    to    the   Administrator’s      Constitution    being    in

violation of the Sports Code. Even the Indian Olympic

Association        (for   short    “IOA”)   has      filed    document
11
No.24274/2018 on 8th February, 2019, objecting to the

Administrator’s Constitution being in violation of the Sports

Code and the Constitution of the World Archery. Another

application has been filed by Kerala State Archery Association

(“KSAA”), being I.A. No.30011/2019 on 18 th February, 2019,

for directions to declare that the elections conducted by the

Administrator on the basis of the Administrator’s Constitution,

is null and void and to appoint a new Returning Officer to hold

fresh elections in consonance with the Court approved

Constitution, in terms of the order dated 4 th December, 2017.

The appellant (MAA) has also filed an application on 1 st March,

2019, being I.A. No.3792/2019 seeking a direction to declare

the Administrator’s Constitution     as void ab initio and to

appoint a Returning Officer/Observer to conduct fresh election

for AAI in terms of the Court approved Constitution as per

order dated 4th December, 2017. The Union of India, as per

the liberty given by this Court, has filed an affidavit on 5 th

March, 2019 highlighting the deviations in the Administrator’s

Constitution and the Sports Code.
12
10.   During the course of hearing of these matters, before

closing the matter for judgment, the Court called upon the

Administrator, appointed by the High Court, to submit a flow

chart pointing out the steps taken by him from 4 th December,

2017 till 22nd December, 2018, until the election of the new

body. The Administrator has accordingly filed a compilation

giving details about the follow up steps taken by him in that

regard.
11. We have heard Mr. K.M. Natarajan, learned Additional

Solicitor General appearing for Union of India, Mr. Shyam

Divan, Mr. Sunil Gupta, Mr. Siddharth Dave, Mr. Shekhar

Naphade, Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned counsel

appearing for the respective parties and Mr. Rahul Mehra,

respondent No.1 appearing­in­person.
12. The core issue to be answered in these proceedings is

about the purport of the order passed by this Court on 4th

December, 2017. The background in which the said order

came to be passed after hearing the parties, leaves no manner

of doubt that it had modified the impugned order of the High
13
Court dated 10th August, 2017. Further, the contentious

issues regarding the proposed amendment in the Constitution

stood answered to that extent. In that, this Court passed a

peremptory order not only for approving the proposed

amendments, as noted in the order dated 4 th December, 2017,

but also directed the Administrator to conduct elections in

consonance thereto within a period of four weeks, after

incorporating the amendments within one week from the date

of the order. That was the limited mandate given to the

Administrator. Indeed, this Court had given liberty to the

Administrator to seek clarification or directions if and when

necessary. That liberty, however, by no stretch of imagination

could be mistaken as authorising the Administrator to carry

out   amendments    in   the    Constitution   beyond   the   four

amendments referred to in the order dated 4 th December,

2017, much less to do so unilaterally without any prior notice

to all the stakeholders and due deliberations with them as

mandated by the Constitution of the AAI. In any case, any

further amendments to the Constitution could be incorporated
14
only after taking prior permission of this Court which was still

in seisen of the matter. The Administrator was also ill­advised

not to seek extension of time for completion of election

process, which was to be completed not later than five weeks

from 4th December, 2017.
13. The stand taken by the Administrator is that the order

dated 4th December, 2017 gave him liberty to ensure that the

Constitution of the Association is strictly in accordance with

the Sports Code and only thereafter to proceed with the

election. Indeed, liberty was given to the Administrator in the

last paragraph of the order dated 4th December, 2017.

However, the order if read as a whole and keeping in mind the

spirit of the order, it had directed the Administrator to ensure

timely completion of election within five weeks from the date of

the order on the basis of four amendments approved by the

Court, which were required to be incorporated by the

Administrator within one week from the date of the order. No

more and no less. For any other doubt or deviation, the

Administrator was obliged to seek clarification and appropriate
15
directions from this Court, before the expiry of the timeline

given   in   the    order   dated      4th   December,   2017.   The

Administrator, however, merely filed a compliance report on

24th September, 2018, in the Registry of this Court without

attempting even once to invite the attention of this Court

thereto. The Administrator has also filed a further report in

terms of the order dated 28th March, 2019. On perusal of the

said reports, we may hasten to accept the plea that the steps

taken by the Administrator were under a mistaken belief ­ that

he had the authority to proceed in the manner that he did and

including    to    amend    the    Constitution   beyond   the   four

amendments referred to in the order dated 4 th December,

2017.   It is not a case of defiance or disobedience of the

Court’s order as such.
14. The appellant(s) would contend that even if it is not a

case of intentional disobedience of the order of this Court by

the Administrator, however, since steps taken by him are not

in conformity with the spirit of the directions given by the

Court, the same be declared as null and void and non est.
16
For, his actions had caused serious prejudice owing to the

        unilateral, unauthorised action taken by him, including of

        having deprived the members of the appellant Association(s)

        from representing and participating in the election process of

        the apex body, which they were otherwise entitled to under the

        Constitution, as approved by this Court in terms of the order

        dated 4th December, 2017. All this having been done by the

        Court appointed Administrator, in the guise of an order of this

        Court, the Court must step in and nullify all the actions taken

        by the Administrator which are beyond the scope of the order

        dated 4th December, 2017. To buttress this submission,

        reliance has been placed on
Delhi Development Authority

        Vs. Skipper Construction Co. (P) Ltd. and Anr.
1,
Anita

        International Vs. Tungabadra Sugar Works Mazdoor

        Sangh and Ors.2
, and
Bihari Lal Vs. Shankar Das and

        Ors.3
1
(1996) 4 SCC 622 (paragraph 19)
2
(2016) 9 SCC 44 (paragraphs 54, 55)
3
AIR 1925 Lahore 309
17
15. We are in agreement with the stand taken by the

appellant(s) that the Administrator could have taken only such

steps as were permitted by this Court vide order dated 4 th

December, 2017, in their letter and spirit. Indisputably, the

additional amendments incorporated by the Administrator

have resulted in denial of right to represent in and contest

elections of the AAI for the existing members. Notably, even

the direction given by the High Court whilst appointing the

Administrator vide the impugned judgment, in no way gave

authority to the Administrator to amend the Constitution, but

was limited to conduct elections on the basis of the

Constitution as it stood then. As ordered by the High Court, it

was for the newly elected body to take steps in the right

earnest to amend the Constitution to bring it in line with the

National Sports Code on specified matters and then to conduct

fresh elections on the basis of such amended Constitution. In

other words, the Constitution could be amended only in

accordance with law, which means by the elected body after

interacting with all the stakeholders and members. The
18
Administrator had no power to amend the Constitution, much

        less unilaterally, except for the four amendments approved by

        this Court, for which no further formality was required to be

        undertaken.          The Administrator was obliged to conduct

        elections on the basis of such amended Constitution in terms

        of the order of this Court dated 4 th December, 2017. No more

        and no less.
16. Appellants have rightly invited our attention to the

        decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Smt.

        Damyanti Naranga Vs. The Union of India and Ors.4
,

        which had approved the exposition in
G.K. Ghose and Anr.

        Vs. E.X. Joseph.5 In
that case, this Court had held that the

        right to form an Association was conditioned by the existence

        of the recognition of the said Association by the Government.

        In that case the Court had held:
“It is not disputed that the Fundamental Rights guaranteed
               by
Article 19
can be claimed by Government servants.
Article
               33
which confers power on the Parliament to modify the
               rights in their application, to the Armed Forces, clearly
               brings out the fact that all citizens, including Government
               servants, are entitled to claim the rights guaranteed by
Article 19.
Thus, the validity of the impugned rule has to be
4
(1971) 1 SCC 678
5
(1963) Supp. 3 SCR 789
19
judged on the basis that the respondent and his co­
     employees are entitled to form Associations or Unions. It is
     clear that Rule 4­B imposes a restriction on this right. It
     virtually compels a Government servant to withdraw his
     membership of the Service Association of Government
     servants as soon as recognition accorded to the said
     Association is withdraw or if, after the Association is formed,
     no recognition is accorded to it within six months. In other
     words, the right to form an Association is conditioned by the
     existence of the recognition of the said Association by the
     Government. If the Association obtains the recognition and
     continues to enjoy it, Government servants can become
     members of the said Association; if the Association does not
     secure recognition from the Government or recognition
     granted to it is withdrawn, Government servants must cease
     to be the members of the said Association. That is the plain
     effect of the impugned rule.”
17. This     dictum     was     quoted     with    approval     by     the

Constitution Bench to conclude that the right to form an

Association included the right to its continuance and any law

altering the composition of the Association compulsorily will

be a breach of the right to form the Association. Thus

understood, the steps taken by the Administrator beyond the

scope of the authority        bestowed upon him in terms of the

order of this Court dated 4th December, 2017, cannot be

validated by the Court but must be treated as non est in law. It

would have been a different matter if the Administrator had

presented the additional amendments before this Court and
20
invited this Court to approve the same after hearing the

        concerned parties.
18. Be that as it may, the question as to whether the

        amendments incorporated by the Administrator are justified

        and proper or, so to speak, essential as per the exposition of

        this Court in Board of Control for
Cricket Vs. Cricket

        Association of Bihar and Ors.6
, need not detain us. For, the

        further amendments to the Constitution could be effected only

        in the manner provided by the Constitution of the AAI

        including in terms of the order dated 4th December, 2017. It is

        thus not necessary for us to examine as to whether, in fact,

        there is any deviation or not from the dispensation predicated

        in the National Sports Code, as contended by the respondents

        and the counsel appearing for the Administrator.
19. For the time being, without any hesitation, we are of the

        considered opinion that all steps taken by the Administrator,

        including the elections conducted by him on the basis of the

        Constitution (as amended by him), will have to be treated as

        null and void and non est in law. The parties will have to be
6
(2016) 8 SCC 535
21
relegated to the position as on 4th December, 2017, consequent

to incorporation of the four amendments approved in terms of

the same order. After carrying out those four amendments in

the Constitution, the election will have to be conducted to

constitute the new body, which would then take steps to

introduce further amendments to the Constitution, if so

required, to bring it in line with the National Sports Code, after

giving an opportunity to all concerned. Only after the

amendments are accepted and approved, fresh elections be

conducted for constituting a new body in conformity with such

duly amended Constitution.
20. In reference to certain apprehensions expressed by the

respondents due to reactions of the World Archery body, we

must observe that the controversy cannot be adjudicated on

the basis of perception of the World Archery body. Similarly,

we do not wish to expand the scope of the present proceedings

as the main writ petition is still pending before the High Court

of Delhi, where all issues can be deliberated and answered

appropriately. While doing so, the High Court, no doubt, would
22
be guided by the exposition in
Sheela Barse Vs. Union of

         India and Ors.7
,
K. Murugan Vs. Fencing Association of

         India, Jabalpur and Ors.8
, and Board of Control for

         Cricket in
India Vs. Cricket Association of Bihar and Ors,9
on which reliance has been placed by the counsel representing

         the newly elected body of AAI and the respondents, for issuing

         appropriate directions in a public interest litigation. In other

         words, the High Court will examine all aspects of the matter

         on their own merits in accordance with law.
21. We make it clear that the High Court may also consider

         the stand taken by the appellant(s) and Union of India that the

         decision of this Court in Board of Control for
Cricket
(supra)10 will be of no avail to the present case, because the

         National Sports Code takes within its fold fifty­two disciplines

         of sports and Cricket is not one of the scheduled sports. In

         other words, the dispensation to be followed must be in

         conformity with the National Sports Code in so far as AAI is
7
(1988) 4 SCC 226 (para 1)
8
(1991) 2 SCC 412 (para 12)
9
(2015) 3 SCC 251 (para 100­103)
10
(2016) 8 SCC 535
23
concerned. We keep this issue open to be considered at the

appropriate stage.
22. In view of the above, we dispose of these appeals and all

the applications on the following basis:
(I)    We declare that the Constitution of AAI is amended only

        to the extent of four amendments referred to in the

        order dated 4th December, 2017, treating it as amended

        by an order of this Court, without requiring to comply

        with any other formality. Rest of the amendments are

        declared as null and void and non est in law. The same,

        at best, may be pursued as a proposal to be considered

        after the newly elected body initiates a procedure for

        carrying out further amendments to the Constitution of

        AAI as per law.
(II)   We further declare that all steps taken by the

        Administrator on the basis of the Administrator’s

        Constitution, including the elections conducted on 22 nd

       December, 2018, are null and void and non est in law.
 (III) All concerned parties are relegated to the position as it

        stood after the incorporation of the four amendments
24
referred to in the order dated 4 th December, 2017.
Further,   the   High        Court­appointed   Administrator

    stands relieved in terms of this order. The elected body,

    in office, would continue to function hereafter as a

    Committee of Administrators appointed in terms of this

    order. We deem it appropriate to allow this Committee

    to continue in office as nothing adverse has been

    brought to our notice for their continuation until the

    newly elected body takes over. However, the Committee

    shall discharge only routine and day­to­day activities

    and shall not take any policy decision or create new

    financial liability, until the newly elected body takes

     over.
(IV) The election for constituting the new elected body be

    completed by the aforementioned Committee appointed

    by this Court within four weeks from today and the

    election   process   must       be   conducted   strictly   in

    accordance with the Constitution as amended in terms

    of order dated 4th December, 2017.
25
(V)   The newly elected body, after taking over the office,

       shall move a proposal for further amendment of the

       Constitution to bring it in line with the National Sports

       Code and that process be taken to its logical end

      expeditiously.
(VI) Any issue arising from such amendment may be raised

       before the High Court where the main matter i.e. Writ

       Petition (Civil) No.195/2010 is pending. That writ

       petition be decided on its own merits and in accordance

       with law.
(VII) The Committee shall submit a compliance report before

       the High Court immediately after the newly elected body

       takes over the office but not later than six weeks from

       today. Issues concerning the said report may also be

       considered by the High Court on their own merits in

     accordance with law.
23. The appeals are allowed in the aforementioned terms. All

the applications are disposed of.
24. While    parting,   we   place   on   record   our   word   of

appreciation for the services rendered by the High Court

appointed Administrator Mr. S.Y. Quraishi. We also appreciate
26
the sincere effort of respondent No.1 for the cause of sports

and for introducing reforms in the functioning of the apex

body (AAI).
…………………………..….J.
                                   (A.M. Khanwilkar)




                                   …………………………..….J.
                                   (Ajay Rastogi)
New Delhi;
May 01, 2019.