[Cites
21
, Cited by
13
]
Supreme Court of India
Century Metal Recycling Pvt. Ltd. vs Union Of India on 17 May, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 445
Author:
Sanjiv Khanna
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
Deepak Gupta
,
Ranjan Gogoi
REPORTABLE
                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                 CIVIL APELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5011 OF 2019
                              (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 33602 OF 2017)


                         CENTURY METAL RECYCLING PVT.
                         LTD. AND ANOTHER                                        …..    APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

                         UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                               …..   RESPONDENT(S)



                                                         JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
Leave granted.
2.      Impugned order dated 12th September, 2017 passed by the Division

                                 Bench of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad dismisses Writ

                                 Petition Tax No.307 of 2017 filed by the appellants, namely M/s

                                 Century Metal Recycling Pvt. Ltd. and Gauri Shankar Agarwala, inter

                                 alia, on the grounds that the High Court would not exercise

                                 extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution of

                                 India as the matter relates to the valuation of imported aluminium

                                 scrap which could be assailed in a statutory appeal and it would not
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
be appropriate for the writ court to decide whether the appellant had
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2019.05.17
19:38:37 IST
Reason:
or had not agreed to valuation by the customs authorities.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                Page 1 of 30
3.     The appellant Company is stated to be engaged in the manufacture

       of aluminium alloys, for which they regularly import aluminium waste

       as a raw material for self-consumption. Imported scrap, it is

       accepted, falls under different code names as per specifications of

       the Institute of Recycling Industry. The grievance raised by the

       appellants is that the 2nd respondent i.e. the Principal Commissioner

       of Customs, Noida Customs Commissionerate and its Officers

       almost uniformly do not clear the consignments as per the declared

       transaction value in the bill of entry but insist that the appellants write

       a letter agreeing to pay customs duty as per the valuation by the

       customs authorities and compel them to forego their right to

       provisional assessment under
Section 18
of the Customs Act, 1962

       (‘the Act’, for short). The appellants, coerced and intimated, have no

       option but to give in and issue a letter of consent agreeing to

       assessment/valuation by the customs authorities to avoid delay in

       clearance, levy of demurrage, ground rent and container detention

       charges, etc. It is also alleged that the respondents without

       observing and contrary to the mandate of
Section 14
of the Act

       discard the declared transactional value and recompute the

       consignment value in view of the Valuation Alert dated 1st December,

       2016 issued by the Central Board of Excise and Customs (‘the

       Board’, for short).
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                  Page 2 of 30
4.     At the outset, we would record that the appellants had given up

       prayers (a) and (b) before the High Court as is recorded in the

       impugned order and we are, therefore, primarily to confine our

       decision to prayer (c) of the Writ Petition which reads as under:
“In the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the
                 petitioner respectfully prays that this Hon’ble Court may
                 be graciously pleased to:
(c) Issue a suitable writ, order or direction in the nature
                 of MANDAMUS commanding the Assessing Officer
                 that Respondent No.2 and his subordinate officers to
                 make assessment of aluminium scrap being imported
                 by the petitioner on the basis of the declared
                 transaction value in accordance with statutory
                 provisions under
Section 14
&
17(1)
of the Customs
                 Act, and in case of non-acceptance, to allow
                 Provisional Assessment thereof under
Section 18
of
                 the Customs Act in accordance with Circular No.38
                 dated 22.08.2016 (Annexure-5)”


       We would for the reasons stated also examine validity of the

       adjudication order dated 7th April, 2017.
5.     We are not inclined to remit the appellant to an alternative remedy by

       way of statutory appeal under
Section 128
of the Act for the reason

       that the impugned order dated 7th April, 2017 in Assessment

       No.12/AC/CUS/2017 cannot be sustained in view of the decision of

       this Court in Commissioner of Central Excise and Service Tax,

       Noida v. M/s Sanjivini Non-Ferrous Trading Pvt. Ltd.1, the latter

       being the sister concern of the first appellant in this case. Further,
1
Civil Appeal Nos. 18300-18305 of 2017 decided on December 10, 2018
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                    Page 3 of 30
having heard learned counsel for the parties, we would like to clarify

       the legal position and therefore in the facts of this case would

       exercise our discretion to entertain this appeal despite the alternative

       remedy.
6.     We would begin by reproducing
Section 14
of the Act and Rules 3

       and 12 of the Customs Valuation (Determination of Value of Imported

       Goods) Rules, 2007 (‘the 2007 Rules’, for short) which read as

       under:
“
Section 14
: Valuation of Goods.
(1) For the purposes of the
Customs Tariff Act, 1975
(51 of 1975), or any other law for the time being in
                  force, the value of the imported goods and export
                  goods shall be the transaction value of such goods,
                  that is to say, the price actually paid or payable for the
                  goods when sold for export to India for delivery at the
                  time and place of importation, or as the case may be,
                  for export from India for delivery at the time and place
                  of exportation, where the buyer and seller of the goods
                  are not related and price is the sole consideration for
                  the sale subject to such other conditions as may be
                  specified in the rules made in this behalf:
Provided that such transaction value in the case of
                  imported goods shall include, in addition to the price as
                  aforesaid, any amount paid or payable for costs and
                  services, including commissions and brokerage,
                  engineering, design work, royalties and licence fees,
                  costs of transportation to the place of importation,
                  insurance, loading, unloading and handling charges to
                  the extent and in the manner specified in the rules
                  made in this behalf:
Provided further that the rules made in this behalf may
                  provide for, —
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                    Page 4 of 30
(i) the circumstances in which the buyer and the seller
                  shall be deemed to be related;
(ii) the manner of determination of value in respect of
                  goods when there is no sale, or the buyer and the
                  seller are related, or price is not the sole consideration
                  for the sale or in any other case;
(iii) the manner of acceptance or rejection of value
                  declared by the importer or exporter, as the case may
                  be, where the proper officer has reason to doubt the
                  truth or accuracy of such value, and determination of
                  value for the purposes of this section:
Provided also that such price shall be calculated with
                  reference to the rate of exchange as in force on the
                  date on which a bill of entry is presented under
section
                  46
, or a shipping bill of export, as the case may be, is
                  presented under
section 50
.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
                  (1), if the Board is satisfied that it is necessary or
                  expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official
                  Gazette, fix tariff values for any class of imported
                  goods or export goods, having regard to the trend of
                  value of such or like goods, and where any such tariff
                  values are fixed, the duty shall be chargeable with
                  reference to such tariff value.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section—
(a) “rate of exchange” means the rate of exchange—
(i) determined by the Board, or
(ii) ascertained in such manner as the Board may
                       direct, for the conversion of Indian currency into
                       foreign currency or foreign currency into Indian
                       currency;
(b) “foreign currency” and “Indian currency” have the
                  meanings respectively assigned to them in clause (m)
                  and clause (q) of
section 2
of the Foreign Exchange
                  Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999).
xx           xx       xx
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                     Page 5 of 30
RULES
Rule 3. Determination of the method valuation:
(1) Subject to rule 12, the value of imported goods shall
                  be the transaction value adjusted in accordance with
                  provisions of rule 10;
(2) Value of imported goods under sub-rule (1) shall be
                  accepted:
Provided that –
(a) there are no restrictions as to the disposition or use
                  of the goods by the buyer other than restrictions which-
(i) are imposed or required by law or by the public
                       authorities in India; or
(ii) limit the geographical area in which the goods
                       may be resold; or
(iii) do not substantially affect the value of the
                       goods;
(b) the sale or price is not subject to some condition or
                  consideration for which a value cannot be determined
                  in respect of the goods being valued;
(c) no part of the proceeds of any subsequent resale,
                  disposal or use of the goods by the buyer will accrue
                  directly or indirectly to the seller, unless an appropriate
                  adjustment can be made in accordance with the
                  provisions of rule 10 of these rules; and
(d) the buyer and seller are not related, or where the
                  buyer and seller are related, that transaction value is
                  acceptable for customs purposes under the provisions
                  of sub-rule (3) below.
(3) (a) Where the buyer and seller are related,        the
                  transaction value shall be accepted provided that      the
                  examination of the circumstances of the sale of        the
                  imported goods indicate that the relationship did      not
                  influence the price.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                     Page 6 of 30
(b) In a sale between related persons, the transaction
                  value shall be accepted, whenever the importer
                  demonstrates that the declared value of the goods
                  being valued, closely approximates to one of the
                  following values ascertained at or about the same time.
(i) the transaction value of identical goods, or of
                       similar goods, in sales to unrelated buyers in India;
(ii) the deductive value for identical goods or similar
                       goods;
(iii) the computed value for identical goods or
                       similar goods:
Provided that in applying the values used for
                  comparison, due account shall be taken of
                  demonstrated difference in commercial levels, quantity
                  levels, adjustments in accordance with the provisions
                  of rule 10 and cost incurred by the seller in sales in
                  which he and the buyer are not related;
(c) substitute values shall not be established under the
                  provisions of clause (b) of this sub-rule.
(4) if the value cannot be determined under the
                  provisions of sub-rule (1), the value shall be
                  determined by proceeding sequentially through rule 4
                  to 9.
xx           xx        xx

                  Rule 12. Rejection of declared value:
(1) When the proper officer has reason to doubt the
                  truth or accuracy of the value declared in relation to
                  any imported goods, he may ask the importer of such
                  goods to furnish further information including
                  documents or other evidence and if, after receiving
                  such further information, or in the absence of a
                  response of such importer, the proper officer still has
                  reasonable doubt about the truth or accuracy of the
                  value so declared, it shall be deemed that the
                  transaction value of such imported goods cannot be
                  determined under the provisions of sub-rule (1) of rule
3.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                      Page 7 of 30
(2) At the request of an importer, the proper officer,
                  shall intimate the importer in writing the grounds for
                  doubting the truth or accuracy of the value declared in
                  relation to goods imported by such importer and
                  provide a reasonable opportunity of being heard,
                  before taking a final decision under sub-rule (1).
Explanation. - (1) For the removal of doubts, it is
                  hereby declared that: -
(i) This rule by itself does not provide a method for
                  determination of value, it provides a mechanism and
                  procedure for rejection of declared value in cases
                  where there is reasonable doubt that the declared
                  value does not represent the transaction value; where
                  the declared value is rejected, the value shall be
                  determined by proceeding sequentially in accordance
                  with rules 4 to 9.
(ii) The declared value shall be accepted where the
                  proper officer is satisfied about the truth and accuracy
                  of the declared value after the said enquiry in
                  consultation with the importers.
(iii) The proper officer shall have the powers to raise
                  doubts on the truth or accuracy of the declared value
                  based on certain reasons which may include –
(a) the significantly higher value at which identical
                       or similar goods imported at or about the same
                       time in comparable quantities in a comparable
                       commercial transaction were assessed;
(b) the sale involves an abnormal discount or
                       abnormal reduction from the ordinary competitive
                       price;
(c) the sale involves special discounts limited to
                       exclusive agents;
(d) the misdeclaration of goods in parameters
                       such as description, quality, quantity, country of
                       origin, year of manufacture or production;
(e) the non-declaration of parameters such as
                       brand, grade, specifications that have relevance to
                       value;
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                    Page 8 of 30
(f)   the fraudulent or manipulated documents.”
7.
Section 14
has to be read with Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules. Rule 12

       uses the expression ‘the proper officer has reason to doubt the truth

       or accuracy of the value declared in relation to the imported goods’.

       This expression is distinctly different from the words and

       preconditions imposed for rejecting the declared transactional value

       under the repealed Customs Valuation (Determination of Price of

       Imported Goods) Rules,1988 (‘the 1988 Rules’, for short) and the

       pre-amended
Section 14(1)
of the Act which were considered and

       interpreted by this Court in
Eicher Tractors Limited, Haryana v.

       Commissioner of Customs, Mumbai2
.
In fact, the judgment in
Eicher Tractors Limited
(supra) had not considered Rule 10-A of

       the 1988 Rules enforced with effect from 19 th February, 1998 as the

       imports therein related to the year 1993. Rule 10-A brought the

       concept of ‘reason to doubt the declared value’ in place of special or

       extraordinary circumstances particularised in Rule 4(2) of the 1988

       Rules.
However, the interpretation given to
Section 14(1)
in
Eicher

       Tractors Limited
(supra) as to the meaning of the word ‘payable’

       used therein would be still applicable. The word ‘payable’ used in
Section 14(1)
refers to the particular transaction and the payability in

       respect of ‘the transaction’. It refers to the notional value, albeit the
2
(2001) 1 SCC 315
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                    Page 9 of 30
transaction value as declared in the bill of entry plus the amount

       which has to be added in terms of Rule 10 of the 2007 Rules.
8.     This Court in M/s
Sanjivini Non-Ferrous Trading Pvt. Ltd.
(supra),

       while interpreting the provisions of
Section 14
and Rules 3, 4 and 12

       of the 2007 Rules, had held as under:
“10. The law, thus is clear. As per
Sections 14(1)
and
14
(1-A), the value of any goods chargeable to ad
                  valorem duty is deemed to be the price as referred to in
                  that provision.
Section 14(1)
is a deeming provision as
                  it talks of ‘deemed value’ of such goods. Therefore,
                  normally, the Assessing Officer is supposed to act on
                  the basis of price which is actually paid and treat the
                  same as assessable value/transaction value of the
                  goods. This, ordinarily, is the course of action which
                  needs to be followed by the Assessing Officer. This
                  principle of arriving at transaction value to be the
                  assessable value applies. This is also the effect of
                  Rule 3(1) and Rule 4(1) of the Customs Valuation
                  Rules, namely, the adjudicating authority is bound to
                  accept price actually paid or payable for goods as the
                  transaction value. Exceptions are, however, carved out
                  and enumerated in Rule 4(2). As per that provision,
                  the transaction value mentioned in the Bills of Entry
                  can be discarded in case it is found that there are any
                  imports of identical goods or similar goods at a higher
                  price at around the same time or if the buyers and
                  sellers are related to each other.
In order to invoke
                  such a provision it is incumbent upon the Assessing
                  Officer to give reasons as to why the transaction value
                  declared in the Bills of Entry was being rejected; to
                  establish that the price is not the sole consideration;
                  and to give the reasons supported by material on the
                  basis of which Assessing Officer arrives at his own
                  assessable value.”
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                 Page 10 of 30
The Division Bench has quoted the following sub-para from
Commissioner of Customs, Calcutta v. South India Television

       (P) Ltd.3
:
“13.
Section 14(1)
speaks of "deemed value".
                  Therefore, invoice price can be disputed. However, it is
                  for the Department to prove that the invoice price is
                  incorrect. When there is no evidence of
                  contemporaneous imports at a higher price, the invoice
                  price is liable to be accepted. The value in the export
                  declaration may be relied upon for ascertainment of the
                  assessable value under the Customs Valuation Rules
                  and not for determining the price at which goods are
                  ordinarily sold at the time and place of importation. This
                  is where the conceptual difference between value and
                  price comes into discussion.”
9.     As per
Section 14(1)
of the Act, value of the imported goods shall be

       the transactional value of such goods, which means the price

       actually paid or payable for the goods when sold for export to India

       where the buyers and sellers are not related and the price fixed is

       the sole consideration for sale. As per the first proviso to
Section

       14(1)
of the Act, the transactional value for the purpose of customs

       duty would include amounts paid or payable as costs and services

       like commission, brokerage, engineering, design work, cost of

       transportation, etc., as may be specified in the rules made in this

       behalf. These amounts are to be added to the declared transactional

       value. Accordingly, in terms of Rule 10 of the 2007 Rules, the value

       and price of costs and services are added to the price actually paid
3
(2007) 6 SCC 373
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                   Page 11 of 30
or payable for the imported goods for determining the transaction

       value.
10.    Sub-section (2) of
Section 14
is a non-obstante provision, which

       applies notwithstanding sub-section (1), i.e. when the Board has

       issued a notification in the Official Gazette fixing tariff values for any

       class of imported or exported goods. The Board has been authorised

       to issue notifications under
Section 14(2)
of the Act when it is

       satisfied that it is necessary or expedient. Thus, whenever tariff has

       been fixed vide notification issued by the Board under
Section 14(2)
of the Act, then notwithstanding the transactional value of the

       imported goods under sub-section (1) to
Section 14
of the Act, as

       per sub-section (2) to
Section 14
of the Act the customs duty is

       payable as per the tariff value so fixed. In the present case, the

       Board has not considered it necessary and expedient to issue a

       notification under
Section 14(2)
of the Act to fix a tariff for the

       imported aluminium waste.
11.    The second proviso to
Section 14 (1)
deals with different situations,

       enumerated under the three clauses; (i) when buyers and sellers are

       deemed to be related; (ii) when there is no sale, or buyers and

       sellers are related or the price is not the sole consideration for sale,

       etc. and (iii) where the proper officer has reason to doubt the truth or

       accuracy of such value. When the conditions specified in the second
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                 Page 12 of 30
proviso are satisfied, the transactional value for the purpose of

       charging of customs duty is to be made as per rules framed in this

       behalf.
12.    Rules 3 and 12 of the 2007 Rules i.e. Customs Valuation

       (Determination of Value of Imported Goods) Rules, 2007 were

       enacted and enforced with effect from 10 th October, 2007 replacing

       and superseding the 1988 Rules. Rule 3(1) of the 2007 Rules states

       that value of the imported goods shall be the transaction value

       adjusted in accordance with the provisions of Rule 10 of the 2007

       Rules which Rule, as observed above, deals with the costs and

       services which are to be added to the price actually paid or payable

       for the imported goods for determining the transaction value. Sub-

       rule (1) to Rule 3 is however subject to Rule 12 and therefore give

       primacy to Rule 12 which we shall subsequently elaborate and

       explain. Sub-rule (2) to Rule 3 states that value of the imported

       goods under sub-rule (1) shall be accepted i.e. accepted by the

       customs authorities. The proviso then vide different clauses sets out

       the pre-conditions for accepting value of the imported goods. Rule

       11 provides for declaration to be given by the importer or his agent

       certifying that they had disclosed full and accurate details of the

       value of the imported goods and any other statement, information

       and document including invoice of the manufacturer or producer of
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017            Page 13 of 30
the goods where the goods are imported from or through a person

       other than the manufacturer of goods, as considered necessary by

       the proper officer for valuation of the imported goods. Sub-rule (2)

       states that the declared value shall be accepted where the proper

       officer is satisfied about the truth and accuracy of the declared value

       after an enquiry in consultation with the importers.
13.    Sub-rule (3) to Rule 3 deals with cases when the buyer and seller

       are related. We would not dilate on the said sub-rule for this is not

       required for the purpose of the present decision. As per sub-rule (4),

       where the value cannot be determined under sub-rule (1) to Rule 3,

       the transaction is to be valued by step wise applying Rules 4 to 9.

       Rule 4 deals with transaction value based on identical goods. Rule 5

       deals with transaction value based on similar goods. Rule 6 deals

       with the determination of value where the transactional value cannot

       be determined under Rules 3, 4 and 5. Rules 7 and 8 deal with

       deductive value and computed value respectively. Rule 9 prescribes

       the residual method for computing the transaction value. What is

       important to note is that Rules 4 to 9 are subject to the provisions of

       Rule 3 thereby giving primacy to Rule 3 which in turn gives primacy

       to Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules.
14.    Rule 12, which as noticed above enjoys primacy and pivotal position,

       applies where the proper officer has reason to doubt the truth or
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017              Page 14 of 30
accuracy of the value declared for the imported goods. It envisages

       a two-step verification and examination exercise. At the first

       instance, the proper officer must ask and call upon the importer to

       furnish further information including documents to justify the

       declared transactional value. The proper officer may thereafter

       accept the transactional value as declared. However, where the

       proper officer is not satisfied and has reasonable doubt about the

       truth or accuracy of the value so declared, it is deemed that the

       transactional value of such imported goods cannot be determined

       under the provision of sub-rule (1) of Rule 3 of the 2007 Rules.

       Clause-(iii) of Explanation to Rule 12 states that the proper officer

       can on ‘certain reasons’ raise doubts about the truth or accuracy of

       declared value. ‘Certain reasons’ would include conditions specified

       in clauses (a) to (f) i.e. higher value of identical similar goods of

       comparable quantities in a comparable transaction, abnormal

       discount or abnormal deduction from ordinary competitive prices,

       sales involving the special prices, misdeclaration on parameters

       such as description, quality, quantity, country of origin, year of

       manufacture or production, non-declaration of parameters such as

       brand and grade etc. and fraudulent or manipulated documents.

       Grounds mentioned in (a) to (f) however are not exhaustive of

       ‘certain reasons’ to raise doubt about the truth or accuracy of the

       declared value. Clause (ii) to Explanation states that the declared
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017            Page 15 of 30
value shall be accepted where the proper officer is satisfied about

       the truth and accuracy of the declared value after enquiry in

       consultation with the importers. Clause-(i) to the Explanation states

       that Rule 12 does not provide a method of determination of value but

       provides the procedure or mechanism in cases where declared

       value can be rejected when there is a reasonable doubt that the

       declared transaction value does not represent the actual transaction

       value.     In such cases the transaction value is to be sequentially

       determined in accordance with Rules 4 to 9 of the 2007 Rules.
Sub-rule (2) of Rule 12 stipulates that on request of an

       importer, the proper officer shall intimate to the importer in writing the

       grounds, i.e. the reason for doubting the truth or accuracy of the

       value declared in relation to the imported goods. Further, the proper

       officer shall provide a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the

       importer before he makes the valuation in the form of final decision

       under sub-rule (1).
15.    The requirements of Rule 12, therefore, can be summarised as

       under:
(a)      The proper officer should have reasonable doubt as to the

       transactional value on account of truth or accuracy of the value

       declared in relation to the imported goods.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                 Page 16 of 30
(b)     Proper officer must ask the importer of such goods further

       information which may include documents or evidence;
(c)     On receiving such information or in the absence of response

       from the importer, the proper officer has to apply his mind and decide

       whether or not reasonable doubt as to the truth or accuracy of the

       value so declared persists.
(d)     When the proper officer does not have reasonable doubt, the

       goods are cleared on the declared value.
(e)     When the doubt persists, sub-rule (1) to Rule 3 is not

       applicable and transaction value is determined in terms of Rules 4 to

       9 of the 2007 Rules.
(f)     The proper officer can raise doubts as to the truth or accuracy

       of the declared value on ‘certain reasons’ which could include the

       grounds specified in clauses (a) to (f) in clause (iii) of the

       Explanation.
(g)     The proper officer, on a request made by the importer, has to

       furnish and intimate to the importer in writing the grounds for

       doubting the truth or accuracy of the value declared in relation to the

       imported goods. Thus, the proper officer has to record reasons in

       writing which have to be communicated when requested.
(h)     The importer has to be given opportunity of hearing before the

       proper officer finally decides the transactional value in terms of Rules

       4 to 9 of the 2007 Rules.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017               Page 17 of 30
16.    Proper officer can therefore reject the declared transactional value

       based on ‘certain reasons’ to doubt the truth or accuracy of the

       declared value in which event the proper officer is entitled to make

       assessment as per Rules 4 to 9 of the 2007 Rules. What is meant by

       the expression “grounds for doubting the truth or accuracy of the

       value declared” has been explained and elucidated in clause (iii) of

       Explanation appended to Rule 12 which sets out some of the

       conditions when the ‘reason to doubt’ exists. The instances

       mentioned in clauses (a) to (f) are not exhaustive but are inclusive

       for there could be other instances when the proper officer could

       reasonably doubt the accuracy or truth of the value declared.
17.    The choice of words deployed in Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules are

       significant and of much consequence. The Legislature, we must

       agree, has not used the expression “reason to believe” or

       “satisfaction” or such other positive terms as a pre-condition on the

       part of the proper officer. The expression “reason to believe” which

       would have required the proper officer to refer to facts and figures to

       show existence of positive belief on the undervaluation or lower

       declaration of the transaction value. The expression “reason to

       doubt” as a sequitur would require a different threshold and

       examination. It cannot be equated with the requirements of positive

       reasons to believe, for the word ‘doubt’ refers to un-certainty and
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017              Page 18 of 30
irresolution reflecting suspicion and apprehension. However, this

       doubt must be reasonable i.e. have a degree of objectivity and

       basis/foundation for the suspicion must be based on ‘certain

       reasons’.
18.    The expression ‘proof beyond reasonable doubt’ in criminal law

       requires the prosecution to establish guilt and secure conviction of

       the accused by proving the charge ‘beyond reasonable doubt’.
In
Ramakant Rai Vs. Madan Rai & Ors.
(2003) 12 SCC 395 referring

       to the expression ‘reasonable doubt’ in criminal law it was held as

       under:
“24. Doubts would be called reasonable if they are free
                  from a zest for abstract speculation. Law cannot afford
                  any favourite other than the truth. To constitute
                  reasonable doubt, it must be free from an
                  overemotional response. Doubts must be actual and
                  substantial doubts as to the guilt of the accused
                  persons arising from the evidence, or from the lack of
                  it, as opposed to mere vague apprehensions. A
                  reasonable doubt is not an imaginary, trivial or a merely
                  possible doubt; but a fair doubt based upon reason and
                  common sense. It must grow out of the evidence in the
                  case.”


               Proof     beyond      ‘reasonable        doubt’ is   certainly     not   the

       requirement under proviso to
Section 14
of the Act and Rule 12 of

       the 2007 Rules, albeit the above quote draws a distinction between

       a simple doubt and a doubt which is reasonable. In the context of the

       proviso to
Section 14
read with Rule 12 and clause (iii) of

       Explanation to the 2007 Rules, the doubt must be reasonable and
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                           Page 19 of 30
based on ‘certain reasons’. The proper officer must record ‘certain

       reasons’ specified in (a) to (f) or similar grounds in writing at the

       second stage before he proceeds to discard the declared value and

       decides to determine the same by proceeding sequentially in

       accordance with Rules 4 to 9 of the 2007 Rules. It refers to a doubt

       which the proper officer possesses even after the importer has been

       asked to furnish further information including documents and

       evidence during the preliminary enquiry to clear his doubt about the

       truth and accuracy of the value declared. Therefore, there has to be

       a preliminary enquiry by the proper officer in which the importer must

       be given an opportunity for clarification of the doubts of the officer by

       furnishing of documents and evidence as to the accuracy or truth of

       the value declared. It is only in case where the doubt of the proper

       officer persists after conducting examination of information including

       documents or on account of non-furnishing of information that the

       procedure for further investigation and determination of value in

       terms of Rules 4 to 9 would come into operation and would be

       applicable. Reasonable doubt will exist if the doubt is reasonable

       and for ‘certain reasons’ and not fanciful and absurd. A doubt to

       justify detailed enquiry under the proviso to
Section 14
read with

       Rule 12 should not be based on initial apprehension, be imaginary or

       a mere perception not founded on reasonable and ‘certain’ material.
It should be based and predicated on grounds and material in the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                Page 20 of 30
form of ‘certain reasons’ and not mere ipse dixit. Subjecting imports

       to detailed enquiry on mere suspicion because one is distrustful and

       unsure without reasonable and certain reasons would be contrary to

       the scheme and purpose behind the provisions which ensure quick

       and expeditious clearance of imported goods.
19.
Section 18
of the Act, reads:
“
Section 18
. Provisional assessment of duty. —

                  (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act but
                  without prejudice to the provisions of
Section 46
and
Section 50
, —
(a) where the importer or exporter is unable to make
                  self-assessment under sub-section (1) of Section 17
                  and makes a request in writing to the proper officer for
                  assessment; or
(b) where the proper officer deems it necessary to
                  subject any imported goods or export goods to any
                  chemical or other test; or
(c) where the importer or exporter has produced all the
                  necessary documents and furnished full information but
                  the proper officer deems it necessary to make further
                  enquiry; or
(d) where necessary documents have not been
                  produced or information has not been furnished and
                  the proper officer deems it necessary to make further
                  enquiry,

                  the proper officer may direct that the duty leviable on
                  such goods be assessed provisionally if the importer or
                  the exporter, as the case may be, furnishes such
                  security as the proper officer deems fit for the payment
                  of the deficiency, if any, between the duty as may be
                  finally assessed or re-assessed as the case may be,
                  and the duty provisionally assessed.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                 Page 21 of 30
(1A) Where, pursuant to the provisional assessment
                  under sub-section (1), if any document or information is
                  required by the proper officer for final assessment, the
                  importer or exporter, as the case may be, shall submit
                  such document or information within such time, and the
                  proper officer shall finalise the provisional assessment
                  within such time and in such manner, as may be
                  prescribed.
(2) When the duty leviable on such goods is assessed
                  finally or re-assessed by the proper officer in
                  accordance with the provisions of this Act, then—
(a) in the case of goods cleared for home consumption
                  or exportation, the amount paid shall be adjusted
                  against the duty finally assessed or re-assessed, as
                  the case may be and if the amount so paid falls short
                  of, or is in excess of, the duty finally assessed or re-
assessed, as the case may be, the importer or the
                  exporter of the goods shall pay the deficiency or be
                  entitled to a refund, as the case may be;
(b) in the case of warehoused goods, the proper officer
                  may, where the duty finally assessed or re-assessed,
                  as the case may be, is in the excess of the duty
                  provisionally assessed, require the importer to execute
                  a bond, binding himself in a sum equal to twice the
                  amount of the excess duty.
(3) The importer or exporter shall be liable to pay
                  interest, on any amount payable to the Central
                  Government, consequent to the final assessment
                  order or re-assessment order under sub-section (2), at
                  the rate fixed by the Central Government under
Section 28AA
from the first day of the month in which
                  the duty is provisionally assessed till the date of
                  payment thereof.
(4) Subject to sub-section (5), if any refundable amount
                  referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) is not
                  refunded under that sub-section within three months
                  from the date of assessment of duty finally or re-
                  assessment of duty, as the case may be, there shall be
                  paid an interest on such unrefunded amount at such
                  rate fixed by the Central Government under
Section
                  27A
till the date of refund of such amount.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                 Page 22 of 30
(5) The amount of duty refundable under sub-section
                  (2) and the interest under sub-section (4), if any, shall,
                  instead of being credited to the Fund, be paid to the
                  importer or the exporter, as the case may be, if such
                  amount is relatable to—
(a) the duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty paid
                  by the importer, or the exporter, as the case may be, if
                  he had not passed on the incidence of such duty and
                  interest, if any, paid on such duty to any other person;
(b) the duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty on
                  imports made by an individual for his personal use;
(c) the duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty
                  borne by the buyer, if he had not passed on the
                  incidence of such duty and interest, if any, paid on such
                  duty to any other person;
(d) the export duty as specified in
Section 26
;
(e) drawback of duty under
Sections 74
and
75
.”


               The significance of
Section 18
of the Act can be understood in

       light of the above provisions.
Section 18
provides for provisional

       assessment of duty in cases specified in sub-section (1) of the

       Section. Clause (c) of sub-section (1) deals with cases where

       importer or exporter has produced necessary documents and

       furnished full information for assessment of duty but the proper

       officer deems it necessary to make further enquiry for assessing the

       duty. However, Clause (d) is wider and would apply when the

       importer or exporter does not produce necessary documents or

       furnish information. In all cases covered under Clauses (a) to (d), the

       proper officer may direct provisional assessment of the duty leviable
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                   Page 23 of 30
on the imported goods. Where duty is assessed provisionally, the

       importer or exporter has to furnish security as the proper officer

       deems fit for payment of deficiency, if any, between the duty

       provisionally paid and the duty finally assessed.
On interpreting
Section 18
of the Act, it is held that when there

       is a dispute between the customs authorities and the importer as

       regards the valuation of the imported goods, on satisfaction of the

       conditions enumerated in sub-section (1), the authorities should

       make provisional assessment of customs duty under
Section 18
of

       the Act. This expedites clearance, pending final adjudication on

       merits which may take time. This is also the mandate of the Board

       Circular No.38/2016 dated 22nd August, 2016. Any insistence and

       compulsion by the authorities that the importer should disclaim and

       forgo his statutory right under
Section 18
of the Act would not be

       correct. Neither would it be right to reject the valuation as declared

       by the importer without reasonable doubt for certain reasons.
20.    We would ex facie for the reasons recorded below reject the

       contention of the respondents predicated on the letter of appellants

       dated 6th March, 2017 that the appellants did not seek provisional

       assessment of the bill of entry and had accepted and paid duty on

       the valuation done by the customs authorities. This letter exposits

       the predicament faced by the appellants as it states that the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                Page 24 of 30
appellants were in urgent requirement and wanted clearance of the

       goods. Pertinently, the appellants had earlier written several letters,

       including communications dated 22nd December, 2016 and 4th March,

       2017 requesting for clearance of the imported consignment of

       aluminium scrap on the declared transaction value pointing out

       therein that on account of delay in the clearance of the imported

       consignments, the appellants and its sister concern had been

       compelled to pay excess duty of over Rs.25 crores from August

       2013 onwards. It is unfortunate and has to be accepted that the

       respondent authorities had compelled and forced the appellant to

       furnish the letter dated 6th March, 2017 thereby waiving of its right to

       provisional assessment and accepting valuation in terms of Rules 4

       to 10.
As per sub Rule (2) of Rule 12, the proper officer when

       required must intimate to the importer in writing the grounds for

       doubting the truth or accuracy of the value declared.           The said

       mandate of sub-Rule (2) of Rule 12 cannot be ignored or waived.

       Formation of opinion regarding reasonable doubt as to the truth or

       accuracy of the valuation and communication of the said grounds to

       the importer is mandatory, subterfuge to by-pass and circumvent the

       statutory mandate is unacceptable.               Formation of belief and

       recording of reasons as to reasonable doubt and communication of

       the reasons when required is the only way and manner in which the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                 Page 25 of 30
proper officer in terms of Rule 12 can proceed to make assessment

       under Rules 4 to 9 after rejecting the transaction value as declared.
21.    The mandate to record reasons at the second stage of enquiry is not

       expressly stipulated, albeit it has been read by us by implication in

       Rule 12. Being conscious that this mandate if applied to past cases

       would possibly lead to complications and difficulties, we would

       invoke the doctrine of prospective application with the direction that

       the past cases will be decided on a case to case basis, depending

       upon the factual matrix and considerations like whether the importer

       has asked for ‘certain reasons’, whether the reasons were not

       communicated, whether ‘certain reasons’ can be deciphered from

       the assessment/valuation order, whether misdescription or false

       declaration was apparent, etc.
22.
In
Commissioner of Customs vs. Prabhu Dayal Prem Chand4
,

       this Court had rejected the plea that the Revenue was justified in

       redetermining the value of brass and copper scrap on the basis of

       information received from London Metal Exchange on the price of

       the said metals on the ground that the importer was not confronted

       with any contemporaneous material for enhancing the transaction

       value.
This Court affirmed the order of the Tribunal in
Prabhu Dayal

       Prem Chand
(supra) and held that the order in original had not
4
2010 (13) SCC 535
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017              Page 26 of 30
indicated details of any contemporaneous import or other material in

       the form of corroborative material which had necessitated the

       enhancement in the transaction valuation.
23.    We would now refer to the findings of the order in original in the

       present case which observes that the appellants had declared value

       of    the    aluminium       scrap     as    Rs.81.31   per   kg,   albeit   the

       contemporaneous import data in the form of different bills of entry

       had indicated aluminium scrap values between Rs. 83.26 to Rs.

       120.897 per kg. The said portion of the order refers to at least four

       bills of entries declaring assessable value of less than Rs. 85 per kg.

       Interestingly, the order in original also records that the imported

       goods being aluminium scrap was not a homogeneous commodity

       and therefore, cannot be evaluated on the basis of the samples or

       lab testing. Further, the order holds that it was very difficult to find

       any identical/ similar goods imported in India having same chemical

       and physical composition and that the values of aluminium scrap

       identical/similar to the imported goods in nature and specification

       were not available. Without commenting on correctness of the said

       statements, we would observe that the aforesaid reasoning for

       rejection of the transactional value, would not meet the mandate of
Section 14
and the Rules as elucidated in M/s
Sanjivini Non-

       Ferrous Trading Pvt. Ltd.
(supra) wherein it was held that the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                      Page 27 of 30
transaction value mentioned in the bill of entry should not be

       discarded unless there are contrary details of contemporaneous

       imports or other material indicating and serving as corroborative

       evidence of import at or near the time of import which would justify

       rejection of the declared value and enhancement of the price

       declared in the bill of entry. We have also elaborated and explained

       the legal position with reference to Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules.
24.    Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the present case, it has

       to be held that the adjudication order in original is flawed and

       contrary to law for it does not give cogent and good reason in terms

       of
Section 14(1)
and Rule 12 for rejection of the transaction value as

       declared in the bill of entry. The order in original is not in accordance

       with
Section 14
and Rules 3 and 12 as the mandate of these

       provisions has been ignored. The Assistant Collector has rejected

       the transaction value as declared in the bill of entry which, as noticed

       above, is clearly and fundamentally erroneous besides being

       contradictory. In the aforesaid circumstances, we do not think that

       the order in assessment dated 7th April, 2017 can be sustained and

       upheld. It is set aside and quashed.
25.    Before closing, we would observe that the Valuation Alerts, as also

       stated by the respondents, are issued by the Director General of

       Valuation based on the monitoring of valuation trends of sensitive
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                Page 28 of 30
commodities with a view to take corrective measures. They provide

       guidance to the field formation in valuation matters. They help

       ensure uniform practice, smooth functioning and prevent evasion

       and short payment of duty. However, they should not be construed

       as interfering with the discretion of the assessment authority who is

       required to pass an Assessment Order in the given factual matrix.

       Declared valuation can be rejected based upon the evidence which

       qualifies and meets the criteria of ‘certain reasons’. Besides the

       opinion formed must be reasonable.
Reference to foreign journals

       for the price quoted in exchanges etc., to find out the correct

       international price of concerned goods would be relevant but

       reliance can be placed on such material only when the adjudicating

       authority had conducted enquiries and ascertained details with

       reference to the goods imported which are identical or similar and

       ‘certain reasons’ exists and justifies detailed investigation. These

       reasons       are    to   be     recorded        and   if   requested   disclosed/

       communicated to the importer. Valuation alerts could be relied upon

       for default valuation computation under the Rules. (See
Varsha

       Plastic Pvt. Ltd. vs. Union of India5
).
26.    We would also like to clarify that we have not issued any general or

       omnibus direction that the transaction value declared in the bill of

       entries should invariably be accepted in all cases and/or that in all
5
(2009) 3 SCC 365
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                          Page 29 of 30
cases where imports of aluminium scrap are involved. The matter

       has to be examined on a case to case basis, the evidence before the

       authorities, the material placed on record and the enquiries

       conducted by the adjudicating authorities etc.
27.    With the aforesaid clarification, we allow the present appeal and

       quash and set aside the order of Assessment dated 7th April, 2017 by

       issuing a writ of certiorari. In the facts of the case, there shall be no

       order as to costs.
...............................CJI
                                                              [RANJAN GOGOI]



                                                        .................................J.
                                                              [DEEPAK GUPTA]



                                                        .................................J.
                                                            [SANJIV KHANNA]

       NEW DELHI;
MAY 17, 2019.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 33602 of 2017                      Page 30 of 30