[Cites
9
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Jammu And Kashmir vs Farid Ahmad Tak on 2 May, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 2352, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 238
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Indu Malhotra
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
Civil Appeal No. …….. of 2019 @ SLP(C)NO. 29252 OF 2018 ETC.
     The State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors. vs. Farid Ahmad Tak                               1




                                                                                               Reportable
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4563 OF 2019
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil)No.29252 of 2018)
     THE STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AND ORS.                                …Appellants

                                                        VERSUS
     FARID AHMAD TAK                                                        …Respondent
                                                          WITH
                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4564 OF 2019
                              (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil)No.2651 of 2019)

     THE STATE OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR                                             …Appellant

                                                        VERSUS

     GIRDHARI LAL                                                         …Respondent
                                                          WITH
                                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4565 OF 2019
                             (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil)No. 11445 of 2019)
                                                   (D.No.17515 of 2018)
     THE STATE OF JAMMU KASHMIR AND ANOTHER …Appellants
                                                        VERSUS
     MUMTAZ HUSSAIN BHAT                                                    …Respondent

                                                      JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.                  Leave granted.
2.                  These appeals arise out of three separate judgments passed by the High Court of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Jammu Kashmir at Jammu on 11.12.2017 in LPASW No.182 of 2017, LPASW No.
JAYANT KUMAR ARORA
Date: 2019.05.03
16:56:16 IST
Reason:
159 of 2017 and LPASW No.180 of 2017.
Civil Appeal No. …….. of 2019 @ SLP(C)NO. 29252 OF 2018 ETC.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors. vs. Farid Ahmad Tak
2
3.    The appeal arising out of decision in LPASW No. 182 of 2017 is taken as the

lead matter and the facts leading to said appeal are mentioned in detail.
4.    The Respondent was appointed as Junior Engineer, Power Development

Department, Jammu and Kashmir in the year 1985 and with the passage of time stood

promoted as Assistant Executive Engineer. FIR No. 30 of 2006 -VOJ (Vigilance

Organisation, Jammu) was registered against the Respondent at Police Station

Vigilance Organisation, Jammu in respect of offences punishable under Section 5(1)
(d) read with
Section 5(2)
of Jammu and Kashmir Prevention of Corruption Act, 2006

and under Section 120-B of the Ranbir Penal Code. In due course of time, sanction

for prosecution was granted by the competent authority after having found substance

in the allegations. The prosecution in respect of said offence is still pending.
5.    On 20.5.2015 a Committee comprising of Chief Secretary – Government of

J&K, Principal Secretary to the Chief Minister, Principal Secretary to the Government

– Home Department, Commissioner/Secretary to the Government – General

Administration Department and Secretary to the Government – Department of Law

Justice & Parliamentary Affairs was constituted under the orders issued by the

Commissioner/Secretary to Government, General Administration Department,

Government of Jammu and Kashmir. In terms of
Article 226(2)
and
226(3)
of Jammu

and Kashmir Civil Services Regulations (for short ‘the Regulations’) cases of officials

for premature retirement were placed before the Committee. The Committee held

meetings on 21.5.2015, 11.6.2015 and 26.6.2015 and considered cases of
Civil Appeal No. …….. of 2019 @ SLP(C)NO. 29252 OF 2018 ETC.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors. vs. Farid Ahmad Tak
3

officers/officials including the respondent. Insofar as the case of the respondent was

concerned, the Report of the Committee stated as under:-
“The accused officer by abusing his official position made payments
               against unexecuted works resulting in huge loss to the State
               exchequer. The accused officer in league with JE, recorded fraudulent
               measurements and prepared exorbitant bills for drawal, thereby,
               misusing his official position. Accordingly, FIR No.30/2006-VOJ,
               was registered by the Vigilance Organisation. The investigation of the
               case was concluded as proved. The Competent Authority has also
               accorded sanction vide Govt. Order No.34-GAD (Vig) of 2012 dated
               20.09.2012. Further, the case already stands challaned in the court of
               law.
It was reported by the Department that the Annual Confidential
               Reports (ACRs) of the officer are not available.
The Committee took note of the fact that the officer while holding a
               post in Power Development Department, indulged in corrupt practices
               and caused loss to the State exchequer by fraudulent means, thereby,
               substantiating the fact that he has outlived his utility to the public.

               Since, the officer is generally known to have bad reputation and
               embezzled Government money by misusing and abusing his official
               position, and under a conspired plan, dishonestly prepared fraudulent
               bills on the basis of false/excessive measurements thus caused loss to
               the State exchequer, therefore, it is recommended that Mr. Fareed
               Ahmad Tak be retired from the Government Service in the public
               interest, under
Article 226(2)
of J&K CSRs.              It is further
               recommended that Mr. Fareed Ahmad Tak be given three months pay
               and allowances in advance, as admissible, in lieu of the notice.”
6.    On 30.6.2015 in exercise of power conferred under aforesaid
Article 226(2)
, an

order was passed compulsorily retiring the Respondent from service. The text of the

order was as under:-
“Whereas the Government is of opinion that it is in the public interest
               to do so.
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by
Article 226(2)
of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations, the
               Government hereby gives notice to Shri Fareed Ahmad Tak, I/c
               Assistant Executive Engineer, Estates Division, Jammu, that he
               having rendered 22 years of service, shall retire from service w.e.f.
               forenoon of 01/07/2015.
He is allowed three months of pay and allowances in lieu of three
Civil Appeal No. …….. of 2019 @ SLP(C)NO. 29252 OF 2018 ETC.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors. vs. Farid Ahmad Tak
4

               months notice.
By order of the Government of Jammu and Kashmir.”
7.    The Respondent challenged the aforesaid order dated 30.6.2015 by filing a

Writ Petition namely SWP No.2405 of 2015 in the High Court of Jammu and

Kashmir at Jammu. In its affidavit-in-reply, the State justified the action submitting

inter alia that the order of compulsory retirement was passed in public interest after

due consideration by a Committee which comprised of very senior officials. The

Writ Petition was allowed by a Single Judge of the High Court by his judgment and

order dated 22.12.2016.         It was held by the Single Judge that the decision to

compulsorily retire the Respondent was taken merely on the basis of registration of a

First Information Report against the Respondent without taking into account the

APRs of the Respondent. Further, the norms evolved by the State to arrive at a

decision with regard to integrity of the Respondent were also not followed and as

such, the order compulsorily retiring the Respondent was not sustainable.
8.    The State being aggrieved, preferred Letters Patent Appeal being LPASW No.

182 of 2017 which was dismissed by a Division Bench of the High Court by its order

dated 11.12.2017. On the same date, two other Letters Patent Appeals viz. LPASW

Nos. 159 of 2017 and 180 of 2017 were also considered and dealt with by the

Division Bench. While considering the instant Letters Patent Appeal, the Division

Bench stated in paragraph 16 of the lead matter as under:-
“16. Learned counsel for the appellant urged that the fact that the
               respondent had been booked by the vigilance organisation pursuant to
Civil Appeal No. …….. of 2019 @ SLP(C)NO. 29252 OF 2018 ETC.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors. vs. Farid Ahmad Tak
5

                   the lodging of a complaint and was caught red handed while
                   demanding and accepting bribe was a case, which would come within
                   the ambit of paragraph 27 of Suryakant Chunilal Shah’s1 case and,
                   therefore, in those circumstances, the order of premature retirement
                   could not be said to be bad in law.”

         The aforesaid paragraph also appears ad verbatim in the judgment in respect of

LPASW No. 159 of 2017 as paragraph no.15 and as paragraph no. 16 in its decision

in LPASW No. 180 of 2017.
9.       The State being aggrieved is presently in appeal challenging the correctness of

the decisions of the Division Bench of the High Court.
10.      It was submitted by Mr. M. Shoeb Alam, learned advocate for the appellant

that the law
laid down by
this Court in various decisions, leading case being
Baikuntha Nath Das and Another vs. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada

and Another2
, is very clear and summed up in paragraph no. 34 of the decision in

Baikuntha Nath Das2 as under:-
“34. The following principles emerge from the above discussion:
(i) An order of compulsory retirement is not a punishment. It
                implies no stigma nor any suggestion of misbehaviour.
(ii) The order has to be passed by the government on forming the
                opinion that it is in the public interest to retire a government
                servant compulsorily. The order is passed on the subjective
                satisfaction of the government.
(iii) Principles of natural justice have no place in the context of
                an order of compulsory retirement. This does not mean that
                judicial scrutiny is excluded altogether. While the High Court or
                this Court would not examine the matter as an appellate court,
                they may interfere if they are satisfied that the order is passed (a)
                mala fide or (b) that it is based on no evidence or (c) that it is
                arbitrary — in the sense that no reasonable person would form

1
State of Gujarat and another vs. Suryakant Chunilal Shah
– (1999) 1 SCC 529
2   (1992)2 SCC 299
Civil Appeal No. …….. of 2019 @ SLP(C)NO. 29252 OF 2018 ETC.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors. vs. Farid Ahmad Tak
6

            the requisite opinion on the given material; in short, if it is found
            to be a perverse order.
(iv) The government (or the Review Committee, as the case may
            be) shall have to consider the entire record of service before
            taking a decision in the matter — of course attaching more
            importance to record of and performance during the later years.
            The record to be so considered would naturally include the
            entries in the confidential records/character rolls, both favourable
            and adverse. If a government servant is promoted to a higher post
            notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such remarks lose their
            sting, more so, if the promotion is based upon merit (selection)
            and not upon seniority.
(v) An order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be quashed
            by a Court merely on the showing that while passing it
            uncommunicated adverse remarks were also taken into
            consideration. That circumstance by itself cannot be a basis for
            interference.”



      It was further submitted that the High Court principally relied upon paragraph

no. 27 of the decision of this Court in Chunilal Shah’s case1. Said paragraph no.27

was as under:-
“27. The whole exercise described above would, therefore, indicate
                 that although there was no material on the basis of which a reasonable
                 opinion could be formed that the respondent had outlived his utility as
                 a government servant or that he had lost his efficiency and had
                 become a dead wood, he was compulsorily retired merely because of
                 his involvement in two criminal cases pertaining to the grant of
                 permits in favour of fake and bogus institutions. The involvement of a
                 person in a criminal case does not mean that he is guilty. He is still to
                 be tried in a court of law and the truth has to be found out ultimately
                 by the court where the prosecution is ultimately conducted. But before
                 that stage is reached, it would be highly improper to deprive a person
                 of his livelihood merely on the basis of his involvement. We may,
                 however, hasten to add that mere involvement in a criminal case
                 would constitute relevant material for compulsory retirement or not
                 would depend upon the circumstances of each case and the nature of
                 offence allegedly committed by the employee.”
Civil Appeal No. …….. of 2019 @ SLP(C)NO. 29252 OF 2018 ETC.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors. vs. Farid Ahmad Tak
7
11.      Mr. Alam submitted that the Committee in question comprised of very high

officials/officers under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary.      The Respondent’s

involvement in the crime, as well as the fact that the competent authority had granted

sanction, were the factors which weighed with the Committee, and the decision was

taken in public interest. The order of compulsory retirement was an innocuous order

and completely satisfied the principles as culled out in Baikunth Nath Das2. He

further submitted that the Division Bench completely failed to consider the fact

situation in the matter. It was never the case of the prosecution that the Vigilance

Organisation had caught Respondent red handed while demanding and accepting

bribe. As a matter of fact, in none of the present three cases was there any such

allegation of the accused being caught red handed while demanding and accepting

bribe.
12.      Mr. Pramod Kumar Sharma, learned advocate who appeared for Respondents

in all three matters relied upon various orders passed by this Court dismissing

Special Leave Petitions arising from judgment and orders passed by the Division

Bench in identical situations. He particularly relied upon the orders passed by this

Court in Special Leave Petition (c) CC Nos.6027-6028 of 2017 arising from the

judgment and order dated 07.10.2016 passed by the Division Bench of the High

Court of Jammu and Kashmir at Jammu in LPASW Nos.103 of 2016 and 122 of 2016

and various other orders passed by this Court subsequently.
Civil Appeal No. …….. of 2019 @ SLP(C)NO. 29252 OF 2018 ETC.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors. vs. Farid Ahmad Tak
8
13.   The provisions under which the Committee was constituted viz. 226(2) of the

Regulations prescribes norms which are required to be followed by the Screening

Committee. Said
Article 226(2)
is as under:-
“(i) The Annual Performance Report of the Non-Gazetted employees
               are neither normally written very carefully nor are they fully available
               in a large number of cases. The Screening Committee should,
               therefore, consider the entire service record including all material and
               relevant information available on record about the employee before
               coming to any conclusion.
(ii) The Government employees whose integrity is doubtful should
               be retired. For the purpose of establishing that the integrity of the
               Government servant is doubtful the following information/records
               could be considered.
   Number and nature of complaints received, if any,
                      against the Government servant pertaining to doubtful
                      integrity or corruption.
   Number and nature of various audit paras pending, if
                      any, against the Government Servant in which concerned
                      govt. servant is found to be involved.
   Number and nature of vigilance cases pending inquiry, if
                      any, against the Government servant.
   Adverse entries in the APRs concerning doubtful
                      integrity, if any.
   Number         and      nature       of     departmental
                      inquiries/preliminary inquiries, if any, which are going
                      on against the concerned Government servant.
   Number and nature of administrative censure/warnings/
                      punishment pertaining to corruption/doubtful integrity
                      against the Government servant, if any.
   General reputation of the employees.
(iii) Government employee who is found to be ineffective should be
               retired. The basic consideration in identifying such employees should
               be fitness/competence of the employee to continue in the post, which
               he is holding. If he is not found fit to continue in his present post, and
               than his fitness/competence to continue in the lower post from where
Civil Appeal No. …….. of 2019 @ SLP(C)NO. 29252 OF 2018 ETC.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors. vs. Farid Ahmad Tak
9

               he had been previously promoted should be considered.
(iv) The specific norms for efficiency/effectiveness cannot be really
               laid down since they pertain to the nature of the work in each
               particular department would vary from department to department.
               However, these norms should be similar to norms
laid down in
the
               APRs of the employees concerned relating to his performance and
               efficiency/effectiveness. Specific norms on two to three parameters
               should be laid down for specific jobs. An illustrative list of norms is
               given below:
 For Teachers the pass percentage achieved by their
                     students.
 For Revenue staff, norms relating to revenue work, such
                     as mutations attested, jamabandies completed, revenue
                     pass books issued etc.

                    For engineering staff, norms relating to timely project
                     implementations without time and cost over-runs etc.

               The concerned Administrative Department should, for each specific
               category of employees under its control, identify two to three key
               result areas/norms against which the efficiency/effectiveness of the
               Government employees should be considered. These norms should be
               communicated to the screening committee by the Administrative
               Department in advance.
(v) While the entire record of the employee should be considered at
               the time of review, no employee should ordinarily be retired on
               grounds of ineffectiveness, if his services during the preceding 5
               years, or where he has been promoted on higher post during 5 years
               his service in the higher post have been found satisfactory.
(vi) No employee should ordinarily be retired on grounds of
               ineffectiveness, if in any event he would be retiring on superannuation
               within a period of one year from the date of considering of his case.
(vii)This provision of Rule for premature retirement should not be
               used for reduction of surplus staff or an economy measure. Similarly,
               it should not be used to retire a Government servant on grounds of
               specific act of misconduct as a shortcut to initiating formal
               disciplinary proceedings against him. The appropriate authority shall
               not, however, be precluded to take action against a Government
               servant to retire him prematurely at the relevant time, even at that
               time, specific act of misconduct has come to notice.
(viii) Once a decision has been taken under the relevant service rule
               to retain a Government servant in service beyond the prescribed age
               or beyond the prescribed length of service, he shall ordinarily
Civil Appeal No. …….. of 2019 @ SLP(C)NO. 29252 OF 2018 ETC.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors. vs. Farid Ahmad Tak
10

                  continue in service till he attains the age of superannuation.”
14.      According to Mr. Alam, the relevant criteria for engineering staff which was

stipulated in clause (iv) related to timely project implementations without time and

cost over-runs. It was submitted that not only the prosecution that was initiated

against the Respondent, but the order of sanction issued by the competent authority

showed that public interest was completely compromised, leading to total loss of

more than Rs.16,00,000/- as a result of acts of commission and omission on part of

the Respondent.
15.      It is true that the exercise of power under aforesaid
Article 226(2)
of the

Regulations by the very same Committee did not meet with the approval, and the

Division Bench in certain cases did reject the plea of the State Government, and

affirmed the orders passed by the Single Judge setting aside the orders of compulsory

retirement.     It is also true that in those matters Special Leave Petitions were

dismissed summarily. However, it is well settled that mere summary disposal of a

Special Leave Petition does not conclude the issue on merits3.
We, however, need not go into the matter as some striking features which

emerge from three matters are as under:-
a)    In all these three cases the concerned Respondent official was

               never caught red handed while accepting bribe. However,

3    M/s.
Rup Diamonds and others vs. Union of India & Ors
– (1989) 2 SCC 356 para 8;
Supreme Court
Employees’ Welfare Association vs. Union of India and another
– (1989) 4
    SCC 187 para 22;
Yogendra Narayan Chowdhury and others vs. Union of India and others
–
    (1996) 7 SCC 1 para 5
Civil Appeal No. …….. of 2019 @ SLP(C)NO. 29252 OF 2018 ETC.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors. vs. Farid Ahmad Tak
11

            observations which are identical in all three matters indicate

            that the Division Bench considered the matters from that

            premise. The basic foundation was thus incorrect.
b)    The matter from the perspective of Clause (iv) of
Article

            226(2)
of the Regulations was also not considered. The orders

            of sanction in all these three matters highlight the acts of

            commission and omission on part of the concerned

            Respondents as a result of which there was wrongful loss to

            the State and public interest was compromised.
16.   The aforesaid two features are common in all these three matters. The basic

premise, as indicated hereinabove, on the basis of which the matter was considered by

the Division Bench was incorrect and secondly, the matter was also not considered

from the perspective of Clause (iv) of
Article 226(2)
as stated above. We, therefore,

set aside the judgments and orders under appeal passed by the Division Bench of the

High Court in LPASW Nos.182 of 2017, 159 of 2017 and 180 of 2017. The matters

are remitted to the Division Bench for fresh consideration. These Letters Patent

Appeals stand restored to the file of the High Court which may now be dealt with

afresh.
Civil Appeal No. …….. of 2019 @ SLP(C)NO. 29252 OF 2018 ETC.
The State of Jammu and Kashmir and Ors. vs. Farid Ahmad Tak
12
17.   The appeals are allowed to the aforesaid extent. No costs.
.………………….J.
                                                                   (Uday Umesh Lalit)



                                                                   …………………..J.
                                                                     (Indu Malhotra)
 New Delhi,
 May 02, 2019.