[Cites
10
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Anjum Hussain vs Intellicity Business Park Pvt Ltd on 10 May, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 260, 2019 (6) SCC 519, (2019) 137 ALL LR 788, (2019) 204 ALLINDCAS 170, (2019) 3 CIVLJ 602, (2019) 3 CURCC 98, (2019) 3 RECCIVR 329, (2019) 4 CAL HN 146, (2019) 7 SCALE 695
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Arun Mishra
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1676 OF 2019
     ANJUM HUSSAIN & ORS. VS. INTELLICITY BUSINESS PARK PVT. LTD. & ORS.

                                                                                                                          1


                                                                                                               Reportable
                                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.1676 OF 2019


                      ANJUM HUSSAIN & ORS.                                                         …Appellant(s)



                                                                             VERSUS



                      INTELLICITY BUSINESS PARK PVT. LTD. & ORS.                                   …Respondent(s)



                                                                       J U D G M E N T
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.                 This appeal under
Section 23
of the Consumer Protection Act,

      1986 (hereinafter referred to as the Act) is directed against the

      Judgment and Order dated 10.10.2018 passed by the National Consumer

      Disputes                  Redressal                Commission,                New    Delhi      (‘the      National

      Commission’, for short) in Consumer Case No.2241 of 2018 preferred

      by the appellants.
2.                 The   appellant          no.1         had         booked    an   office    space     admeasuring

      about 440 sq.ft in a project consisting of residential units, shops

      and                offices   launched              by       the       respondent.       The     Builder    –    Buyer

      Agreement                 was       executed                between       the       appellant    no.1     and     the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
respondent on 02.12.2013, whereunder the respondent was to deliver
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2019.05.10
17:00:18 IST
Reason:
possession of the office unit within four years.                                                      Similar such

      Agreements were entered into between the appellant nos.2 to 44 and
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1676 OF 2019
ANJUM HUSSAIN & ORS. VS. INTELLICITY BUSINESS PARK PVT. LTD. & ORS
.
2
the respondent in respect of various units from the same project.
3.         Since the respondent had failed to honour its commitments of

delivering possession in four years and as the project was still at

the stage of excavation, Case No.2241 of 2018 was filed by the

appellants 1 to 44 seeking refund of the amounts paid by them to

the         respondent                  along            with         interest   and   compensation.   An

application under
Section 12(1)(c)
of the Act was also filed by the

appellants.
4.         The first listing of the case before the National Commission

was on 10.10.2018 when the application moved by the appellants

under
Section 12(1)(c)
of the Act was dealt with by the National

Commission as under:-
1.   This complaint has been instituted for
                                   the benefit of entire class of buyers, who
                                   have booked shops/offices in a project
                                   namely     “Intellicity”     consisting    of
                                   residential units, shops and offices at
                                   Greater Noida. The scope of this complaint
                                   is not restricted only to the complainants.
An application seeking permission in terms
                                   of
Section   12(1)(c)
of    the  Consumer
                                   Protection Act, to institute this complaint
                                   on behalf of all such buyers of commercial
                                   units, being IA/18734/2018, has also been
                                   filed, along with the complaint.        It is
                                   alleged that the complainants are consumers
                                   as they had booked small shops/offices for
                                   the purpose of earing their livelihood by
                                   means of self-employment.
1. As provided in
Section 2(1)(d)
of the Consumer
           Protection Act, the term ‘consumer’ excludes from its
           ambit, a person hiring or availing services for a
           commercial purpose, unless he can bring his case
           within the four-corners of the explanation below
Section 2(1)(d)
of the Consumer Protection Act.     A
           person hiring or availing services for the purpose of
           earning his livelihood by way of self-employment has
           thereby   been   included   in  the   definition   of
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1676 OF 2019
ANJUM HUSSAIN & ORS. VS. INTELLICITY BUSINESS PARK PVT. LTD. & ORS
.
3
‘consumer’.   Otherwise, a shop/commercial unit                                          is
              deemed to be booked for a commercial purpose.
2. Since the scope of the complaint is not restrict only
           to the complainants and encompasses all the allottees
           of the shops/commercial units, as is specifically
           stated in the complaint and is also evident from the
           prayers made in the compliant, seeking direction to
           the opposite party to refund the amount deposited by
           each complainant as well as other allottees along
           with   interest   and   compensation,   it  would  be
           maintainable as a class action only if it is alleged
           and   shown   that    all   the   allottees   of  the
           shops/commercial units in the above referred project
           had booked the same solely for the purpose of the
           earning their livelihood by way of self-employment,
           meaning thereby that all the allottees intend to work
           themselves in these shops/commercial units and the
           occupation of the said units by them has to be for
           the purpose of earning their livelihood.    A careful
           perusal of the complaint would show that it is not
           even alleged that all the allottees of the commercial
           units/shops in the above referred project had booked
           the said shops/units solely for the purpose of the
           earning their livelihood by way of self-employment.
           In the absence of such an averment in the complaint,
           no evidence can even be led to prove that not only
           the complainants but all the allottees of the
           shops/commercial units had booked the same solely for
           the purpose of the earning their livelihood by way of
           self-employment.    Even otherwise, the complainants
           cannot know the purpose for which the allottees,
           other than the complainants had booked the shops,
           commercial units in the aforesaid project. The said
           purpose can be in the knowledge only of the concerned
           allottees.     Therefore, this class action under
Section 12(1)(c)
of the Consumer Protection Act on
           behalf of not only the complainants but all the
           allottees of the shops/commercial units in the
           aforesaid project is not maintainable.”
5.         The National Commission thus concluded that the case could not

be accepted as class action and dismissed the same.                                              It was however

observed             that         the        dismissal                would   not   come   in   the   way   of   the

complainants availing such other remedies as would be open to them.
6.         The dismissal of the case as class action is questioned in
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1676 OF 2019
ANJUM HUSSAIN & ORS. VS. INTELLICITY BUSINESS PARK PVT. LTD. & ORS
.
4
this appeal.
7.         We       heard           Mr.        Yash          Srivastava,       learned   Advocate   for   the

appellants                 and        Mr.         Ashutosh            Dubey,   learned   Advocate   for   the

respondent.
8.         Relevant provisions of the Act may be adverted to at the

outset.
Sections 2(1)
b and 2(1)(d) of the Act define “complainant”

and “consumer” as under:-
(b) “complainant” means –
(i) a consumer; or
(ii) any voluntary consumer association
                                   registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1
                                   of 1956) or under any other law for the time
                                   being in force; or
(iii) the Central Government or any State
                                   Government; or
(iv) one or more consumers, where there are
                                   numerous consumers having the same interest;
(v) in case of death of a consumer, his
                                   legal heir or representative; who or which
                                   makes a complaint;
(d) "consumer" means any person who
(i) buys any goods for a consideration which
                                   has been paid or promised or partly paid and
                                   partly promised, or under any system of
                                   deferred payment and includes any user of
                                   such goods other than the person who buys
                                   such   goods  for   consideration  paid   or
                                   promised or partly paid or partly promised,
                                   or under any system of deferred payment when
                                   such use is made with the approval of such
                                   person, but does not include a person who
                                   obtains such goods for resale or for any
                                   commercial purpose; or
(ii) hires or avails of any services for a
                                   consideration   which  has   been  paid   or
                                   promised or partly paid and partly promised,
                                   or under any system of deferred payment and
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1676 OF 2019
ANJUM HUSSAIN & ORS. VS. INTELLICITY BUSINESS PARK PVT. LTD. & ORS
.
5
includes any beneficiary of such services
                                   other than the person who [hires or avails
                                   of the services for consideration paid or
                                   promised,   or  partly   paid   and  partly
                                   promised, or under any system of deferred
                                   payments, when such services are availed of
                                   with the approval of the first-mentioned
                                   person; but does not include a person who
                                   avails of such services for any commercial
                                   purpose;
Explanation : For the purposes of this
                                   clause     "commercial purpose" does not
                                   include use by a person of goods bought and
                                   used by him and services availed by him
                                   exclusively for the purposes of earning his
                                   livelihood, and services availed by him by
                                   means of self-employment;
9.
Section 12
of the Act states:
12. Manner in which complaint shall be made
                                   – (1) A complaint in relation to any goods
                                   sold or delivered or agreed to be sold or
                                   delivered or any service provided or agreed
                                   to be provided, may be filed with a District
                                   Forum, by –
(a) the consumer to whom such goods are sold
                                       or delivered or agreed to be sold or
                                       delivered or such service provided or
                                       agreed to be provided;
(b) any   recognised   consumers  association
                                       whether the consumer to whom the goods
                                       sold or delivered or service provided or
                                       agreed to be provided is a member of such
                                       association or not;
(c) one or more consumers, where there are
                                       numerous   consumers  having   the  same
                                       interest, with the permission of the
                                       District Forum, on behalf of, or for the
                                       benefit of, all consumers so interested;
                                       or
(d) the Central Government or the State
                                       Government, as the case may be, either in
                                       its   individual    capacity    or   as   a
                                       representative   of    interests   of   the
                                       consumers in general.”
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1676 OF 2019
ANJUM HUSSAIN & ORS. VS. INTELLICITY BUSINESS PARK PVT. LTD. & ORS
.
6
10.
Section 13(6)
of the Act reads as under:
13. Procedure on admission of complaint –
                                   (1) to (5)……….
(6) Where the complainant is a consumer
                                   referred to in sub-clause (iv) of clause (b)
                                   of   subsection  (1)   of  section   2,  the
                                   provisions of Rule 8 of Order I of the First
                                   Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure,
                                   1908 (5 of 1908) shall apply subject to the
                                   modification that every reference therein to
                                   a the plaintiff and the defendant shall be
                                   construed as a reference to a complaint or
                                   the opposite party, as the case may be.
11.        According                 to        the          National        Commission,         though     all        the

appellants                had       a      common           grievance           that   the    respondent       had    not

delivered possession of the respective units booked by them and thus

the respondent was deficient in rendering service, it was not shown

how many of the allottees had booked the shops/commercial units

solely          for        the        purchase              of        earning    their   livelihood      by     way    of

self-employment.
12.
In
Chairman,                Tamil          Nadu         Housing    Board,     Madras     vs.    T.    N.

Ganapathy1
it was held by this Court that the persons who may be

represented in a Suit under Order 1 Rule 8 of Civil Procedure Code

need not have the same cause of action and all that is required for

application of said provision                                         is that     the    persons concerned must

have common interest or common grievance.                                                    What is required is

sameness of interest.                                Paragraphs 7 and 9 of the decision were as

under:-
7. On the question of maintainability of the

1           (1990) 1 SCC 608
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1676 OF 2019
ANJUM HUSSAIN & ORS. VS. INTELLICITY BUSINESS PARK PVT. LTD. & ORS.
7
suit in a representative capacity under
Order I, Rule 8 of the Code of Civil
                                   Procedure
, it has been contended that since
                                   the injury complained of is in regard to
                                   demand of money and that too by a separate
                                   demand against each of the allottees, giving
                                   rise to different causes of action, Rule 1
                                   has no application. The learned counsel
                                   proceeded to say that it is not known
                                   whether each of the allottees in Ashok Nagar
                                   had been even served with an additional
                                   demand before the suit was filed; and
                                   further emphasised that those who had been
                                   so served are interested in defeating only
                                   the demand individually referable to each of
                                   them. Each one of them is not interested in
                                   what   happens   to   the   others.   It   is,
                                   therefore, suggested that only such of the
                                   allottees who have already been served with
                                   additional demands are entitled to maintain
                                   an action in court, and they also should do
                                   it by filing separate suits. We do not find
                                   any merit in the argument. The provisions of
                                   Order I of Rule 8 have been included in the
                                   Code in the public interest so as to avoid
                                   multiplicity of litigation. The condition
                                   necessary for application of the provisions
                                   is that the persons on whose behalf the suit
                                   is   being   brought   must  have   the   same
                                   interest. In other words either the interest
                                   must be common or they must have a common
                                   grievance which they seek to get redressed.
In
Kodia Goundar v. Velandi Goundar (ILR
1955 Mad 339: AIR 1955 Mad 281) a Full Bench
                                   of the Madras High Court observed that on
                                   the plain language of Order I Rule 8, the
                                   principal requirement to bring a suit within
                                   that rule is the sameness of interest of the
                                   numerous persons on whose behalf or for
                                   whose benefit the suit is instituted. The
                                   court, while considering whether leave under
                                   the rule should be granted or not, should
                                   examine    whether   there    is    sufficient
                                   community   of   interest   to   justify   the
                                   adoption of the procedure provided under the
                                   rule. The object for which this provision is
                                   enacted is really to facilitate the decision
                                   of questions, in which a large number of
                                   persons are interested, without recourse to
                                   the ordinary procedure. The provision must,
                                   therefore, receive an interpretation which
                                   will subserve the object for its enactment.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1676 OF 2019
ANJUM HUSSAIN & ORS. VS. INTELLICITY BUSINESS PARK PVT. LTD. & ORS
.
8
There are no                  words in the rule to limit its
                                   scope to any                  particular category of suits or
                                   to exclude a                   suit in regard to a claim for
                                   money or for                  injunction as the present one.
…   …   …
9. It is true that each of the allottees is
                                   interested individually in fighting out the
                                   demand separately made or going to be made
                                   on him and, thus, separate causes of action
                                   arise in the case, but, that does not make
                                   Order I Rule 8 inapplicable. Earlier there
                                   was some doubt about the rule covering such
                                   a case which now stands clarified by the
                                   Explanation introduced by
the Code of Civil
                                   Procedure
(Amendment) Act, 1976, which reads
                                   as follows:
“Explanation.—   For   the  purpose   of
                                             determining whether the persons who sue
                                             or are sued, or defend, have the same
                                             interest in one suit, it is not
                                             necessary   to   establish   that   such
                                             persons have the same cause of action
                                             as the persons on whose behalf, or for
                                             whose benefit, they sue or are sued, or
                                             defend the suit, as the case may be.”

                                   The objects and reasons for the amendment
                                   were stated below:
“Objects   and   Reasons:  Clause   55;
                                       sub-clause (iv), — Rule 8 of Order I
                                       deals with representative suits. Under
                                       this rule, where there are numerous
                                       persons having the same interest in one
                                       suit, one or more of them may, with the
                                       permission of the court, sue or be
                                       sued, on behalf of all of them. The
                                       rule has created a doubt as to whether
                                       the party representing others should
                                       have the same cause of action as the
                                       persons represented by him. The rule is
                                       being substituted by a new rule and an
                                       explanation is being added to clarify
                                       that such persons need not have the
                                       same cause of action.”

                                   There is, therefore, no doubt that the
                                   persons who may be represented in a suit
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1676 OF 2019
ANJUM HUSSAIN & ORS. VS. INTELLICITY BUSINESS PARK PVT. LTD. & ORS
.
9
under Order I, Rule 8 need not have the same
                                   cause of action. The trial court in the
                                   present case was right in permitting the
                                   respondent to sue on behalf of all the
                                   allottees of Ashok Nagar. We, therefore, do
                                   not find any merit in this appeal which is
                                   dismissed   with   costs.  Before   closing,
                                   however, we would like to point out that the
                                   plaintiff has represented only those in the
                                   low income group in Ashok Nagar who will be
                                   governed by this judgment, and nothing that
                                   has been said or decided in this case is
                                   applicable to any other group or colony.”
13.        Very same issue was dealt with by Full Bench of the National

Commission                  in
Ambrish               Kumar     Shukla   and   Ors.   vs.   Ferrous

Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd.2
.                                     The National Commission relied upon the

decision of this Court in T.N. Housing Board1.                                       Relevant portion of

the decision of the National Commission was :-
“10. Since by virtue of
Section 13(6)
of the
                                   Consumer Protection Act, the provisions of
                                   the
Order 1 Rule 8 of CPC
apply to the
                                   consumer complaints filed by one or more
                                   consumers where there are numerous consumers
                                   having the same interest, the decision of
                                   the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Tamil Nadu
                                   Housing Board
(supra) would squarely apply,
                                   while answering the reference. The purpose
                                   of giving a statutory recognition to such a
                                   complaint being to avoid the multiplicity of
                                   litigation, the effort should be to give an
                                   interpretation which would sub serve the
                                   said objective, by reducing the increasing
                                   inflow of the consumer complaints to the
                                   Consumer Forums. The reduction in the number
                                   of   consumer   complaints   will  be   cost
                                   effective not only for the consumers but
                                   also for the service provider.
11..……As held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
                                   in
Tamil Nadu Housing Board
(supra), the
                                   interest of the persons on whose behalf the
                                   claim is brought must be common or they must
                                   have a common grievance which they seek to
                                   get addressed.
The defect or deficiency in

2           Consumer Case No.97 of 2016, decided on 07.10.2016
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1676 OF 2019
ANJUM HUSSAIN & ORS. VS. INTELLICITY BUSINESS PARK PVT. LTD. & ORS
.
10
the goods purchased, or the services hired
                                   or availed of by them should be the same for
                                   all the consumers on whose behalf or for
                                   whose benefit the complaint is filed.
                                   Therefore, the oneness of the interest is
                                   akin to a common grievance against the same
                                   person. If, for instance, a number of flats
                                   or plots in a project are sold by a
                                   builder/developer to a number of persons, he
                                   fails to deliver possession of the said
                                   flats/plots within the time frame promised
                                   by him, and a complaint is filed by one or
                                   more such persons, either seeking delivery
                                   of possession of flats/plots purchased by
                                   them and other purchasers in the said
                                   project, or refund of the money paid by them
                                   and    the    other    purchasers   to   the
                                   developer/builder is sought, the grievance
                                   of such persons being common i.e. the
                                   failure of the builder/developer to deliver
                                   timely possession of the flats/plots sold to
                                   them, they would have same interest in the
                                   subject    matter   of   the  complaint  and
                                   sufficient community of interest to justify
                                   the adoption of the procedure prescribed in
Order 1 Rule 8 of the Code of Civil
                                   Procedure
, provided that the complaint is
                                   filed on behalf of or for the benefit of all
                                   the persons having a common grievance
                                   against the same developer/builder, and
                                   identical relief is sought for all such
                                   consumers.
The primary object behind permitting a class
                                   action such as a complaint under
Section
                                   12(1)(c)
of the Consumer Protection Act
                                   being to facilitate the decision of a
                                   consumer dispute in which a large number of
                                   consumers are interested, without recourse
                                   to each of them filing an individual
                                   complaint, it is necessary that such a
                                   complaint is filed on behalf of or for the
                                   benefit of all the persons having such a
                                   community of interest. A complaint on behalf
                                   of only some of them therefore will not be
                                   maintainable. If for instance, 100 flat
                                   buyers/plot buyers in a project have a
                                   common      grievance       against      the
                                   Builder/Developer and a complaint under
Section 12(1)(c)
of the Consumer Protection
                                   Act is filed on behalf of or for the benefit
                                   of say 10 of them, the primary purpose
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1676 OF 2019
ANJUM HUSSAIN & ORS. VS. INTELLICITY BUSINESS PARK PVT. LTD. & ORS
.
11
behind permitting a class action will not be
                                   achieved, since the remaining 90 aggrieved
                                   persons will be compelled either to file
                                   individual complaints or to file complaints
                                   on behalf of or for the benefit of the
                                   different group of purchasers in the same
                                   project. This, in our view, could not have
                                   been the Legislative intent. The term
                                   'persons so interested' and 'persons having
                                   the same interest' used in
Section 12(1)(c)
mean, the persons having a common grievance
                                   against the same service provider. The use
                                   of the words 'all consumers so interested'
                                   and "on behalf of or for the benefit of all
                                   consumers so interested", in
Section 12(1)
(c) leaves no doubt that such a complaint
                                   must necessarily be filed on behalf of or
                                   for the benefit of all the persons having a
                                   common grievance, seeking a common relief
                                   and consequently having a community of
                                   interest against the same service provider.”
14.        It was observed by this Court in T.N. Housing Board1 that the

provision must receive an interpretation which would subserve the

object for its enactment.                                     It is in this light that the Full Bench

of the National Commission held that oneness of the interest is

akin to a common grievance against the same person.
15.        However,               the         National                Commission   in   the    instant   case,

completely lost sight of the principles so clearly
laid down in
the

decisions
referred to above
.                                           In our view, the approach in the

instant case was totally erroneous.
16.        We, therefore, allow this appeal, set aside the Order under

appeal.              The application preferred by the appellants under
Section

12(v)(o)
of the Act is held to be maintainable.                                               Case No.2241 of

2018 is restored to the file of the National Commission and shall

be proceeded with in accordance with law.
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1676 OF 2019
ANJUM HUSSAIN & ORS. VS. INTELLICITY BUSINESS PARK PVT. LTD. & ORS
.
12
17.        The appeal is allowed in aforesaid terms.                  No costs.
..…..……………….J.
                                                                            (Arun Mishra)


                                                                            ..…………………….J.
                                                                       (Uday Umesh Lalit)
New Delhi;
May 10, 2019.