[Cites
73
, Cited by
21
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Steel Authority Of India Ltd. (Unit ... vs Commissioner Of Central Excise Raipur on 8 May, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 450, 2019 (6) SCC 693 (2019) 8 SCALE 1, (2019) 8 SCALE 1
Author:
K.M. Joseph
Bench:
K.M. Joseph
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Ranjan Gogoi
REPORTABLE

                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2150 OF 2012

         M/S. STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LTD.                ..APPELLANT(S)
                                VERSUS

         COMMISSIONER OF CENTRAL EXCISE,
         RAIPUR                                        ..RESPONDENT(S)

                                          WITH
                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.2562/2012
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO.600/2013
                             CIVIL APPEAL NO.1522-23/2013
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO.599/2013

                                          JUDGMENT
K.M. JOSEPH, J.
1.              A   Bench   of     two   judges    doubted   the

         correctness of the judgment rendered by a Bench of

         two learned judges of this Court in CCE v. SKF India
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2019.05.08
16:13:50 IST
Reason:
Ltd. 2009 (13) SCC 461 (hereinafter referred to as
1
the   “SKF   Case”)   as   also   the   another    judgment

rendered by the same Bench in CCE v. International

Auto Ltd. 2010 (2) SCC 672 and on the said basis to

resolve the controversy the matter stood posted

before us.
2.      Very briefly put, the question which we are

called upon to consider and resolve is as to whether

interest is payable on the differential excise duty

with retrospective effect that become payable on the

basis of escalation clause under
Section 11AB
of the

Central Excise Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to

as “the Act”).
3.      In this batch of appeals, we will treat C.A.

No.2150/2012 as the leading case.        We will refer to

the said case as the SAIL Case.         In the said case

originally,     the   appellant     company       which   is

manufacturer of various products including rail
2
sold the same to the Indian Railways.      The products

were cleared on sale from 1st January, 2005 to July

2006.   The goods were cleared on the payment of

excise duty on the payment of price which was fixed

based   on     their    circular   dated   24.04.2005.

Subsequently, the prices were enhanced by way of

price circular dated 20.07.2006.      The revision came

into effect with retrospective effect.      It is based

on the same that SAIL deposited Rs.142 crores by way

of excise duty.        This was done in August 2006.

Thereupon, the officers of the department indulged

in   correspondence     with   SAIL   seeking   details

regarding the clearances which were effected.        On

the basis of material made available, SAIL was

called upon to remit interest under
Section 11AB
of

the Act.     SAIL filed its objections.    It is after

considering the objections, the authority found

that SAIL was liable to pay interest on a sum of
3
Rs.142 crores calculated based on the date of

removal of the goods during the period from January,

2005 to July,2006.    Various objections raised by

the appellants were dealt with and they were found

merit less.     An appeal was carried before the

Tribunal.   The Tribunal relied upon the judgment of

this Court in SKF India Ltd. Case (supra) and

accordingly dismissed the appeal.    Thereafter when

the matter came up before this Court, a Bench of two

learned judges after elaborately hearing the matter

doubted the correctness of the decision in SKF case

and also International Auto and hence the cases were

referred to us in the decision reported in 2015 (16)

SCC 107.    We heard learned counsel for the parties.
4.      In SKF case also the assessee on the basis

of revision of prices with retrospective effect paid

the differential duty on being called upon to pay

the said amount.     Thereafter the Revenue called
4
upon the assesee to pay interest under
Section 11AB
of the Act.
A Bench of two learned judges after

considering Sections 11A and 11AB disapproved the

judgment of the Bombay High Court in
CCE v. Rucha

Engineering P.Ltd
. holding inter alia as follows:
“11. Section 11-A puts the cases of
       non-levy or short-levy, non-payment or
       short-payment or erroneous refund of duty
       in two categories. One in which the
       non-payment or short-payment, etc. of
       duty is for a reason other than deceit;
       the default is due to oversight or some
       mistake and it is not intentional. The
       second in which the non-payment or
       short-payment, etc. of duty is “by reason
       of fraud, collusion or any wilful
       misstatement or suppression of facts, or
       contravention of any of the provisions of
       the Act or of Rules made thereunder with
       intent to evade payment of duty”; that is
       to say, it is intentional, deliberate
       and/or by deceitful means. Naturally, the
       cases falling in the two groups lead to
       different consequences and are dealt with
       differently.
12. Section 11-A, however allow the
       assessees-in-default in both kinds of
       cases to make amends, subject of course
       to certain terms and conditions. The
       cases   where    the   non-payment    or
       short-payment, etc. of duty is by reason
       of fraud, collusion, etc. are dealt with
       under sub-section (1-A) of Section 11-A
5
and the cases where the non-payment or
short-payment of duty is not intentional
under sub-section (2-B).
13. Sub-section (2-B) of Section 11-A
provides that the assessee-in-default
may, before the notice issued under
sub-section (1) is served on him, make
payment of the unpaid duty on the basis
of    his  own   ascertainment    or   as
ascertained by a Central Excise Officer
and inform the Central Excise Officer in
writing about the payment made by him and
in that event he would not be given the
demand notice under sub-section (1). But
Explanation 2 to the sub-section makes it
expressly clear that such payment would
not be exempt from interest chargeable
under Section 11-AB, that is, for the
period from the first date of the month
succeeding the month in which the duty
ought to have been paid till the date of
payment of the duty.
17. We are unable to subscribe to the
view taken by the High Court in Rucha
Engg. [ First Appeal No. 42 of 2007
decided on 3-4-2007] It is to be noted
that the assessee was able to demand from
its customers the balance of the higher
prices by virtue of retrospective
revision of the prices. It, therefore,
follows that at the time of sale the goods
carried a higher value and those were
cleared on short-payment of duty. The
differential duty was paid only later
when the assessee issued supplementary
invoices to its customers demanding the
balance amounts. Seen thus, it was
clearly a case of short-payment of duty
6
though indeed completely unintended and
       without any element of deceit, etc. The
       payment of differential duty thus clearly
       came under sub-section (2-B) of Section
       11-A and attracted levy of interest under
Section 11-AB
of the Act.”
5.     The same Bench in International Auto case

came to reiterate the same view in the latter

decision.
The Bench also proceeded to distinguish

the decision in
MRF Ltd. v. Collector of Central

Excise, Madras
1997 (5) SCC 104.
This is what the

court has
laid down in
regard to
MRF
case in

paragraph 9.
“9. In our view, with the entire change
       in the scheme of recovery of duty under
       the Act, particularly after insertion of
       Act 14 of 2001 and Act 32 of 2003, the
       judgment     of    this   Court     in MRF
       Ltd. [(1997) 5 SCC 104 : (1997) 92 ELT
       309] would not apply. That judgment was
       on interpretation of
Section 11-B
of the
       Act, which concerns claim for refund of
       duty by the assessee. That judgment was
       in the context of the price list approved
       on 14-5-1983. In that case, the assessee
       had made a claim for refund of excise duty
       on the differential between the price on
       the date of removal and the reduced price
7
at which tyres were sold. The price was
        approved by the Government. In that case,
        the assessee submitted that its price
        list was approved by the Government on
        14-5-1983, but subsequent thereto, on
        account of consumer resistance, the
        Government of India directed the assessee
        to roll back the prices to pre-14-5-1983
        level and on that account, price
        differential arose on the basis of which
        the assessee claimed refund of excise
        duty which stood rejected by this Court
        on the ground that once the assessee had
        cleared the goods on classification, the
        assessee became liable to payment of duty
        on the date of removal and subsequent
        reduction in the prices for whatever
        reason cannot be made a matter of concern
        to the Department insofar as the
        liability to pay excise duty was
        concerned.”
6.      A Bench of two learned judges who have

referred the cases felt that the MRF decision would

continue to prevail, the value at the time of removal

of the goods alone would govern the Situation which

is a fundamental principle which continues to hold

good till now.    The additional duty to be paid in

future cannot be treated as attracting the concept

of “short payment”. Though the differential duty may
8
be payable but the interest is not payable.       The

interest clock would start ticking from the date the

differential duty is due, that is, the day on which

the parties agree upon the escalated price and not

before.    The expression “ought to have been paid”

found in Section 11AB was not considered by this

Court in SKF case, it was pointed out.      The Court

felt that SKF Case runs contrary to the Constitution

Bench decision in JK Synthetics and interest cannot

be demanded by way of damages or compensation.
7.        In our view, the following questions will

fall to be decided by us:
1)   Whether the decision in SKF case and also in

      International Auto lay down the correct law

      having regard to the decision of this Court in
MRF
case which was in fact rendered by a Bench

      of three Judges.
9
2)   The effect of the judgment in JK Synthetics

 v.   State   of   Rajathan   as   also    the   other

 judgments cited before us in regard to demand

 for interest under fiscal statutes.
3)   Whether the determination of duty under

 Section 11A(2) is necessary to sustain the

 demand for interest under
Section 11AB
of the

 Act.
4)   The impact of Rule 7 of the Central Excise

 rules     which     contemplates         provisional

 assessment.
5)   Whether payment of differential duty can be

 treated as a case of payment of duty under the

 head “short paid”.
6)   The effect of decisions under the
Income Tax

 Act
relating to accrual of income and the

 impact of accrual of income under the Income
10
Tax Act on the liability under
Section 11AB
of

      the Act having regard to the statutory scheme

      under the Act and the Rules.
8.      Before we proceed to deal with the matter in

greater detail, we must at once notice the following

finding in the reference order passed by this Court

in
Steel Authority of India vs. CCE
(supra):
“21. In the first instance, he pointed out
      that in these appeals, there can be two
      distinct types of transactions:
(a) where the price of the goods is
      “fixed” at the time and place of removal,
      and as a result of subsequent negotiations
      (often    protracted)    the    price   is
      retrospectively revised by the buyer;
(b) where the price at the time and place
      of removal is “not fixed” (price subject to
      escalation clause), and the final price is
      agreed between the seller and buyer
      subsequently.
According to him in the cases falling in the
      first category, even the differential duty
      is not payable.       However, all these
      appeals fall in the second category and,
      therefore, we are not indulging in any
      discussion    pertaining   to   the    first
11
category. We may also point out that in
        all these appeals, the period in dispute
        (i.e. the period in which supplementary
        invoices on account of price revision were
        raised) is post the introduction of the
        “transaction value” definition in
Section
        4
of the 1944 Act but before 2010.
22.    It is a common case of the parties and
        even the learned counsel for the assessee
        admits that in non-fixed price scenario,
        differential duty is liable to be paid on
        subsequent revision of price which the
        assessee had already paid the differential
        duty at or about the time when revised price
        was agreed upon by the seller and the buyer.
        The question, however, is as to whether
        interest thereon is payable from the date
        of clearance of goods when duty was paid on
        the basis of invoice, till the date when
        differential duty was paid.”

Therefore, we proceed further in this matter on the

basis that the price at the time of removal is not

fixed. That is, the price is subject to revision

under    the   escalation     clause.      There    is   also

admittedly no dispute raised either before the Bench

which referred the matter or before us by the learned

counsel for the appellant that differential duty is
12
indeed payable on the subsequently revised price

which is to operate with retrospective effect.
9.       At this juncture we think it apposite to

refer to the facts in
MRF
case (
MRF Limited v.

Collector of Central Excise, Madras
).
MRF
Case was

decided on 12.3.1997 and it is reported in 1997 (5)

SCC 104.    The appeal was filed in this Court against

the order passed by the Tribunal dated 24.9.1986.

By the impugned order the assessee’s claim for

refund of excess duty paid on differential price on

the date of removal and the reduced price was

rejected.     The case set up by the assessee was that

the   price    list    was    approved    on    14.5.1983.

Subsequently,     there      was   resistance     by   the

consumers.     The Ministry of Commerce, Government of

India,     thereupon    directed    the    manufacturer-

assessee pursuant to a decision taken in a meeting

of Manufacturers to bring down the prices to the pre
13
14.5.1983 level.     On the basis of the same a

difference in the prices arose.    This led to a claim

for refund.   The Tribunal was of the view that the

prices at the time of removal alone mattered.      The

subsequent reduction in the prices for whatever

reason was totally irrelevant.        Thereafter, the

court proceeded to hold as follows:
“2. We have heard the learned counsel for
       the assessee.    Once the assessee has
       cleared the goods on the classification
       and price indicated by him at the time of
       the removal of the goods from the factory
       gate, the assessee becomes liable to
       payment of duty on that date and time and
       subsequent reduction in prices for
       whatever reason cannot be a matter of
       concern to the Central Excise Department
       insofar as the liability to payment of
       excise duty was concerned. This is the
       view which was taken by the Tribunal in
       the case of Indo Hacks Ltd. V. CCE (1986)
       25 ELT 69 (Trib)and it seems to us that
       the Tribunal’s view that the duty is
       chargeable at the rate and price when the
       commodity is cleared at the factory gate
       and not on the price reduced at a
       subsequent date is unexceptionable.
Besides as rightly observed by the
       Tribunal the subsequent fluctuation in
       the prices of the commodity can have no
       relevance whatsoever so far as the
14
liability    to   pay   excise   duty   is
        concerned.    That being so, even if we
        assume that the roll back in the price of
        tyres manufactured by the appellant
        Company was occasioned on account of the
        directive    issued    by    the   Central
        Government, that by itself, without
        anything more, would not entitle the
        appellant to claim a refund on the price
        differential unless it is shown that
        there was some agreement in this behalf
        with the Government and the latter had
        agreed to refund the excise duty to the
        extent of the reduced price. That being
        so, we see no merit in this appeal brought
        by the assessee and dismiss the same with
        no order as to costs.”
10.     We may at once notice a feature which stands

out.
In the
MRF
case at the time when the goods were

removed,   the   prices   were   fixed   and   there   was

absolutely no occasion for the assessee or the

department to even contemplate a price revision

either upwards or downwards.         The price was not

provisional.
Therefore, we would think that out of

the two situations which are noted in paragraph 21

of the Reference Order, the first situation would

be comparable to the facts of the decision obtaining
15
in
MRF
case.   In case where the price is fixed there

would be no occasion for the assessee to seek refund

but here in the case before us, admittedly the case

does   not   fall   under   the   first   category    even

according to the appellants.      It could be said that

the price was subject to variation based on the

operation of the price escalation clause.           Now the

time is ripe for us to consider the statutory

framework under the Act and the Rules made under the

Act.
Section 2(h)
of the Act defines sale and

purchase as follows:
2(h) “sale” and “purchase”, with their
       grammatical    variations   and    cognate
       expressions, mean any transfer of the
       possession of goods by one person to
       another in the ordinary course of trade or
       business for cash or deferred payment or
       other valuable consideration.”
11.     Interestingly, unlike under the definition

of
Sale of Goods Act, 1930
, “sale” under the Act

takes place on transfer of possession. However we
16
need not say anything further as it is not necessary

for the cases at hand.
Section 3
is the charging

section. With effect from 1.7.2000 under the
Finance

Act
of 2000,
Section 4
of the Act which is crucial

for our case reads as follows:
“4. Valuation of excisable goods for
       purpose of charging of duty of excise –
       (1) Where under this Act, the duty of
       excise is chargeable on any excisable
       goods with reference to their value,
       then, on each removal of the goods, such
       value shall –
(a)    In a case where the goods are
         sold by the assessee, for delivery at
         the time and place of the removal, the
         assessee and the buyer of the goods are
         not related and the price is the sole
         consideration for the sale, be the
         tansaction value;
(b)     In any other case, including the
         case where the goods are not sold, be the
         value determined in such manner as may
         be prescribed
       (2) The provisions of this section shall
       not apply in respect of any excisable
       goods for which a tariff value has been
       fixed under sub-section (2) of
section 3
.
        (3) For the purpose of this section,-
17
(a)    “assessee” means the person who
         is liable to pay the duty of excise under
         this Act and includes his agent;
(b)    xxx       xxx      xxx
         (c)    xxx       xxx      xxx
         (d)     “transaction value” means the
price actually paid or payable for the
         goods, when sold, and includes in
         addition to the amount charged as price,
         any amount that the buyer is liable to
         pay to, or on behalf of, the assessee,
         by reason of, or in connection with the
         sale, whether payable at the time of the
         sale or at any other time, including,
         but not limited to, any amount charged
         for, or to make provision for,
         advertising or publicity, marketing and
         selling      organization      expenses,
         storage, outward handling, servicing,
         warranty, commission or any other
         matter; but does not include the amount
         of duty of excise, sales tax and other
         taxes, if any, actually paid or actually
         payable on such goods.”
12.    Section 11A was inserted in the year 1980 and

it underwent changes.
Section 11A
of the Act as it

stood at the relevant time read as follows:
“11A.    Recovery of duties not levied or
       not paid or short-levied or shot-paid or
       erroneously refunded – (1) When any duty
       of excise has not been levied or paid or
18
has been short-levied or short-paid or
[erroneously refunded, whether or not
such non-levy or non-payment, short-levy
or short payment or erroneous refund, as
the case may be, was on the basis of any
approval   acceptance    or   assessment
relating to the rate of duty on or
valuation of excisable goods under any
other provisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder], a Central Excise
Officer may, within [one year] from the
relevant date, serve notice on the person
chargeable with the duty which has not
been levied or paid or which has been
short-levied or short-paid or to whom the
refund has erroneously been made,
requiring him to show cause why he should
not pay the amount specified in the
notice:
Provided that where any duty of
excise has not been levied or paid or has
been short-levied or shot-paid or
erroneously refunded by reason of fraud,
collusion or any wilful mis-statement or
suppression of facts, or contravention of
any of the provisions of this Act or of
the rules made thereunder with intent to
evade payment of duty by such person or
his agent, the provisions of this
sub-section shall have effect [as if,
{***]] for the words [one year], the words
“five years” were substituted.
[Provided further that where the amount
of duty which has not been levied or paid
or has been short-levied or short-paid or
erroneously refunded is one crore rupees
or less a notice under this sub-
section
19
shall be served by the Commissioner of
Central Excise or with his prior approval
by any officer subordinate to him:
Provided also that where the amount
of duty which has not been levied or paid
or has been short-levied or short-paid or
erroneously refunded is more than one
crore rupees, no notice under this
sub-section shall be served without the
prior approval of the Chief Commissioner
of Central Excise.]
(2) The [Central Excise Officer] shall,
after considering the representation, if
any, made by the person on whom notice is
served under sub-section (1), determine
the amount of duty of excise due from such
person (not being in excess of the amount
specified in the notice) and thereupon
such person shall pay the amount so
determined.
(3) For the purposes of this section,-
(i) “refund”    includes    rebate   of
duty of excise on excisable goods
exported out of India or on excisable
materials used in the    manufacture of
goods which are exported out of India;
(ii) “relevant date” means,-
[(a) in the case of excisable goods on
    which duty of excise has not been
    levied    or   paid    or  has   been
    short-levied or short-paid -
(A) where under the rules made
             under this Act a periodical
             return,             showing
20
particulars of the duty
                    paid on the excisable goods
                    removed during the period
                    to which the said return
                    relates, is to be filed by
                    a   manufacturer    or    a
                    producer or a licensee of a
                    warehouse, as the      case
                    may be, the date on which
                    such return is so filed;
(B) where no periodical return
                    as aforesaid is filed, the
                    last date on which such
                    return is to be filed under
                    the said rules;
(C) in any other case, the date
                    on which the duty is to be
                    paid under this Act or the
                    rules made thereunder;]”
13.    Section 11AB is undoubtedly the most crucial

Section as far as this case is concerned.          Section

11AB read as follows:
“11AB.   Interest on delayed payment of
       duty,– (1) Where any duty of excise has
       not been levied or paid or has been
       short-levied or shot-paid or erroneously
       refunded by reason of fraud, collusion or
       any wilful mis-statement or suppression
       of facts, or contravention of any of the
       provisions of this Act or the rules made
       thereunder with intent to evade payment
21
of duty, the person liable to pay duty as
       determined under sub-section (2) of
       section 11A shall, in addition to the
       duty, be liable to pay interest [at such
       rate not below eighteen per cent, and not
       exceeding thirty-six per cent, per annum,
       as is for the time being fixed by the
       Central Government, by notification in
       the Official Gazette], from the first day
       of the month succeeding the month in which
       the duty ought to have been paid under
       this Act or the rules made thereunder or
       from the date of such erroneous refund,
       as the case may be, but for the provisions
       contained in sub-section (2) of section
       11A, till the date of payment of such
       duty.
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is
       hereby declared that the provisions of
       sub-section (1) shall not apply to cases
       where the duty became payable before the
       date on which the Finance (No.2) Bill,
       1996   receives   the  assent   of   the
       President.”

       Explanation 1 and 2 are not extracted.
14.    It is also now relevant to notice certain

rules under the Central Excise Rules, 2002.         Rules

4,5,6,7 and 8 read as under:
“RULE 4. Duty payable on removal.-
(1) Every person who produces or
       manufactures any excisable goods, or who
       stores such goods in a warehouse, shall
       pay the duty leviable on such goods in the
22
manner provided in rule 8 or under any
other law, and no excisable goods, on
which any duty is payable, shall be
removed without payment of duty from any
place, where they are produced or
manufactured, or from a warehouse, unless
otherwise provided :
Proviso and Explanation omitted.
(1A)     XXX      XXX      XXX

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained
in sub-rule (1), where molasses are
produced in a khandsari sugar factory,
the person who procures such molasses,
whether directly from such factory or
otherwise, for use in the manufacture of
any commodity, whether or not excisable,
shall pay the duty leviable on such
molasses, in the same manner as if such
molasses have been produced by the
procurer.
(3) Omitted

(4)      XXX      XXX      XXX
RULE 5. Date of determination of duty and
tariff valuation. —
(1) The rate of duty or tariff value
applicable to any excisable goods, other
than khandsari molasses, shall be the
rate or value in force on the date when
such goods are removed from a factory or
a warehouse, as the case may be.
(2) The rate of duty in the case of
khandsari molasses, shall be the rate in
force on the date of receipt of such
23
molasses in the factory of the procurer
of such molasses.
Explanation. - If any excisable goods are
used within the factory, the date of
removal of such goods‘ shall mean the date
on which the goods are issued for such
use.
(3) omitted.
RULE 6. Assessment of duty.- The assessee
shall himself assess the duty payable on
any excisable goods:
Provided that in case of cigarettes, the
Superintendent or Inspector of Central
Excise shall assess the duty payable
before   removal    by   the   assessee.
Provisional assessment.
RULE 7. Provisional assessment.-
(1) Where the assessee is unable to
determine the value of excisable goods or
determine the rate of duty applicable
thereto, he may request the Assistant
Commissioner of Central Excise or the
Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise, as
the case may be, in writing giving reasons
for payment of duty on provisional basis
and the Assistant Commissioner of Central
Excise or the Deputy Commissioner of
Central Excise, as the case may be, may
order allowing payment of duty on
provisional basis at such rate or on such
value as may be specified by him.
(2) The payment of duty on provisional
basis may be allowed, if the assessee
executes a bond in the form prescribed by
24
notification by the Board with such
surety or security in such amount as the
Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise
or the Deputy Commissioner of Central
Excise, as the case may be, deem fit,
binding the assessee for payment of
difference between the amount of duty as
may be finally assessed and the amount of
duty provisionally assessed.
(3) The Assistant Commissioner of Central
Excise or the Deputy     Commissioner of
Central Excise, as the case may be, shall
pass order for final assessment, as soon
as   may    be,   after    the   relevant
information, as may be required for
finalizing the assessment, is available,
but within a period not exceeding six
months from the date of the communication
of the order issued under sub-rule (1):
Provided that the period specified in
this sub-rule may, on sufficient cause
being shown and the reasons to be recorded
in   writing,    be   extended    by   the
Commissioner of Central Excise for a
further period not exceeding six months
and by the Chief Commissioner of Central
Excise or Chief Commissioner of Central
Excise for such further period as he may
deem fit.
(4) The assessee shall be liable to pay
interest on any amount payable to Central
Government, consequent to order for final
assessment under sub-rule(3), at the rate
specified by the Central Government by
notification under section 11AA or
Section 11AB
of the Act from the first day
of the month succeeding the month for
25
which such amount is determined, till the
date of payment thereof.
(5) Where the assessee is entitled to a
refund consequent to order for final
assessment under sub-rule (3), subject to
sub-rule (6), there shall be paid an
interest on such refund as provided under
section 11BB
of the Act from the first day
of the month succeeding the month for
which such refund is determined, till the
date of refund.
(6). Any amount of refund determined
under sub-rule (3) shall be credited to
the Fund:
Provided that the amount of refund,
instead of being credited to the Fund, be
paid to the applicant, if such amount is
relatable to –
(a) the duty of excise paid by the
manufacturer, if he had not passed on the
incidence of such duty to any other
person; or
(b) the duty of excise borne by the buyer,
if he had not passed on the incidence of
such duty to any other person.
RULE 8. Manner of payment .-
(1) The duty on the goods removed from the
factory or the warehouse during a month
shall be paid by the 5th day of the
following month:
Provided that in case of goods removed
during the month of March, the duty shall
be paid by the 31st day of March :
26
Provided further that where an assessee
is availing of the exemption under a
notification based on the value of
clearances in a financial year, the duty
on goods cleared during a calender month
shall be paid by the 15th day of the
following month except in case of goods
removed during the month of March for
which the duty shall be paid by the 31st
day of March.
Explanation – Not extracted

(1A)     ***       ***      ***

(2) The duty of excise shall be deemed to
have been paid for the purposes of these
rules on the excisable goods removed in
the manner provided under sub-rule (1)
and the credit of such duty allowed, as
provided by or under any rule.
(3)If the assessee fails to pay the amount
of duty by the due date, he shall be liable
to pay the outstanding amount along with
an interest at the rate of two per cent
per month or rupees one thousand per day,
whichever is higher, for the period
starting with the first day after due date
till the date of actual payment of the
outstanding amount:
Provided that the total amount of
interest payable in terms of this
sub-rule shall not exceed the amount of
duty which has not been paid by the due
date:
Provided further that till such time the
amount of duty outstanding and the
interest payable thereon are not paid, it
27
shall be deemed that the goods in
       que3stion in respect of which the duty and
       interest are outstanding, have been
       charged without payment of duty, and
       where such duty and interest are not paid
       within a period of one month from the due
       date, the consequences and the penalties
       as provided in these rules shall follow.
Illustrations – Not extracted

       (4) The provisions of
Section 11
of the
       Act shall be applicable for recovery of
       the duty as assessed under rule 6 and the
       interest under sub-rule (3) in the same
       manner as they are applicable for
       recovery of any duty or other sums payable
       to the Central Government.”
15.     Excise duty is a duty on manufacture or

production of goods.    It is, however, collected at

the point of removal of goods. When the duty of

excise is chargeable with reference to the value of

goods,
Section 4
provides that on each removal of

the goods, the value will be determined either under

clause(a) or clause(b).       We are in these cases

governed by clause(a). Section (4) yields the

following elements: -
28
(i)   when the goods are sold;
(ii) for delivery;
(iii) at the time and place of removal;
(iv) the assessee (appellants in these cases

      are the assesses) and the buyer not being

      related;
(v)   price is the sole consideration for the

      sale, then the transaction value will be

      the value for the determination of excise

      duty.
The price may be what is actually paid or what

 is payable for the goods when sold.
Apart from what is shown as the price the

 transaction value would include:
(i)   Any amount the buyer is liable to pay

              to the assessee by reason of or in

              connection with the sale whether at the

              time of the sale or any other time.
29
(ii) Any amount payable on behalf of the

                 assessee by reason of or in connection

                 with the sale whether at the time of

                 sale or any other time.
(iii) The    aforesaid    amounts       encompass

                 certain amounts which are specifically

                 enumerated      namely,     advertising,

                 publicity,   marketing     and     selling,

                 organizational     expenses,       storage,

                 outward handling serving, warranty,

                 commission or any other matter.
16.       Thus, the intent is to determine the value

by not only including the actual price paid or

payable    but   all   amounts    which    are    separately

enumerated and found mention as hereinbefore.
17.       Now it is time to look at the effect of the

rules relevant for the purpose of this case.           Rule

4 falls under the heading ‘duty payable on removal’.
30
It is contemplated that duty is to be paid on the

goods       in the manner provided under Rule 8 or under

any law.      No excisable good on which duty is payable

can be removed without payment of excise duty unless

otherwise provided.         This would take us to Rule 8

as there is no case that any other law is applicable.

Rule    8    under   the   heading    ‘manner   of   payment’

declares that duty on the goods removed from the

factory etc. during a month shall be paid by the          5th

day of the following month.          Removal however in the

month of March will entail liability to pay by 31st

day of March.        Sub-rule 3 of Rule 8 provides for

liability with the assessee who fails to pay the

amount by the due date.              Sub rule 4 refers to

liability to pay interest.           It is amply clear that

the expression ‘due date’ would be 5th day of the

month following the month during which the goods are

removed except with regard to the goods removed
31
during the month of March in which case the due date

would be 31st day of March.
18.       The scheme of the rules further is that

assessment is to be done by the assessee itself by

way of self-assessment and the duty paid by the due

date (see Rule 6). What is to happen when the

asssessee is confronted with a situation when it is

unable to determine the value of the goods or find

the rate of duty.       Rule 7 provides the solution.

The assessee can thereunder apply giving reasons and

seeking     permission     to     make       a   provisional

assessment.       The     officer       may,     grant   such

permission.    Thereupon,       duty    is     payable   on   a

provisional basis.       The value or the rate would be

indicated by the officer in the order permitting

such provisional assessment.           This is however made

subject to the assessee executing a bond binding the

assessee to pay the difference between the duty as
32
payable     under    the    final    assessment      and     the

provisional assessment.        The final assessment is to

be   made   within    six   months    from     the   date     of

communication of the order permitting provisional

assessment under Rule 7(1). The period can be

extended by the Commissioner for six months and by

the chief Commissioner for which there is no time

limit.
Sub-rule (4) of Rule 7 is very crucial. It

provides as follows:-
1)   The assessee shall be liable to pay interest
2)   On    any   amount    payable    based    on   a     final

      assessment under Rule 7(3)
3)   At the rate fixed under Section 11A or Section

      11B of the Act
4)   From the first date of the month succeeding the

      month for which the amount is determined till

      the date of payment thereof.
33
Rule 7(5) contemplates interest on refund based

 on the final assessment.
19.       Now it is important that we delve upon the

case of SAIL before the Commissioner, its stand in

the appeal and finally before this Court.                   As

already noticed SAIL sold and cleared rails to

Indian Railways based on the price circular dated

24/04/2005.      The transaction in question related to

the period 01/01/2005 to July, 2006.            Later, based

upon a revised price circular dated 20/07/2006, the

prices    were   revised     and   it   took    effect   from

01/01/2005. The excise duty undoubtedly in a sum of

Rs. 142.78 crores came to be paid by SAIL in August

2006.      However,   upon    receipt    of    notice    under
Section 11AB
of the Act calling upon it to pay more

than Rs. 15 crores as interest under Section 11AB.

SAIL raised various objections.                It, in fact,

contended that this is not a case of short payment
34
of duty as the price at the time of actual removal

of goods formed the basis for which duty was duly

paid.   It was not liable to pay the differential

duty.   Rebutting the case of the department, it was

contended that it was not liable to resort to

provisional    assessment   under   Rule   7.   The

Commissioner however, took the view that the price

which were shown originally by SAIL was itself

provisional.    It was a case where the assessee

should have invoked Rule 7 and proceeded to make the

provisional assessment.      In appeal before the

Tribunal, the assessee-SAIL continued with its

contention that it actually was not liable to pay

the differential duty.      The Tribunal as already

noticed following the judgment of this Court in SKF

case (supra) which came to be delivered by that time

dismissed the appeal of the assessee. Before the

Bench which referred the matters to this Bench
35
however, the appellants have made it clear that they

are indeed liable to pay the differential duty.         We

have noticed that stand which has been expressly

recorded by this Court in paragraphs 21-22 of the

reference order.
20.     Much    reliance   has     been   placed   by   the

appellants on the decision of this Court in J K

Synthetics. The first decision is the decision of

this Court in Associated Cement. The said decision

was rendered by a Bench of three learned judges.

There was a cleavage of opinion.            Justice E.S.

Venkataramiah, as His Lordship then was wrote the

majority judgment.       Justice P.N. Bhagwati as His

Lordship then was dissented.        The case arose under

the
Rajasthan Sales Tax Act
.          The two relevant

provisions     to   be   noticed    under   the    statute

considered by the said Bench are
Sections 7
and
Section 11B
of the Act.      They read as follows:
36
"7. Submission of returns.-(1) Every
registered dealer and such other dealer,
as may be required to do so by the
assessing authority by notice served in
the prescribed manner, shall furnish
prescribed returns, for the prescribed
periods, in the prescribed forms, in the
prescribed   manner   and   within   the
prescribed   time   to   the   assessing
authority:
Provided that the assessing authority may
extend the date for the submission of such
returns by any dealer or class of dealers
by a period not exceeding fifteen days in
the aggregate.
(2)   Every     such   return   shall    be
accompanied by a Treasury receipt or
receipt of any bank authorised to receive
money on behalf of the State Government,
showing the deposit of the full amount of
tax due on the basis of return in the State
Government Treasury or bank concerned.
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained
in sub-section (2), the State Government
may by notification in the official
Gazette require any dealer or class of
dealers specified therein, to pay tax at
intervals shorter than those prescribed
under sub-section (1). In such cases, the
proportionate tax on the basis of the last
return shall be deposited at the
intervals     specified    in   the    said
notification in advance of the return.
The difference, if any, of the tax payable
according to the return and the advance
tax paid shall be deposited with the
return    and    the   return   shall    be
accompanied by the treasury receipt, or
receipts, of any Bank authorised to
37
receive money on behalf of the State
Government, for the full amount of tax due
shown in the return

(3) If any dealer discovers any omission,
error, or wrong statement in any returns
furnished by him under sub-section (1),
he may furnish a revised return in the
prescribed manner before the time
prescribed for the submission of the next
return but not later.
(4) Every deposit of tax made under
sub-section (2) shall be deemed to be
provisional    subject    to    necessary
adjustments in pursuance of the final
assessment of tax made for any year under
section 10
."
“11-B. Interest on failure to pay tax, fee
or penalty – (a) If the amount of any tax
payable under sub-sections (2) and (2-A)
of Section 7 is not paid within the period
allowed, or
(b)If the amount specified in any notice
of demand, whether for tax, fee or
penalty, is not paid within the period
specified in such notice, or in the
absence of such specification, within 30
days from the date of service of such
notice, the dealer shall be liable to pay
simple interest on such amount at one per
cent per month from the day commencing
after the end of the said period for a
period of three months and at one and a
half per cent per month thereafter during
the time he continues to make default in
the payments;
38
Provided that, where, as a result, of
        any order under this Act, the amount, on
        which interest was payable under this
        section, has been reduced, the interest
        shall be reduced accordingly and the
        excess interest paid, if any, shall be
        refunded;
Provided further that no interest
        shall be payable under this section on
        such amount and for such period in respect
        of which interest is paid under the
        provisions of
Sections 11
and
14
.”
21.     In Associated Cement Ltd., the majority was

dealing with the case falling under Section 11B(a).

After analyzing the various provisions the majority

took the view that not only the assessee should have

paid the tax on the basis of the return but the return

must be a return which it ought to have filed in law

and on facts.       Justice Bhagwati who dissented

however, took exception to this reasoning and found

that such an interpretation would raise conflicts

between the provisions contained in clause (a) and

clause(b) of Rule 11B.       Justice Bhagwati in his
39
dissent pointed out the anomaly behind the reasoning

of the majority.   In particular, we may point out

that it was noticed by the learned Judge that if the

reasoning of the majority is accepted, different

rates of interest would apply at different stages.

Furthermore, it was reasoned that an assessee cannot

do beyond paying the tax according to the return.

He cannot possibly divine what the assessing officer

will finally assess him to.   In fact, in the later

judgment in JK Synthetics, the Constitution Bench

subscribed to the view expressed in the dissenting

judgment in
ACC Ltd.
case which it accepted as laying

down the correct position in law and overruled the

majority in Associated Cement Co. case.    In the JK

Synthetics judgment also the case arose under the
Rajasthan Sales Tax Act
though it arose under
Section 7(2)(A)
.
The case in Associated Cement

case fell under under
Section 7(2)
of the Act.   What
40
is relevant for our purpose     are two aspects.   One

is we must bear in mind the actual provisions of the

Rajasthan tax law which fell for consideration that

we have already set forth.     We must advert to the

law which has been laid down in JK Synthetics.

Following is the discussion:
“16. It is well-known that when a statute
       levies a tax it does so by inserting a
       charging section by which a liability is
       created or fixed and then proceeds to
       provide the machinery to make the
       liability effective. It, therefore,
       provides the machinery for the assessment
       of the liability already fixed by the
       charging section, and then provides the
       mode for the recovery and collection of
       tax, including penal provisions meant to
       deal with defaulters. Provision is also
       made for charging interest on delayed
       payments, etc. Ordinarily the charging
       section which fixes the liability is
       strictly construed but that rule of
       strict construction is not extended to
       the machinery provisions which are
       construed like any other statute. The
       machinery provisions must, no doubt, be
       so construed as would effectuate the
       object and purpose of the statute and not
       defeat             the              same.
(See Whitney v. IRC [1926 AC 37 : 42
TLR
       58] , CIT v. Mahaliram Ramjidas
[(1940)
       8 ITR 442 : AIR 1940 PC 124 : 67 IA
       239], India         United          Mills
41
Ltd. v. Commissioner of Excess Profits
Tax, Bombay [(1955) 1 SCR 810 : AIR 1955
SC 79 : (
1955) 27 ITR 20] and Gursahai
Saigal v. CIT, Punjab
[(1963) 3 SCR 893
: AIR 1963 SC 1062 : (1963) 48 ITR 1] ).
But it must also be realised that
provision by which the authority is
empowered to levy and collect interest,
even if construed as forming part of the
machinery provisions, is substantive law
for the simple reason that in the absence
of contract or usage interest can be
levied under law and it cannot be
recovered by way of damages for wrongful
detention of the amount. (See
Bengal
Nagpur Railway Co. Ltd. v. Ruttanji
Ramji
[AIR 1938 PC 67 : 65 IA 66 : 67
CLJ
153] and Union of India v. A.L. Rallia
Ram
[(1964) 3 SCR 164, 185-90 : AIR 1963
SC 1685] ). Our attention was, however,
drawn by Mr Sen to two cases.
Even in those
cases,
CIT v. M. Chandra Sekhar
[(1985)
1 SCC 283 : 1985 SCC (Tax) 85 : (
1985) 151
ITR 433] and Central Provinces Manganese
Ore Co. Ltd. v. CIT
[(1986) 3 SCC 461 :
1986 SCC (Tax) 601 : (1986) 160 ITR 961]
, all that the Court pointed out was that
provision for charging interest was, it
seems, introduced in order to compensate
for the loss occasioned to the Revenue due
to delay. But then interest was charged
on the strength of a statutory provision,
may be its objective was to compensate the
Revenue for delay in payment of tax. But
regardless of the reason which impelled
the Legislature to provide for charging
interest, the Court must give that
meaning to it as is conveyed by the
language used and the purpose to be
achieved. Therefore, any provision made
in a statute for charging or levying
42
interest on delayed payment of tax must
be construed as a substantive law and not
adjectival law. So construed and applying
the normal rule of interpretation of
statutes, we find, as pointed out by us
earlier    and   by   Bhagwati,    J.   in
the
Associated Cement Co.
case [(1981) 4
SCC 578 : 1982 SCC (Tax) 3 : (1981) 48 STC
466] , that if the Revenue's contention
is accepted it leads to conflicts and
creates certain anomalies which could
never   have   been   intended    by   the
Legislature.
17. Let us look at the question from a
slightly different angle.
Section 7(1)
enjoins on every dealer that he shall
furnish prescribed returns for the
prescribed period within the prescribed
time to the assessing authority. By the
proviso the time can be extended by not
more than 15 days. The requirement of
Section 7(1)
is undoubtedly a statutory
requirement. The prescribed return must
be accompanied by a receipt evidencing
the deposit of full amount of ‘tax due’
in the State Government on the basis of
the return. That is the requirement of
Section 7(2)
.
Section 7
(2-A), no doubt,
permits payment of tax at shorter
intervals but the ultimate requirement is
deposit of the full amount of ‘tax due’
shown in the return. When Section 11-B(a)
uses the expression “tax payable under
sub-sections (2) and (2-A) of
Section 7
”,
that must be understood in the context of
the aforesaid expressions employed in the
two    sub-sections.    Therefore,     the
expression ‘tax payable’ under the said
two sub-sections is the full amount of tax
due and ‘tax due’ is that amount which
43
becomes due ex hypothesi on the turnover
and taxable turnover “shown in or based
on the return”. The word ‘payable’ is a
descriptive word, which ordinarily means
“that which must be paid or is due, or may
be paid” but its correct meaning can only
be determined if the context in which it
is used is kept in view. The word has been
frequently understood to mean that which
may, can or should be paid and is held
equivalent to ‘due’. Therefore, the
conjoint reading of
Sections 7(1)
, (2)
and (2-A) and 11-B of the Act leaves no
room for doubt that the expression ‘tax
payable’ in Section 11-B can only mean the
full amount of tax which becomes due under
sub-sections (2) and (2-
A) of the Act
when
assessed on the basis of the information
regarding turnover and taxable turnover
furnished or shown in the return.
Therefore, so long as the assessee pays
the tax which according to him is due on
the basis of information supplied in the
return filed by him, there would be no
default on his part to meet his statutory
obligation under
Section 7
of the Act and,
therefore, it would be difficult to hold
that the ‘tax payable’ by him ‘is not
paid’ to visit him with the liability to
pay interest under clause (a) of Section
11-B. It would be a different matter if
the return is not approved by the
authority but that is not the case here.
It is difficult on the plain language of
the section to hold that the law envisages
the assessee to predicate the final
assessment and expect him to pay the tax
on that basis to avoid the liability to
pay interest. That would be asking him to
do the near impossible.”
44
22.       In short, therefore, the principle may be

taken to be established that while levy of interest

is a part of the adjective law, yet to levy interest

there must be substantive provision. Demand for

interest can be made only if the legislature has

specifically intended collection of interest.             We

must look at the statutory provisions.
23.
In
Purolator India Limited Vs. Commissioner

of Central Excise
2015 (10) SCC 715, a Bench of two

learned    Judges   was    called   upon   to   decide   the

question as to whether cash discount and trade

discount are to be deducted for arriving at the

transaction value.        The Bench went on to consider
section 4
of the Act prior to its amendment in 1973,

after the amendment in 1973 and also still further

after the amendment in the year 2000.                After

elaborate consideration of the matter, the Bench
45
speaking through Justice Rohinton Fali Nariman held

as follows:
“14. It can be seen that the common thread
       running through
Section 4
, whether it is
       prior to 1973, after the amendment in
       1973, or after the amendment of 2000, is
       that excisable goods have to have a
       determination of “price” only “at the
       time of removal”. This basic feature of
Section 4
has never changed even after two
       amendments. The “place of removal” has
       been amended from time to time so that it
       could be expanded from a factory or any
       other   premises    of   manufacture    or
       production, to warehouses or depots
       wherein the excisable goods have been
       permitted to be deposited either with
       payment of duty, or from which such
       excisable goods are to be sold after
       clearance from a factory. In fact,
Section 4(2)
pre-2000 made it clear that
       where the price of excisable goods for
       delivery at the place of removal is not
       known,    and   the   value   thereof   is
       determined with reference to the price
       for delivery at a place other than the
       place    of   removal,    the    cost   of
       transportation from the place of removal
       to the place of delivery is to be excluded
       from such price. This is because the value
       of excisable goods under the section is
       to be determined only at the time and
       place of removal. Even after the
       amendment of
Section 4
in 2000, the same
       scheme continues. Only,
Section 4(2)
is
       in terms replaced by Rule 5 of the Central
       Excise Valuation (Determination of Price
       of Excisable Goods) Rules, 2000.
46
*      *         *        *         *
18. It can be seen that
Section 4
as
amended introduces the concept of
“transaction value” so that on each
removal    of    excisable    goods,    the
“transaction value” of such goods becomes
determinable. Whereas previously, the
value of such excisable goods was the
price at which such goods were ordinarily
sold in the course of wholesale trade,
post-amendment     each   transaction    is
looked    at     by    itself.     However,
“transaction value” as defined in
sub-section (3)(d) of
Section 4
has to be
read along with the expression “for
delivery at the time and place of
removal”. It is clear, therefore, that
what is paramount is that the value of the
excisable goods even on the basis of
“transaction value” has only to be at the
time of removal, that is, the time of
clearance    of    the  goods   from    the
appellant's factory or depot as the case
may be. The expression “actually paid or
payable for the goods, when sold” only
means that whatever is agreed to as the
price for the goods forms the basis of
value, whether such price has been paid,
has been paid in part, or has not been paid
at all. The basis of “transaction value”
is therefore the agreed contractual
price. Further, the expression “when
sold” is not meant to indicate the time
at which such goods are sold, but is meant
to   indicate     that   goods    are   the
subject-matter of an agreement of sale.
Once this becomes clear, what the learned
counsel for the assessee has argued must
47
necessarily be accepted inasmuch as cash
          discount is something which is “known” at
          or prior to the clearance of the goods,
          being contained in the agreement of sale
          between the assessee and its buyers, and
          must therefore be deducted from the sale
          price in order to arrive at the value of
          excisable goods “at the time of removal”.
24.       No doubt, there are decisions of the High

Court which followed in MRF Ltd. [see 2007 (207) ELT

31, Punjab and Haryana] to the effect that a

subsequent reduction in prices would not entitle the

assessee to lay a claim for refund.          In 2010(257)

ELT 369, Karnataka, the Division Bench of Karnataka

High Court distinguished the judgment of this Court

in SKF India Ltd.(supra) by noting that in the said

case after the goods were initially cleared and

appropriate duty had been paid, subsequently the

price escalation was due to the increase in input

labour and other costs which was determined by the

All India Industrial Prices Indices and by the

Reserve    Bank   of   India   nominated   by   All   India
48
Electrical Manufacturer Association.      In terms of

the   said   direction,    the   court   noted   that

supplementary invoices were issued.      It was noted

that the assessee had also paid differential price.

It is undoubtedly the case of the appellant that the

SLP carried against the said judgment has been

dismissed.   We notice that this Court has given no

reasons while dismissing the SLP.
25.
In
India Carbon Ltd. & Ors. vs. State of

Assam
1997 (6) SCC 479 there was delay in payment

of central sale tax.      The appellants were called

upon to pay interest of 24% per annum by the sale

tax authorities of the state of Assam under the Assam

Sales Tax Act.
Following the judgment of the

Constitution Bench in
J.K. Synthetics v. CCE
(supra)

among other judgments, the court inter alia went on

to hold that there is no substantive provision in

the Central Act requiring payment of interest under
49
the
Central Sales Tax Act
.     Though
Section 9(2)
was

pressed into service by the Revenue and the said

provision did refer to the power to recover interest

under the State Act noticing the absence of any power

to recover interest under the Central Act in respect

of tax due under the Central Act, the Court took the

view that interest could not be demanded from the

appellant.
CASE LAW UNDER THE INCOME TAX ACT.
26.      Appellants have sought to derive support

from certain judgments rendered by this Court under

the
Income Tax Act
.
In
E.D. Sassoon & Co. Ltd. v.

CIT
AIR 1954 SC 470, the appellant company which

was the managing agent of certain companies agreed

to    transfer   their   agencies   to   two   companies.

Amounts were received on formal deeds of conveyance

and transfer being executed in the year 1944.         The

entire amount of the managing agency commission
50
received by the transferees were assessed by the

officers as income of the transferees for the year

1945-1946.       In    appeal    the   contention    of   the

transferees was accepted, in that it was found that

commission received by them should be apportioned

on the proportionate basis and they were to be

assessed on the commission earned during the period

they had worked as managing agents of the respective

companies.   Proceedings were commenced against the

appellant who were transferors’ of the commission

agency in regard to the amounts of the commission

earned   prior    to    the     date   of   the   respective

transfers.   The case of the transferor inter alia

was that no part of the commission for the broken

period of 1943 was earned by them.          The contract of

employment was an entire indivisible contract.            The

Court had to consider the connotation of the word

“earned” which was used in
Section 4
of the Income
51
Tax Act which fell for consideration.       The majority

judgment inter alia held as follows:
“35. If therefore on the construction of
       the Managing Agency Agreements we cannot
       come to the conclusion that the Sassoons
       had created any debt in their favour or
       had acquired a right to receive the
       payments from the Companies as at the date
       of the transfers of the Managing Agencies
       in favour of the transferees no income can
       be said to have accrued to them. They had
       no doubt rendered services as Managing
       Agents of the Companies for the broken
       periods. But unless and until they
       completed their performance viz. the
       completion of the definite period of
       service of a year which was a condition
       precedent to their being entitled to
       receive the remuneration or commission
       stipulated thereunder no debt payable by
       the Companies was created in their favour
       and they had no right to receive any
       payment    from     the    Companies.    No
       remuneration     or     commission    could
       therefore be said to have accrued to them
       at the dates of the respective transfers.
40. It is no doubt true that the accrual
       of income does not much later depend upon
       its ascertainment or the accounts cast by
       assessee. The accounts may be made up at
       a much later date. That depends upon the
       convenience of the assessee and also upon
       the exigencies of the situation. The
       amount of the income, profits or gains may
       thus be ascertained later on the accounts
       being made up. But when the accounts are
       thus made up the income, profits or gains
52
ascertained as the result of the account
are referred back to the chargeable
accounting period during which they have
accrued or arisen and the assessee is
liable to tax in respect of the same
during    that   chargeable    accounting
period. “The computation of the profits
whenever it may take place cannot
possibly be allowed to suspend their
accrual …”. “The quantification of the
commission is not a condition precedent
to its accrual”. (Per Ghulam Hassan, J.
in
CIT v. K.R.M.T.T.           Thiagaraja
Chetty and Co.
[24 ITR 525 at p. 534] See
also Isaac      Holden      and      Sons,
Ltd. v. Commissioners       of      Inland
Revenue[12 TC 768], and Commissioners of
Inland Revenue v. Newcastle Breweries
Ltd.[12 TC 927] What has however got to
be determined is whether the income,
profits or gains accrued to the assessee
and in order that the same may accrue to
him it is necessary that he must have
acquired a right to receive the same or
that a right to the income, profits or
gains has become vested in him though its
valuation may be postponed or though its
materialisation may depend on the
contingency that the making up of the
accounts would show income, profits or
gains. The argument that the income,
profits or gains are embedded in the sale
proceeds as and when received by the
Company    also   does   not    help   the
transferees, because the Managing Agents
have no share or interest in the sale
proceeds received as such. They are not
co-sharers with the Company and no part
of the sale proceeds belongs to them. Nor
is there any ground for saying that the
Company are the trustees for the business
53
or any of the assets for the Managing
Agents. The Managing Agents cannot
therefore be said to have acquired a right
to receive any commission unless and
until the accounts are made up at the end
of the year, the net profits ascertained
and the amount of commission due by the
Company to the Managing Agents thus
determined.
(See Commissioners of Inland
Revenue v. Lebus) [(1946) 1 AER 476
(Z3)”.
55. The whole difficulty has arisen
because the High Court could not
reconcile itself to the situation that
the transferees had not worked for the
whole calendar year and yet they would be
held entitled to the whole income of the
year of account; whereas the transferors
had worked for the broken periods and yet
they would be held disentitled to any
share in the income for the year. If the
work done by the transferors as well as
the transferees during the respective
periods of the year were taken to be the
criterion the result would certainly be
anomalous. But the true test under
Section 4(1)(a)
of the Income Tax Act is
not whether the transferors and the
transferees had worked for any particular
periods of the year but whether any income
had accrued to the transferors and the
transferees    within    the   chargeable
accounting period. It is not the work done
or the services rendered by the person but
the income received or the income which
has accrued to the person within the
chargeable accounting period that is the
subject-matter of taxation. That is the
proper    method    of   approach    while
considering the taxability or otherwise
54
of income and no considerations of the
          work   done   for   broken   periods   or
          contribution made towards the ultimate
          income derived from the source of income
          nor any equitable considerations can make
          any difference to the position which
          rests entirely on a strict interpretation
          of the provisions of
Section 4(1)(a)
of
          the Income Tax Act.”
27.
In
Commissioner of Income Tax, Madras v. A.

Gajapathy Naidu, Madras
AIR 1964 SC 1653, a Bench

of three learned Judges had to deal with the

following factual scenario.           The respondent had

entered into a contract with the government for

supplying bread.        He was maintaining his accounts

on mercantile basis.        Amount due was credited to his

account      sometime     later.         The   respondent

represented to the Government complaining that he

was   supplying     bread    at   a   loss.    Therefore,

Government directed payment of compensation for the

loss which was supplied in 1948-1949.          He received

a certain sum during the year 1950-1951.              This
55
amount was included by the officer in the assessment

year 1951-1952.      One of the contentions of the

appellant assessee was that he had received sum in

respect of the contract which was executed in the

year   1948-1949   and   therefore    it   could     not   be

included in the assessment year 1951-1952.             This

Court proceeded on the basis that amount received

by way of compensation was taxable. It went on to

consider the question whether the assessee had been

assessed correctly in the year 1951-1952.              This

Court allowed the appeal and took the view that the

respondent-assessee was correctly assessed in the

year 1951-1952.
It referred the case of
E.D.

Sassoon & Co. Ltd. v. CIT
(supra) which we have

already referred to.      The Court held inter alia as

follows:
“8. Under this definition accepted by this
       Court, an income accrues or arises when the
       assessee acquires a right to receive the
       same. It is common place that there are two
56
principal methods of accounting for the
income, profits and gains of a business-,
one is the cash basis and the other, the
mercantile basis. The latter system of
accountancy "brings into credit what is due
immediately it becomes legally due and
before it is actually received; and it
brings into debit expenditure the amount
for which a legal liability has been
incurred before it is actually disbursed."
The book profits are taken for the purpose
of assessment of tax, though the credit
amount is not realized or the debit amount
is not actually disbursed. If an income
accrues within a particular year, it is
liable to be-,assessed in the succeeding
year. When does the right to receive an
amount under a contract accrue or arise to
the assessee i.e., come into existence?
That depends upon the terms of a particular
contract. No other relevant provision of
the Act has been brought to our notice-for
there is none- which provides an exception
that though an assessee does not acquire a
right to receive an income under a contract
in a particular accounting year, by some
fiction the amount received by him in a
subsequent year in connection with the
contract, though not arising out of a right
accrued to him in the earlier year, could
be related back to the earlier year and made
taxable along with the income of that year.
But that legal position is sought to be
reached by a process of reasoning found
favour with English courts. It is said that
on the basis of proper commercial
accounting practice, if a transaction
takes place in a particular year, all that
57
has accrued in respect of it, irrespective
of the year when it accrues, should belong
to the year of transaction and for the
purpose of reaching that result closed
accounts could be reopened. Whether this
principle is justified in the English law,
it has no place under the Indian Income tax
Act. When an Income-tax Officer proceeds to
include a particular income in the
assessment, he should ask himself inter
alia, two questions, namely, (i) what is
the system of accountancy adopted by the
assessee? and (ii) if it is mercantile
system of accountancy, subject to the
deemed provisions, when has the right to
receive that amount accrued? If he comes to
the conclusion that such a right accrued or
arose to the assessee in a particular
accounting year, he shall include the said
income in the assessment of the succeeding
assessment year. No power is conferred on
the Income-tax Officer under the Act, to
relate back an income that accrued or arose
in a subsequent year to another earlier
year on the ground that the said income
arose out of an earlier transaction. Nor is
the question of reopening of accounts
relevant in the matter of as certaining
when a particular income accrued or
arose.
Section 34
of the Act empowers the
Income-tax Officer to assess the income
which escaped assessment or was under-
assessed in the relevant assessment year.
Subject to the provisions of the section
and following the procedure prescribed
thereunder, he can include the escaped
income and re-assess the assessee on the
basis of which the earlier assessment was
58
made. So too, under
s. 35
of the Act the
  officers mentioned therein can rectify
  mistakes either of their own motion or when
  such mistakes are brought to their notice
  by a party to the proceedings. For that
  purpose the correct item may be taken into
  consideration in the matter of assessment.
  But strictly speaking even in those cases
  there is no reopening of the accounts of the
  assessee, but a re-assessment is made or
  the mistake is corrected on the basis of the
  actual income accrued or received by the
  assessee. We do not see any relevancy of the
  question of reopening of accounts in
  considering the question when an assessee
  acquired a right to receive an amount.
The Court also held inter alia as follows:
“9……We would prefer to base our conclusion
  on the ground that we cannot extend the
  meaning of the word "accrue" -or "arise"
  in
s. 4(1)(b)(i)
of the Act so as to take
  in amounts received by the assessee in a
  later year, though the receipt was not on
  the basis of the right accrued in the
  earlier year. Such amounts are in law
  received by the assessee only in the year
  when they are paid. We cannot apply the
  English decisions in the matter of
  construction   of   the    provisions   of
  the Indian Act, particularly when they
  have     received     an     authoritative
  interpretation from this Court…”.
59
28.
In
Vikrant Tyres Ltd. v. First Income Tax

Officer, Mysore
2001(3) SCC 76 under an assessment

order under the
Income Tax Act, 1961
the appellant

assessee paid the tax.   On his appeal being allowed

the tax was refunded.    The High Court reversed the

Appellate order.   On fresh demands being made the

assessee repaid the tax as assessed and demanded.

The revenue demanded payment of interest under
Section 220(2)
of Income Tax Act, 1961 for the period

commencing with the refund of the tax.    This Court

allowed the appeal filed by the assessee and took

the view that no tax could be levied or imposed by

an act of Parliament without the words “clearly

disclosing such an intention”.    Finding there was

no default in payment within the time by the assessee

it was found that invocation of
Section 220
was

misplaced.
This Court purported to follow the

decision in
V.V.S. Sugars vs. Govt. of A.P. and
60
Others
1999(4) SCC 192 (India Carbon vs. VBS

Sugar).
The last judgment we would advert to under

the Income Tax Act was rendered by one among us

(Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi) and the decision is

P.G. & W. Sawoo (P) Ltd. v. CIT & Ors.         2017(13) SCC
284.     The facts of the said case in a nutshell was

as follows:
The assessee had let out its premises to the

Government.     The rent was enhanced with effect from

01.9.1987.        The     factum   of    enhancement    was

communicated      to    the   assessee   by   letter   dated

29.3.1994.      The Income Tax Officer purported to

reopen the assessment for the year 1989-1990.            The

Court relying upon the judgment in
E.D. Sassoon &

Co. Ltd. v. CIT    (Supra
) inter alia held as follows:
“7. Viewed     from    the     aforesaid
          perspective, it is clear that no such
          right to receive the rent accrued to the
          assessee at any point of time during the
          assessment year in question, inasmuch as
          such     enhancement     though     with
61
retrospective effect, was made only in
       the year 1994. The contention of the
       Revenue that the enhancement was with
       retrospective effect, in our considered
       view, does not alter the situation as
       retrospectivity is with regard to the
       right to receive rent with effect from an
       anterior date. The right, however, came
       to be vested only in the year 1994.”
29.     It was accordingly found that the notice to

reopen the assessment for the assessment year

1989-1990 was without jurisdiction.
30.     We are of the view that the appellants are

not justified in seeking to derive support from the

judgments rendered by this Court under the
Income

Tax Act
.   The impact of taxing of income under the
Income Tax Act
would not be apposite for considering

the question which arises in these cases which is

whether interest can be levied under
Section 11AB
of the Act in respect of the amounts which are short

paid or short levied inter alia.      Even it be that

for the purpose of the
Income Tax Act
, it is only
62
when on the basis that party agreed to escalation

in price on a date which is after the date of the

removal of goods rendering it exigible to income tax

on a later date, it would be irrelevant for the

purpose of deciding the liability to pay interest

in terms of the clear provisions of the Act.
31.     Now we may advert to the judgment of this

Court in E.I.D. Parry (India) Ltd. v. CCT 2005 (4)

SCC 779. The appellant therein was a manufacturer

of sugar.   The minimum price of sugarcane which they

purchased from farmers was payable immediately.
Under Clause 5A of the Sugarcane (Control) Order

1966, additional price was payable which would be

determined only at the end of the year.       On the

advice of the Government the manufacturer paid the

additional price as advance at the time of purchase

from the farmers and it was subsequently adjusted

under Clause 5A.    In proceedings under the Tamil
63
Nadu General Sales Tax Act 1959, the assessee showed

the turnover on the basis of minimum price and paid

tax thereon.   It did not pay tax on the additional

price which has been paid but it was included in the

turnover.   When the price was fixed under Clause 5A,

the appellant filed revised return and paid tax.

Interest was sought to be charged under
Section

24(3)
on the price fixed under Clause 5A from the

date of purchase of sugarcane till the payment of

tax.   The appellants contended before this Court

that the price determined under Clause 5A would be

known only after it was determined.    Only then the

same would be includable in the returns.         The

advances given on advice from Government were merely

ad hoc payments and did not constitute the price.
32.     Under the Tamilnadu Sales Tax Act, the

dealers were given an option to pay tax in advance
64
on the basis of monthly return. Under
Section 13(1)
which provided for advance payment of tax, the tax

could   be   collected   in   advance   in   monthly   or

prescribed instalment.        The assessing authority

could provisionally determine the amount, payable

in advance and intimate the dealer to pay the tax.

Sub-section (2) of
Section 13
provided that the

dealer may at his option pay tax in advance on the

basis of his actual turnover for each month or for

such other period as prescribed.        Tax under this

provision was to be paid on the basis of return to

be filed by him.   It was also to become due without

any notice of demand to the dealer inter alia.         The

Court proceeded to take the view that in the monthly

returns, the advance which was received by the

assessee should have been included as part of the

turnover.    When it came to the question relating to

liability to interest, the Court referred to
Section
65
24
of the Act.
Section 24(3)
provided for interest.

It read as follows:
“(3) On any amount remaining unpaid after
        the date specified for its payment as
        referred to in sub-section (1) or in the
        order permitting payment in instalments,
        the dealer or person shall pay, in
        addition to the amount due, interest at
        one-and-half per cent per month of such
        amount for the first three months of
        default and at two per cent per month of
        such amount for the subsequent period of
        default:
Provided    that   if   the    amount
        remaining unpaid is less than one hundred
        rupees and the period of default is not
        more than a month, no interest shall be
        paid:
Provided further that where a dealer
        or person has preferred an appeal or
        revision against any order of assessment
        or revision of assessment under this Act,
        the    interest   payable    under    this
        sub-section, in respect of the amount in
        dispute in the appeal or revision, shall
        be postponed till the disposal of the
        appeal or revision, as the case may be,
        and shall be calculated on the amount that
        becomes due in accordance with the final
        order passed on the appeal or revision as
        if such amount had been specified in the
        order of assessment or revision of
        assessment, as the case may be.”
66
33.    Thereafter,    the   Court    in
E.I.D.    Parry

(India)Ltd.   V.   Asst
.   Commercial     of   Commercial

Taxes, Chennai held as follows:
“….Under
Section 24(1)
if the tax has been
       assessed or has become payable under the
       Act, then the payment has to be made
       within the said time as may be specified
       in the notice of assessment and tax under
Section 13(2)
has to be paid without any
       notice of demand. However, as seen above,
       the tax under
Section 13(2)
, in the
       absence of any determination by the
       assessing authority, is tax as per the
       returns. If default is made in payment of
       such tax then interest becomes payable
       under the Act. In the present case, it is
       an admitted position that tax as per the
       monthly return had been paid within time.
       It is also an admitted position that there
       was no assessment, even provisional, by
       the assessing authority prior to the
       final assessment made after the revised
       returns had been filed. Interest becomes
       payable under
Section 24(3)
on an amount
       remaining unpaid after the date specified
       for its payment under sub-section (1) of
Section 24
. As seen above, sub-section
       (1) of
Section 24
deals with an assessed
       tax or tax which has become payable under
       the Act. In cases covered by
Section 13(2)
tax must be paid without any notice of
       demand. But as stated above, under
Section 13(2)
tax is to be paid “on the
       basis of such returns”. Tax as per the
       returns has admittedly been paid. If the
       returns were incomplete or incorrect as
       now claimed the assessing authority had
67
to determine the tax payable and issue a
       notice of demand. In the absence of any
       assessment, even provisional, and a
       notice of demand no interest would be
       payable under
Section 24(3)
. …”
34.
Section 24(1)
incidentally provided for a

notice of assessment save as it was otherwise

provided in
Section 13(2)
.      The tax under
Section

13(2)
was to be paid without any notice of demand.
The Court drew support from the decision in JK

Synthetics Ltd. (supra).      We may also notice the

following discussion:
“..In this respect the principles laid
       down     in J.K.      Synthetics      Ltd.
case [(1994) 4 SCC 276] fully apply even
       though the provisions of the
Tamil Nadu
       General Sales Tax Act and the Rajasthan
       Act
may not be identical. The principle
       to be kept in mind is, that, when the levy
       of interest emanates as a statutory
       consequence and such liability is a
       direct consequence of non-payment of tax,
       be it under
Section 215
of the Income Tax
       Act or under
Sections 7(2)
/
7
(2-A) read
       with
Section 11-B(a)
of the Rajasthan
       Sales Tax Act, 1954 (as discussed in the
       decision of this Court in
J.K. Synthetics
       Ltd.
case [(1994) 4 SCC 276] ) or under
Sections 13(2)
/
24(3)
read with Rule 18(3)
       under the Tamil Nadu General Sales Tax
68
Act, 1959, then such a levy is different
          from the levy of interest which is
          dependent on the discretion of the
          assessing officer. The default arising on
          non-payment of tax on an admitted
          liability in the case of self-assessment
          falls under
Section 24(3)
read with Rule
          18(3) which attracts automatic levy of
          interest whereas the default in filing
          incomplete and incorrect return falls
          under   Rule   18(4)    which    attracts
          best-judgment assessment in which the
          levy of interest is based on the
          adjudication by the assessing officer.
          Therefore, Rule 18(3) and Rule 18(4)
          operate in different spheres…”
35.       We are of the view that the scheme of the
Central Excise Act
and the Rules are a separate code.
Section 11A is a provision for recovery.             If there

is    a   non-levy,       non-payment,        short-levy     or

short-payment, the same becomes recoverable under

Section    11A.      If   there   is    any    of   the    four

contingencies referred to in Section 11A, then

Section 11AB is attracted.             The working of the

parent Act is intricately intertwined with the

rules, the scope of which we have already referred
69
to.   Therefore, if the value which is declared by

way of self-assessment, by way of rule 6 and on which

the duty is paid is not the full value then under

the scheme of Section 11A read with Section 11AB and

the   Rules,   the    assessee      incurs     liability     for

interest when in a case where there is full value

found and it dates back to the date of removal.
36.     We have noticed that in this case admittedly

that at the time goods were removed the price was

not fixed.     The assessee was fully conscious of the

fact that it was subject to variation.                 Assessee

must be imputed with knowledge that the value it was

declaring was amenable to upward revision.                   The

circumstances were indeed clearly both apposite and

appropriate     for    the       assessee     to    invoke   the

provisions     of    Rule    7   and   seek    an    order   for

provisional assessment.           In fact, take the example
70
of manufacturer A and manufacturer B.                 Both remove

goods under contracts which contain escalation

clauses.       Manufacturer A invokes Rule 7.            It seeks

permission for removal of goods on provisional

assessment.       Though an order of final assessment

has to be passed within a period of time it is capable

of     being    extended        without   any    time     limit.

Manufacturer-A on the basis of upward revision of

the     price      with     retrospective        effect        and

acknowledging       the    value     to   be    the    value    as

provisionally assessed and as enhanced by the

escalation arrived at under the escalation clause

pays the duty when the escalation comes into effect

on the difference in the value under Rule 7.               Apart

from    payment    of     the    differential     excise    duty

manufacturer A becomes also liable to pay interest

from the date when the escalation would come into

play on the arrival at the higher price having
71
retrospective     operation.      Manufacturer    B   in

identical facts clears the goods on the basis of

self-assessment even though he is fully aware that

the value of the goods which is paid is not fixed

and   is     amenable   to   upward   revision.       He

deliberately chooses not to go in for provisional

assessment.     Thereafter, he pleads that though he

was aware that the value is not fixed and the prices

on removal was tentative and was amenable to change

since he has paid duty on the tentative value he is

not liable to pay interest on the value of the goods

on the differential duty which he is admittedly

liable to pay.     Is it contemplated?
37.        It was by Act No.26 of 1978 that Sections

11A, 11B and 11C were inserted in the Act. Though

it was inserted by Act 26 of 1978, it was brought

into force only in 1980.     The words “levy, not paid,

short levy and erroneously refunded” were not
72
expressions which were however introduced for the

first time through Section 11A.         Rule 10 of the

Central Excise Rules 1944 made under the Act as it

read was as follows:
“10. Recovery of duties not levied or not
       paid, or short-levied or not paid in full
       or erroneously refunded.—(1) Where any
       duty has not been levied or paid or has
       been    short-levied     or    erroneously
       refunded or any duty assessed has not been
       paid in full, the proper officer may,
       within six months from the relevant date,
       serve notice on the person chargeable
       with the duty which has not been levied
       or paid, or which has been short-levied,
       or to whom the refund has erroneously been
       made, or which has not been paid in full,
       requiring him to show cause why he should
       not pay the amount specified in the
       notice:
Provided that—
(a) where any duty has not been levied or
       paid or has been short-levied or has not
       been paid in full, by reason of fraud,
       collusion or any wilful misstatement or
       suppression of facts by such person or his
       agent, or
(b) where any person or his agent,
       contravenes any of the provisions of
       these rules with intent to evade payment
       of duty and has not paid the duty in full,
       or
73
(c) where any duty has been erroneously
refunded by reason of collusion or any
wilful misstatement or suppression of
facts by such person or his agent, the
provisions of this sub-section shall, in
any of the cases
referred to above
, have
effect as if for the words ‘six months’,
the words ‘five years’ were substituted.
Explanation.—Where the service of the
notice is stayed by an order of a court,
the period of such stay shall be excluded
in computing the period of six months, or
five years, as the case may be.
(2) The Assistant Collector of Central
Excise shall, after considering the
representation, if any, made by the
person on whom notice is served under
sub-rule (1), determine the amount of
duty due from such person (not being in
excess of the amount specified in the
notice) and thereupon such person shall
pay the amount so determined.
(3) For the purposes of this rule,—
(i) ‘refund’ includes rebate referred to
in Rules 12 and 12-A;
(ii) ‘relevant date’ means,—
(a) in the case of excisable goods on
which duty of excise has not been levied
or paid or on which duty has been
short-levied or has not been paid in full,
the date on which the duty was required
to be paid under these rules;
(b) in the case of excisable goods on
which the value or the rate of duty has
been provisionally determined under
74
these rules, the date on which the duty
         is adjusted after final determination of
         the value or the rate of duty, as the case
         may be;
(c) in the case of excisable goods on
         which duty has been erroneously refunded,
         the date of such refund.”
38.      Thus, Rule 10 did provide for recovery of

duties which were not levied or not paid or short

levied   or   erroneously    refunded.      What      is   the

position as far as the expression short paid to be

found in
Section 11A
of the Act is concerned?              Was

there a counterpart in Rule 10?        A perusal of Rule

10 would show that the expression ‘short paid’ as

such was not used in Rule 10 as it is used in Section

11A.     However,    we   notice    that    Rule      10   did

contemplate recovery of duties which was assessed

but have not been paid in full.
39.      Before we proceed to pronounce on the scope

of the expression ‘short paid’ in Section 11A, we

deem it appropriate also to refer to Rules 173-B and
75
173-C of the Central Excise Rules, 1944.            The

relevant provisions thereof read as follows:
“173-B. Assessee to file list of goods
       for approval of the proper officer.—(1)
       Every assessee shall file with the proper
       officer for approval a list in such form
       as   the  Collector    may   direct,   in
       quintuplicate, showing—
(a) the full description of — (i) all
       excisable goods produced or manufactured
       by him, (ii) all other goods produced or
       manufactured by him and intended to be
       removed from his factory, and (iii) all
       the excisable goods already deposited or
       likely to be deposited from time to time
       without payment of duty in his warehouse;
(b) the Chapter, Heading No. and
       Sub-Heading No., if any, of the
Schedule
       to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(5
       of 1986) under which each such goods fall;
(c) the rate of duty leviable on each such
       goods; and
(d) such other particulars        as   the
       Collector may direct.
(2) The proper officer shall, after such
       inquiry as he deems fit, approve the list
       with such modifications as are considered
       necessary and return one copy of the
       approved list to the assessee who shall,
       unless otherwise directed by the proper
       officer, determine the duty payable on
76
the goods intended to be removed in
accordance with such list.
(2-A) All clearances shall, subject to
the provisions of Rule 173-CC, be made
only after the approval of the list by the
proper officer. If the proper officer is
of the opinion that on account of any
inquiry to be made in the matter or for
any other reason to be recorded in
writing, there is likely to be delay in
according the approval, he shall, either
on a written request made by the assessee
or on his own accord, allow such assessee
to avail himself of the procedure
prescribed under Rule 9-B for provisional
assessment of the goods.
(3) Where the assessee disputes the rate
of duty approved by the proper officer in
respect of any goods, he may, after giving
an intimation to that effect to such
officer, pay duty under protest at the
rate approved by such officer.
(4) If in the list approved by the proper
officer    under    sub-rule   (2),    any
alteration becomes necessary because of—
(a) the assessee commencing production,
manufacture or warehousing of goods not
mentioned in that list, or
(b) the assessee intending to remove from
the factory any non-excisable goods not
mentioned in that list, or
(c) a change in the rate or rates of duty
in respect of the goods mentioned in that
list or, by reason of any amendment to the
Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff
Act, 1985
(5 of 1986), a change in the
Chapter, Heading No. and Sub-Heading No.
77
the assessee shall likewise file a fresh
list or an amendment of the list already
filed for the approval of such officer in
the same manner as is provided in sub-rule
(1).
(5) When the dispute about the rate of
duty has been finalized or for any other
reasons affecting rate or rates of duty,
a modification of the rate or rates of
duty is necessitated, the proper officer
shall make such modification and inform
the assessee accordingly.
(6) The Collector may exempt by a general
order any class of assessees, who
manufacture wholly goods which, for the
time being, are exempt from paying duty,
from filing the list under sub-rule (1):
Provided that as and when duty exemption
is withdrawn or modified or no longer
applicable, the assessee shall comply
with the provisions of sub-rule (4) as if
he had filed a list earlier and the list
had been approved with ‘nil’ rate of duty.
173-C. Assessee to file price list of
goods assessable ad valorem.—(1) Every
assessee who produces, manufactures or
warehouses goods which are chargeable
with duty at a rate dependent on the value
of the goods, shall file with the proper
officer a price list, in such form and in
such manner and at such intervals as the
Collector may require, showing the price
of each of such goods and the trade
discount, if any, allowed in respect
thereof to the buyers along with such
other particulars as the Central Board of
Excise and Customs or the Collector may
specify.
78
(2) Prior approval by the proper officer
of the price list filed by an assessee
under sub-    rule(1) shall be necessary
only, where the assessee—
(i) sells goods to or through a related
person as defined in Section 4 of the Act;
or
(ii) uses such goods for manufacture or
production of other goods in his factory;
or
(iii) clears such goods for free
distribution; or
(iv) clears such goods in any other manner
which does not involve sale to a
non-related person; or
(v) clears the goods of the same kind and
quality from his factories located in the
jurisdiction of different Collectors of
Central Excise or Assistant Collectors of
Central Excise; or
(vi) submits a fresh price list or an
amendment of the price list already filed
with the proper officer and which has the
effect of lowering the existing value of
the goods.
***           ***           ***
(5) Subject to the provisions of Rule
173-CC, an assessee specified in sub-rule
(2) shall not clear any goods from a
factory, warehouse or other approved
place of storage unless the price list has
been approved by the proper officer. In
case the proper officer is of the opinion
that on account of any enquiry to be made
in the matter or for any other reasons to
be recorded in writing, there is likely
to be delay in according approval, he
shall either on a written request made by
the assessee or of his own accord allow
79
such assessee to avail himself of the
         procedure prescribed under Rule 9-B for
         provisional assessment of the goods.”
40.      We have already noticed that the new Central

Excise Rules have come into force known as Central

Excise   Rules    2002.    Under   Rule   173-B    of   the

erstwhile Rules, the method of assessment and

payment of tax was essentially by the assessee

filing a classification list under Rule 173-B which

inter alia was to contain the rate of duty leviable.

The Rule further contemplated approval of the said

list with any modification as may be considered

necessary.       The clearance was, subject to the

provision of Rule 173-CC, to be made only after the

approval by the competent officer.        Equally under

rule 173(C), the assessee, the manufacturer or

producer or one who warehoused goods chargeable with

duty on the value of goods was to file a price list.

Prior    approval   was   necessary   only   in    certain
80
circumstances which included sale to or through

related person as defined in
Section 4
of the Act.

Under Sub-rule 5 of Section 173-C again subject to

the provisions of Rule 173CC, the assessee covered

by Rule 173C(2) could not clear any goods from a

factory, warehouse or other approved place of

storage unless the price list was approved.   Under

the new dispensation namely, Excise Rule 2002, we

have noticed that assessment was based on the value

and the rate of tax as declared by the assessee.
41.    In the context of Rule 173B and 173C,

questions have arisen before this Court as to the

effect of notice issued under Rule 10 of the Excise

Rules, 1944 when the approved classification was

sought to be reopened. The Assistant Collector

sought to revise the net assessable value and

recover the differential duty. A Bench of two
81
learned Judges held in
Rainbow Industries (P) Ltd.

v. CCE
(1994)6 SCC 563, that once the price list was

approved and acted upon this reclassification would

be effective from the date of issue of the show cause

notice.
A Bench of three learned Judges in
Balarpur

Industries Ltd. v. Assistant Collector of Customs

and Central Excise & Ors.
(1995) Supplement 3 SCC

429, sought to confine the aforesaid judgment to the

facts   of   the   case.
Finally,   the   matter   was

considered by a Constitution Bench in the case of
Collector of Central Excise, Baroda v. Cotspun Ltd.
reported in (1999) 7 SCC 633.
This Court approved

the view taken in
Rainbow Industries
(supra) and it

disapproved of Balarpur Industries noticing that it

did not advert to Rule 173-B. In the course of

judgment, the Court inter alia held as follows:
“12. Rule     173-B     deals    with
        classification lists. It entitles the
        proper officer of Excise to make such
        enquiry thereon as he deems fit and
82
requires him to approve the list only
thereafter,    and   that     with   such
modifications    as     are    considered
necessary. The assessee must determine
the excise duty that is payable by him on
the goods he intends to remove in
accordance     with      the     approved
classification    list.    Sub-rule   (5)
provides for modification of an approved
classification list.
13. Rule 10 is a provision for recovery
of duties that have not been levied or
paid in full or part. So far as is relevant
for our purposes, it provides that where
any duty has been short-levied, the
Excise Officer may, within six months
from the relevant date, serve notice on
the assessee requiring him to show cause
why he should not pay the amount that had
been short-levied. Rule 10 does not deal
with classification lists or relate to
the reopening of approved classification
lists. That is exclusively provided for
by Rule 173-B.
14. The levy of excise duty on the basis
of an approved classification list is the
correct levy, at least until such time as
to the correctness of the approval is
questioned by the issuance to the
assessee of a show-cause notice. It is
only when the correctness of the approval
is    challenged   that    an    approved
classification list ceases to be such.
15. The levy of excise duty on the basis
of an approved classification list is not
a short levy. Differential duty cannot be
83
recovered on the ground that it is a short
        levy. Rule 10 has then no application.”

                               (Emphasis supplied)
42.     A Bench of two learned Judges in the case of

M/s.
Eastland Combines, Coimbatore v. Collector of

Central Excise, Coimbatore
reported in AIR 2003 SC

843   after   noticing   the     judgment   in   Ballarpur

Industries, Rainbow and also noticing the change

brought about by the
Finance Act
10 of 2000 in

Section 11A, proceeded to take the view that in view

of the amendment, the basis for arriving at the

conclusion    that   Rule   10    does   not     deal   with

classification list or relate to the reopening of

classification list is altered and the conditions

on which
Cotspun
(supra) judgment was rendered in

(1999)7 SCC 633 was fundamentally altered.
The view

taken in M/s.
Eastland Combines, Coimbatore
(supra)

came to be doubted by another Bench of two Judges.
84
Consequently, again it was referred to a Bench of

three learned Judges and the reference came to be

answered in the decision reported in
ITW Signod

India Limited     vs. Collector of Central Excise
reported in (2004) 3 SCC 48. Thereunder, the Court,

after referring to the 1994 Rules, Section 11A which

was introduced in the Act, the amendment which was

brought about by
Section 97
of the Finance Act, 2000,

found that Section 11A, as amended by the
Finance

Act, 2000
brought about a completely different

situation in the course of the judgment of the Court

held inter alia as under:
“55. Section 11-A deals with a case when
        inter alia excise duty has been levied or
        has been short-levied or short-paid. The
        word “such” occurring after the words
        “whether or not” refers to non-levy,
        non-payment, short-levy or short payment
        or erroneous refund. It is, therefore,
        not correct to contend that the word
        “such” indicates only such short-levy
        which has been held to be non-existent
        in Cotspun [(1999) 7 SCC 633] having
        regard to Rule 173-B. Such short-levy or
        non-levy may be on the basis of any
85
approval,   acceptance    or  assessment
relating to the rate of duty on or
valuation of excisable goods. Thus, any
approval made in terms of Rule 10
(sic 173-B), in the event, any mistake
therein is detected, would also come
within the purview of the expression
“such short-levy or short payment”. Such
notice is to be served on the person
chargeable with the duty which inter alia
has been short-levied or short-paid.”
57. The procedure laid down under Rule
173-B of the Rules has specifically been
included in the Act. Furthermore, by
reason of the amended Act a provision has
been made for reopening the approved
classification lists. It is a procedural
provision, in terms whereof statutory
authorities are required to determine as
to whether the earlier classification was
correctly done or not. The said authority
upon giving an opportunity of hearing to
the parties may come to the conclusion
that decision on the approval granted
need not be reopened and even if the same
is reopened, the reasons therefor are to
be stated. As the provision of Section
11-A is a recovery provision as regards
non-levy or non-paid or short-levy or
short-paid   or    erroneously   refunded
duties by reason of the said amendment,
Parliament had merely provided that an
approval on the basis of a classification
list inter alia in case of a short-levy
can be recovered if a finding is arrived
at that the goods had undergone a
short-levy.    For   the   aforementioned
purpose,
Section 110
of the Finance Act,
validating actions taken under Section
11-A can be taken into consideration
86
whereby and whereunder a legal fiction is
          created.”
                              (Emphasis supplied)
43.       Section 11A, thus, was held to be a recovery

provision        as   regards     non-levy,      non-paid,

short-levy,       short-paid or erroneously refunded

duty. Levy of excise duty under Rule 10 of the Excise

Rules, 1944 on the basis of approved classification

list or price list was found to be correct levy. It

did not give rise to short-levy. Undoubtedly, the

amended     provisions    of    Section    11A   empowered

recovery    of    duty   even   in   a    case   where   the

classification list has been approved earlier and

it would operate from the date of removal and not

from the date on which show cause was issued.
44.
In the case of
N.B. Sanjana, Assistant

Collector of Central Excise, Bombay & Ors. v. The

Elphinstone Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. Ltd.
;
87
1978 E.L.T. (J 399), the contention of the assessee

was that neither Rule 9 nor Rule 10A (1944 Rules)

gave power to the Revenue to raise the demand notice

involved in the said case.    The demand had to be made

if at all under Rule 10 and the demand having been

made long after three months, contrary to what was

prescribed in the said Rule, the notices were

illegal and void. The court inter alia held as

follows:-
“14. We are not inclined to accept the
       contention of Dr. Syed Mohammad that the
       expression 'levy' in Rule 10 means actual
       collection of some amount. The charging
       provision
Section 3(i)
specifically says
       "There shall be levied and collected in
       such a manner as may "be prescribed the
       duty of excise. It is to be noted that
       Sub-section (i) uses both the expressions
       "levied and collected" and that clearly
       shows that the expression "levy" has not
       been used, in the Act or the Rules as
       meaning actual collection. Dr. Syed
       Mohammad is, no doubt, well founded in his
       contention that if the appellants have
       power to issue notice either under Rule
       10A or Rule 9(2), the fact that the notice
88
refers specifically to a particular rule,
   which may not be applicable, will not make
   the notice invalid on that ground as has
   been held by this Court in
J.K. Steel Ltd.
   v. Union of India
(1969) 2 SCR 418 = (AIR
   1970 SC 1173).
“If the exercise of a power can be traced
   to a legitimate source, the fact that the
   same was purported to have been exercised
   under a different power does not vitiate
   the exercise of the power in question.
   This is a well settled proposition of law.
In this connection reference may usefully
   be made to the decisions of this Court in
B. Balakotaiah v. The Union of India
:
[1958]SCR 1052 = (AIR 1958 SC 232); and
Afzal Ullah v. State of U.P.
[1964]4SCR
   991 = (AIR 1964 SC 264).
The Court further proceeded to held as follows:-
“18. This now takes us to the question of
   proper interpretation to be placed on the
   expression "short-levied" and "paid" in
   Rule    10.    Does    the     expression
   "short-levied" mean that some amount
   should have been levied as duty as
   contended by Dr. Syed Mohammad or will
   that expression cover even cases where
   the assessment is of 'nil duty', as
   contended by Mr. Daphtary. What is the
   meaning of the word "paid" in Rule 10 ?
   It is contended on behalf of the
   appellants that it means "actually paid",
   whereas, according to the respondents, it
   means "ought to have been paid". Taken
   literally, the word "paid" does mean
89
actually paid in cash. That means that a
party or an assessee must have paid some
amount of duty whatever may be the
quantum. If this literal interpretation
is placed on the expression "paid" in rule
it is needless to state that it will
support in a large measure the contention
of Dr. Syed Mohammad that Rule 10
contemplates a short-levy in the sense
that the amount which falls short of the
correct amount has been assessed and
actually paid. In our opinion, the
expression "paid" should not be read in
a vacuum and it will not be right to
construe the said word literally, which
means actually paid. That word will have
to be understood and Interpreted in the
context in which it appears in order to
discover its appropriate meaning. If this
is appreciated and the context is
considered it is apparent that there is
an ambiguity in the meaning of the word
"paid". It must be remembered that Rule
10 deals with recovery of duties or
charges short levied or erroneously
refunded. The expression "paid" has been
used to denote the starting point of
limitation of three months for the issue
of a written demand.
The Act
and the Rules
provide in great detail the stage at which
and the time when the excise duty is to
be paid by a party. If the literal
construction that the amount should have
been actually paid is accepted, then in
case like the present one on hand, when
no duty has been levied, the Department
will not be able to take any action under
Rule 10. Rule 10-A cannot apply when a
short-levy is made through error or
misconstruction on the part of an
officer, as such a case is specifically
90
provided by Rule 10. therefore, in our
opinion, the proper interpretation to be
placed on the expression "paid" is "ought
to    have    been    paid".    Such    an
interpretation has been placed on the
expression "paid" occurring in certain
other enactments as in Gursahai Saigal v.
Commissioner    of   Income-tax,    Punjab
[1963] 3 SCR 893 = (AIR 1963 SC 1062), and
in Allen v. Thorn Electrical Industries
Ltd. (1968) 1 QB 487. In (1963) 3 SCR 893
= (AIR 1963 SC 1062, the question arose
as follows: In certain assessment
proceedings under the
Indian Income-tax
Act, 1922
, an assessee was charged with
interest Under Sub-section (8) of
Section 18A of that Act Under that
Sub-section interest calculated in the
manner laid down in Sub-section (6) of
Section 18A was to be added to the tax
assessed.       Sub-
section      3
of
Section 18A dealt with cases of a person
who has not been assessed before and he
was required to make his own estimate of
the tax payable by him and pay
accordingly.     Sub-section     (3)    of
Section 18A was     applicable    to   the
assessee in that case. However, he
neither submitted any estimate nor did he
pay any advance tax. Under Sub-section
(6) of Section 18A it was provided:
“Where in any year an assessee has paid
 tax Under Sub-section(2) or Sub-section
 (3) on the basis of his own estimate, and
 the tax so paid is less than eighty
 percent of the tax determined on the
 basis of regular assessment simple
 interest at the rate of six per cent per
 annum from the 1st day of January in the
91
financial year in which the tax was paid
  up to the date of the said regular
  assessment shall be payable by the
  assessee upon the amount by which the
  tax so paid falls short of the said
  eighty percent.”
“25. We may point out that if the
contention of Dr. Syed Mohammad that in
order to constitute short-levy, some
amount should have been assessed as
payable by way of duty so as to make Rule
10 applicable, is accented the result
will be rather anomalous. For instance if
due to collusion (which means collusion
between a party and an officer of the
Department) a sum of Rs. 2/-is managed to
be assessed by way of duty when really
more than thousand times that amount is
payable and if the smaller amount of duty
so assessed has been paid, the Department
will have to take action within three
months for payment of the proper amount
of duty. On the other hand, if due to
collusion    again   an   order   of   nil
assessment is passed, in which case no
duty would have been paid, according to
the appellants Rule 10A will apply. We do
not see any reason to distinguish the
above two cases one from the other. Both
are cases of collusion and if an assessee
in collusion manages to have a petty
amount of duty assessed and paid he can
effectively plead limitation of three
months under Rule 10. Whereas in the same
case of collusion where no duty has been
levied there will be no period of
limitation. In our opinion, that will not
be a proper interpretation to be placed
on Rule 10A by us. By the interpretation
placed by us on Rule 10, the position will
92
be that an assessee who has been assessed
       to a smaller amount as well as an assessee
       who has been assessed to nil duty will all
       be put on a par and that is what is
       intended by Rule 10.”
                            (Emphasis supplied)
45.     In fact, it is to be noticed, that Section

11A which was inserted by Act 26 of 1978 is

substantially the reproduction of Rule 10 of 1944

Rules. We notice, in fact, the following answers

given by Shri Satish Aggarwal, the Minister of State

in the Ministry of Finance, as regards, the reasons

for Act 26 of 1978 by which Section 11A was

inserted:-
“Shri Amrit Nahata made a frontal attack
       on clause 24 and asked, why are you going
       to increase the limit with regard to short
       levy from six months to five years?
       Previously, there was no limit. It was
       only in August 1977 that the rules were
       amended and provision made in the rules
       to fix a time limit in the case of fraud.
       Earlier, a case could be reopened even
       after 20 years in the case of fraud. In
       1977 the rules prescribed a time limit of
       five years in the case of fraud.
       Otherwise, the period was unlimited. When
       we limited the period to five years, the
       Committee on Subordinate Legislation
93
recommended       that      instead     of
       incorporating      such    an    important
       provision in the rules it should find a
       place in the Act itself. That is why we
       have brought in this amendment to the Act.
       Otherwise, since those rules were laid on
       the Table of the House by implication they
       were approved by the House without any
       amendment. So, that is more or less the
       law now. We are only incorporating it in
       the Act, as recommended by the Committee
       on Subordinate Legislation.”
46.    It is apparently thus that Section 11A came

to be inserted.
47.    Coming to Section 11AB, it came to be

inserted by Act 33 of 1996. Thereafter, it was

amended by Act 10 of 2000, Act 14 of 2001, Act 20

of 2002 and Act 49 of 2005.           We have already

extracted the relevant provisions of the said

section. Section 11A must necessarily be read with

Section 11AB. This is for the reason that interest

under Section 11AB is premised upon the duty of

excise not being levied or paid or short levied,

short paid or erroneously refunded. Such duty is
94
either determined under sub-Section(2) of Section

11A or without such determination it being paid

under Section 2B of Section 11A. In any of the

circumstances,      namely,   non-levy,   non-payment,

short-levy    and   short-paid,   any   duty   has   been

determined or paid as has been provided under

Section    11A,   necessarily   the   assessee   becomes

liable to pay interest from the first date of the

month succeeding the month in which duty ought to

have been paid.
48.       The question which we are necessarily called

upon to decide is when price is revised upward with

retrospective effect and the excise duty on the same

is paid immediately       on a future date whether

interest is payable under Section 11AB from the

first day of the month succeeding the month in which

the duty ought to have been paid under the Act. To

keep the matter in focus, the exact question is which
95
is the month in which the duty ought to have been

paid.
49.      Under the Rules, goods become exigible to

duty on removal.      Assessment is to be done by

assessee itself by way of self-assessment. In a case

where duty is payable on the basis of the value, the

assessee is to apply the rate of duty to the value

and pay the duty on or before the sixth day of the

month succeeding the month in which removal of the

goods takes place. Undoubtedly, if the removal takes

place in March, the payment is to be made by 31st of

March.
50.      We have also noticed what happens if there

is    provisional   assessment.   In   the   case    of

provisional assessment, the assessee entertains a

doubt regarding the actual value or the rate of duty.
He applies and he is permitted under the order to

remove goods on a provisional assessment.           The
96
assessment is thereafter finalized.             When the

provisional assessment is finalized, the assessee

becomes liable however to pay interest from the

first date of the month succeeding the month for

which the amount is determined.         We have no doubt

in our mind that under Rule 7(4), the expression

“succeeding the month for which such amount” is

determined refer to the month of removal of the

goods.   When the provisional assessment has such

consequences,    it    would    occasion   an   invidious

discrimination    to    place    an   interpretation   on

Section 11AB by which those assesses who go in for

provisional assessment under Rule 7 are called upon

to pay interest upon finalization of the assessment

with reference to the date of removal in a case where

the value is fully determined as a result of

escalation clause being worked resulting in an

upward revision of prices and under Section 11AB
97
payability arises with reference to the date of

decision to grant escalation.    In other words, the

law will have to be interpreted in a manner that it

is fair and equal to similarly situated group of

assessees.   Legislative intention, in this regard,

also cannot be otherwise.    Legislature has clearly

in Section 11AB spelt out the time with reference

to the Act and the Rules.   Under Section 11AB in the

case of short levy or short payment inter alia, the

expression “month in which the duty has become

payable” under the Act and the rules must be

understood as the month in which the duty is payable

under the Rules made under the Act.    Thus, if goods

are removed in the month of January ordinarily

payment must be made by the 6th of February.   If the

duty is not paid by the 6th of February, Section 11AB

must be understood as mulcting the assessee     with

liability to pay interest from the first day of March
98
in the example we have given.           If the assessee went

in for provisional assessment under rule 7, it

becomes    liable   from    the   1st    day    of   the   month

following    the    month   for   which        the   amount   is

determined.
51.       The expression “the month in which the duty

ought to have been paid” under this Act, when it is

read alongwith Rule 8, which declares that the duty

on the goods removed from the factory or warehouse

during a month is to be paid on the 6th day of the

following month would mean that the Legislature has

understood the expression “the month in which the

duty ought to have been paid” under the Act in the

same sense as it is declared in Rule 8.
52.       In this regard it is also pertinent to notice

the finding in the order of the original authority

that perusal of the Circular dated 01/07/2004 makes

it unambiguously clear that the price was understood
99
as provisional price.    This belies quite clearly

the case of the appellant that the price was final.

Could the assessee in the light of the Circular even

for a moment in the same breath contend that the

assessee was unhesitatingly ready and able to

determine the price and hence the value.    We would

think that it certainly presented a situation where

the assessee should have resorted to Rule 7.
53.     As we have already noted, SAIL has paid the

differential duty of Rs.142.78 crores even without

waiting for any notice under Section 11A(1).     The

assessee volunteered and made payment in October

2006.   We find merit in the finding by the authority

that this is a case where therefore the payment made

by the assessee is to be treated as one falling under

Section 11A(2)b).   This meant also that there was

no need for determination of the duty within the
100
meaning of Section 11A(2)(a) or issuance of notice

under Section 11A.
54.      It is important to notice that when we

contrast Section 11A as it was introduced with

effect from 15.11.1980 with Section 11A after

amendment by
Section 97
of the Finance Act, 2000,

we find that in the later avtar of Section 11A, the

following words have been inserted: -
“Whether or not such non-levy or non-payment,
        short-levy or short-payment or erroneous
        refund, as the case may be, was on the basis
        of any approval, acceptance or assessment
        relating to the rate of duty on or valuation
        of excisable goods under any other provisions
        of this Act or the rules made thereunder.”


      No doubt, it had the effect of taking away the

basis for the decision in the case of
Collector of

Central Excise, Baroda v. Cotspun Ltd.
reported in

(1999) 7 SCC 633, which took the view that a levy

based on the approved classification list, is not

short-levy.     But its impact goes beyond the same.
101
Power under Section 11A to recover the duty which

has not been levied or not been paid or short-levied

or     short-paid   will   be   available    inter    alia

irrespective of, whether the aforesaid contingency

was or was not the result of any approval, acceptance

or assessment either relating to the rate of duty

or the valuation under the Act and the Rules. Thus,

even when there has been an assessment or acceptance

in relation to the rate of duty or valuation, it does

not stand in the way of invoking power under Section

11A.
55.       Rule 12 declares that every assessee is to

file monthly returns.      There is no provision in the

rule which contemplates an assessment as such based

on the return by the authorities. Assessment is

self-assessment by the assessee under Rule (6).

No doubt, in the case covered by Rule 7 there is a

provisional     assessment      followed    by   a   final
102
assessment.       The      main     ingredients    for

self-assessment would appear to be (1) the rate of

duty (2) valuation (3) quantity of removal.
56.       Are   cases     of   non-levy,   non-payment,

short-levy and short-payment mutually exclusive?.

In other words, can it be said that in a case of

non-payment, it would not be a case of non-levy?    Do

they overlap?    If there is non-levy, will there by

short levy at the same time.      Finally, in a case of

short levy, can there also be short payment?
57.       What is levy?    We have already noticed that

in the decision of this Court in
N.B. Sanjana
(supra), this Court rejected the argument of the

Revenue that levy in Rule 10 means collection of some

amount.    The Court went on to hold that levy has not

been used in the Act or the rules as meaning actual

collection.
103
58.     In     a   case   where     goods   are    removed

clandestinely, there would be no levy.            Equally,

there will be non-payment.        Thus, a case of non-levy

can overlap with non-payment.         No doubt, there can

be cases where despite full levy there can be no

payment, may be by mistake or otherwise.           Equally

thus, if there is no non-levy, there can be partial

payment.     That would make it a case of short payment

as the payment does not match the amount of duty

levied as per the self-assessment carried out by the

assessee.     A short levy ordinarily would be a case

where out of the ingredients of assessment, namely,

(1) rate of duty, (2) valuation and (3) quantity

removed, the components all or any are incorrectly

applied. As an instance if the full rate of duty

applicable is not applied though the valuation and

the quantity is correctly arrived at, it may fall

under short-levy.      In one sense it could be said
104
that there is short-payment also, as if payment

could be understood as the amount which ought to have

been paid but it has not been paid, it may be a case

of short payment.       But it may be more appropriate

to put it under short levy where the deficit in

payment is essentially in terms of a short-levy.
59.      We are here concerned in these cases with one

of    the    ingredients     of   assessment,    namely,

valuation.      There is no dispute regarding the

quantity removed.        There is no issue relating to

rate of duty.         The dispute is relating to the

correct value.       To appreciate it better, let us take

an    example   of    an   assessee   who   deliberately

undervalues the goods which he removed.             This

results in assessee arriving at an amount which

would not be the correct amount.            He pays this

incorrectly assessed amount.       Would it be a case of
105
short levy or short payment?      If short- levy is to

be   understood   as   confined   to   cases   where   the

assessment is not the full assessment, taking into

account the parameters involved correctly, namely,

rate of duty, valuation and quantity it could be

classified as a case of short levy as one of the

components of proper assessment namely, valuation

has been incorrectly arrived at.         The payment in

such a case is made in terms of the incorrectly

assessed    figure.     The   payment     matches      the

assessment.   In fact, it is worthwhile to recall

that under Rule 10 of 1944 Rules which we have

adverted to., the expression “short-payment” is not

used.   Instead the words duty has not been paid in

full, has been used. No doubt, in a case where in

law though the amount which is paid is in harmony

with the amount which is assessed, it is not the

amount which ought to have been paid by the assessee.
106
The absence of full payment of duty or short payment

has indeed also in one sense taken place.                  In a case

where there is an escalation clause goods are

cleared on a provisional price. Consequently, the

value    is    provisional.        There    is    a     subsequent

escalation      with    retrospective        effect.       It    will

affect the valuation which was employed in the

self-assessment        by    the    assessee          which     would

necessarily be provisional.                Enhancement of the

value will date back to the dates of removal in view

of the retrospective operation. Admittedly the

liability for payment of differential duty has

arisen.        Upon    the   true   value,       in    a   case    of

retrospective escalation of price though later

agreed        being     received       and        consequential

differential duty being admittedly payable, it

would result in Section 11A read with Section 11AB

applying.
107
60.      It is true that the statutory authority has

found it to be a case of short payment.               In the

notice issued claiming interest it is stated there

is short levy (see page 89 Vol.II SLP paper book).

Proceeding on the basis that it is a case of short

levy,    Section   11A    read   with   Section   11AB      is

attracted and the interest clock ticks from the date

as we have found namely as provided in Rule 8 read

with Section 11AB.       If the concept of short payment

is stretched to include all amounts which ought to

have been paid, it may also be treated as a case of

short payment though juridically it may be true that

it may strictly fall under short levy.
61.      While it may be true that interest cannot be

demanded by way of damages or compensation and it

is    also   further   true   that   unless   there    is    a

substantive provision providing for payment of
108
interest in a fiscal statute, interest cannot be

demanded, we would think in the context of the Act

and the Rules in question, under Section 11AB,

particularly, when there is no dispute relating to

liability to pay the differential duty and we notice

that absence of dispute is a fair acknowledgement

of the fact that the facts of the present cases are

unlike the situation in MRF decision where the price

was fixed at the time of removal, interest is payable

as provided in Section 11AB and from the point of

time indicated therein.    But in these cases, the

price was variable under the escalation clause which

was very much within the knowledge of the assessee

and the demand for interest is sustainable.
62.     As far as the scope of the second explanation

of Section 11A(2)(b) is concerned, it contemplates

payment voluntarily by the assessee.   It is without
109
any notice being issued under Section 11A.            There

is also reference to liability on the part of the

assessee to pay interest under Section 11A(2)(b),

not only on the amount which is paid within the

meaning of Section 11A(2)(b) but on any short

payment as may be determined by the excise officer.

This only means that payment can by an assessee of

any of the four amounts with which we are more

concerned      namely,      non-levy,          non-payment,

short-levy or short-payment.            Since there is no

notice under Section 11A and non-determination of

the amount as such pursuant to which the amount is

paid it may happen that there may be shortfall in

the   amount   which   is   paid   by    the   assessee   in

comparison to what the assessee is legally required

to pay.     The short payment which is therefore

referred to in the second Explanation to Section

11A(2)(B) can only be the aforesaid short payment
110
and it is not referring to the short payment of duty

which was originally occasioned and which is the

subject matter of Section 11A(2)(b) and Section

11AB.
63.      We are of the view that the reasoning of this

Court in the order referring the cases to us (to this

Bench) that for the purpose of Section 11AB, the

expression “ought to have been paid” would mean the

time when the price was agreed upon by the seller

and the buyer does not square with our understanding

of the clear words used in Section 11AB and as the

rules proclaim otherwise and it provides for the

duty to be paid for every removal of goods on or

before   the   6th   day   of   the   succeeding   month.

Interpreting the words in the manner contemplated

by the Bench which referred the matter would result

in doing violence to the provisions of the Act and
111
the Rules which we have interpreted.                   We have

already noted that when an assessee in similar

circumstances resorts to provisional assessment

upon       a   final   determination    of       the     value

consequently, the duty and interest dates back to

the month “for which” the duty is determined.             Duty

and interest is not paid with reference to the month

in which final assessment is made.           In fact, any

other interpretation placed on Rule 8 would not only

be opposed to the plain meaning of the words used

but also defeat the clear object underlining the

provisions.       It may be true that the differential

duty becomes crystalised only after the escalation

is finalized under the escalation clause but it is

not    a   case   where   escalation   is   to   have     only

prospective operation.       It is to have retrospective

operation admittedly.       This means the value of the

goods which was only admittedly provisional at the
112
time of clearing the goods is finally determined and

it is on the said differential value that admittedly

that differential duty is paid.    We would think that

while the principle that the value of the goods at

the time of removal is to reign supreme, in a case

where the price is provisional and subject to

variation and when it is varied retrospectively it

will be the price even at the time of removal.    The

fact that it is known, later cannot detract from the

fact, that the later discovered price would not be

value at the time of removal.     Most significantly,

section 11A and section 11AB as it stood at the

relevant time did not provide read with the rules

any other point of time when the amount of duty could

be said to be payable and so equally the interest.

We would concur with the views expressed in SKF

case(supra) and International Auto (supra).        We
113
find no merit in the appeals.   The appeals will

stand dismissed.
…………………………………CJI.
(Ranjan Gogoi)


                          ……………………………………………J.
                           (Uday Umesh Lalit)


                            ………………………………………J.
                                (K.M. Joseph)
New Delhi;
May 08, 2019
114