[Cites
12
, Cited by
16
]
Supreme Court of India
Pramod Kumar vs Zalak Singh . on 10 May, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 2465, 2019 (6) SCC 621, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 298, 2019 (5) ABR 69, (2019) 128 CUT LT 701, (2019) 203 ALLINDCAS 40, (2019) 2 ALL RENTCAS 322, (2019) 2 CLR 163 (SC), (2019) 2 KER LT 910, (2019) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 326, (2019) 3 CIVILCOURTC 480, (2019) 3 PAT LJR 75, (2019) 3 RAJ LW 2661, (2019) 3 RECCIVR 160, (2019) 4 ANDHLD 198, (2019) 4 CAL HN 50, (2019) 4 CALLT 65, (2019) 4 ICC 278, (2019) 8 SCALE 288, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1977, (2019) 2 CURCC 365 (2019) 261 DLT 79, (2019) 261 DLT 79
Author:
K.M. Joseph
Bench:
K.M. Joseph
,
Ashok Bhushan
Reportable

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 1055 of 2019


     PRAMOD KUMAR & ANR.                                                  Appellant(s)

                                                            VERSUS

     ZALAK SINGH & ORS.                                                   Respondent(s)



                                               J U D G M E N T
K.M. JOSEPH, J.
1.      This    appeal    by    special     leave   is   directed

                      against the judgment and order dated 31.08.2012

                      passed by the High Court in Second Appeal No. 5 of

                      1995.     By the impugned judgment, the High Court

                      has   set      aside   the     concurrent    findings     of   the

                      Courts below resulting in dismissal of the suit

                      filed     by    the    respondents    (plaintiffs)       on    the

                      ground that the suit was barred by
Order II Rule 2

                      of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (hereinafter

                      referred to ‘
the CPC
’) as also constructive res
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
judicata.       The High Court has remanded the matter
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2019.05.10
18:06:36 IST
to the First Appellate Court to decide on merits.
Reason:
1
2.     One    Tikaram      was   the      husband    of    respondent

No.4 and the father of respondent Nos. 1 to 3.                     He

was holding 8.22 acres of land in Khasra No.189 at

Village Gondia in his name.                      On 21.01.1959, he

sold the land to the extent of 3.20 acres out of

the    total      8.22      acres    to     the     appellants     and

thereafter, on 11.02.1959, he sold the remaining

portion      of    4.82    acres     of    land,    which    was   the

balance out of 8.22 acres, also to the appellants.

Tikaram passed away on 15.07.1959.
2.     The respondents filed a suit (bearing Civil

Suit No. 131 of 1963) for setting aside the Sale

Deed dated 21.01.1959 and for other reliefs.                       The

allegation made by the respondents in the suit was

that    the       land     was   a       joint    family    ancestral

property and he had sold it for immoral purposes

and in a manner prejudicial to the interest of

joint family.            He was addicted to drink and there

was no necessity to sell the property.
3.     On 31.01.1969, the Trial Court dismissed the

said suit holding that Tikaram was the owner of

the property due to the partition effected in the

year 1957.         Hence, he had the right to sell the
2
suit     land.       The     appellants     were     bona    fide

purchasers.
4.      Aggrieved by the decree of the Trial Court,

the    respondents      filed   an   appeal      (bearing   Civil

Appeal NO. 22 of 1969) on 10.02.1971.
5.      The respondents again filed the present suit

(bearing Civil Suit No. 34 of 1971) challenging

the Sale Deed dated 11.02.1959 and seeking other

reliefs.       It is the said suit which came to be

dismissed both by the Trial Court and the First

Appellate      Court.    The    Trial    Court    answered   the

issues including whether the Suit is barred under

Order II Rule 2 and also affected by constructive

res judicata. It found that the suit is liable to

be dismissed on the ground of Order II Rule 2 and

constructive res judicata. The dismissal by the

Appellate Court was essentially on the basis of

the provisions of
Order II Rule 2 of the CPC
as

also constructive res judicata on the score that

the second alienation dated 21.02.1959 ought to

have been the subject matter of the earlier suit.

The Appellate Court, in fact, found that the Trial

Court    was   right    in   answering    the     other   points.
3
It is to be noted that the judgment of the Trial

Court in the first suit came to be reversed in the

civil appeal and the same has become final.
6.      The High Court, however, reversing the orders

of both the courts found that Order II Rule 2 will

not be a bar.        For Order II Rule 2, the cause of

action in the first suit and the cause of action

in the second suit must be identical.                        In this

case, there were two alienations by the Tikaram

giving rise to two cause of actions.                    It is also

found    that     constructive       res    judicata        will   not

apply.
7.      We have heard learned counsel for the parties

and perused the record.
8.      Learned counsel for the appellants contended

that the High Court has clearly erred in coming to

the conclusion that Order II Rule 2 was not a bar.

Order II Rule 2 is indeed attracted.                   He   took    us

through     the    pleadings     in        the   two    suits      and

contended that the cause of action in the second

suit is identical with the cause of action in the

first suit.       As on the date of the institution of

the   first     suit,   the   second       alienation       was    very
4
much available to be impugned and it is not open

      to the respondents to split the cause of action in

      separate suits and seek relief which is precisely

      what    has     been   done    by     the    respondents        in    this

      case.        He relied upon the judgment of this Court

      in
Coffee Board v. Ramesh Exports Private Limited1
and
A.B.C.     Laminart         Pvt.   Ltd.     &    Anr.   v.     A.P.

      Agencies, Salem2
.
9.      Learned counsel for the respondents drew our

      attention to Order VII Rule 1.                   He points out that

      the     cause    of    action        in     both       the   suits    are

      different.       He also drew our attention to
Article

      109
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
, which reads as

      follows:
109.
By a Hindu governed Twelve years                       When the alienee
by Mitakshara law to                                   takes possession of
set aside his                                          the property.
father’s alienation
of ancestral
property.
10.     He     would    contend           that     the       period     of

      limitation       as    far    as    the     second      sale   deed    is


1   (2014) 6 SCC 424
2   (1989) 2 SCC 163
5
different from the period of limitation as far as

     the first sale deed is concerned.                  The period of

     limitation      as   far    as    the     second   alienation    is

     concerned will expire only on the expiry of 12

     years from the date of taking of possession by the

     alienee.       He further relied on the judgment of

     this Court in
Alka Gupta v. Narender Gupta3
.
11.     The first question, which we are called upon

     to decide, is whether the High Court was right in

     holding that the bar, under Order II Rule 2, will

     not apply in the facts of this case.
12.     Before, we advert to the              decisions    on the

     point    it    would   be   profitable        to   refer   to   the

     pleadings in two suits.
13.     In Civil Suit No. 131 of 1963, we notice the

     following pleadings.         The respondents (plaintiffs)

     are Hindus governed by Mitakshara School of Law as

     administered by Benaras School.                Tikaram’s father

     died    when    Tikaram     was       a   minor.     During     the

     minority of Tikaram, the property was managed by

     his mother.        On becoming major, Tikaram fell into

     bad and immoral habits and grew into a drunkard.

3   (2010) 10 SCC 141
6
He was also addicted to other vices.                      He indulged

in wasteful habits and therefore sold his joint

family ancestral property for immoral purposes and

in a manner prejudicial to the interest of the

joint family.        On the intervention of relations, a

partition was entered into on 11.01.1957, which

was duly registered.
14.    At    the    time      of    partition,         plaintiff     No.2

though begotten was born afterwards on 02.06.1957

and as such he could not and was not made a party

to the above partition.                  Plaintiff No. 3 was born

on 26.08.1959 and therefore he had interest in the

suit    property.          At      the     time   of    partition,    in

Khasra      No.    189   an     area       of   8.22   acres   was   not

included in the share of either deceased Tikaram

or plaintiff No.1 but was kept joint thereafter.

We may notice the following:
“(g) That in or about the month of
      September, 1958, plaintiffs knew that
      Tikaram wanted to sale their lands and
      hence    they    published    a   general
      prohibitory notice in the issue dated
      14th September, 1958 of the Hindu Daily
      “NAVBHARAT” which has wide circulation
      at Gondia and the surrounding area
      warning public in general not to accept
      any transfer of land from deceased
      Tikaram.       That    subsequently   the
7
plaintiffs learnt that the defendants
      intended to enter into a contract of
      sale with deceased Tikaram in respect of
      the suit land and hence they served the
      defendants with a written notice dated
      4.1.1959 asking them to desist from
      purchasing land mentioned in para 1(e)
      above.
3.That, however, despite warning and
      notices   the  defendants   purchased  a
      portion of Kh.No. 189 admeasuring 3.20
      acres, as particularly described in the
      plaintiff map by letters Pa, Pha, Ba,
      Bha, Ma and in red colour, for the
      alleged consideration of Rs.8,000/- vide
      registered sale deed dated 21.1.1959.”
15.    It is the further case that the property was

the     ancestral      joint    family          property      and   the

alienation       was   not     one       for    necessity      or   for

conferring benefits upon the estate or for payment

of antecedent debt.           It is liable to be set aside.

Plaintiff Nos. 1 to 3 have interest in the land by

birth and plaintiff No. 4 (the widow of Tikaram)

had     a   share      with     them.            The    payment      of

consideration is fictitious and it never passed.

Being without consideration, the alienations were

not valid and not binding on the plaintiffs and

thus    liable    to   be     set       aside   for    this    reason.

Thereafter, there were certain further allegations
8
with which we are not concerned.
16.    The reliefs sought by the plaintiffs in the

plaint       were      to    declare       the    sale    deed     as    not

binding on the interest of plaintiff No. 4 and for

delivery          of    possession          to    her      or     in     the

alternative a decree for setting aside the sale

deed        dated      21.01.1957          and    for      delivery       of

possession to the plaintiff, enquiry as to mesne

profits and for mandatory injunction to demolish

certain constructions.
17.    Let     us      now   look     at    the    pleadings       in    the

second suit viz. Civil Suit No. 34 of 1971.
18.    Herein          also,        the     plaintiffs           and     the

defendants are the same.                   It is stated inter alia

as follows:
The Bhumidhari land Kh. No. 189 area 8.22

 acres        situated         in     village          Gondia     is     the

 ancestral property of plaintiff Nos. 1, 2 and 3.
Plaintiff No. 4 is the mother of plaintiff Nos.
1     to    3.        The    plaintiffs         are     Hindu    and    are

 governed by Mitakshara Law as administered by

 Benaras          School.           The    same    allegations          were

 raised about Tikaram having fallen into immoral
9
habits and growing into an incorrigible drunkard

and    selling   joint   family   ancestral     lands   for

immoral purposes. It also referred to partition

dated    11.01.1957.     There   were   also   allegations

relating to Kh. No. 189 wherein 8.22 acres of

land was not included either in the share of

deceased Tikaram or plaintiff No.1 but was kept

joint.     It is relevant to extract para 3 of the

second plaint which is to the following effect:-
“That, however, despite warning and
      notices the defendants purchased a
      portion of Kh. NO. 189 from the
      deceased father of the plaintiffs
      admeasuring 3.20 acres vide sale deed
      dated 21.01.1959. The plaintiffs have
      filed C.S. No. 131 of 1963 against the
      defendants for setting aside the said
      sale.   The suit having been dismissed
      by the trial court the plaintiffs have
      filed Civil Appeal No. 22/69 against
the said judgment
and decree which is
      now pending in the Court of the
      Assistant Judge, at Bhandara 4(a).
      That Tikaram the deceased father of
      the plaintiffs again on 11.02.1959
      sold an area of 4.82 acres out of suit
      Kh. No. 189 to the plaintiffs under
      the same circumstances stated above
      and as described in the plaintiff map
      by letters Ka, Kha, Ga, Gha, Cha,
      Chha, Ja, Ta, Tha, Da, Na and Pa and
      in   red   colour,  for   the   alleged
      consideration    of   Rs.4000/-    vide
      registered sale deed dated 11.2.1959
10
and the same is sought to be set aside
        in this suit.”
19.     It is further stated that the land is to be

treated as an ancestral joint family property and

the alienation being not one for necessity or for

conferring benefits upon the estate or for payment

of antecedent debt and it is liable to be set

aside.
20.     Having    referred      to    the    pleadings,       let     us

examine what the High Court has held. The High

Court holds that all successive claims, arising

under    the     same   obligation,         shall     be    deemed   to

constitute one cause of action. It further finds

that the crux of the matter is, there are two

alienations       of    separate      areas      of   the    land    on

different dates, and although they are in favour

of the same parties, it would give rise to more

than one cause of action. It was further found

that by restricting to first suit to the first

alienation, it could not be found that plaintiff

has split-up the claims or split-up the remedies.

The execution of the second sale deed in favour of

the   same     party    gives    rise       to   distinctive         and
11
separate cause of action. The High Court further

      proceeds to refer to the illustrations in
Order II

      Rule 2 CPC
, which reads as follows:
“A lets a house to B at a yearly rent of
            Rs. 1200. The rent for the whole of the
            years 1905, 1906 and 1907 is due and
            unpaid. A sues B in 1908 only for the
            rent   due  for   1906.   A  shall   not
            afterwards sue B for the rent due for
            1905 or 1907”.
21.     Thereafter, the High Court proceeds to take a

      case where A owns two houses and he let them to B.

      A suit is filed in respect of arrears of rent in

      respect of one house, though arrears were there in

      respect of the other house also. The High Court

      takes    the     view   that   it    is   the   choice   of   the

      plaintiff either to unite or not to unite both the

      causes of action and the second suit would not be

      barred.
22.
In the case of
Mohammad Khalil Khan v. Mehbub

      Ali     Mian4
,    the   earlier      suit   related      to   the

      property    at    Oudh.   The   parties     belonged     to   the

      Sunni sect and the properties belonged to one Rani

      Barkatunnissa who owned properties at Shahjahanpur

4   AIR (36) 1949 Privy Council 78
12
and    Oudh.    The       first   suit      did    not   include   the

property at Shahjahanpur. The Court proceeded to

uphold the views taken by the Courts in India and

maintained          the    finding        that    second   suit,    in

relation       to    the    property       at     Shahjahanpur,    was

barred by virtue of Order II Rule 2. It would be

profitable to refer to paragraphs 45 and 46 as

they throw light upon what constitutes cause of

action:
“45. Shortly stated O.2, R.2, Civil
      P.C., enacts that if a plaintiff fails
      to sue for the whole of the claim which
      he is entitled to make in respect of a
      cause of action in the first suit, then
      he is precluded from suing in a second
      suit in respect of the portion so
      omitted. As pointed out in Moonshee
      Buzloor Ruheem v. Shumsunnissa Begum,
      (1867) 11 M.I.A. 551.
The correct test in all cases of this
      kind is, whether the claim in the new
      suit is, in fact, founded on a cause of
      action distinct from that which was the
      foundation of the former suit….
The object of the rule is clearly to
      avoid splitting up of claims and to
      prevent multiplicity of suits”.
46. “every fact which it would be
      necessary for the plaintiff to prove, if
      traversed, in order to support his right
      to the judgment of the Court. It does
      not comprise every piece of evidence
13
which is necessary to prove each fact,
      but every fact which is necessary to be
      proved.”

        I agree with the definition given by
      the Master of Rolls of a cause of
      action, and that it includes every fact
      which it would be necessary to prove, if
      traversed,   in   order   to   enable  a
      plaintiff to maintain his action.

        Now the cause of action has no
      relation whatever to the defence which
      may be set up by the defendant, nor does
      it depend upon the character of the
      relief prayed for by the plaintiff. It
      refers entirely to the grounds set out
      in the plaint as the cause of action,
      or, in other words, to the media upon
      which the plaintiff asks the Court to
      arrive at a conclusion in his favour.”
23.    The Privy Council proceeded to summarize the

principles    in   paragraph   61,   which   reads   as

follows:
“61. The principles laid down in the
      cases thus far discussed may be thus
      summarized:
(1)   The correct test in cases falling
      under O.2 R.2, is “whether the claim in
      the new suit is in fact founded upon a
      cause of action distinct from that which
      was the foundation for the former suit.
      (2) The cause of action means every
      fact which will be necessary for the
      plaintiff to prove if traversed in order
      to support his right to the judgment.
14
(3)   If the evidence to support the two
      claims is different, then the causes of
      action are also different.
(4) The causes of action in the two
      suits may be considered to be the same
      if in substance they are identical.
      (5) The cause of action has no
      relation whatever to the defence that
      may be set up by the defendant nor does
      it depend upon the character of the
      relief prayed for by the plaintiff. It
      refers….. to the media upon which the
      plaintiff asks the Court to arrive at a
      conclusion in his favour.”
24.    Still further, in paragraph 63, the Court has

proceeded to conclude as follows:
“63. The plaintiffs’ cause of action
      to recover the properties consists of
      those facts which would entitle them to
      establish their title to the properties.
      These facts are the same with respect to
      both properties, these being, that Rani
      Barkatunnissa was the owner of the
      properties;   that  she   died  on   13th
      February, 1927, that she was a Sunni by
      faith and that they are her heirs under
      the Muhammadan law.
Having regard to the conduct of the
      parties their Lordships take the view
      that the course of dealing by the
      parties in respect of both properties
      was the same and the denial of the
      plaintiffs’ title to the Oudh property
      and the possession of the Shahjahanpur
      property by the defendants obtained as a
      result of that denial formed part of the
      same transaction. On this question, the
      learned Judges of the High court have
15
expressed their opinion in two places in
      their judgment as follows:
“In the case before us the trespass on
      title or slander of title in the case so
      far as the Oudh suit was concerned was
      not distinct and different either in
      point of time or in point of character
      from the trespass on possession in the
      case of the Shahjahanpur property…”



      Again, it is stated as follows:
“Here in the present case we find that
      the   two   trespasses,   one   on   the
      Shahjahanpur property and the other on
      the Oudh property were similar in
      character and formed part of the same
      transaction and the evidence to prove
      the facts which it was necessary for the
      plaintiffs to prove… was the same and
      the bundle of essential facts was also
      the same.”
25. At this juncture, we may advert to Order II Rule 2,

which reads as follows:
“2. Suit to include the whole claim

        (1) Every suit shall include the whole
      of the claim which the plaintiff is
      entitled to make in respect of the cause
      of   action;   but   a   plaintiff   may
      relinquish any portion of his claim in
      order to bring the suit within the
      jurisdiction of any Court.
(2) Relinquishment of part of claim-
Where a plaintiff omits to sue in
      respect     of,     or     intentionally
      relinquishes, any portion of his claim,
16
he shall not afterwards sue in respect
      of   the    portion  so   omitted   or
      relinquished.
(3) Omission to sue for one of several
      reliefs – A person entitled to more than
      one relief in respect of the same cause
      of action may sue for all or any of such
      reliefs; but if he omits, except with
      the leave of the Court, to sue for all
      such reliefs, he shall not afterwards
      sue for any relief so omitted.”
26.     Order II Rule 2(1) provides that a plaintiff

is to include the whole of the claim, which he is

entitled      to    make,      in   respect      of    the    cause   of

action. However, it is open to him to relinquish

any portion of the claim. Order II Rule 2 provides

for the consequences of relinquishment of a part

of a claim and also the consequences of omitting a

part of the claim. It declares that if a plaintiff

omits    to   sue       or   relinquishes        intentionally        any

portion    of      his   claim,     he   shall        be   barred    from

suing on that portion so omitted or relinquished.

Order II Rule 2(3), however, deals with the effect

of omission to sue for all or any of the reliefs

in    respect      of    the    same     cause    of       action.
The

consequences of such omission will be to precluded

plaintiff from suing for any relief which is so
17
omitted. The only exception is when he obtains

      leave of the Court. In a recent judgment of this

      Court, the distinction between Order II Rule 2(1)

      and Order II Rule 2(3) has been succinctly brought

      out    in   Virgo   Industries     (Eng.)    (
P)   Ltd.   v.

      Venturetech      Solutions   (P)   Ltd.5
,.    This   Court,

      inter alia, has held as follows:
“
Order 2 Rule 1 CPC
requires every
            suit to include the whole of the claim
            to which the plaintiff is entitled in
            respect of any particular cause of
            action. However, the plaintiff has an
            option to relinquish any part of his
            claim if he chooses to do so.
Order 2
            Rule 2 CPC
contemplates a situation
            where a plaintiff omits to sue or
            intentionally relinquishes any portion
            of the claim which he is entitled to
            make. If the plaintiff so acts, Order 2
            Rule 2 makes it clear that he shall not,
            afterwards, sue for the part or portion
            of the claim that has been omitted or
            relinquished. Leave of the Court is
            contemplated by Order 2 Rule 2(3) in
            situations   where   a   plaintiff    being
            entitled to more than one relief on a
            particular cause of action, omits to sue
            for   all  such    reliefs.  In    such   a
            situation, the plaintiff is precluded
            from bringing a subsequent suit to claim
            the relief earlier omitted except in a
            situation where leave of the court had
            been obtained. It is clear from a
            conjoint reading of the provisions of

5   (2013) 1 SCC 625
18
Order 2 Rules 2(2) and (3)that the
     aforesaid two sub-rules of Order 2 Rule
     2 contemplate two different situations,
     namely, where a plaintiff omits or
     relinquishes a part of a claim which he
     is entitled to make and, secondly, where
     the plaintiff omits or relinquishes one
     out of the several reliefs that he could
     have claimed in the suit. It is only in
     the   latter    situations    where    the
     plaintiff can file a subsequent suit
     seeking the relief omitted in the
     earlier suit proved that at the time of
     omission to claim the particular relief
     he had obtained leave of the court in
     the first suit.
The object behind the enactment of
     Order 2 Rules 2(2) and (3)
CPC
is not
     far to seek. The Rule engrafts a
     laudable principle that discourages/
     prohibits vexing the defendant again and
     again by multiple suits except in a
     situation where one of the several
     reliefs,    though    available    to    a
     plaintiff, may not have been claimed for
     a good reason. A later suit for such
     relief is contemplated only with the
     leave   of   the   court   which    leave,
     naturally, will be granted upon due
     satisfaction and for good and sufficient
     reasons.”
27. Thus, in respect of omission to include a

part of the claim or relinquishing a part of the

claim flowing from a cause of action, the result

is    that   the   plaintiff    is   totally   barred   from

instituting a suit later in respect of the claim

so omitted or relinquished. However, if different
19
reliefs could be sought for in one suit arising

out of a cause of action, if leave is obtained

from     the        Court,      then     a    second       suit,     for     a

different relief than one claimed in the earlier

suit,     can        be    prayed        for.       There     are        three

expressions which are found in Order II Rule 2.

Firstly, there is reference to the word "cause of

action", secondly the word "claim is alluded to"
and finally reference is made to "relief".
28. The        defence,          which        is     set     up     by     the

defendants, would be irrelevant to determine what

cause    of     action         means.       The    reliefs,       which    are

sought         by      the       plaintiffs,           will        not     be

determinative             of     what        constitutes          cause     of

action.       Cause       of    action,       as    explained       by     the

Privy     Council          in
Mohammad       Khalil    Khan
case

(supra),        means          the    Media        through    which        the

plaintiff seeks to persuade the Court to grant

him relief. It could, therefore, be said to be

the factual and legal basis or premise upon which

the Court is invited by the plaintiff to decide

the case in his favour. It is also clear that the
20
cause    of   action,    in    both    the   suits,     must    be

identical. In order that it be identical, what

matters, is the substance of the matter.
29.
In
Coffee Board
case (supra), the respondent

purchased      coffee    at    the     export   auctions       and

exported them to certain countries. He filed two

suits. The Coffee Board had provided for stamps

system for exporting of coffee. Complaint of the

plaintiff      was   that     the     defendants   failed      to

supply   the    stamps   but    there     was   delay    and    it

resulted in losses. This is what the Court held:
“12. The courts in order to determine
  whether a suit is barred by Order 2 Rule
  2 must examine the cause of action
  pleaded by the plaintiff in his plaints
  filed in the relevant suits (see
S.
  Nazeer Ahmed v. State Bank of Mysore
;
2007 (11)| SCC 75). Considering the
  technicality of the plea of Order 2 Rule
  2, both the plaints must be read as a
  whole to identify the cause of action,
  which is necessary to establish a claim
  or necessary for the plaintiff to prove
  if     traversed.    Therefore,    after
  identifying the cause of action if it is
  found that the cause of action pleaded
  in both the suits is identical and the
  relief claimed in the subsequent suit
  could have been pleaded in the earlier
  suit, then the subsequent suit is barred
  by Order 2 Rule 2.
21
xxx         xxx                      xxx
16. In the plaint in OS No. 3150 of
      1985 being the earlier suit, it has been
      claimed by the respondent being the
      plaintiff therein that the appellant
      being the defendants failed to supply
      ICO stamps for 268.08 tonnes of coffee
      purchased by him for export between 11-
      8-1982 and 8-9-1982, in spite of its
      assurances leading to delay in the
      shipment of the coffee resulting in
      losses to the plaintiff. On the basis of
      the same, the respondent claimed for the
      losses suffered by him along with
      damages. The respondent further averred
      that the cause of action for the suit
      arose   on   various  dates   when   the
      respondent purchased coffee from the
      appellant in the auctions held by them
      on the assurance that the ICO stamps
      will be supplied by the appellant to
      them.
17. The cause of action in the above
      suit is the failure of ICO to supply
      stamps to the respondent in spite of its
      assurances. The respondent to ensure the
      success of his claim, was required to
      prove that on account of the omission of
      the appellant i.e failure to provide ICO
      stamps for the coffee purchased by them,
      the respondent suffered losses.”
30.    The Court went on further hold that plaintiff

could only succeed only by proving failure by the

appellant      to   provide   stamps.   The   grounds   of

difference in the suit were found to be as regards
22
the amount of coffee and the date when the same

      was purchased.
31.    The   respondents       sought        support        from       the

      judgment in
Alka Gupta v. Narender Kumar Gupta6
.

      The appellants and the respondents entered into a

      partnership to run an institute at place "P" in

      New Delhi. Thereafter, an agreement was entered

      into    to   sell     the    undivided          half     share.        The

      respondents         paid     only        part      of     the        sale

      consideration        which    led       to   the     suit       by     the

      appellant for the balance amount. The suit was

      decreed.      Thereafter,           the         appellant            filed

      subsequent suit for rendition of accounts for the

      period from 05.04.2000, which was date on which

      the partnership deed was executed till 31.07.2004.

      According to the appellant, the partnership was

      one    at    will     and    was        dissolved.       This        Court

      overturned the view of the High Court that the

      suit was barred by Order II Rule 2 and by the

      principles of constructive res judicata.
The Court

      followed     the    judgment    of       this    Court    in
Gurbux



6   (2010) 10 SCC 141
23
Singh    v.   Bhooralal7
,   and   inter   alia,   held   as

      follows:
“A Division Bench upheld that decision
            on the grounds that the suit was barred
            by
Order 2 Rule 2 CPC
and that the
            appellant had settled all her claims
            with the respondent under the bayana
            agreement dated 29.06.2004. The present
            appeal was then filed by special leave.
The cause of action for the first suit
            was non-payment of price under the
            agreement of sale dated 29.06.2004,
            whereas the cause of action for the
            second suit was non-settling of accounts
            of a dissolved partnership constituted
            under the deed dated 05.04.2000. Merely
            because the agreement of sale related to
            an immovable property at R and the
            business run therein under the name of
            “Takshila Institute” and the second suit
            referred to a partnership in regard to
            business run at P also under the same
            name of Takshila Institute, it could not
            be assumed that the two suits related to
            the same cause of action so as to
            attract
Order 2 Rule 2 CPC
.”
32.     As regards the plea of res judicata, here is

      what the Court held as follows:-
“Plea of res judicata is a restraint
            on the right of a plaintiff to have an
            adjudication of his claim. The plea must
            be     clearly     established,     more
            particularly where the bar sought is on
7   AIR 1964 SC 1810
24
the basis of constructive res judicata.
The plaintiff who is sought to be
            prevented by the bar of constructive res
            judicata should have notice about the
            plea and have an opportunity to put
            forth his contentions against the same.
            In the present case, there was no plea
            of constructive res judicata, nor had
            the appellant-plaintiff an opportunity
            to meet the case based on such plea. Res
            judicata means “a thing adjudicated”,
            that is, an issue that is finally
            settled   by   judicial   decision.   The
            principle of constructive res judicata
            emerges from Explanation IV to
Section
            11
CPC when read with Explanation III
            thereof both of which explain the
            concept   of    “matter    directly   and
            substantially   in    issue”.   In   view
            thereof, even though a particular ground
            of defence or attack was not actually
            taken in the earlier suit, if it was
            capable of being taken in the second
            suit in view of the principle of
            constructive res judicata. Constructive
            res judicata deals with grounds of
            attack and defence which ought to have
            been raised, but not raised, whereas
Order 2 Rule 2 CPC
relates to reliefs
            which ought to have been claimed on the
            same cause of action but not claimed.”
33.
In
Union of India v. H.K. Dhruv8
, the Court

      held, inter alia, as follows:
“4. Having heard the learned Senior
            Counsel for the appellant as also the
            respondent appearing in person, we are
            satisfied that no fault can be found
            with the view taken by the High Court.
            In order to attract applicability of the

8   (2005) 10 SCC 218
25
bar enacted by
Order 2 Rule 2 CPC
, it is
            necessary that the cause of action on
            which the subsequent claim is founded
            should have arisen to the claimant when
            he sought for enforcement of the first
            claim before any court. On the facts
            found and as recorded in the judgment of
            the High Court and with which we find no
            reason to differ, the second demand
            raised   by  the   respondent   was   not
            available to be made a a part of the
            claim raised in the first application.
The bar enacted by
Order 2 Rule 2 CPC
is
            clearly not attracted.”
                                    (Emphasis supplied)
34.
In
S. Nazeer Ahmed v. State Bank of Mysore9
,

      the appellant/defendant borrowed some money from

      the    plaintiff's   bank    by     hypothecating   and   by

      mortgaging two items. The money suit filed by the

      bank was decreed. The proceedings in execution was

      unsuccessful as the bus, which was hypothecated,

      could not be traced. The bank prayed to proceed

      against the mortgaged property in execution. It

      was resisted by the appellant by pointing out that

      there was no decree on the mortgage and the bank

      could only attach the properties and could not

      sell    it   straightaway.    The    said   objection     was

      upheld. Thereupon, the bank instituted the second


9   (2007) 11 SCC 75
26
suit for enforcement of the equitable mortgage.

This Court proceeded to take a view that the cause

of action in the second suit was different. The

Court also further drew support from Order XXXIV

Rule 14 and proceeded to hold as follows:
“14. Applying the test so laid down, it
      is   not  possible   to  come   to  the
      conclusion that the suit to enforce the
      equitable mortgage is hit by Order 2
      Rule 2 of the Code in view of the
      earlier suit for recovery of the mid
      term loan, especially in the context of
      Order 34 Rule 14 of the Code. The two
      causes of action are different, though
      they might have been parts of the same
      transaction. Even otherwise, Order 34
      Rule 14 read with Rule 15 removes the
      bar if any that may be attracted by
      virtue of Order 2 Rule 2 of the Code.
      The decision of the Rangoon High Court
      in Pyu Municipality Vs. U. Tun Nyein
      (AIR 1933 Rangoon 158) relied on by
      learned counsel for the appellant does
      not enable him to successfully canvass
      for the position that the present suit
      was barred by Order 2 Rule 2 of the
      Code, as the said decision itself has
      pointed out the effect of Order 34 Rule
      14 and in the light of what we have
      stated above.”
35.    Let us first consider the argument of the

learned    counsel   for   the   respondent   that   under
Article 109
of the
Limitation Act
, the period of

limitation commences from the date of possession
27
obtained by alienee, and therefore, the cause of

action for the second suit, in respect of the sale

deed dated 21.02.1959, would be different from the

earlier suit, as in respect of the sale deed of an

earlier date, it would have a different period of

limitation.         We   are    of    the       view   that,     that   the

period    of        limitation         under
Article      109
is

different from the period of limitation in respect

of the first sale deed, cannot operate so as to

exclude       the    bar   under       Order         II   Rule    2.    The

principle underlying Order II Rule 2 is that no

man can be vexed twice over the same cause of

action. All claims and reliefs, which arise from a

cause    of    action,         must    be       comprehended       in   one

single    suit.      Order      II    Rule       2   provides     for   the

principle of repose. If this be the underlying

object of Order II Rule 2, the fact that at the

time when the first suit was filed even though the

second    alienation           could       be    challenged       and    it

stemmed from one single cause of action and not

two different causes of action, the mere fact that

a   different        period     of     limitation         is     provided,
28
cannot stand in the way of the bar under Order II

Rule 2.
36.   Now, let us consider the further argument of

the learned counsel for the respondent based on
Order VII Rule 1 CPC
. Order VII Rule 1 provides

for the particulars to be contained in a plaint.
It,   inter       alia,        provides     that      the       facts

constituting      the     cause    of   action      and     when   it

arose, be pleaded. Apparently, the argument of the

respondents is having regard to
Article 109
of the
Limitation Act
, the cause of action as provided in
Article 109
, would commence from the date of the

deed being 11.02.1959, and therefore, it has a

different period of limitation as already noted.

It indicates that cause of action, raised in the

second    suit,   is    not    identical     with     a    cause   of

action in the first suit. We are of the view that

this argument proceeds on a misapprehension as to

what constitutes the cause of action. Cause of

action has been explained in many decisions. It is

the bundle of facts, which if traversed, must be

proved.    However,       as    laid      down   by       the   Privy

Council, it would be understood also to mean the
29
media through which Court’s intervention is sought

by the plaintiff.
37.     What   is     the    legal    basis/factual      matrix

premised on which the plaintiff seeks a decree?
38.     In this case, we have noticed the pleadings.

The case of the plaintiffs appears to be that the

property is ancestral property. Their late father

Tikaram was given to wasteful ways and addicted to

drink    and   otherwise.       He   was   given   to   selling

properties.         His     well-wishers    intervened      and

partition ensued. However, 8.22 acres falling in

Kh.No.189 was kept out of the partition deed. He

decided to sell 8.22 acres without there being any

legal necessity and without any benefit to the

joint family. The first part of the transaction,

which consisted of two parts, pertained to sale

deed dated 21.01.1959 and that was the subject

matter of the first suit. At the time of filing of

the said first suit, late predecessor-in-interest

of the plaintiff, had also executed another sale

deed which constituted the remaining portion which

consisted of the 8.22 acres as already noticed.

The suits contained virtually identical averments
30
in regard to both the transactions. The first suit

was filed in 1963 and the second suit filed in the

year 1971.
39.    We are of the view that in such circumstances,

this   is    a     case    where      the   plaintiff    ought    to    have

included     relief       in    the    form   of    setting    aside     the

second sale deed also. This is not a case where the

second      sale    deed       had    not   been    executed     when    the

plaintiff instituted the first suit. We are not, for a

moment, declaring the effect of the sale deed having

been executed subsequently to the institution of the

suit as we do not have to pronounce on the effect of

such a sale. We are only emphasizing that it was open

to the respondent/plaintiff to seek relief in respect

of the second sale executed by their predecessor-in-

interest and what is more important in favour of the

same     parties      (defendants)          who    are   the   appellants

before us.
40.    The High Court has proceeded to reason based

on Order II Rule 3. It is open to the plaintiff to

combine causes of action. Order II Rule 3 reads as

follows:
31
“3. Joinder of causes of action
      (1) Save as otherwise provided, a
      plaintiff may unite in the same suit
      several causes of action against the
      same defendant, or the same defendants
      jointly;   and  any   plaintiffs  having
      causes of action in which they are
      jointly interested against the same
      defendant or the same defendants jointly
      may unite such causes of action in the
      same suit.
(2) Where causes of action are united,
      the jurisdiction of the Court as regards
      the suit shall depend on the amount or
      value of the aggregate subject-matters
      at the date of instituting the suit.”
41.    It is undoubtedly true that the law does not

compel a litigant to combine one or more causes of

action in a suit. It is open to a plaintiff, if he

so wishes, however to combine more than one cause

of    action   against    same       parties   in    one   suit.

However, it is undoubtedly true that the embargo

in Order II Rule 2 will arise only if the claim,

which is omitted or relinquished and the reliefs

which are omitted and not claimed, arise from one

cause of action. If there is more than one cause

of action, Order II Rule 2 will not apply. It is

undoubtedly     also     true    that    Order      II   Rule   2
32
manifests a technical rule as it has the effect of

posing    an    obstacle     in     the    path    of     a    litigant

ventilating his grievance in the Courts. But as

already      noted,     there     is      an    equally       important

principle that no person shall be vexed twice on

the same cause of action.
42.   That      on     the   same       cause     of    action,     the

plaintiffs having omitted to sue in respect of the

sale deed in question, we would think that bar

under Order II Rule 2 would apply.                      In this view

of the matter we do not think it necessary to

pronounce on the question relating to constructive

res judicata.          In the light of this, we allow the

appeal    and    set    aside     the     judgment      of    the   High

Court. Parties to bear their respective costs.
…............J.
                                                   [ASHOK BHUSHAN]



                                                  ..............J.
                                                    [K.M. JOSEPH]
NEW DELHI;
MAY 10, 2019.
33