[Cites
89
, Cited by
48
]
Supreme Court of India
Federation Of Obstetrics And ... vs Union Of India on 3 May, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 2214, 2019 (6) SCC 283, 2019 (5) ABR 97, 2019 (3) AKR 210, (2019) 2 CRILR(RAJ) 561, (2019) 2 CRIMES 211, (2019) 4 ANDHLD 210, (2019) 4 MAD LJ 448, (2019) 7 SCALE 314, 2019 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 561, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 1797, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 227
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
Vineet Saran
,
Arun Mishra
1


                                                                             REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                               WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.129 OF 2017


         Federation of Obstetrics and
         Gynecological Societies of India (FOGSI)                            ..Petitioner


                                                   Versus

         Union of India and others                                           ..Respondents

                                             JUDGMENT
Arun Mishra, J.
1.              The instant writ petition has been filed by the Federation of

         Obstetrics             and    Gynaecological       Societies   of   India   (FOGSI)

         (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Society’) highlighting the issues

         and             problems     affecting   the   practice   of   obstetricians   and

         gynaecologists across the country under the Pre­conception and

         Pre­natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection)

         Act, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’) and challenging the

         constitutional validity of Sections 23(1) and 23(2) of the Act and

         seeking direction in the nature of certiorari/mandamus for
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2019.05.03
17:08:57 IST
Reason:
decriminalising anomalies in paperwork/record keeping/clerical

         errors in regard of the provisions of the Act for being violative of
2
Articles 14
, 19(1)(g)
and
21
of the Constitution of India.       The

Society is the apex body of obstetricians and gynaecologists of the

country and is concerned for the welfare of its members.
2.   The case set up on behalf of the petitioner­Society is that

the Act was enacted with the objective to prohibit pre­natal

diagnostic techniques for determination of sex of the foetus

leading    to    female    foeticide.     But   unfortunately,    its

implementation is more in letter and less in spirit. The problem

of sex determination and gender selection is a serious issue and

is one of the biggest social problems faced by our society.

Despite enactment of the Act and subsequent amendments, the

Child Sex Ratio has not shown significant improvement, hence,

putting    sufficient   concern   and   questions   on   the   proper

implementation of the Act. It is contended that equating clerical

errors on the same footing with the actual offence of sex

determination shows the inherent weakness in the language of

the Act.
3.   It is further contended that the Appropriate Authority

appointed under the Act conducts inspections and raids in

various districts and cities and even if there are mere anomalies
3
in the paperwork, it seals the sonography machine and files a

criminal case under the Act.      As a result, doctors who do not

conduct sex determination and gender selection are being

targeted on the basis of aforesaid anomalies.          The inherent

infirmity in the Act as it stands currently in its present form

amounting to treating unequals as equals. The Act has failed to

distinguish between criminal offences and the anomalies in

paperwork like incomplete ‘F’­Forms, clerical mistakes such as

writing NA or incomplete address, no mentioning of the date,

objectionable pictures of Radha Krishna in sonography room,

incomplete filling of Form ‘F’, indication for sonography not

written, faded notice board and not legible, striking out details in

the Form ‘F’ etc., thereby charging the members of the petitioner­

Society   for   heinous   crime   of   female   foeticide   and   sex

determination and that too merely for unintentional mistakes in

record keeping.    The Act provides same punishment for the

contravention of any provision of the Act, thus equating the

anomalies in paperwork and the offence of sex determination and

gender selection on the same pedestal. The sealing of machines

directly deprives a woman in that vicinity of a critical medical aid

and thereby putting the lives of the women in danger.             The
4
unreasonable sealing of the sonography machine not only

impacts the welfare of the women as such, but it also amounts to

undue harassment and mental torture of the members of the

petitioner­Society.
4.    It is further contended that the ambiguous wording of

Section 23(1) of the Act has resulted in grave miscarriage of

justice and the members of the petitioner­Society have faced

grave hardships and have undergone criminal prosecution for

act, which cannot be equated with the acts of sex determination.
5.    It is averred that even the smallest anomaly in paperwork

which is in fact an inadvertent and unintentional error has made

the   obstetricians   and   gynaecologists   vulnerable    to   the

prosecution by the Authorities all over the country.
6.    Section 23(2) of the Act empowers the State Medical Council

to suspend the registration of any doctor indefinitely, who is

reported by the Appropriate Authority for necessary action,

during the pendency of trial.   The petitioner­Society submitted

that Section 23(2) of the Act is ultra vires the Constitution as it

assumes the guilt of the alleged accused even before his/her

conviction by a competent court and hence violates the
5
fundamental           right   guaranteed     under
Article    21
of   the

Constitution.
7.      It is contended that presumption of innocence is a cardinal

principle of rule of law for which petitioner­Society has placed

reliance on
Article 14(2)
of the International Covenant on Civil

and Political Rights, 1966, which states that everyone charged

with a criminal offence shall have the right to be presumed

innocent until proved guilty according to law.
Article 14(2)
of the

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966 reads

thus:
“Article 14
1. ***
2. Everyone charged with a criminal offence shall have the right
        to be presumed innocent until proved guilty according to law.”
8.      It is contended that the Act fails to distinguish between the

cases of presence and absence of                   mens rea during the

commission of minor clerical mistakes.                 Mens rea is not be

presumed at the time of taking cognizance and must be

established as held by this Court in
Arun Bhandari v. State of

U.P.
, (2013) 2 SCC 801.
6
9.    The petitioner­Society has further placed reliance on the

decisions rendered by this Court in cases of penal statues to give

proper effect to the scheme of the Act concerned and to balance

various interests involved by striking down/reading down/

diluting the concerned penal provisions.
10.   It is further contended that suspension of the medical

licence at the stage of framing of charges is highly improper and

harsh, which results in loss of livelihood of not only the members

of the Society, but also his family as well as the dependents, who

are deprived of financial security and well­being. The vague and

ambiguous wordings of Section 23(1) renders Section 25 totally

redundant.
11.   It is further submitted that Form­F as it stands today does

not serve the purpose for which it was made and there is no

substantive evidence which proves that errors in Form­F have

any   direct nexus with the offence of sex          selection   and

determination.
12.   Respondent Nos.1 to 4 has refuted the claims of the

petitioner­Society altogether.   It is contended that the Act is a

social welfare legislation with a social objective to prevent
7
elimination of girls before birth and it is not a general law

providing any general right to practice medicine.      The specific

choice of legislature cannot be called arbitrary and is in no way

ultra vires or violative of the Constitution. The Act is a Central

legislation; however, its implementation lies primarily with the

States, who are required to enforce the law through the statutory

bodies in the State, constituted under the Act. The Act empowers

the Central Government to regulate the use of pre­natal

diagnostic techniques.       The proliferation of the technology is

resulting in a catastrophe in the form of female foeticide leading

to severe imbalance in child sex ratio and sex ratio at birth. The

Centre is duty bound to intervene in such a case to uphold the

welfare of the society, especially of the women and the children.

The Act was enacted with a purpose to ban the use of sex

selection techniques before or after conception; prevent the

misuse of pre­natal diagnostic techniques for sex selection

abortions and to regulate such techniques.      It is mandatory to

maintain proper record in respect of use of ultrasound machines

under the Act.       For effective implementation of the Act, a

hierarchy of Appropriate Authority at State, District and Sub­

District level is created.
8
13.   It is contended that ultrasonography test on a pregnant

woman is considered to be an important part of a pre­natal

diagnostic test and the person conducting such test has to

maintain a complete record thereof in the manner prescribed in

the rules and a deficiency or inaccuracy in maintaining such

records would amount to an offence.         Chapter VII of the Act

prescribes offences and penalties and there is no gradation of

offences under the Act as it does not classify offences. Equating

the clerical errors on same footing with the actual offence of sex

determination is in compliance with the provisions of the Act and

rules thereunder.     The Act does not differentiate among the

violations committed by doctors and provides for punishment for

all violations under the Act. The Act prescribes punishment in

furtherance of its object and purposes which is to prevent

detection of female foetus which is in the larger public interest,

hence Section 23 of the Act does not violate
Articles 14
and
21.
It is further averred that right to practice a profession under
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution is not an absolute right.
14.   It is contended that petitioner­Society in the garb of social

cause is trying to mislead this Court and a criminal act cannot be
9
protected under the umbrella of the
Article 19.
The offences

under the Act are per se criminal and no exemption can be

sought for criminal violations in the guise of public interest or

right to freedom.
15.   It is contended that the Appropriate Authority conducts

inspection pursuant to the directions issued by this Court in

Centre for Enquiry into
Health & Allied Themes (CEHAT) v. Union

of India
, (2003) 8 SCC 398, wherein it was directed to constitute

National Inspection and Monitoring Committee for conducting

inspections. As the sex determination is hatched in secrecy and

committed in privacy and as both the parties are hand in glove

with each other, therefore it becomes difficult to detect the

commission of the offence, hence traps are usually laid or raids

are conducted by the inspecting authorities and sometimes non­

maintenance of records or incomplete records may provide

substantial evidence towards the commission of offence.       It is

further submitted that the Act specifically provides for the record

keeping under Rule 9 of the Pre­conception and Pre­natal

Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Rules, 1996

(hereinafter referred to as ‘the Rules’) and any deficiency or
10
inaccuracy in record keeping amounts to violation of Sections 5

and 6 of the Act.
16.   The respondents contend that record keeping is important

for proper implementation of the Act and the stringent provisions

with regard to maintenance of records and punishment for

non­compliance cannot be equated or considered as infirmity of

the Act. If it is exempted from the mandatory requirement, the

probably involvement in sex determination and sex selection in

the guise of use of diagnostic techniques would continue

unabated.
17.   It is also contended that the purpose of Form ‘F’ is to

maintain personal and medical record of the patient visiting the

Pre­Natal Diagnostic Clinic to avail the services and confirmation

regarding the consent of the patient/pregnant woman with

regard to the prohibition of communication of the sex of foetus so

as to avoid abuse of the technology.     Section 4(3) of the Act

requires every Genetic Counselling Centre/Genetic Clinic to fill

Form ‘F’. The filling of Form ‘F’ is commensurate with the objects

of the Act which is to regulate the technology and to avoid the

abuse of the technology for the purpose of sex determination. It
11
gives the insight into the reasons for conducting ultrasonography

and incomplete Form ‘F’ raises presumption of doubt against the

medical practitioner and in the absence of Form ‘F’, the

Appropriate Authority will have no means to supervise the usage

of the ultrasonography machine and shall not be able to regulate

the use of the technique. The non­maintenance of records is not

merely a technical or procedural lapse in the context of sex

determination, it is the most significant piece of evidence for

identifying the accused. It is further contended that clerical

errors in Form ‘F’ fall under Section 4 of the Act and any

deficiency   or   inaccuracy    found   therein   shall   amount   to

contravention of the provisions of Section 5 or 6 of the Act unless

contrary     is   proved   by    the    person    conducting   such

ultrasonography.
18.   It is contended that every aggrieved person, who suffered

from any procedural irregularity, can avail legal remedy as

provided under Section 21 of the Act and Rule 19 of the Rules.
19.   The respondents have placed reliance on decision rendered

by High Court of Gujarat in
Suo Motu v. State of Gujarat
, (2009) 1

GLR 64, which dealt with the issue of proper maintenance of
12
records and to the decision rendered by High Court of Rajasthan

in
S.K. Gupta v. Union of India
, wherein it was observed that

female infants have also right to live. There is right of still born

child to be looked after properly during pregnancy. Once a child

is conceived, it has to be treated with dignity. Such right cannot

be denied and practice of female foeticide/infanticide is prevailing

at large which is illegal and unconstitutional.
20.   The respondents have also drawn our attention to the

provisions of Regulation 1.3 of the Indian Medical Council

(Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002;

Regulation 6.2 of Pharmacy Practice Regulation, 2015; and
Transplantation of Human Organs and Tissues Act, 1994
, which

contains the provisions with respect to maintenance of proper

records.
21.   It is submitted that
Section 23
and
Section 25
are

complimentary to each other, not contradictory as contended by

the petitioner­Society.   It is lastly contended that no case for

striking down the proviso to
Section 4(3)
is made out.
22.   Shri Soli J. Sorabjee and Shri Shyam Divan, learned senior

counsel urged that present is the classic example of unequals
13
being treated as equals.       Due to inherent infirmity in the Act,

whereunder members of the petitioner­Society are treated

unequally as mere clerical errors has resulted in breach of

personal liberties.
The Act
fails to classify offence of actual sex

determination vis­à­vis clerical error in maintenance of record.

There is no gradation of offence.
23.   The presumption of innocence ought not to be disposed

away with under the Act.         The same is part of human rights.

Presumption of innocence continues until conviction.              The

provisions of suspension under
Section 23(2)
is draconian. Any

deficiency or inaccuracy in maintenance of records ought not to

amount to contravention under
Section 5
or
Section 6
and the

proviso to
Section 4(3)
accordingly be diluted. It may be clarified

that contravention of proviso to
Section 4(3)
, Section 29 and Rule

9 or technical lapses attracting minor penalty should not attract
Section 27
of the Act.        The provision of
Section 23(2)
be read

down so that suspension should not fall under
Section 23(2)
in

the   case    of   clerical    mistakes   or   inadvertent   technical

errors/lapses.     Issuance of notice be made mandatory under
Section 20
.    No action be taken on technical grounds such as

writing short forms, writing ‘NA’ instead of “not applicable”,
14
writing initials of the doctors etc. while filing up Form ‘F’. The

competent authority should consider each case on merits with

the aid of legal advisor.     Denial of renewal of registration of

Centre of a running unit on the ground of pendency of criminal

trial is illegal and harsh.   There should not be seizure of any

equipment etc. as ultrasound machine are necessary for human

use. It is not appropriate to keep such utilitarian instruments

sealed.
24.   Ms. Pinki Anand, Additional Solicitor General appearing on

behalf of respondents countering the submission raised on behalf

of petitioner­Society contended that there is alarming decline in

the child sex ratio in India and in several districts it is worse as

the ratio per thousand is below 800. She has also relied upon

the purpose and legislative history of enactment of the Act

including amendments made thereunder and the Rules. It has

been made mandatory to maintain proper records in respect of

use of ultrasound machines.
The Act
provides for prohibition of

sex selection/determination as well as regulation of pre­natal

diagnostic techniques. The rate of conviction is extremely poor,

despite 24 years of the existence of the Act, it is only 586 out of

4202 cases registered, resulting into action against 138 medical
15
licenses.   Emphasis has been laid by this Court in several

decisions on proper maintenance of records.
Section 23
is the

central provision in the scheme of the Act.     Form ‘F’ is very

important as it gives the details and the reasons for conducting

ultrasonography and incomplete Form ‘F’ raises the presumption

of doubt against the medical practitioner.
Section 23
and Form

‘F’ are inter­linked, thus, the provisions cannot be diluted. She

further contended that the non­maintenance of records is not

merely procedural lapse, it is key evidence given the collusive

nature of the crime.      There exist effective and efficacious

remedies to the instances cited by the petitioner­Society.    She

also relied upon a case study on record keeping as an

implementation tool of Prabhakar Hospital in Panipat.
The Act
enjoys a presumption of constitutionality and no case of violation

of fundamental rights has been made out by the petitioner­

Society.
The Act
is regulatory and is for the wholesome purpose

same advances the intendment of other provisions applicable to

medical fraternity, which requires rigorous maintenance of

records.    Considering the wide prevalence of violence against

women and children in different forms, the Legislature has

enacted several Acts in order to ensure gender justice and to take
16
care of cry of female foetus. No case for striking down, dilution or

issuance of any guidelines is made out by the petitioner­Society.
25.   It was urged on behalf of intervenor that
Section 28
of the

Act makes it clear that no court shall take cognizance of an

offence unless on a complaint made by Appropriate Authority.

The composition of Appropriate Authority is provided under
Section 17(3)(a)
, which is a High­Powered Body. The Supervisory

Board shall review the activities of the Appropriate Authorities as

provided under Section 16A(1)(ii).             The Supervisory Committee

consists of large body. Thus, there are adequate safeguards to

maintain check and balance provided within the Act.
26.   Before we dilate upon various aspects, we take note of

provisions of the Act.
The Act
was introduced by Parliament with

the following Statement of Objects and Reasons:
“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS

           It is proposed to prohibit pre­natal diagnostic techniques for
      determination of sex of the foetus leading to female foeticide.
      Such abuse of techniques is discriminatory against the female
      sex and affects the dignity and status of women. A legislation is
      required to regulate the use of such techniques and to provide
      deterrent punishment to stop such inhuman act.
The Bill, inter alia, provides for:—
(i) prohibition of the misuse of pre­natal diagnostic
                     techniques for determination of sex of foetus, leading
                     to female foeticide;
(ii) prohibition of advertisement of pre­natal diagnostic
                     techniques for detection or determination of sex;
17
(iii) permission and regulation of the use of pre­natal
                    diagnostic techniques for the purpose of detection of
                    specific genetic abnormalities or disorders;
(iv) permitting the use of such techniques only under
                    certain conditions by the registered institutions; and
(v) punishment for violation of the provisions of the
                    proposed legislation.
2.       The Bills seeks to achieve the above objectives.”

      The concern of the Legislature was that the female child is

not welcomed with open arms in most of Indian families and the

diagnostic technique is being used to commit female foeticide.
27.   The female foeticide is not only the concern of India, but of

various countries.      The United Nations General Assembly had

adopted Resolution No.52/106 on 11.2.1998 expressing concern

about pre­natal sex selection, female infanticide and female

genital mutilation. The said Resolution also urged all States to

enact and enforce legislation protecting girls from all forms of

violence, including female infanticide and prenatal sex selection.

The United Nations Fourth World Conference on Women in

September, 1995 adopted the Beijing Declaration and Platform

for Action.             Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action

identified “violence against women” to “include forced sterilization

and forced abortion, coercive/forced use of contraceptives, female

infanticide and pre­natal sex selection”.                   It further urged

Governments to “enact and enforce legislation against the
18
perpetrators of practices and acts of violence against women,

such as female genital mutilation, female infanticide, prenatal

sex selection and dowry­related violence”.                    Further urged

Governments to “Eliminate all forms of discrimination against the

girl child and the root causes of son preference, which result in

harmful and unethical practices such as pre­natal sex selection

and female infanticide; this is often compounded by the

increasing use of technologies to determine foetal sex, resulting

in abortion of female foetuses”.
28.   Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action was adopted at

the 16th Plenary Meeting of the Fourth World Conference on

Women held on 15.9.1995 at Beijing.                   The relevant extract

relating to violence against women and actions to be taken is

reproduced hereunder:
“115. Acts of violence against women also include forced
      sterilization and forced abortion, coercive/forced use of
      contraceptives, female infanticide and prenatal sex selection.
Strategic objective L.2. Eliminate negative cultural attitudes and
      practices against girls

      Actions to be taken
276. By Governments:
(a) Encourage and support, as appropriate, non­governmental
      organizations and community­based organizations in their efforts
      to promote changes in negative attitudes and practices towards
      girls;
(b)**
(c)**
19
(d) Take steps so that tradition and religion and their expressions
      are not a basis for discrimination against girls.
277. By Governments and, as appropriate, international and
      non­governmental organizations:
(a)**
(b)**
(c) Eliminate all forms of discrimination against the girl child and
      the root causes of son preference, which result in harmful and
      unethical practices such as prenatal sex selection and female
      infanticide; this is often compounded by the increasing use of
      technologies to determine foetal sex, resulting in abortion of
      female foetuses”
29.   The    1994 Programme of Action                  of the      International

Conference on Population and Development (ICPD) resolved to

eliminate all forms of discrimination against the girl child and the

root causes of son preference, which result in harmful and

unethical practices regarding female infanticide and prenatal sex

selection, and also to increase public awareness of the value of

the girl child.     Further urged Governments to take necessary

measures     to    prevent      infanticide,      prenatal      sex     selection,

trafficking of girl children and forcing of girls in prostitution and

pornography.      The International Conference on Population and

Development       adopted      the     Programme         of    Action        of   the

International Conference on Population and Development and

passed the resolution at the 14th Plenary meeting held on

13.9.1994.     The relevant portion of the aforesaid resolution is

extracted hereunder:
20
“4.15. Since in all societies discrimination on the basis of sex
       often starts at the earliest stages of life, greater equality for the
       girl child is a necessary first step in ensuring that women realize
       their full potential and become equal partners in development. In
       a number of countries, the practice of prenatal sex selection,
       higher rates of mortality among very young girls, and lower rates
       of school enrolment for girls as compared with boys, suggest that
       "son preference" is curtailing the access of girl children to food,
       education and health care. This is often compounded by the
       increasing use of technologies to determine foetal sex, resulting
       in abortion of female foetuses. Investments made in the girl
       child's health, nutrition and education, from infancy through
       adolescence, are critical.
Objectives
       4.16. The objectives are:
(a) To eliminate all forms of discrimination against the girl child
       and the root causes of son preference, which results in harmful
       and unethical practices regarding female infanticide and prenatal
       sex selection;
(b) To increase public awareness of the value of the girl child, and
       concurrently, to strengthen the girl child's self­image, self­esteem
       and status;
(c) To improve the welfare of the girl child, especially in regard to
       health, nutrition and education.
4.23. Governments are urged to take the necessary measures to
       prevent infanticide, prenatal sex selection, trafficking in girl
       children and use of girls in prostitution and pornography.”
30. The Resolution 56/139 adopted by the U.N. General

Assembly,      on     26.2.2002       expressed        deep     concern        about

discrimination against the girl child, including practices such as

female infanticide, incest, early marriage, prenatal sex selection

etc.   The Resolution also urged States to enact and enforce

legislation to protect girls from all forms of violence, including

female infanticide and prenatal sex selection, female genital

mutilation, rape, domestic violence, incest, sexual abuse, sexual

exploitation, child prostitution and child pornography, and to
21
develop age­appropriate safe and confidential programmes and

medical, social and psychological support services to assist girls

who are subjected to violence. The General Assembly of United

Nations    adopted      the     following      resolution      no.56/139     on

26.2.2002:
“Deeply concerned about discrimination against the girl child and
      the violation of the rights of the girl child, which often result in
      less access for girls to education, nutrition and physical and
      mental health care and in girls enjoying fewer of the rights,
      opportunities and benefits of childhood and adolescence than
      boys and often being subjected to various forms of cultural,
      social, sexual and economic exploitation and to violence and
      harmful practices, such as female infanticide, incest, early
      marriage, prenatal sex selection and female genital mutilation.
10. Also urges all States to enact and enforce legislation to
      protect girls from all forms of violence, including female
      infanticide and prenatal sex selection, female genital mutilation,
      rape, domestic violence, incest, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation,
      child prostitution and child pornography, and to develop age­
      appropriate safe and confidential programmes and medical,
      social and psychological support services to assist girls who are
      subjected to violence.”
31.   Resolution 70/138, adopted by the U.N. General Assembly

on 17.12.2015, also expressed its concern at discrimination

against girl child including pre­natal sex selection, and urged

states “to enact and enforce legislation to protect girls from all

forms of violence, discrimination, exploitation and harmful

practices in all settings, including female infanticide and prenatal

sex selection”.
22
32.   The General Assembly of United Nations in the 80 th Plenary

Meeting    adopted       resolution        no.70/138         dated      17.12.2015

concerning the girl child, the relevant portion of the said

resolution reads thus:
“…Deeply concerned also about discrimination against the girl
      child and the violation of the rights of the girl child, including
      girls with disabilities, which often result in less access for girls to
      education, and to quality education, nutrition, including food
      allocation, and physical and mental health­care services, in girls
      enjoying fewer of the rights, opportunities and benefits of
      childhood and adolescence than boys, and in leaving them more
      vulnerable than boys to the consequences of unprotected and
      premature sexual relations and often being subjected to various
      forms of cultural, social, sexual and economic exploitation and
      violence, abuse, rape, incest, honour­related crimes and harmful
      practices, such as female infanticide, child, early and forced
      marriage, prenatal sex selection and female genital mutilation.
20.Urges all States to enact and enforce legislation to protect girls
      from all forms of violence, discrimination, exploitation and
      harmful practices in all settings, including female infanticide and
      prenatal sex selection, female genital mutilation, rape, domestic
      violence, incest, sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, child
      prostitution and child pornography, trafficking and forced
      migration, forced labour and child, early and forced marriage,
      and to develop age­appropriate, safe, confidential and disability­
      accessible programmes and medical, social and psychological
      support services to assist girls who are subjected to violence and
      discrimination.
29.Calls upon Governments, civil society, including the media,
      and non­governmental organizations to promote human rights
      education and full respect for and the enjoyment of the human
      rights of the girl child, inter alia, through the translation,
      production and dissemination of age­appropriate and gender­
      sensitive information material on those rights to all sectors of
      society, in particular to children.
30.Requests the Secretary­General, as Chair of the United
      Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to
      ensure that all organizations and bodies of the United Nations
      system, individually and collectively, in particular the United
      Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Educational,
      Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Food Programme,
      the United Nations Population Fund, the United Nations Entity
      for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN­
      Women), the World Health Organization, the Joint United Nations
      Programme on HIV/AIDS, the United Nations Development
23
Programme, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
          for Refugees and the International Labour Organization, take into
          account the rights and the particular needs of the girl child in
          country programmes of cooperation in accordance with national
          priorities, including through the United Nations Development
          Assistance Framework.”
33.   The General Assembly of United Nations adopted the

following resolution no.52/106 on 12.12.1997 keeping in view

the discrimination against the girl child and violation of her

rights:
“Deeply concerned about discrimination against the girl child and
          the violation of the rights of the girl child, which often result in
          less access for girls to education, nutrition, physical and mental
          health care and in girls enjoying fewer of the rights, opportunities
          and benefits of childhood and adolescence than boys and often
          being subjected to various forms of cultural, social, sexual and
          economic exploitation and to violence and harmful practices such
          as incest, early marriage, female infanticide, prenatal sex
          selection and female genital mutilation.
3. Also urges all States to enact and enforce legislation protecting
          girls from all forms of violence, including female infanticide and
          prenatal sex selection, female genital mutilation, incest, sexual
          abuse, sexual exploitation, child prostitution and child
          pornography, and to develop age­appropriate safe and
          confidential programmes and medical, social and psychological
          support services to assist girls who are subjected to violence.”
34.   The concern world over as to female foeticide and infanticide

is writ large from aforesaid resolution. It is worthwhile to quote

the statistics of World Factbook, 2016 of the Central Intelligence

Agency        of    the     United      States      of    America        on      female

foeticide/infanticide across the world, which is to the following

effect:
Rank     Name of the country            Sex ratio at birth
24
1.    Liechtenstein                  126 males/100 females
            2.    China                          115 males/100 female
            3.    Armenia                        113 males/100 females
            4.    India                          112 males/100 females
            5.    Azerbaijan                     111 males/100 females
            5.    Viet Nam                       111 males/100 females
            6.    Albania                        110 males/100 females
            7.    Georgia                        108 males/100 females
            8.    South Korea                    107 males/100 females
            8.    Tunisia                        107 males/100 females
            9.    Nigeria                        106 males/100 females
           10.    Pakistan                       105 males/100 females
           11.    Nepal                          104 males/100 females
35.     There is sharp decline in the sex ratio in India. In the year

1901 where 972 females as against 1000 males were recorded.
In 1961, it was recorded as 941; in 1971 it was 930; in 1981 it

was reported 934; in 1991 it was 927; in 2001 it was 933 and in

2011 it was 943.             On behalf of respondent­Union of India

following State wise data has been furnished:
“Sex Ratio (Female per 1000 Male) at Birth by residence, India and bigger States,
                            SRS 2012­14 to 2014­16

 S.N.       India and     2012­   2013­       Change   2013­    2014­    Change
               India       906     900          ­6      900      898       ­2
1.         Andhra        919     918          ­1      918      913       ­5
             Pradesh
2.          Assam         918    900         ­18     900       896        ­4
3.          Bihar         907    916           9     916       908        ­8
4.      Chhattisgarh      973    961         ­12     961       963         2
5.          Delhi         876    869          ­7     869       857       ­12
6.         Gujarat        907    854         ­53     854       848        ­6
7.         Haryana        866    831         ­35     831       832         1
8.        Himachal        938    924         ­14     924       917        ­7
9.       Jammu &          899    899           0     899       906         7
             Kashmir
10.      Jharkhand        910    902          ­8     902       918        16
25
11.     Karnataka    950    939         ­11    939    935     ­4
12.       Kerala     974    967          ­7    967    959     ­8
13.      Madhya      927    919          ­8    919    922      3
           Pradesh
14.    Maharashtra   896    878         ­18    878    876     ­2
15.       Orissa     953    950          ­3    950    948     ­2
16.       Punjab     870    889          19    889    893      4
17.     Rajasthan    893    861         ­32    861    857     ­4
18.    Tamil Nadu    921    911         ­10    911    915      4
19.     Telangana    N.A.   N.A.        N.A.   N.A.   901    N.A.
20.        Uttar     869    879          10    879    882      3
           Pradesh
21.    Uttarakhand   871    844         ­27    844    850      6
22.    West Bengal   952    951          ­1    951    937     ­14



        The aforesaid table indicates decline in 18 States and

maximum decline of 53 points was recorded in Gujarat followed

by Haryana by 35 points and Rajasthan by 32 points. Sex ratio

of the States in 2014­2016 indicates decline in 13 States. The

maximum decline of 14 points was recorded in West Bengal

followed by Delhi recorded at 12 points.           In a publication of

United Nations (UNFPA), it was published that 0.46 million girls

were missing at birth on an average annually during the period

2001­2012 as a result of sex­selective abortions. The fall in sex

ratios does not only have an impact on the demography of the

nation, but it also gives rise to violent practices such as

trafficking of women and bride buying.
The Act
was conceived

out of the urgency for the prohibition of sex selection practices

and prohibition of the advertisement of the pre­natal diagnostic

techniques for detection/determination of sex. It came into force
26
in the year 1996. It was amended in 2003 following a PIL which

was filed in 2000 to improve regulation of technology capable of

sex selection. By way of amendment in the Act, the name of the

Act   has    been   changed   to    Pre­Conception    and     Pre­natal

Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 1994.
The main purpose of the Act is to ban the use of sex selection

and misuse of pre­natal diagnostic technique for sex selective

abortions and to regulate such techniques.         The amendments

have brought techniques of pre­conception sex selection within

the ambit of the Act and have also brought use of ultrasound

machines under its umbrella.            It has further provided for

constitution of Central and State Level Supervisory Board. More

stringent punishments have been provided.            The Appropriate

Authorities have been given powers of civil court for search,

seizure and sealing. The maintenance of record has been made

mandatory in respect of use of ultrasound machines. It has also

regulated the sale of ultrasound machines only to the registered

bodies.
The    Act
provides      for   prohibition    of   sex

selection/determination    and      regulate   pre­natal     diagnostic

technology. Several important amendments were notified in the

Rules.      Rule 11(2) was amended in 2011 to provide for
27
confiscation of the unregistered machines and
Section 23(1)
prescribes imprisonment upto three years and with fine upto ten

thousand rupees against the unregistered clinic/facilities and on

any subsequent conviction, the imprisonment may extend to five

years and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees

and
Section 23(3)
prescribes imprisonment upto three years of

imprisonment and with fine upto fifty thousand rupees against

the unregistered clinic/facilities for the first offence and for any

subsequent offence, the imprisonment may extend to five years

and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. Rule 3A(3)

has been inserted in 2012 to restrict the registration of medical

practitioners qualified under the Act to conduct ultrasonography

in maximum of two ultrasound facilities within a district only.

Number    of   hours   during   which    the   Registered   Medical

Practitioner would be present in each clinic would be specified

clearly to the Appropriate Authority.    The amendment made to

Rule 13 in 2012 requires every Genetic Counselling Centres,

Genetic Laboratory, Genetic Clinic, Ultrasound Clinic and

Imaging Centre to intimate every change of employee, place,

address and equipment installed to the Appropriate Authority 30

days in advance of the expected date of such change and seeks
28
issuance of a new certificate with the changes duly incorporated.

Rules for six months’ training in ultrasound for the MBBS

doctors have been notified vide GSR 14(E) dated 10.1.2014. The

Rules include the training curriculum, criteria for accreditation of

institutions which will impart training and procedure for

Competency Based Evaluation Test for such trained medical

practitioners. Revised Form ‘F’ has been notified vide GSR 77 (E)

date 4.2.2014.          The revised format is more simplified as the

details of invasive and non­invasive diagnostic procedures have

been separated and made more simplified.
36.     There are only 586 convictions out of 4202 cases registered

even after 24 years of existence. It reflects the challenges being

faced by the Appropriate Authority in implementing this social

legislation.      Below is the chart showing State wise status of

implementation of the Act as on September 2018 submitted on

behalf of respondents:
State wise status of implementation of the PC&PNDT Act as on
                                       SEPTEMBER, 2018
S.No.    States/UTs       No. of      No. of   No. of    Convictions*  Medical     Number
                       registered ongoing Machines                     licenses    of cases
                         bodies      Court/   seized/                 cancelled/   decided/
                                      Police  sealed                  suspended     closed
                                      cases
1.      Andhra            3119          20       18           0            0          8
Pradesh
2.      Arunachal           97           0        ­           0            0          ­
        Pradesh
3.      Assam              930          11        4           1            0          4
4.      Bihar             2761         132       38           6            0         32
29
5.      Chhattisgar       700         14         0           0    0     7
        h
6.      Goa               174          1         1           0    0
7.      Gujarat          5994        235         2          18    7     99
8.      Haryana          2144        313       562          85   21    157
9.      Himachal          464          0         4           1    0      3
        Pradesh
10.     Jammu &           493          3        13           1    0     ­
        Kashmir
11.     Jharkhand         761         32         0           2    0     ­
12.     Karnataka        4711         49        58          38    0    41
13.     Kerala           1737          0         ­           0    0     ­
14.     Madhya           1723         50        17           4    3     9
        Pradesh
15.     Maharashtra      8672        587       462          99   79    358
16.     Manipur           130          0         ­           0    0      ­
17.     Meghalaya          50          0         ­           0    0      ­
18.     Mizoram            61          0         ­           0    0      ­
19.     Nagaland           49          0         0           0    0      ­
20.     Odisha           1001         66         ­           5    0      4
21.     Punjab           1603        147        38          31    1     93
22.     Rajasthan        3039        701       506         149   21    368
23.     Sikkim             27          0         0           0    0      ­
24.     Tamil Nadu       6717        123         ­         109    2     83
25.     Telangana        3547         24       108           3    0     25
26.     Tripura            48          1         ­           0    0      ­
27.     Uttarakhand       647         47        12           4    0     16
28.     Uttar            6031        139        39          20    1     10
        Pradesh
29.     West Bengal      3238         24        29           0    0     1
30.     A & N Island       17          0         ­           0    0     ­
31.     Chandigarh        183          1         ­           0    0     2
32.     D & N Haveli       16          0         0           0    0     ­
33.     Daman &            10          0         0           0    0     ­
        Diu
34.     Delhi            1584        104       170          10    3     57
35.     Lakshadeep          9          0         ­           0    0      ­
36.     Puducherry        109          1         ­           0    0      ­
              TOTAL     62596       2825      2081         586   138   1377
Note: *Convictions and Medical licenses data up to June 2018
37.    In the light of aforesaid, we examine the submission raised

on behalf of petitioner based upon clerical errors. It was urged

that the license of members of noble charitable profession are

being suspended on account of clerical errors/mistakes in paper

work under the Act and the Rules made thereunder. On account
30
of clerical errors in filling up of the forms, it would not be

appropriate to inflict the punishment. In case of actual offence of

sex determination, the provisions of the Act may govern the field.
As submission appears to be attractive and it requires deep

scrutiny whether it is a clerical error in filling up of the forms or

is foundation of substantial breach of the provisions of the Act

and Rules framed thereunder. It was urged that
Section 23
of

the Act treats unequals as equals and there is infirmity in the Act

as the clerical error in filling up of the Form ‘F’ cannot be treated

at par with actual offence of sex determination.                  There is no

gradation of the offence under the Act. Learned senior counsel

has placed reliance on
Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Ltd. vs.

Ayodhya Prasad Mishra
, (2008) 10 SCC 139, wherein this Court

held that unequals cannot be treated equally. Treating of

unequals as equals would as well offend the doctrine of equality

enshrined in
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution. The same is

extracted hereunder:
“40. It is well settled that equals cannot be treated unequally.
      But it is equally well settled that unequals cannot be treated
      equally. Treating of unequals as equals would as well offend the
      doctrine of equality enshrined in
Articles 14
and
16
of the
      Constitution. The High Court was, therefore, right in holding that
      Executive Engineers placed in Category I must get priority and
      preference for promotion to the post of Superintendent Engineer
      over Executive Engineers found in Category II.”
31
38.   It is contended that merely clerical error cannot be equated

with offences as mentioned in
Sections 5
and
6
of the Act. The

main purpose and the object of the Act is being misused and

more than 60 per cent cases registered under the Act, are

pertaining to non­maintenance of record.
39.   In order to appreciate whether it is clerical omission or

otherwise, we have to delve on the provisions of the Act what is

mandated thereunder.
Section 3
provides for regulation of

Genetic Counselling Centres, Genetic Laboratories and Genetic

Clinics, Section 3A deals with prohibition of sex­selection and

Section 3B deals with prohibition on sale of ultrasound machine,

etc. to persons, laboratories, clinics, etc. not registered under the

Act. The same are extracted hereunder:
“3. Regulation of Genetic Counselling Centres, Genetic
      Laboratories and Genetic Clinics.— On and from the
      commencement of this Act, —

      (1) no Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic
      Clinic unless registered under this Act, shall conduct or associate
      with, or help in, conducting activities relating to pre­natal
      diagnostic techniques;
(2) no Genetic Counselling Centre or Genetic Laboratory or
      Genetic Clinic shall employ or cause to be employed or take
      services of any person whether on honorary basis or on payment
      who does not possess the qualifications as may be prescribed;
(3) no medical geneticist, gynaecologist, paediatrician, registered
      medical practitioner or any other person shall conduct or cause
      to be conducted or aid in conducting by himself or through any
      other person, any pre­natal diagnostic techniques at a place
      other than a place registered under this Act.
32
3A. Prohibition of sex­selection.— No person, including a
      specialist or a team of specialists in the field of infertility, shall
      conduct or cause to be conducted or aid in conducting by himself
      or by any other person, sex selection on a woman or a man or on
      both or on any tissue, embryo, conceptus, fluid or gametes
      derived from either or both of them.
3B. Prohibition on sale of ultrasound machine, etc., to
      persons, laboratories, clinics, etc., not registered under the
      Act.— No person shall sell any ultrasound machine or imaging
      machine or scanner or any other equipment capable of detecting
      sex of foetus to any Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic
      Laboratory, Genetic Clinic or any other person not registered
      under the Act.”                             (emphasis supplied)
40.
Section 4
deals with regulation of pre­natal diagnostic

techniques, which is extracted hereunder:
“4. Regulation of pre­natal diagnostic techniques. — On and
      from the commencement of this Act,—

      (1) no place including a registered Genetic Counselling Centre or
      Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic shall be used or caused to
      be used by any person for conducting pre­natal diagnostic
      techniques except for the purposes specified in clause (2) and
      after satisfying any of the conditions specified in clause (3);
(2) no pre­natal diagnostic techniques shall be conducted except
      for the purposes of detection of any of the following
      abnormalities, namely: —
(i) chromosomal abnormalities;
(ii) genetic metabolic diseases;
(iii) haemoglobinopathies;
(iv) sex­linked genetic diseases;
(v) congenital anomalies;
(vi) any other abnormalities or diseases as may be specified
           by the Central Supervisory Board;
(3) no pre­natal diagnostic techniques shall be used or conducted
      unless the person qualified to do so is satisfied for reasons to be
      recorded in writing that any of the following conditions are
      fulfilled, namely:—
(i) age of the pregnant woman is above thirty­five years;
(ii) the pregnant woman has undergone of two or more
           spontaneous abortions or foetal loss;
(iii) the pregnant woman had been exposed to potentially
           teratogenic agents such as drugs, radiation, infection or
           chemicals;
33
(iv) the pregnant woman or her spouse has a family history
           of mental retardation or physical deformities such as,
           spasticity or any other genetic disease;
(v) any other condition as may be specified by the Board;
Provided that the person conducting ultrasonography on a
      pregnant woman shall keep complete record thereof in clinic in
      such manner, as may be prescribed, and any deficiency or
      inaccuracy found therein shall amount to contravention of the
      provisions of
section 5
or
section 6
unless contrary is proved by
      the person conducting such ultrasonography;
      (4) no person including a relative or husband of the pregnant
      woman shall seek or encourage the conduct of any pre­natal
      diagnostic techniques on her except for the purposes specified in
      clause (2).
(5) no person including a relative or husband of a woman shall
      seek or encourage the conduct of any sex­selection technique on
      her or him or both.”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)

     There is prohibition created under
Section 4(1)
to use any

registered Genetic Counselling Centre or Genetic Laboratory or

Genetic Clinic for conducting pre­natal diagnostic techniques

except for the purposes specified in sub­section (2) of
Section 4
.

Wrong expression has been used as clause (2) in the Act, where it

should be sub­section (2).          Be that as it may.
Section 4(2)
provides for conducting of pre­natal diagnostic techniques for the

purpose of detection of abnormalities.
Section     4(3)
provides     that     no     pre­natal     diagnostic

techniques shall be used unless the person qualified to do so is

satisfied for the reasons to be recorded in writing that prescribed

conditions are fulfilled such as age of the pregnant women is

above thirty­five years; the pregnant woman has undergone two
34
or more spontaneous abortions or foetal loss; she had been

exposed   to   potentially     teratogenic      agents     such     as drugs,

radiation, infection or chemicals; the pregnant woman or her

spouse has a family history of mental retardation or physical

deformities as prescribed therein; or any other condition as may

be specified by the Board.
In the absence of aforesaid fulfilment of the aforesaid

conditions provided in
Section 4(3)
and in the absence of

abnormality as provided in
Section 4(2)
, no such test can be

performed.     Proviso to
Section 4(3)
makes it mandatory that

person conducting ultrasonography on a pregnant woman shall

keep complete record as may be prescribed and any deficiency or

inaccuracy found therein shall amount to contravention of the

provisions of
Section 5
or
Section 6
unless contrary is proved by

the person conducting such ultrasonography.
Section 5
provides

for written consent of pregnant woman and prohibition of

communicating the sex of foetus, whereas
Section 6
provides that

determination of sex is prohibited.
Sections 5
and
6
are

extracted below:
“5. Written consent of pregnant woman and prohibition of
      communicating the sex of foetus.—

      (1) No person referred to in clause (2) of
section 3
shall conduct
      the pre­natal diagnostic procedures unless—
35
(a) he has explained all known side and after effects of such
             procedures to the pregnant woman concerned;
(b) he has obtained in the prescribed form her written
             consent to undergo such procedures in the language which
             she understands; and
(c) a copy of her written consent obtained under clause (b)
             is given to the pregnant woman.
(2) No person including the person conducting pre­natal
        diagnostic procedures shall communicate to the pregnant woman
        concerned or her relatives or any other person the sex of the
        foetus by words, signs, or in any other manner.
6. Determination of sex prohibited.— On and from the
        commencement of this Act, —
(a) no Genetic Counselling Centre or Genetic Laboratory or
        Genetic Clinic shall conduct or cause to be conducted in its
        Centre, Laboratory or Clinic, pre­natal diagnostic techniques
        including ultrasonography, for the purpose of determining the
        sex of a foetus;
(b) no person shall conduct or cause to be conducted any pre­
        natal diagnostic techniques including ultrasonography for the
        purpose of determining the sex of a foetus.
(c) no person shall, by whatever means, cause or allow to be
        caused selection of sex before or after conception.”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)
41.     Independently, specific provisions have been made barring

use of technology i.e., pre­natal diagnostic techniques for

determination of sex of foetus under
Section 6
of the Act. The

use of technology can only be for the purposes as provided in
Section 4(2)
and with the pre­conditions as provided in
Section

4(3)
.
42.     As a safeguard to arbitrary use of powers by concerned

authorities the constitution of State Supervisory Board and
36
Union Territory Supervisory Board is provided in Section 16A,

which is a large body consisting of various representatives.              It

has to create public awareness, review the activities of the

Appropriate Authorities and to monitor the implementation of the

provisions of the Act and to send the periodical report. Relevant

portion of
Section 16A
of the Act reads thus:
“16A. Constitution of State Supervisory Board and Union
      territory Supervisory Board.—

      (1) Each State and Union territory having Legislature shall
      constitute a Board to be known as the State Supervisory Board
      or the Union territory Supervisory Board, as the case may be,
      which shall have the following functions:—
(i) to create public awareness against the practice of pre­
           conception sex selection and pre­natal determination of sex
           of foetus leading to female foeticide in the State;
(ii) to review the activities of the Appropriate Authorities
           functioning in the State and recommend appropriate action
           against them;
(iii) to monitor the implementation of provisions of the Act
           and the rules and make suitable recommendations relating
           thereto, to the Board;
(iv) to send such consolidated reports as may be prescribed
           in respect of the various activities undertaken in the State
           under the Act to the Board and the Central Government;
           and
(v) any other functions as may be prescribed under the Act.
(2) The State Board shall consist of,—
(a) the Minister in charge of Health and Family Welfare in
           the State, who shall be the Chairperson, ex­officio;
(b) Secretary in charge of the Department of Health and
           Family Welfare who shall be the Vice­Chairperson, ex­
           officio;
(c) Secretaries or Commissioners in charge of Departments
           of Women and Child Development, Social Welfare, Law and
           Indian System of Medicines and Homoeopathy, ex­officio, or
           their representatives;
(d) Director of Health and Family Welfare or Indian System
           of Medicines and Homoeopathy of the State Government,
           ex­officio;
(e) three women members of Legislative Assembly or
           Legislative Council;
37
(f) ten members to be appointed by the State Government
            out of which two each shall be from the following categories:
—
(i) eminent social scientists and legal experts;
(ii) eminent women activists from non­governmental
                    organizations or otherwise;
(iii) eminent gynaecologists and obstetricians or
                    experts of stri­roga or prasuti­tantra;
(iv) eminent paediatricians or medical geneticists;
(v) eminent radiologists or sonologists;
(g) an officer not below the rank of Joint Director in charge
            of Family Welfare, who shall be the Member Secretary,
            ex­officio.
(3) The State Board shall meet at least once in four months.”
43.   The constitution of Appropriate Authority and Advisory

Committee is provided in
Section 17
. It consists of an officer of

or above the rank of the Joint Director of Health and Family

Welfare    as    Chairperson,       an     eminent     woman       representing

women’s organization and an officer of Law Department of the

State or the Union Territory as members as the case may be. The

functions of the Appropriate Authority are prescribed in
Section

17(4)
. It empowers the Appropriate Authority to grant, suspend

or    cancel    the   registration,      enforce     standards,        investigate

complaints      and     to   do    other      acts   as    provided         therein.

Constitution of Advisory Committee is also provided under
Section 17(6)
, to aid and advise the Appropriate Authority,

consisting of three medical experts from amongst gynaecologists,

obstetricians, paediatricians and medical geneticists, one legal

expert, an officer as provided thereunder, and three eminent
38
social workers. No person who has been associated with the use

or promotion of pre­natal diagnostic techniques for determination

of sex or sex selection can be member of the Advisory Committee.
Section 17
is extracted hereunder:
“17. Appropriate Authority and Advisory Committee.—
      (1) The Central Government shall appoint, by notification in the
      Official Gazette, one or more Appropriate Authorities for each of
      the Union territories for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The State Government shall appoint, by notification in the
      Official Gazette, one or more Appropriate Authorities for the
      whole or part of the State for the purposes of this Act having
      regard to the intensity of the problem of pre­natal sex
      determination leading to female foeticide.
(3) The officers appointed as Appropriate Authorities under sub­
      section (1) or sub­section (2) shall be,—
(a) when appointed for the whole of the State or the Union
            territory, consisting of the following three members:—
(i) an officer of or above the rank of the Joint Director
                    of Health and Family Welfare—Chairperson;
(ii) an eminent woman representing women’s
                    organization; and
(iii) an officer of Law Department of the State or the
                    Union territory concerned:
Provided that it shall be the duty of the State or the Union
           territory concerned to constitute multi­member State or
           Union territory level Appropriate Authority within three
           months of the coming into force of the Pre­natal Diagnostic
           Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuse)
           Amendment Act, 2002:
Provided further that any vacancy occurring therein shall be
           filled within three months of the occurrence.
(b) when appointed for any part of the State or the Union
           territory, of such other rank as the State Government or the
           Central Government, as the case may be, may deem fit.
(4) The Appropriate Authority shall have the following functions,
      namely:—
(a) to grant, suspend or cancel registration of a Genetic
            Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic;
(b) to enforce standards prescribed for the Genetic
            Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory and Genetic Clinic;
39
(c) to investigate complaints of breach of the provisions of
     this Act or the rules made thereunder and take immediate
     action;
(d) to seek and consider the advice of the Advisory
     Committee, constituted under sub­section (5), on
     application for registration and on complaints for
     suspension or cancellation of registration;
(e) to take appropriate legal action against the use of any
     sex selection technique by any person at any place, suo
     motu or brought to its notice and also to initiate
     independent investigations in such matter;
(f) to create public awareness against the practice of sex
     selection or pre­natal determination of sex;
(g) to supervise the implementation of the provisions of the
     Act and rules;
(h) to recommend to the Board and State Boards
     modifications required in the rules in accordance with
     changes in technology or social conditions;
(i) to take action on the recommendations of the Advisory
     Committee made after investigation of complaint for
     suspension or cancellation of registration.
(5) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case
may be, shall constitute an Advisory Committee for each
Appropriate Authority to aid and advise the Appropriate
Authority in the discharge of its functions, and shall appoint one
of the members of the Advisory Committee to be its Chairman.
(6) The Advisory Committee shall consist of—
(a) three medical experts from amongst gynaecologists,
      obstericians, paediatricians and medical geneticists;
(b) one legal expert;
(c) one officer to represent the department dealing with
      information and publicity of the State Government or the
      Union territory, as the case may be;
(d) three eminent social workers of whom not less than one
      shall be from amongst representatives of women’s
      organisations.
(7) No person who has been associated with the use or promotion
of pre­natal diagnostic techniques for determination of sex or sex
selection shall be appointed as a member of the Advisory
Committee.
(8) The Advisory Committee may meet as and when it thinks fit or
on the request of the Appropriate Authority for consideration of
any application for registration or any complaint for suspension
or cancellation of registration and to give advice thereon:
Provided that the period intervening between any two
meetings shall not exceed the prescribed period.
(9) The terms and conditions subject to which a person may be
appointed to the Advisory Committee and the procedure to be
40
followed by such Committee in the discharge of its functions
      shall be such as may be prescribed.”
44.   Section 17A empowers Appropriate Authority to summon

any person who is in possession of any information relating to

violation of the provisions of the Act and production of

documents, issue search warrant etc. It is mandatory that such

Genetic Counselling Centres, Laboratories or Clinics should be

registered under
Section 18
of the Act.
45.
Section 20
deals with cancellation or suspension of

registration. An action can be taken as provided under
Section

20(2)
after giving reasonable opportunity of being heard. In case

there is breach of provisions of the Act or the Rules, and the

same is without prejudice to any criminal action that it may take

against such Centres, Laboratory or Clinic, the Appropriate

Authority in public interest for reasons to be recorded in writing,

can suspend the registration of any Genetic Counselling Centres,

Laboratories or Clinics under
Section 20(3)
of the Act without

issuing any notice referred to in sub­section (1) of
Section 20
.

The provisions of appeal against the order of suspension or

cancellation of registration passed by Appropriate Authority has
41
been provided in
Section 21
.
Sections 20
and
21
are extracted

hereunder:
“20. Cancellation or suspension of registration.— (1). The
       Appropriate Authority may suo moto, or on complaint, issue a
       notice to the Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or
       Genetic Clinic to show cause why its registration should not be
       suspended or cancelled for the reasons mentioned in the notice.
(2) If, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the
       Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic
       and having regard to the advice of the Advisory Committee, the
       Appropriate Authority is satisfied that there has been a breach of
       the provisions of this Act or the rules, it may, without prejudice
       to any criminal action that it may take against such Centre,
       Laboratory or Clinic, suspend its registration for such period as it
       may think fit or cancel its registration, as the case may be.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­sections (1) and
       (2), if the Appropriate Authority is of the opinion that it is
       necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, it may, for
       reasons to be recorded in writing, suspend the registration of any
       Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic
       without issuing any such notice referred to in sub­section (1).
21. Appeal.— The Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic
       Laboratory or Genetic Clinic may, within thirty days from the
       date of receipt of the order of suspension or cancellation of
       registration passed by the Appropriate Authority under section
       20, prefer an appeal against such order to—
(i) the Central Government, where the appeal is against the
            order of the Central Appropriate Authority; and
(ii) the State Government, where the appeal is against the
            order of the State Appropriate Authority,

      in the prescribed manner.”

                                                      (emphasis supplied)
46.
Section 22
deals with prohibition of advertisement relating

to pre­conception and pre­natal determination of sex and

punishment for contravention.
42
47.
Section 23
deals with offences and penalties.
Section 23(1)
provides for contravention of any provisions of the Act or Rules

made thereunder, punishment with imprisonment for a term

which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend

to ten thousand rupees.
Section 23(2)
contains provision with

respect to reporting of name of the registered medical practitioner

by the Appropriate Authority to the State Medical Council

concerned for passing appropriate order including suspension of

the registration, if the charges are framed by the Court and till

the case is disposed of and on conviction for removal of his name

from the register of the Council for a period of five years for the

first offence and permanently for the subsequent offence.      Any

person who seek aid of any Genetic Counselling Centre,

Laboratory, Clinic or ultrasound clinic or imaging clinic etc. for

sex selection, shall be punishable with imprisonment which may

extend to three years and with fine which may extend to fifty

thousand rupees for the first offence and for any subsequent

offence with imprisonment which may extend to five years and

with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. If a woman is

compelled by her husband or any other relative to undergo pre­

natal diagnostic technique for the purpose of
Section 4(2)
, such
43
person shall be liable for abetment of offence under
Section 23(3)
.
Sections 23
and
24
are extracted hereunder:
“23. Offences and penalties.— (1) Any medical geneticist,
      gynaecologist, registered medical practitioner or any person who
      owns a Genetic Counselling Centre, a Genetic Laboratory or a
      Genetic Clinic or is employed in such a Centre, Laboratory or
      Clinic and renders his professional or technical services to or at
      such a Centre, Laboratory or Clinic, whether on an honorary
      basis or otherwise, and who contravenes any of the provisions of
      this Act or rules made thereunder shall be punishable with
      imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and
      with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees and on any
      subsequent conviction, with imprisonment which may extend to
      five years and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand
      rupees.
(2) The name of the registered medical practitioner shall be
      reported by the Appropriate Authority to the State Medical
      Council concerned for taking necessary action including
      suspension of the registration if the charges are framed by the
      court and till the case is disposed of and on conviction for
      removal of his name from the register of the Council for a period
      of five years for the first offence and permanently for the
      subsequent offence.
(3) Any person who seeks the aid of any Genetic Counselling
      Centre, Genetic Laboratory, Genetic Clinic or ultrasound clinic or
      imaging clinic or of a medical geneticist, gynaecologist, sonologist
      or imaging specialist or registered medical practitioner or any
      other person for sex selection or for conducting pre­natal
      diagnostic techniques on any pregnant women for the purposes
      other than those specified in sub­section (2) of
section 4
, he shall
      be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
      three years and with fine which may extend to fifty thousand
      rupees for the first offence and for any subsequent offence with
      imprisonment which may extend to five years and with fine which
      may extend to one lakh rupees.
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby provided, that the
      provisions of sub­section (3) shall not apply to the woman who
      was compelled to undergo such diagnostic techniques or such
      selection.
24. Presumption in the case of conduct of pre­natal
      diagnostic techniques.—Notwithstanding anything contained in
      the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
(1 of 1872), the court shall
      presume unless the contrary is proved that the pregnant woman
      was compelled by her husband or any other relative, as the case
      may be, to undergo pre­natal diagnostic technique for the
      purposes other than those specified in sub­section (2) of
section 4
44
and such person shall be liable for abetment of offence under
      sub­section (3) of
section 23
and shall be punishable for the
      offence specified under that section.”
                                                 (emphasis supplied)
48.
Section    25
of   the   Act      deals   with   the   penalty   for

contravention of the provisions of the Act or rules for which no

specific punishment is provided. Any contravention under this

Section shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which

may extend to three months or with fine which may extend to one

thousand rupees or both and in case of continuing contravention

with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred rupees

for every day.
49.   Section 27 makes offence to be cognizable, non­bailable and

non­compoundable. Section 27 is extracted hereunder:
“27. Offence to be cognizable, non­bailable and non­
      compoundable.­Every offence under this Act shall be cognizable,
      non­bailable and non­compoundable.”
50.   The mode of taking cognizance of offence is provided in

Section 28 on a complaint made by the Appropriate Authority or

any officer authorised in this behalf; or by a person who has

given notice of not less than fifteen days to the Appropriate

Authority of the alleged offence and of his intention to make a

complaint to the court. The Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial

Magistrate is competent to try any offence punishable under this
45
Act. Maintenance of records is provided in Section 29 and that

has to be preserved for two years. In case any criminal or other

proceedings are instituted against any Genetic Counselling

Centre, Laboratory or Clinic, the records shall be preserved till

the final disposal of such proceedings.              Section 30 empowers

Appropriate Authority to search and seize records etc. Section 31

provides for protection of action taken in good faith.
51.   Section 32 empowers the Central Government to make rules

for carrying out the provisions of the Act. Section 33 gives power

to the Board to make regulations with the previous sanction of

the Central Government. Rules and regulations are required to

be laid before the Parliament as provided in Section 34.
52.   Rule 9     of the     Rules provides for            maintenance      and

preservation of records. The same is extracted hereunder:
9. Maintenance and preservation of records.—

      (1) Every Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory and
      Genetic Clinic including a mobile Genetic Clinic, Ultrasound
      Clinic and Imaging Centre shall maintain a register showing, in
      serial order, the names and addresses of the men or women given
      genetic counselling, subjected to pre­natal diagnostic procedures
      or pre­natal diagnostic tests, the names of their spouse or father
      and the date on which they first reported for such counselling,
      procedure or test.
(2) The record to be maintained by every Genetic Counselling
      Centre, in respect of each woman counselled shall be as specified
      in Form D.
46
(3) The record to be maintained by every Genetic Laboratory, in
     respect of each man or woman subjected to any pre­natal
     diagnostic procedure/technique/test, shall be as specified in
     Form E.

     (4) The record to be maintained by every Genetic Clinic including
     a mobile Genetic Clinic, in respect of each man or woman
     subjected to any pre­natal diagnostic procedure/technique/test,
     shall be as specified in Form F.

     (5) The Appropriate Authority shall maintain a permanent record
     of applications for grant or renewal of certificate of registration as
     specified in Form H. Letters of intimation of every change of
     employee, place, address and equipment installed shall also be
     preserved as permanent records.
(6) All case related­records, forms of consent, laboratory results,
     microscopic      pictures,    sonographic       plates    or     slides,
     recommendations and letters shall be preserved by the Genetic
     Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic,
     Ultrasound Clinic or Imaging Centre for a period of two years
     from the date of completion of counselling, pre­natal diagnostic
     procedure or pre­natal diagnostic test, as the case may be. In the
     event of any legal proceedings, the records shall be preserved till
     the final disposal of legal proceedings, or till the expiry of the said
     period of two years, whichever is later.
(7) In case the Genetic Counselling Centre or Genetic Laboratory
     or Genetic Clinic or Ultrasound Clinic or Imaging Centre
     maintains records on computer or other electronic equipment, a
     printed copy of the record shall be taken and preserved after
     authentication by a person responsible for such record.

     (8)   Every Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory,
     Genetic Clinic, Ultrasound Clinic and Imaging Centre shall send
     a complete report in respect of all pre­conception or pregnancy
     related procedures/techniques/tests conducted by them in
     respect of each month by 5th day of the following month to the
     concerned Appropriate Authority.”

    Rule 9 makes it mandatory to maintain a register showing

in serial order the names and addresses of the men or women

given genetic counselling, subjected to pre­natal diagnostic

procedures or pre­natal diagnostic tests, the name of their

spouse or father and the date on which they first reported for
47
such counselling. Rule 9(2) states that record to be maintained

uniformly.     Rule 9(4) provides that record to be maintained by

every Genetic Clinic in respect of each man or woman subjected

to any pre­natal diagnostic procedure/technique/test, shall be

specified in Form ‘F’.          Rule 10 deals with conditions for

conducting      pre­natal    diagnostic    procedures.        Rule   10(1A)

provides that it is mandatory for every person conducting

ultrasonography to declare that he/she has neither detected nor

disclosed the sex of foetus of the pregnant woman to anybody.

The pregnant woman shall declare before undergoing the test

that she does not want to know the sex of her foetus. Rule 19

provides for an appeal against the decision of Appropriate

Authority.     Form ‘F’, which is the bone of contention of the

learned counsel for the parties, is extracted hereunder:
“FORM F
            FORM FOR MAINTENANCE OF RECORD IN RESPECT OF
            PREGNANT WOMAN BY GENETIC CLINIC/ULTRASOUND
                       CLINIC/IMAGING CENTRE
1.     Name and address of the Genetic Clinic/Ultrasound
              Clinic/Imaging Centre.
2.     Registration No.
3.     Patient’s name and her age
4.     Number of children with sex of each child
5.     Husband’s/Father’s name
6.     Full address with Tel. No., if any
7.     Referred by (full name and address of Doctor(s) /
              Genetic Counselling Centre (referral note to be
              preserved carefully with case papers)/self referral
8.     Last menstrual period/weeks of pregnancy
9.     History of genetic/medical disease in the family
              (specify)
48
Basis of diagnosis:
(a) Clinical
(b) Bio­chemical
(c) Cytogenetic
(d) Other (e.g. radiological, ultrasonography etc.
          specify)
10.   Indication for pre­natal diagnosis
      A. Previous child/children with:
(i) Chromosomal disorders
(ii) Metabolic disorders
(iii) Congenital anomaly
(iv) Mental retardation
(v) Haemoglobinopathy
(vi) Sex linked disorders
(vii) Single gene disorder
(viii) Any other (specify)
      B. Advanced maternal age (35 years)
      C. Mother/father/sibling has genetic disease (specify)
      D. Other (specify)
11.   Procedures carried out (with name and registration No.
      of Gynaecologist/ Radiologist/ Registered Medical
      Practitioner) who performed it.
Non­Invasive
(i) Ultrasound (specify purpose for which
          ultrasound is to done during pregnancy)
          [List of indications for ultrasonography of pregnant
          women are given in the note below]
      Invasive
(ii) Amniocentesis
(iii) Chorionic Villi aspiration
(iv) Foetal biopsy
(v) Cordocentesis
(vi) Any other (specify)
12.   Any complication of procedure – please specify
13.   Laboratory tests recommended
(i) Chromosomal studies
(ii) Biochemical studies
(iii) Molecular studies
(iv) Preimplantation genetic diagnosis
14.   Result of
(a) pre­natal diagnostic procedure (give details)
(b) Ultrasonography              Normal/Abnormal (specify
      abnormality detected, if any).
15.   Date(s) on which procedures carried out.
16.   Date on which consent obtained. (In case of invasive)
17.   The result of pre­natal diagnostic procedure were
      conveyed to ……….on ……………
18.   18. Was MTP advised/conducted?
19.   Date on which MTP carried out

Date ……………..         Name, Signature and Registration number
Place……………..         of the Gynaecologist/Radiologist/Director of
                     the Clinic
49
DECLARATION OF PREGNANT WOMAN
I, Ms…………………..(name of the pregnant woman) declare that
by undergoing ultrasonography /image scanning etc. I do not
want to know the sex of my foetus.
Signature/Thump impression of pregnant woman

       DECLARATON OF DOCTOR/PERSON CONDUCTING
             ULTRASONOGRAPHY/IMAGE SCANNING
I,……………………(name              of     the   person   conducting
ultrasonography/image scanning) declare that while conducting
ultrasonography/image scanning on Ms…………………..(name of
the pregnant woman), I have neither detected nor disclosed the
sex of her foetus to any body in any manner.
Name and signature of the person conducting
           ultrasonography/image scanning/Director or owner of
                  genetic clinic/ultrasound clinic/imaging centre.

Important Notes:—
(i)   Ultrasound      is   not   indicated/advised/performed      to
determine the sex of foetus except for diagnosis of sex­linked
diseases such as Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, Haemophilia A
& B, etc.
(ii) During pregnancy Ultrasonography should only be
performed when indicated. The following is the representative list
of indications for ultrasound during pregnancy.
(1) To diagnose intra­uterine and/or ectopic pregnancy and
      confirm viability.
(2) Estimation of gestational age (dating).
(3) Detection of number of foetuses and their chorionicity.
      (4) Suspected pregnancy with IUCD in­situ or suspected
      pregnancy following contraceptive failure/MTP failure.
      (5) Vaginal bleeding / leaking.
(6) Follow­up of cases of abortion.
(7) Assessment of cervical canal and diameter of internal os.
      (8) Discrepancy between uterine size and period of
      amenorrhoea.
(9) Any suspected adenexal or uterine pathology /
      abnormality.
(10) Detection of chromosomal abnormalities, foetal
      structural defects and other abnormalities and their follow­
      up.
(11) To evaluate foetal presentation and position.
      (12) Assessment of liquor amnii.
(13) Preterm labour / preterm premature rupture of
      membranes.
(14) Evaluation of placental position, thickness, grading and
      abnormalities       (placenta      praevia,     retroplacental
      haemorrhage, abnormal adherence etc.).
(15) Evaluation of umbilical cord – presentation, insertion,
      nuchal encirclement, number of vessels and presence of
      true knot.
50
(16) Evaluation of previous Caesarean Section scars.
          (17) Evaluation of foetal growth parameters, foetal weight
          and foetal well being.
(18) Colour flow mapping and duplex Doppler studies.
          (19) Ultrasound guided procedures such as medical
          termination of pregnancy, external cephalic version etc. and
          their follow­up.
(20) Adjunct to diagnostic and therapeutic invasive
          interventions such as chorionic villus sampling (CVS),
          amniocenteses, foetal blood sampling, foetal skin biopsy,
          amnioinfusion, intrauterine infusion, placement of shunts
          etc.
          (21) Observation of intra­partum events.
(22) Medical/surgical conditions complicating pregnancy.
          (23) Research/scientific studies in recognised institutions.

          Person conducting ultrasonography on a pregnant woman
          shall keep complete record thereof in the clinic/centre in
          Form F and any deficiency or inaccuracy found therein
          shall amount to contravention of provisions of
section 5
or
section 6
of the Act, unless contrary is proved by the person
          conducting such ultrasonography.”
53.
The Act
and Rules are not the only regulatory framework

which requires the medical fraternity to keep proper record. The

medical profession has highly specialised nature and considering

the nature of services rendered by medical professional, proper

maintenance of records is an integral part of the medical services.

It is contended on behalf of Medical Council of India that the

Medical Council of India (MCI) under
Section 33
of the Indian

Medical Council Act, 1956 has framed the Indian Medical Council

(Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002,

which also placed a burden on physicians to observe the law of

the country. By the said Regulations, it is mandatory for every

doctor to maintain the records of the patients treated by him/her
51
and non­maintaining of records is a misconduct. MCI
Regulation

1
.3 deals with maintenance of medical records, which reads thus:
“1.3 Maintenance of medical records:
1.3.1 Every physician shall maintain the medical records
      pertaining to his / her indoor patients for a period of 3 years from
      the date of commencement of the treatment in a standard
      proforma
laid down by
the Medical Council of India and attached
      as Appendix 3.
1.3.2. If any request is made for medical records either by the
      patients / authorised attendant or legal authorities involved, the
      same may be duly acknowledged and documents shall be issued
      within the period of 72 hours.
1.3.3 A Registered medical practitioner shall maintain a Register
      of Medical Certificates giving full details of certificates issued.
When issuing a medical certificate he / she shall always enter the
      identification marks of the patient and keep a copy of the
      certificate. He / She shall not omit to record the signature and/or
      thumb mark, address and at least one identification mark of the
      patient on the medical certificates or report. The medical
      certificate shall be prepared as in Appendix 2.

      1.3.4 Efforts shall be made to computerize medical records for
      quick retrieval.”

                                                     (emphasis supplied)
54.
Regulation 7
.1 under Chapter 7 deals with misconduct

committed by a doctor by violating any provisions of the

Regulations, whereas
Regulation 7
.2 provides that the failure to

maintain the medical records of indoor patient for a period of

three years and refusal to provide the medical record to a patient

on request within 72 hours is a misconduct.
Regulation 7
.6

deals with misconduct relating to sex determination and
52
termination of pregnancy. The relevant portion of
Regulation 7
is

reproduced hereunder:
“7. MISCONDUCT
          The following acts of commission or omission on the part of
      a physician shall constitute professional misconduct rendering
      him/her liable for disciplinary action.
7.1 Violation of the Regulations: If he/she commits any
      violation of these Regulations.
7.2 If he/she does not maintain the medical records of his/her
      indoor patients for a period of three years as per regulation 1.3
      and refuses to provide the same within 72 hours when the
      patient or his/her authorised representative makes a request for
      it as per the regulation 1.3.2.
***                ***                ***
      7.6 Sex Determination Tests: On no account sex determination
      test shall be undertaken with the intent to terminate the life of a
      female foetus developing in her mother’s womb, unless there are
      other absolute indications for termination of pregnancy as
      specified in the
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971
. Any
      act of termination of pregnancy of normal female foetus
      amounting to female foeticide shall be regarded as professional
      misconduct on the part of the physician leading to penal erasure
      besides rendering him liable to criminal proceedings as per the
      provisions of this Act.”
55.
Regulation 8
of the MCI Regulation deals with punishment

and disciplinary action for misconduct committed by a doctor.

The relevant portion of
Regulation 8
reads thus:
“8. PUNISHMENT AND DISCIPLINARY ACTION

      8.1 It must be clearly understood that the instances of offences
      and of Professional misconduct which are given above do not
      constitute and are not intended to constitute a complete list of
      the infamous acts which calls for disciplinary action, and that by
      issuing this notice the Medical Council of India and or State
      Medical Councils are in no way precluded from considering and
      dealing with any other form of professional misconduct on the
      part of a registered practitioner. Circumstances may and do arise
      from time to time in relation to which there may occur questions
      of professional misconduct which do not come within any of
      these categories. Every care should be taken that the code is not
      violated in letter or spirit. In such instances as in all others, the
53
Medical Council of India and/or State Medical Councils have to
      consider and decide upon the facts brought before the Medical
      Council of India and/or State Medical Councils.
8.2 It is made clear that any complaint with regard to
      professional misconduct can be brought before the appropriate
      Medical Council for Disciplinary action. Upon receipt of any
      complaint of professional misconduct, the appropriate Medical
      Council would hold an enquiry and give opportunity to the
      registered medical practitioner to be heard in person or by
      pleader. If the medical practitioner is found to be guilty of
      committing professional misconduct, the appropriate Medical
      Council may award such punishment as deemed necessary or
      may direct the removal altogether or for a specified period, from
      the register of the name of the delinquent registered practitioner.
Deletion from the Register shall be widely publicized in local
      press as well as in the publications of different Medical
      Associations/ Societies/Bodies.”
56.   It is further pointed out that Pharmacy Practice Regulations,

2015 also require pharmacists to maintain records. The relevant

portion of the Regulations is extracted hereunder:
“6.2 Maintenance of patient records.—
(a) Every registered pharmacist shall maintain the medical/
      prescription records pertaining to his / her patients for a period
      of 5 years from the date of commencement of the treatment as
      laid down by the Pharmacy Council of India in Appendix II.
(b) If any request is made for medical records either by the
      patients/authorised attendant or legal authorities involved, the
      same may be duly acknowledged and documents shall be issued
      within the period of 72 hours.
(c) Efforts shall be made to computerize medical/prescription
      records for quick retrieval.”
57.   Reference has also been made to the provisions of the
Transplantation of Human Organs and Tissues Act, 1994
and

Rules, which contain provisions that are similar to the Act.
Section 20
of the Transplantation of Human Organs and Tissues

Act, 1994, reads thus:
54
“20. Punishment for contravention of any other provision of
      this Act.— Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or any
      rule made, or any condition of the registration granted,
      thereunder for which no punishment is separately provided in
      this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
      may extend to five years or with fine which may extend to twenty
      lakh rupees.”
58.   Reference has also been made to the
Medical Termination of

Pregnancy Act, 1971
, which also places an obligation on medical

professional to maintain proper records.
59.   When we scrutinise the Form ‘F’ with the provisions of the

Act/Rules and there cannot be any dispute with respect to serial

Nos.1 and 2 wherein name and address of Genetic Laboratory

and its registration number is required to be mentioned in the

Form as it is necessary to have a registration under
Section 18
of

the Act. It cannot be said to be a clerical requirement. Patient

name and her age at serial No.3 is also absolutely necessary so

as to identify a person who is undergoing the test and before the

age of 35 years, it cannot be conducted as provided under
Section 4(3)(i)
. The same is as per the mandatory requirement of
Section 4
. Husband’s/father’s name is also necessary as per the

statutory mandate for the purpose of identification of patient.

Full address is also mandatory so as to ascertain the identity who

is undergoing such test.         In case these information are kept
55
vague, the violation of the Act would be blatant and unchecked

and offence can never be detected. Information at serial No.8 of

the Form ‘F’ requires last menstrual period/weeks of pregnancy

to be mentioned, same is also necessary to be mentioned as it

has co­relation with the investigations and provisions of the Act

and the rules framed thereunder. The column in Form at serial

No.9 requires history of genetic/medical disease in the family to

be specified which is as per the mandate of
Section 4(3)(iv)
of the

Act.   Form ‘F’ at serial No.10 requires indication for pre­natal

diagnosis which is mandatory as per the provisions contained in
Section 4(2)
as except for the purposes as mentioned in
Sections

4(2)
and
4(3)
no such tests/procedures can be performed. Thus,

what is mandated by the Sections and in Rule 9 has been

mentioned in the Form ‘F’. Procedure carried whether invasive or

non­invasive has to be obviously mentioned and in case any

laboratory tests have been recommended that is to be mentioned

along with the result. The note attached to Form ‘F’ also contains

the representative list of indications when ultrasound during

pregnancy can be performed. Thus, though the submission that

Form ‘F’ is clerical requirement urged by learned counsel

appearing for the petitioner­Society appears at the first blush to
56
be worthy examination, but on close scrutiny it is found that in

case any information in the Form is avoided, it will result in the

blatant violation of the provisions of
Section 4
and may lead to

result which is prohibited under
Section 6
. It cannot be

said to be a case of clerical error as doctor has to fulfil pre­

requisites for undertaking the procedure in case the conditions

precedent for undertaking pre­natal diagnostic test is not

specifically mentioned, it would be violative of provisions

contained in
Section 4
.   The Form ‘F’ has to be prepared and

signed by either Gynaecologist/Medical Geneticist / Radiologist /

Paediatrician / Director of the Clinic/Centre/Laboratory. In case

the indications and the information are not furnished as provided

in the Form ‘F’ it would amount that condition precedent to

undertake the test/procedure is absent.        There is no other

barometer except Form ‘F’ to find out why the diagnostic

test/procedure was performed.        In case such an important

information beside others is kept vague or missing from the

Form, it would defeat the very purpose of the Act and the

safeguards provided thereunder and it would become impossible

to check violation of provisions of the Act. It is not the clerical

job to fill the form, it is condition precedent for undertaking
57
test/procedure. With all due regards to the submission advanced

on behalf of petitioner­Society that it is a clerical job, is wholly

without substance but it is a responsible job of the person who is

undertaking   such a test i.e., the Gynaecologist/ Medical

Geneticist/   Radiologist   /   Paediatrician   /   Director   of   the

Clinic/Centre/Laboratory to fill the requisite information.          In

case he keeps it vague, he knows fully well that he is violating the

provisions of the Act and undertaking the test without existence

of the conditions precedent which are mandatory to exist he

cannot undertake test/procedure without filling such information

in the form. There is no other way to ensure that test is

undertaken on fulfilment of the prescribed conditions. There is

nothing else but the record which required to be maintained and

on the basis of which counter­check can be made. There is no

other barometer or criteria to find out the violation of the

provisions of the Act. Rule 9(4) also requires that every Genetic

Clinic to fill Form ‘F’ wherein information with regard to details of

the patient, referral notes with indication and case papers of the

patient are required to be filled and preserved.       Form ‘F’ lays

down the indicative list for conducting ultrasonography during

pregnancy. Form ‘F’ being technical in nature gives the insight
58
into the reasons for conducting ultrasonography and incomplete

Form ‘F’ raises the presumption of doubt against the medical

practitioner. In the absence of Form ‘F’, Appropriate Authorities

will have no tool to supervise the usage of ultrasound machine

and shall not be able to regulate the use of the technique which

is the object of the Act.
60.   It is rightly contended on behalf of respondents that there

are different forms for record keeping prescribed under the Act

and the Rules they are important and interlinked, operate in

tandem with one another. These records have to be maintained

only when the procedure or tests are conducted on pregnant

woman or when patient may have been advised to use pre­

conception diagnostic tools to conceive a child. It is required for

Genetic Counselling Centre advising the procedure/test with a

potential of detecting or determining the sex of the foetus and

referring    a     person   to        a   Genetic   Clinic/Imaging

Centre/Ultrasound Clinic to record the details of Genetic Clinic

to which patient is referred at point 15 of the Form ‘D’ along with

the details of the diagnosis and relevant medical details of the

person. Accordingly, Genetic Clinic/Imaging Centre/Ultrasound

Clinic conducting the aforesaid referred procedure has to record
59
the name and address of Genetic Counselling Centre with the

referral slip along with the relevant medical record of the person

on whom procedure/test/technique is conducted. The aforesaid

record    keeping    procedure   shall        be   followed   by    Genetic

Laboratories also. The scheme of the Act makes it evident that

record keeping is meant to track/monitor and regulate the use of

technology    that   has   potential     of    sex   selection     and   sex

determination.
Section 23
is not stand­alone Section. It is rather

used in the enforcement of other provisions of the Act and

violations of
Section 23
are often accompanied by violations of

provisions of
Sections 4
,
5
,
6
and
18
of the Act. It is submitted

that     non­maintenance    of   record       in   the   context    of   sex

determination is not merely a technical or procedural lapse. It is

most significant piece of evidence for identifying offence and the

accused.      The inspection of records is crucial to identify

wrong­doers as the crime of sex determination being a collusive

crime given the nexus between the patients and the doctors.

Accordingly, punishment is provided in
Section 23
for not

maintaining the records.
61.    Ms. Pinki Anand, learned Additional Solicitor General has

relied upon a case study on record keeping as an implementation
60
tool of Prabhakar Hospital in Panipat. In this case Hospital had

not sent the report of IVF done at its Centre to the Appropriate

Authority despite meeting held on 10.10.2013 and subsequent

reminders. After thirteenth reminder dated 27.11.2014, a show

cause notice was issued to the Hospital on 2.2.2015.                       The

aforesaid case study reads thus:
“In the case of this Hospital the report of IVF done at the centre
      was not sent to the Appropriate Authority despite meetings held
      on 10.10.2013 and reminders sent on 6.3.2014, 14.3.2014,
      20.3.2014, 21.3.2014, 25.3.2014, 28.3.2014, 31.3.2014 and
      finally with a thirteenth reminder on 27.11.2014.
During inspection following discrepancies were found­

         a. In form no.9338, In­vitro Fertilization (IVF) was done on
            patient with 2 female children with repeated history of
            4 abortions.
b. In form no.9700, woman with 8 female children received
            IVF.
c. In form no.10385, patient Santosh with 7 female children
            received IVF but did not fill the section C in F­Form.
            Section C in form F pertains to the records of the invasive
            procedures which requires records of all diagnostic
            procedures done on men and women which has potential
            of sex determination/selection to be recorded.
         d. Form no.10389, woman with 3 female children received
            IVF, form F Section C not filled in.
e. Form no.9338, woman had 2 female children and 6
            abortions, and received IVF.
f. Form no.9700, a woman with 8 female children received
            IVF.
The hospital was asked why patients who had female children
      underwent IVF as evident from the records. In several of the
      cases it is inexplicable why the samples were sent to Delhi and
      Bombay. In many F forms many female patients with wrong
      phone numbers were mentioned. Similarly in other Form F,
      patients with wrong identity proofs, address proof and no identity
      proofs were found. In another set of form F wrong Obstetric and
      Abortion history was mentioned as confirmed from the patients.
      Difference history on referral slip and Form F was observed.
      Signature of patient was found to be missing in the consent form
      in many forms. The Signature of the witness Doctor/Counsellor
      was missing in all consent forms of IVF patients. Accordingly a
      complaint has been filed in the court.”
61
(emphasis supplied)
62.   It is submitted that the record keeping provide information

on individual patients who could have potentially undergone sex

selection/determination techniques, which is an offence under

this Act.   If record keeping is diluted or exempted from the

mandatory requirement of the Act, the probable involvement in

sex determination and sex selection in the guise of use of

diagnostic techniques would continue unbated.
63.   The way in which the non­maintenance of record can be

used for violating the provisions of the Act, is apparent from the

aforesaid example. The aforesaid facts have been mentioned in

the show cause notice that had been issued. In many Form ‘F’

female patients with wrong phone numbers were mentioned. In

other Form ‘F’ patients with wrong identity, proof of address and

no identity proof were found. In another set of Form ‘F’ wrong

obstetric and abortion history was mentioned.          Signature of

patient was also found missing in the consent forms. Thus, the

non­filling of information cannot be termed to be clerical error,

but in case it is kept vague that itself facilitates an offence. It

would definitely a blatant and intentional violation of the

provisions of the Act in order to prevent the mischief which is
62
intended to by maintenance of record, filling up details of the

forms is mandated by
Sections 4
and
5
. The wholesome social

legislation would be defeated in case Form is not filled which is

sine qua non toto undertake tests/procedures if such condition

does not exist, no such procedure can be performed and diluting

the provisions would be against the gender justice. It is in order

to create the equality that the provisions have been enacted not

that unequals are being treated equally. The non­maintenance of

form/not reflecting correct medical condition is offence, not

mentioning it would also be an offence or keeping it vague.
64.   It was pointed on behalf of petitioner­Society by filing

certain affidavits of the medical practitioners raising grievances

with regard to the criminal cases filed against them by the

Appropriate Authority on certain grounds. Acquittals have also

been recorded, but they are not attributable to the deficiency in

the Act. The provision of the law cannot be struck down on the

ground of allegation of such exercise of power in arbitrary

manner, especially when 0.46 million girls were stated to be

missing at birth as a result of sex selective abortions.
63
65.
In
Voluntary Health Association of Punjab v. Union of India
,

(2016) 10 SCC 265, this Court observed as under:
“46. Now, we shall advert to the prayers in Writ Petition (Civil)
      No. 575 of 2014. The writ petition has been filed by Indian
      Medical Association (IMA). It is contended that
Sections 3
­A, 4, 5,
      6, 7, 16, 17, 20, 23, 25, 27 and 30 of the Act and Rules 9(4), 10
      & Form "F" (including foot­note), which being the subject matter
      of concern in the instant writ petition, are being misused and
      wrongly interpreted by the authorities concerned thereby causing
      undue harassment to the medical professionals all over the
      country under the guise of the 'so­called implementation'. It is
      also urged that, implementation of steps and scrutiny of records
      was started at large scale all over the country and lot of
      anomalies were found in records maintained by doctors
      throughout the country. It is however pertinent to mention here
      that the majority of the defaults were of technical nature as they
      were merely minor and clerical errors committed occasionally and
      inadvertently in the filing of Form "F". It is also put forth that the
      Act does not classify the offences and owing to the liberal and
      vague terminology used in the Act, it is thrown open for misuse
      by the implementing authorities concerned and has resulted into
      taking of cognizance of non­bailable (punishable by three years)
      offences against doctors even in the cases of clerical errors, for
      instance non­mentioning of N.A. (Not Applicable) or leaving of any
      column in the Form "F" concerned as blank. It is further
      submitted that the said unfettered powers in the hands of
      implementing authority have resulted into turning of this welfare
      legislation into a draconian novel way of encouraging demands
      for bribery as well as there is no prior independent investigation
      as mandated Under
Section 17
of the Act by these Authorities. It
      is also set forth that the Act states merely that any contravention
      with any of the provisions of the Act would be an offence
      punishable Under
Section 23(1)
of the said Act and further all
      offences under the Act have been made non­bailable and non­
      compoundable and the misuse of the same can only be taken
      care of by ensuring that the Appropriate Authority applies its
      mind to the fact of each case/complaint and only on satisfaction
      of a prima facie case, a complaint be filed rather than launching
      prosecution mechanically in each case. With these averments, it
      has been prayed for framing appropriate guidelines and
      safeguard parameters, providing for classification of offences as
      well, so as to prohibit the misuse of the PCPNDT Act during
      implementation and to read down this Sections 6, 23, 27 of the
      PCPNDT Act. That apart, it has been prayed to add certain
      provisos/exceptions to
Sections 7
,
17
,
23
and Rule 9 of the
      Rules.
64
47. In our considered opinion, whenever there is an abuse of the
        process of the law, the individual can always avail the legal
        remedy. As we find, neither the validity of the Act nor the Rules
        has been specifically assailed in the writ petition. What has been
        prayed is to read out certain provisions and to add certain
        exceptions. We are of the convinced view that the averments of
        the present nature with such prayers cannot be entertained and,
        accordingly, we decline to interfere.”

                                                          (emphasis supplied)
66.     The emphasis of this Court is on the proper maintenance of

records.
In Centre for Enquiry into
Health and Allied Themes

(CEHAT) v. Union of India
, (2001) 5 SCC 577, this Court observed

thus:
“3. It is apparent that to a large extent, the PNDT Act is not
        implemented by the Central Government or by the State
        Governments. Hence, the petitioners are required to approach
        this Court under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India……Prima
        facie it appears that despite the PNDT Act being enacted by
        Parliament five years back, neither the State Governments nor
        the Central Government has taken appropriate action for its
        implementation. Hence, after considering the respective
        submissions made at the time of hearing of this matter, as
        suggested by the learned Attorney­General for India, Mr Soli J.
        Sorabjee, the following directions are issued on the basis of
        various provisions for the proper implementation of the PNDT
        Act:
II. Directions to the Central Supervisory Board (CSB)
1. ***
2. ***
3. CSB shall issue directions to all State/UT appropriate
        authorities to furnish quarterly returns to CSB giving a report on
        the implementation and working of the Act. These returns should
        inter alia contain specific information about:
(i) survey of bodies specified in
Section 3
of the Act;
(ii) registration of bodies specified in
Section 3
of the Act;
(iii) action taken against non­registered bodies operating in
        violation of
Section 3
of the Act, inclusive of search and seizure of
        records;
65
(iv) complaints received by the appropriate authorities under the
      Act and action taken pursuant thereto;
(v) number and nature of awareness campaigns conducted and
      results flowing therefrom.….”
67.
In
Voluntary Health Association of Punjab v. Union of India
,

(2013) 4 SCC 1, the Court dealt with the issue of maintenance of

record and issued the following directions:
“9.4. The authorities should ensure also that all genetic
      counselling centres, genetic laboratories and genetic clinics,
      infertility clinics, scan centres etc. using preconception and pre­
      natal diagnostic techniques and procedures should maintain all
      records and all forms, required to be maintained under the Act
      and the Rules and the duplicate copies of the same be sent to the
      district authorities concerned, in accordance with Rule 9(8) of the
      Rules.
9.6. There will be a direction to all genetic counselling centres,
      genetic laboratories, clinics etc. to maintain Forms A, E, H and
      other statutory forms provided under the Rules and if these
      forms are not properly maintained, appropriate action should be
      taken by the authorities concerned.”
68.   The High Court of Gujarat in
Suo Motu v. State of Gujarat
,

(2009) 1 Gujarat Law Reporter 64, dealt at length with the issue

of proper maintenance of record and observed as under:
“5. A conjoint reading of the above provisions would clearly
      indicate a well­knit legislative scheme for ensuring a strict and
      vigilant enforcement of the provisions of the Act directed against
      female foeticide and misuse of pre­natal diagnostic techniques….
***                       ***                        ***
7. As seen earlier, the Act and the Rules made thereunder
      provide for an elaborate scheme to ensure proper implementation
      of the relevant legal provisions and the possible loopholes in
      strict and full compliance are sought to be plugged by detailed
      provisions for maintenance and preservation of records. In order
      to fully operationalise the restrictions and injunctions contained
      in the Act in general and in Secs. 4, 5 and 6 in particular, to
      regulate the use of pre­natal diagnostic technique, to make the
      pregnant woman and the person conducting the pre­natal
      diagnostic tests and procedures aware of the legal and other
66
consequences and to prohibit determination of sex, the Rules
prescribe the detailed forms in which records have to be
maintained. Thus, the Rules are made and forms are prescribed
in aid of the Act and they are so important for implementation of
the Act and for prosecution of the offenders, that any improper
maintenance of such record is itself made equivalent to violation
of the provisions of Secs. 5 and 6, by virtue of the proviso to sub­
sec. (3) of
Sec. 4
of the Act. It must, however, be noted that the
proviso would apply only in cases of ultra­sonography conducted
on a pregnant woman. And any deficiency or inaccuracy in the
prescribed record would amount to contravention of the
provisions of Secs. 5 and 6 unless and until contrary is proved by
the person conducting such ultra­sonography. The deeming
provision is restricted to the cases of ultra­sonography on
pregnant women and the person conducting ultra­sonography is,
during the course of trial or other proceeding, entitled to prove
that the provisions of Secs. 5 and 6 were, in fact, not violated.
8. It needs to be noted that improper maintenance of the record
has also consequences other than prosecution for deemed
violation of Secs. 5 or 6.
Section 20
of the Act provides for
cancellation or suspension of registration of Genetic Counselling
Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic in case of breach of
the provisions of the Act or the Rules. Therefore, inaccuracy or
deficiency in maintaining the prescribed record shall also amount
to violation of the prohibition imposed by
Sec. 6
against the
Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic
and expose such clinic to proceedings under
Sec. 20
of the Act.
Where, by virtue of the deeming provisions of the proviso to sub­
sec. (3) of
Sec. 4
, contravention of the provisions of Secs. 5 or 6 is
legally presumed and actions are proposed to be taken under
Sec. 20
, the person conducting ultra­sonography on a pregnant
woman shall also have to be given an opportunity to prove that
the provisions of Secs. 5 or 6 were not violated by him in
conducting the procedure. Thus, the burden shifts on to the
person accused of not maintaining the prescribed record, after
any inaccuracy or deficiency is established, and he gets the
opportunity to prove that the provisions of Secs. 5 and 6 were not
contravened in any respect. Although it is apparently a heavy
burden, it is legal, proper and justified in view of the importance
of the Rules regarding maintenance of record in the prescribed
forms and the likely failure of the Act and its purpose if
procedural requirements were flouted. The proviso to sub­sec. (3)
of
Sec. 4
is crystal clear about the maintenance of the record in
prescribed manner being an independent offence amounting to
violation of Secs. 5 or 6 and, therefore, the complaint need not
necessarily also allege violation of the provisions of Secs. 5 or 6 of
the Act. A rebuttable presumption of violation of the provisions of
Secs. 5 or 6 will arise on proof of deficiency or inaccuracy in
maintaining the record in the prescribed manner and equivalence
with those provisions would arise for punishment as well as for
disproving their violation by the accused person. That being the
scheme of these provisions, it would be wholly inappropriate to
quash the complaint leging inaccuracy or deficiency in
67
maintenance of the prescribed record only on the ground that
      violation of Secs. 5 or 6 of the Act was not alleged or made out in
      the complaint. It would also be improper and premature to expect
      or allow the person accused of inaccuracy or deficiency in
      maintenance of the relevant record to show or prove that
      provisions of Secs. 5 or 6 were not violated by him, before the
      deficiency or inaccuracy were established in Court by the
      prosecuting agency or before the authority concerned in other
      proceedings.”
69.
The Act
enjoys a presumption of constitutionality. We find

no violation of the constitutional principles.                The problem of

female foeticide is worldwide and the matters of common

knowledge, reports and history are the basis of the legislation,

provisions of which cannot be termed to be illegal or arbitrary in

any manner.
In
Namit Sharma v. Union of India
, (2013) 1 SCC

745, this Court has laid down as under:
“18. The principles for adjudicating the constitutionality of a
      provision have been stated by this Court in its various
      judgments. Referring to these judgments and more particularly to
Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Justice S.R. Tendolkar
, AIR 1958 SC 538
      and Budhan Choudhry v. State of Bihar, AIR 1955 SC 191, the
      author Jagdish Swarup in his book Constitution of India (2nd
      Edn., 2006) stated the principles to be borne in mind by the
      courts and detailed them as follows: (
Ram Krishna Dalmia
case,
      AIR pp. 547­48, para 11)
      “(a)**
(b) that there is always a presumption in favour of the
      constitutionality of an enactment and the burden is upon him
      who attacks it to show that there has been a clear transgression
      of the constitutional principles;
(c) that it must be presumed that the legislature understands and
      correctly appreciates the need of its own people, that its laws are
      directed to problems made manifest by experience and that its
      discriminations are based on adequate grounds;
(d)**
(e) that in order to sustain the presumption of constitutionality
      the court may take into consideration matters of common
      knowledge, matters of common report, the history of the times
      and may assume every state of facts which can be conceived
      existing at the time of legislation; and
68
(f)**”
70.   The petitioner has not shown which of the entry is not

mandatory in the form. As the entries are mandatory and sine

qua non for undertaking a test/procedure, the assertion that

their fundamental rights are being violated by not providing

requisite information is not germane and is without substance.
71.
The Act
intends to prevent mischief of female foeticide and

the declining sex ratio in India. When such is the objective of the

Act and the Rules and mischief which it seeks to prevent,

violation of the rights under Part III of the Constitution is not

found. This Court in
Hamdard Dawakhana v. The Union of India
,

AIR 1960 SC 554, has laid down the following principles:
“8. Therefore, when the constitutionality of an enactment is
      challenged on the ground of violation of any of the articles in Part
      III of the Constitution, the ascertainment of its true nature and
      character becomes necessary i.e. its subject matter, the area in
      which it is intended to operate, its purport and intent have to be
      determined.
In order to do so it is legitimate to take into
      consideration all the factors such as history of the legislation, the
      purpose thereof, the surrounding circumstances and conditions,
      the mischief which it intended to suppress, the remedy for the
      disease which the legislature resolved to cure and the true reason
      for the remedy; Bengal Immunity co.
Ltd. v. State of Bihar
, 1955­
      2 SCR 603 at pp. 632, 633 ( (S) AIR 1955 SC 661 at p.674);
R.M.D. Chamarbaughwala v. Union of India
, 1957 SCR 930 at p.
      936: ( (S) AIR 1957 SC 628 at p.631);
Mahant Moti Das v. S.P.
      Sahi
, AIR 1959 SC 942 at p. 948.
9. Another principle which has to borne in mind in examining the
      constitutionality of a statute is that it must be assumed that the
      legislature understands and appreciates the need of the people
      and the laws it enacts are directed to problems which are made
69
manifest by experience and that the elected representatives
      assembled in a legislature enact laws which they consider to be
      reasonable for the purpose for which they are enacted.
      Presumption is, therefore, in favour of the constitutionality of an
      enactment.
Charanjit Lal v. Union of India
, 1950 SCR 869: (AIR
      1951 SC 41);
State of Bombay v. F.N. Bulsara
, 1951 SCR 682 at
      p. 708: (AIR 1951 SC 318 at p. 326); AIR 1959 SC 942.”
72.   The mischief sought to be remedied is grave and the effort is

being made to meet the challenge to prevent the birth of the girl

child. Whether Society should give preference to male child is a

matter of grave concern. The same is violative of
Article 39A
and

ignores the mandate of
Article 51A(e)
which casts a duty on

citizens to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of women.

When sex selection is prohibited by virtue of provisions of
Section

6
, the other interwoven provisions in the Acts to prevent the

mischief obviously their constitutionality is to be upheld.
73.   The provisions of
MTP Act
came up for consideration before

the High Court of Delhi in
Raj Bokaria v. Medical Council of India

(W.P. (C) No.795
of 2010), it observed:
“11. On a reading of
Section 5
of the MTP Act, it appears to this
      Court that the opinion formed by the medical practitioner to go
      for either MTP or pre­term inducement of labour when the
      pregnancy is beyond 20 weeks, has necessarily to be in writing
      and in the prescribed format. There was no question of there not
      being any record whatsoever of the forming of such opinion of the
      medical practitioner. The argument advanced by Ms. Acharya
      that in a case of emergency there may be no time for recording
      such opinion cannot explain the failure to record an opinion in
      the present case. The facts narrated by the Petitioner herself
      show that a very conscious decision was taken of going for a pre­
      term inducement of labour sometime around 6th October 2003
      when the deceased was admitted to Respondent No. 3 hospital.
70
Even at that time the opinion of the Petitioner should have been
      recorded. The pre­term induced delivery took place on 8th
      October 2003. There was sufficient time, therefore, for the
      Petitioner to record her opinion, mandatorily required by
Section
      5(1)
. In terms of Rule 3(1) of the Medical Termination of
      Pregnancy Regulations, 2003 the medical practitioner has to
      record her opinion in Form I. The non­maintenance of records to
      show the basis on which an opinion was formed to going in for a
      pre­term inducement in a case where the pregnancy is beyond
      the 20th week is indeed a very serious lapse. There can be no
      excuse whatsoever for a medical practitioner seeking to defend
      herself with reference to
Section 5
of the MTP Act not maintaining
      any record of the formation of the opinion in terms of
Section 5(1)
read with the Regulations of 2003. In the considered view of this
      Court, the above factor alone is enough to demonstrate the gross
      negligence on the part of the Petitioner.”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)
74.   On behalf of petitioner­Society, reliance has been placed

regarding mens rea on
Arun Bhandari v. State of Uttar Pradesh
,

(2013) 2 SCC 801, wherein the Court observed as under:
“22.
In
G.V. Rao v. L.H.V. Prasad
,(2000) 3 SCC 693, this Court
      has held thus: (SCC pp. 696­97, para 7)

        “7. As mentioned above, Section 415 has two parts. While
        in the first part, the person must ‘dishonestly’ or
        ‘fraudulently’ induce the complainant to deliver any
        property; in the second part, the person should
        intentionally induce the complainant to do or omit to do a
        thing. That is to say, in the first part, inducement must
        be dishonest or fraudulent. In the second part, the
        inducement should be intentional.
As observed by this
        Court in
Jaswantrai Manilal Akhaney v. State of Bombay
,
        AIR 1956 SC 575, a guilty intention is an essential
        ingredient of the offence of cheating. In order, therefore,
        to secure conviction of a person for the offence of
        cheating, ‘mens rea’ on the part of that person, must be
        established.
It was also observed in
Mahadeo Prasad v.
        State of W.B.
, AIR 1954 SC 724, that in order to
        constitute the offence of cheating, the intention to deceive
        should be in existence at the time when the inducement
        was offered.”



      No sustenance can be drawn from the aforesaid decision as

keeping the information blank is definitely a violation of the Act
71
and very basic fundamental requisite for undertaking the test.
Thus, when form has not been filled up, obviously the act is

dishonest, fraudulent and can be termed intentional also. Such

case cannot be classified into clerical error.
75.   Reliance has also been placed on the decision of this Court

in
Dr. Subhash Kashinath Mahajan v. State of Maharashtra
,

(2018) 6 SCC 454, in which this Court observed that the Court

has to balance the right of liberty of the accused guaranteed

under
Article 21
, which could be taken away only by just, fair

and reasonable procedure and to check abuse of power by police

and injustice to a citizen. Thus, some filters were required to be

incorporated to meet the mandate of
Articles 14
and
21.
The

substantive as well as procedural laws must conform to
Articles

14
and
21.
The expression procedure established by law under
Article 21
implies just, fair and reasonable procedure. The court

to make purposive interpretation and consider the doctrine of

proportionality. This Court has observed thus:
“12. The learned Amicus submitted that under the scheme of the
      Atrocities Act, several offences may solely depend upon the
      version of the complainant which may not be found to be true.
      There may not be any other tangible material. One sided version,
      before trial, cannot displace the presumption of innocence. Such
      version may at times be self­serving and for extraneous reason.
      Jeopardising liberty of a person on an untried unilateral version,
      without any verification or tangible material, is against the
      fundamental rights guaranteed under the Constitution. Before
72
liberty of a person is taken away, there has to be fair, reasonable
and just procedure. Referring to
Section 41(1)(b)
CrPC it was
submitted that arrest could be effected only if there was
“credible” information and only if the police officer had “reason to
believe” that the offence had been committed and that such
arrest was necessary.
Thus, the power of arrest should be
exercised only after complying with the safeguards intended
under Sections 41 and 41­A
CrPC
. It was submitted that the
expression “reason to believe” in
Section 41
CrPC had to be read
in the light of
Section 26
IPC and judgments interpreting the said
expression. The said expression was not on a par with suspicion.
Reference has been made in this regard to
Joti Parshad v. State
of Haryana
, 1993 Supp (2) SCC 497, Badan Singh v. State of
U.P., 2001
SCC OnLine All 973, Adri Dharan Das v. State of
W.B.
, (
2005) 4 SCC 303, Tata Chemicals Ltd. v. Commr. of
Customs
, (2015) 11 SCC 628 and Ganga Saran & Sons (P) Ltd. v.
CIT, (1981) 3 SCC 143. In the present context, to balance the
right of liberty of the accused guaranteed under
Article 21
, which
could be taken away only by just, fair and reasonable procedure
and to check abuse of power by police and injustice to a citizen,
exercise of right of arrest was required to be suitably regulated by
way of guidelines by this Court under
Article 32
read with
Article
141
of the Constitution. Some filters were required to be
incorporated to meet the mandate of
Articles 14
and
21
to
strengthen the rule of law.
***                     ***                  ***
31. We may, at the outset, observe that jurisdiction of this Court
to issue appropriate orders or directions for enforcement of
fundamental rights is a basic feature of the Constitution. This
Court, as the ultimate interpreter of the Constitution, has to
uphold the constitutional rights and values.
Articles 14
, 19
and
21
represent the foundational values which form the basis of the
rule of law. Contents of the said rights have to be interpreted in a
manner which enables the citizens to enjoy the said rights. Right
to equality and life and liberty have to be protected against any
unreasonable procedure, even if it is enacted by the legislature.
The substantive as well as procedural laws must conform to
Articles 14
and
21.
Any abrogation of the said rights has to be
nullified by this Court by appropriate orders or directions. Power
of the legislature has to be exercised consistent with the
fundamental rights. Enforcement of a legislation has also to be
consistent with the fundamental rights. Undoubtedly, this Court
has jurisdiction to enforce the fundamental rights of life and
liberty against any executive or legislative action. The expression
“procedure established by law” under
Article 21
implies just, fair
and reasonable procedure.
***                     ***                  ***
53. It is well settled that a statute is to be read in the context of
the background and its object. Instead of literal interpretation,
the court may, in the present context, prefer purposive
interpretation to achieve the object of law. Doctrine of
proportionality is well known for advancing the object of
Articles
14
and
21.
A procedural penal provision affecting liberty of
73
citizen must be read consistent with the concept of fairness and
      reasonableness.”
                                                  (emphasis supplied)



      No sustenance can be drawn from aforesaid decision as the

procedure under the Act is due procedure of law with the

safeguards of not only of appeals under Section 21 and Rule 19,

but there is a State Supervisory Board in Section 16A.                       The

constitution of multi­member Appropriate Authority is provided

in Section 17(3)(a) and the Advisory Committee as provided in

Section 17(6) which is again also a multi­member Committee.

The Advisory Committee has to aid and advise the Appropriate

Authority in discharge of its functions.                      Thus, internal

safeguards are provided in the Act and the Rules which conform

to
Articles 14
and
21.
76.   Reliance has also been placed on
Gian Kaur v. State of

Punjab
, (1996) 2 SCC 648, wherein this Court dealt with the

provisions of right to die within the ambit of
Article 21.
While

discussing the aforesaid, this Court has observed thus:
“43. This caution even in cases of physician­assisted suicide is
      sufficient to indicate that assisted suicides outside that category
      have no rational basis to claim exclusion of the fundamental
      principles of sanctity of life. The reasons assigned for attacking a
      provision which penalises attempted suicide are not available to
      the abettor of suicide or attempted suicide. Abetment of suicide
      or attempted suicide is a distinct offence which is found enacted
      even in the law of the countries where attempted suicide is not
      made punishable.
Section 306
IPC enacts a distinct offence
74
which can survive independent of Section 309 in the
IPC
. The
        learned Attorney General as well as both the learned amicus
        curiae rightly supported the constitutional validity of
Section 306
IPC.”
                                                      (emphasis supplied)
77.
In
Subramanian Swamy v. Union of India
, (2016) 7 SCC

221, it was observed that restriction that goes beyond the

requirement of public interest cannot be considered as a

reasonable restriction and would be arbitrary.                         The same

reasonableness is not a static concept.
Articles 14
and
19
are

part of
Article 21.
Misuse of a provision or its possibility of

abuse     is    no    ground      to    declare
Section      499
IPC   as

unconstitutional. If a provision of law is misused or abused, it is

for the Legislature to amend, modify or repeal it.




This Court has observed thus:
“9.3.
Section 499
IPC ex facie infringes free speech and it is a
        serious inhibition on the fundamental right conferred by
Article
        19(1)(a)
and hence, cannot be regarded as a reasonable
        restriction in a democratic republic. A restriction that goes
        beyond the requirement of public interest cannot be considered
        as a reasonable restriction and would be arbitrary. Additionally,
        when the provision even goes to the extent of speaking of truth as
        an offence punishable with imprisonment, it deserves to be
        declared unconstitutional, for it defeats the cherished value as
        enshrined under Article 51­A(b) which is associated with the
        national struggle for freedom. The added requirement of the
        accused having to prove that the statement made by him was for
        the public good is unwarranted and travels beyond the limits of
        reasonableness because the words “public good” are quite vague
        as they do not provide any objective standard or norm or
        guidance as a consequence the provisions do not meet the test of
        reasonable restriction and eventually they have the chilling effect
        on the freedom of speech.
75
9.4. “Reasonableness” is not a static concept, and it may vary
from time to time. What is considered reasonable at one point of
time may become arbitrary and unreasonable at a subsequent
point of time. The colonial law has become unreasonable and
arbitrary in independent India which is a sovereign, democratic
republic and it is a well­known concept that provisions once held
to be reasonable, become unreasonable with the passage of time.
***                      ***                  ***
10.3. Reasonable restriction is founded on the principle of
reasonableness which is an essential facet of constitutional law
and one of the structural principles of the Constitution is that if
the restriction invades and infringes the fundamental right in an
excessive manner, such a restriction cannot be treated to have
passed the test of reasonableness. The language employed in
Sections 499
and
500
IPC is clearly demonstrative of
infringement in excess and hence, the provisions cannot be
granted the protection of
Article 19(2)
of the Constitution.
Freedom of expression is quintessential to the sustenance of
democracy which requires debate, transparency and criticism
and dissemination of information and the prosecution in criminal
law pertaining to defamation strikes at the very root of
democracy, for it disallows the people to have their intelligent
judgment. The intent of the criminal law relating to defamation
cannot be the lone test to adjudge the constitutionality of the
provisions and it is absolutely imperative to apply the “effect
doctrine” for the purpose of understanding its impact on the right
of freedom of speech and expression, and if it, in the ultimate
eventuality, affects the sacrosanct right of freedom, it is ultra
vires. The basic concept of “effect doctrine” would not come in the
category of exercise of power, that is, use or abuse of power but
in the compartment of direct effect and inevitable result of law
that abridges the fundamental right.
***                      ***                  ***
17.2.
Articles 14
and
19
have now been read to be a part of
Article 21
and, therefore, any interpretation of freedom of speech
under
Article 19(1)(a)
which defeats the right to reputation under
Article 21
is untenable. The freedom of speech and expression
under
Article 19(1)(a)
is not absolute but is subject to
constrictions under
Article 19(2).
Restrictions under
Article 19(2)
have been imposed in the larger interests of the community to
strike a proper balance between the liberty guaranteed and the
social interests specified under
Article 19(2).
One’s right must be
exercised so as not to come in direct conflict with the right of
another citizen. The argument of the petitioners that the criminal
law of defamation cannot be justified by the right to reputation
under
Article 21
because one fundamental right cannot be
abrogated to advance another, is not sustainable. It is because (i)
the right to reputation is not just embodied in
Article 21
but also
built in as a restriction placed in
Article 19(2)
on the freedom of
speech in
Article 19(1)(a);
and (ii) the right to reputation is no less
important a right than the right to freedom of speech.
***                      ***                  ***
76
18.2. Misuse of a provision or its possibility of abuse is no
ground to declare
Section 499
IPC as unconstitutional. If a
provision of law is misused or abused, it is for the legislature to
amend, modify or repeal it, if deemed necessary. Mere possibility
of abuse of a provision cannot be a ground for declaring a
provision procedurally or substantively unreasonable.
***                   ***                  ***
76. The submission is that
Sections 499
and
500
IPC are not
confined to defamation of the State or its components but include
defamation of any private person by another private person
totally unconnected with the State. In essence, the proponement
is that the defamation of an individual by another individual can
be a civil wrong but it cannot be made a crime in the name of
fundamental right as protection of private rights qua private
individuals cannot be conferred the status of fundamental rights.
If, argued the learned counsel, such a pedestal is given, it would
be outside the purview of Part III of the Constitution and run
counter to
Articles 14
, 19
and
21
of the Constitution. It is urged
that defamation of a private person by another person is
unconnected with the fundamental right conferred in public
interest by
Article 19(1)(a);
and a fundamental right is
enforceable against the State but cannot be invoked to serve a
private interest of an individual. Elucidating the same, it has
been propounded that defamation of a private person by another
person cannot be regarded as a “crime” under the constitutional
framework and hence, what is permissible is the civil wrong and
the remedy under the civil law.
Section 499
IPC, which stipulates
defamation of a private person by another individual, has no
nexus with the fundamental right conferred under
Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution, for
Article 19(2)
is meant to include the
public interest and not that of an individual and, therefore, the
said constitutional provision cannot be the source of criminal
defamation. This argument is built up on two grounds: (i) the
common thread that runs through the various grounds engrafted
under
Article 19(2)
is relatable to the protection of the interest of
the State and the public in general and the word “defamation”
has to be understood in the said context, and (ii) the principle of
noscitur a sociis, when applied, “defamation” remotely cannot
assume the character of public interest or interest of the crime
inasmuch a crime remotely has nothing to do with the same.
***                   ***                  ***
90.
In
R. Sai Bharathi v. J. Jayalalitha
, (2004) 2 SCC 9, while
opining about crime, it has been observed as under: (SCC pp. 54­
55, para 56)
    “56. Crime is applied to those acts, which are against
    social order and are worthy of serious condemnation.
    Garafalo, an eminent criminologist, defined “ crime” in
    terms of immoral and anti­social acts. He says that:
‘crime is an immoral and harmful act that is regarded as
  criminal by public opinion because it is an injury to so
  much of the moral sense as is possessed by a community
77
— a measure which is indispensable for the adaptation of
  the individual to society’.
The authors of the
Indian Penal Code
stated that:
‘… We cannot admit that a Penal Code is by any means to
   be considered as a body of ethics, that the legislature
   ought to punish acts merely because those acts are
   immoral, or that, because an act is not punished at all, it
   follows that the legislature considers that act as
   innocent. Many things which are not punishable are
   morally worse than many things which are punishable.
   The man who treats a generous benefactor with gross
   ingratitude and insolence deserves more severe
   reprehension than the man who aims a blow in passion,
   or breaks a window in a frolic; yet we have punishment
   for assault and mischief, and none for ingratitude. The
   rich man who refuses a mouthful of rice to save a fellow
   creature from death may be a far worse man than the
   starving wretch who snatches and devours the rice; yet
   we punish the latter for theft, and we do not punish the
   former for hard­heartedness.’”
             ***                     ***                 ***
96. We have referred to this facet only to show that the
submission so astutely canvassed by the learned counsel for the
petitioners that treating defamation as a criminal offence can
have no public interest and thereby it does not serve any social
interest or collective value is sans substratum. We may hasten to
clarify that creation of an offence may be for some different
reason declared unconstitutional but it cannot be stated that the
legislature cannot have a law to constitute an act or omission
done by a person against the other as a crime. It depends on the
legislative wisdom. Needless to say, such wisdom has to be in
accord with constitutional wisdom and pass the test of
constitutional challenge. If the law enacted is inconsistent with
the constitutional provisions, it is the duty of the Court to test
the law on the touchstone of the Constitution.
***                     ***                 ***
122.
In
State of Madras v. V.G. Row
, AIR 1952 SC 196, the Court
has ruled that the test of reasonableness, wherever prescribed,
should be applied to each individual statute impugned and no
abstract standard, or general pattern of reasonableness can be
laid down as applicable to all cases. The nature of the right
alleged to have been infringed, the underlying purpose of the
restrictions imposed, the extent and urgency of the evil sought to
be remedied thereby, the disproportion of the imposition, the
prevailing conditions at the time, should all enter into the judicial
verdict.
***                     ***                 ***
127.
In
Sahara India Real Estate Corpn. Ltd. v. SEBI
, (2012) 10
SCC 603, this Court reiterated the principle of social interest in
the context of
Article 19(2)
as a facet of reasonable restriction.
In
Dwarka Prasad Laxmi Narain v. State of U.P.
, AIR 1954 SC 224,
while deliberating upon “reasonable restriction” observed that it
78
connotes that the limitation imposed upon a person in enjoyment
      of a right should not be arbitrary or of an excessive nature
      beyond what is required in the interest of the public. It was also
      observed that to achieve quality of reasonableness a proper
      balance between the freedom guaranteed under
Article 19(1)( g)
and the social control permitted by clause (6) of
Article 19
has to
      be struck.”

                                                    (emphasis supplied)


     When we consider the aforesaid dictum and apply to the

Act, nothing can be more sinister, immoral and anti­social act

allowing female foeticide.
In
R. Sai Bharathi v. J. Jayalalitha
(supra) it has been observed that crime is against social order,

immoral and harmful act.            It has also been observed by this

Court that legislature can have a law to constitute an act or

omission done by a person against the other as a crime.
Considering the evils sought to be remedied it cannot be said

that the imposition in the Act in question is disproportionate.

The restrictions and the provisions of punishment have close

nexus with the object sought to be achieved. It is not possible to

term action as merely clerical one as that is pre­requisite for the

test/procedure and that is what is intended by the Act, if it is

given a go­bye under the guise of clerical error, the Act would be

rendered otiose. Restriction cannot be said to be excessive and

beyond what is required in the public interest, they cater to the
79
felt need of the society and the complex issues facing people

which the legislature intends to solve.
78.
In
Shreya Singhal v. Union of India
, (2015) 5 SCC 1, the

Court dealt with provisions of Section 66­
A of Information

Technology Act, 2000
. This Court has observed thus:
55. The US Supreme Court has repeatedly held in a series of
      judgments that where no reasonable standards are laid down to
      define guilt in a section which creates an offence, and where no
      clear guidance is given to either law abiding citizens or to
      authorities and courts, a section which creates an offence and
      which is vague must be struck down as being arbitrary and
      unreasonable. Thus, in Musser v. Utah, 92 L Ed 562 a Utah
      statute which outlawed conspiracy to commit acts injurious to
      public morals was struck down.
***               ***                 ***
59. It was further held that a penal law is void for vagueness if it
      fails to define the criminal offence with sufficient definiteness.
Ordinary people should be able to understand what conduct is
      prohibited and what is permitted. Also, those who administer the
      law must know what offence has been committed so that arbitrary
      and discriminatory enforcement of the law does not take place.
***               ***                 ***
66. In Federal Communications Commission v. Fox Television
      Stations Inc., 132 S Ct 2307 it was held: (S Ct p. 2317)
           “A fundamental principle in our legal system is that laws
           which regulate persons or entities must give fair notice of
           conduct that is forbidden or required. See Connally v.
           General Construction Co., 269 US 385, US 391 (“[A]
           statute which either forbids or requires the doing of an
           act in terms so vague that men of common intelligence
           must necessarily guess at its meaning and differ as to its
           application, violates the first essential of due process of
           law”); Papachristou v. Jacksonville, 405 US 156, US 162
           {“Living under a rule of law entails various suppositions,
           one of which is that ‘[all persons] are entitled to be
           informed as to what the State commands or forbids’”
           [quoting Lanzetta v. New Jersey, 306 US 451, US 453
           (alteration in original)]}. This requirement of clarity in
           regulation is essential to the protections provided by the
           Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment. See United
           States v. Williams, 553 US 285, US 304. It requires the
           invalidation of laws that are impermissibly vague. A
           conviction or punishment fails to comply with due
80
process if the statute or regulation under which it is
         obtained “fails to provide a person of ordinary intelligence
         fair notice of what is prohibited, or is so standardless
         that it authorizes or encourages seriously discriminatory
         enforcement.” Ibid. As this Court has explained, a
         regulation is not vague because it may at times be
         difficult to prove an incriminating fact but rather because
         it is unclear as to what fact must be proved. See id., at
306.

         Even when speech is not at issue, the void for vagueness
         doctrine addresses at least two connected but discrete
         due process concerns: first, that regulated parties should
         know what is required of them so they may act
         accordingly; second, precision and guidance are
         necessary so that those enforcing the law do not act in an
         arbitrary or discriminatory way. See Grayned v. Rockford,
         33 L Ed 2d 222, US 108­109.
When speech is involved,
         rigorous adherence to those requirements is necessary to
         ensure that ambiguity does not chill protected speech.””
                                               (emphasis supplied)


     It is apparent from the aforesaid discussion in
Shreya

Singhal
(supra) in a case where no reasonable standards are laid

down to define guilt in a section which creates an offence, it

would be arbitrary and unconstitutional. It is absolutely clear

that the provisions in the Act in question cannot be termed as

arbitrary or illegal or unreasonable.              The provisions are not

vague.    A responsible doctor is supposed to know before

undertaking such pre­natal diagnostic test etc. what is he

undertaking and what his responsibilities are.                    If he cannot

understand the form he is required to fill and the impact of

medical findings and its consequences which is virtually the pre­

requisite for undertaking a test, he is not fit to be a member of a
81
noble medical profession.               Such culpable negligence is not

warranted from a doctor. It is crystal clear from the provisions

of the Act which can be gathered by a person of ordinary

intelligence and they can have fair notice of what is prohibited

and what omission they should not make.
The principles

deliberated upon in
Shreya Singhal
(supra) rather supports the

constitutionality of the Act and the Rules framed thereunder.
79.    The reliance has also been placed by the petitioner in
Nikesh Tarachand Shah v. Union of India
, (2018) 11 SCC 1, in

which Court observed thus:
“10. On the other hand, the learned Attorney General Shri K.K.
      Venugopal impressed upon us the fact that the Parliamentary
      legislation qua money laundering is an attempt by Parliament to get
      back money which has been siphoned off from the economy.
      According to the learned Attorney General, scheduled offences and
      offences under
Sections 3
and
4
of the 2002 Act have to be read
      together and the said Act, therefore, forms a complete code which
      must be looked at by itself. According to the learned Attorney
      General, it is well settled that classification which is punishment
      centric has been upheld by a catena of judgments and so have the
      twin conditions been upheld by various decisions which were
      referred to by him. According to him, the expression “any offence” in
      Section 45(1)(ii) would mean offence of a like nature and not any
      offence, which would include a traffic offence as well. According to
      the learned Attorney General, Section 45 can easily be read down to
      make it constitutional in two ways. First, the expression “there are
      reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such
      offence” must be read as the making of a prima facie assessment by
      the court of reasonable guilt. Secondly, according to the learned
      Attorney General, in any case the conditions contained in Section
      45(1)(ii) are there in a different form when bail is granted ordinarily
      insofar as offences generally are concerned and he referred to State
      of U.P. v. Amarmani Tripathi, (2005) 8 SCC 21 for this purpose.
      According to the learned Attorney General, if harmoniously
      construed with the rest of the Act, Section 45 is unassailable.
He
      relied upon
Section 24
of the Act, which inverts the burden of proof,
82
and strongly relied upon
Gautam Kundu v. Directorate of
    Enforcement
, (
2015) 16 SCC 1 and Rohit Tandon v. Directorate of
    Enforcement
, (2018) 11 SCC 46. In answer to Shri Rohatgi’s
    argument on the object of the 2012 Amendment Act, according to
    the learned Attorney General, it is well settled that where the
    language of the Act is plain, no recourse can be taken to the object
    of the Act and he cited a number of judgments for this proposition.
    He referred us to
Section 106
of the Evidence Act, 1872 and argued
    that when read with Section 24 of the 2002 Act, it would be clear
    that the twin conditions contained in Section 45 are only in
    furtherance of the object of unearthing black money and that we
    should, therefore, be very slow to set at liberty persons who are
    alleged offenders of the cancer of money laundering. Ultimately,
    according to the learned Attorney General, Section 45 being part of
    a complete code must be upheld in order that the 2002 Act work, so
    that money that is laundered comes back into the economy and
    persons responsible for the same are brought to book.
***                   ***                 ***
46. We must not forget that Section 45 is a drastic provision which
    turns on its head the presumption of innocence which is
    fundamental to a person accused of any offence. Before application
    of a section which makes drastic inroads into the fundamental right
    of personal liberty guaranteed by
Article 21
of the Constitution of
    India, we must be doubly sure that such provision furthers a
    compelling State interest for tackling serious crime. Absent any
    such compelling State interest, the indiscriminate application of the
    provisions of Section 45 will certainly violate
Article 21
of the
    Constitution. Provisions akin to Section 45 have only been upheld
    on the ground that there is a compelling State interest in tackling
    crimes of an extremely heinous nature.
***                   ***                 ***
49. The learned Attorney General relied heavily on Section 24 of the
    2002 Act to show that the burden of proof in any proceeding
    relating to proceeds of crime is upon the person charged with the
    offence of money laundering, and in the case of any other person i.e.
    a person not charged with such offence, the court may presume
    that such proceeds are involved in money laundering.
Section 45
of
    the Act only speaks of the scheduled offence in Part A of the
    Schedule, whereas Section 24 speaks of the offence of money
    laundering, and raises a presumption against the person
    prosecuted for the crime of money laundering. This presumption
    has no application to the scheduled offence mentioned in Section
    45, and cannot, therefore, advance the case of the Union of India.”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)


     Considering the compelling general public interest and

gender justice and declining sex ratio, we have no hesitation in
83
upholding the validity of the provisions of
Section 23(1)
of the

Act.
80.     Reliance has also been placed in
P. Rathinam v. Union of

India
, (1994) 3 SCC 394, this Court observed thus:
48. The aforesaid show that law has many promises to keep
       including granting of so much of liberty as would not jeopardise the
       interest of another or would affect him adversely, i.e., allowing of
       stretching of arm up to that point where the other fellow’s nose does
       not begin. For this purpose, law may have “miles to go”. Then, law
       cannot be cruel, which it would be because of what is being stated
       later, if persons attempting suicide are treated as criminals and are
       prosecuted to get them punished, whereas what they need is
       psychiatric treatment, because suicide basically is a “call for help”,
       as stated by Dr (Mrs) Dastoor, a Bombay Psychiatrist, who heads an
       organisation called “Suicide Prevent”. May it be reminded that a law
       which is cruel violates Article 21 of the Constitution, a la, Deena v.
Union of India, (1983) 4 SCC 645.
***               ***                  ***
51. A crime presents these characteristics: (1) it is a harm, brought
       about by human conduct which the sovereign power in the State
       desires to prevent; (2) among the measures of prevention selected is
       the threat of punishment; and (3) legal proceedings of a special kind
       are employed to decide whether the person accused did in fact
       cause the harm, and is, according to law, to be held legally
       punishable for doing so. (See pp. 1 to 5 of Kenny’s Outlines of
       Criminal Law, 19th Edn., for the above propositions.)
                                                    (emphasis supplied)
81.     We find that Act intends not to jeopardise the female

foetus.      As such curtailment of the liberty in cause of such a

violation cannot be said to be disproportionate.
82.     Reliance has also been placed on
State of Uttar Pradesh v.

Wasif Haider
, (2019) 2 SCC 303, in which it has been laid down
84
that an offence has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. The

relevant portion of the decision is extracted hereunder:
“22. In the instant appeals before us, the prosecution has failed to
      link the chain of circumstances so as to dispel the cloud of doubt
      about the culpability of the respondent­accused. It is a well­settled
      principle that a suspicion, however grave it may be cannot take
      place of proof i.e. there is a long distance between "may be" and
      "must be", which must be traversed by the prosecution to prove its
      case beyond reasonable doubt [See
Narendra Singh v. State of M.P.
,
      (2004) 10 SCC 699].”



      There is no dispute with the aforesaid proposition, but that

is not the question before us. When trial takes place obviously

the commission of the offence has to be proved as required

under the relevant applicable law.
83.    There can be a legislative provision for imposing burden of

proof in reverse order relating to gender justice. In the light of

prevalent violence against women and children, the Legislature

has enacted various Acts, and amended existing statutes,

reversing the traditional burden of proof. Some examples of

reversed burden of proof in statutes include
Sections 29
and
30
of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act

in which there is presumption regarding commission and

abetment of certain offences under the Act, and presumption of

mental state of the accused respectively. In Sections 113­A and

113­B of the Indian Evidence Act there is presumption regarding
85
abetment of suicide and dowry death, and in Section 114­
A of

the Indian Evidence Act
there is presumption of absence of

consent of prosecutrix in offence of rape.
84.   These provisions are a clear indication of the seriousness

with which crimes against women and children have been

viewed by the Legislature.          It is also evident from these

provisions that due to the pervasive nature of these crimes, the

Legislature has deemed it fit to employ a reversed burden of

proof in these cases. The presumption in the proviso to
Section

4(3)
of the Act has to be viewed in this light.
85.
The Act
is a social welfare legislation, which was conceived

in light of the skewed sex­ratio of India and to avoid the

consequences of the same. A skewed sex­ratio is likely to lead to

greater incidences of violence against women and increase in

practices   of   trafficking,   ‘bride­buying’ etc.   The   rigorous

implementation of the Act is an edifice on which rests the task of

saving the girl child.
86.   In view of the aforesaid discussion and in our opinion, no

case is made out to hold that deficiency in maintaining the

record mandated by
Sections 5
,
6
and the proviso to
Section 4(3)
86
cannot be diluted as the aforesaid provisions have been

incorporated in various columns of the Form ‘F’ and as already

held that it would not be a case clerical mistake but absence of

sine qua non for undertaking a diagnostic test/procedure.        It

cannot be said to be a case of clerical or technical lapse. Section

23(1) need not have provided for gradation of offence once

offence is of non­maintenance of the record, maintenance of

which itself intend to prevent female foeticide. It need not have

graded offence any further difference is so blur it would not be

possible to prevent crime.     There need not have been any

gradation of offence on the basis of actual determination of sex

and non­maintenance of record as undertaking the test without

the pre­requisites is totally prohibited under the Act. The non­

maintenance of record is very foundation of offence. For first and

second offences, gradation has been made which is quite

reasonable.
87.   Provisions of Section 23(2) has also been attacked on the

ground that suspension on framing the charges should not be

on the basis of clerical mistake, inadvertent clerical lapses. As

we found it is not what is suggested to be clerical or technical

lapse nor it can be said to be inadvertent mistakes as existence
87
of the particular medical condition is mandated by
Sections 4
and
5
including the age etc.    Thus, suspension on framing of

charges cannot be said to be unwarranted. The same intends to

prevent mischief. We are not going into the minutes what can be

treated as a simple clerical mistake that has to be seen case wise

and no categorization can be made of such mistakes, if any, but

with respect to what is mandatory to be provided in the Form as

per provisions of various sections has to be clearly mentioned, it

cannot be kept vague, obscure or blank as it is necessary for

undertaking requisite tests, investigations and procedures.

There are internal safeguards in the Act under the provisions

relating to appeal, the Supervisory Board as well as the

Appropriate Authority, its Advisory Committee and we find that

the provisions cannot be said to be suffering from any vice as

framing of the charges would mean prima facie case has been

found by the Court and
in that case
, suspension cannot be said

to be unwarranted.
88.   It was also prayed that action should be taken under

Section 20 after show cause notice and reasonable opportunity

of being heard. There is already a provision in Section 20(1) to

issue a show cause and in Section 20(2) contains the provision
88
as to reasonable opportunity of being heard. Thus, we find no

infirmity in the aforesaid provision.
89.   There also the Appropriate Authority to consider each case

on merits with the help of Advisory Body which has legal expert.

The Advisory Committee consists of one legal expert which has

to aid and advise the Appropriate Authority as provided in

Sections 16 and 17(5)(6). Thus, the submission that legal advice

should be taken before prosecution, in view of the provisions,

has no legs to stand.
90.   It   was   also   contended     that   action   of   seizure   of

ultrasonography machine and sealing the premises cannot be

said to be appropriate. The submission is too tenuous and liable

to be rejected.
Section 30
of the Act enumerates the power of

search and seizure and Rules 11 and 12 of the Rules provide for

the power of the Appropriate Authority to seal equipment,

inspect premises and conduct search and seizure.               It was

pointed out by the respondents that a “Standard Operational

Procedure”, detailing the procedure for search and seizure has

been developed by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.

Further, regular training of Appropriate Authorities is being

carried out at both the National and State level. All the States
89
have also been directed to develop online MIS for monitoring the

implementation of the Act. It is settled proposition that when

offence is found to be committed, there can be seizure and

sealing of the premises and equipment during trial as no license

can be given to go on committing the offence. Such provisions of

seizure/sealing, pending trial are to be found invariably in

various penal legislations. The impugned provisions contained

in the Act constitute reasonable restrictions to carry on any

profession which cannot be said to be violative of Right to

Equality enshrined under
Article 14
or right to practise any

profession under
Article 19(1)(g).
Considering the Fundamental

Duties under
Article 51A(e)
and considering that female foeticide

is most inhumane act and results in reduction in sex ratio, such

provisions cannot be said to be illegal and arbitrary in any

manner besides there are various safeguards provided in the Act

to prevent arbitrary actions as discussed above.
91.   In light of the nature of offences which necessitated the

enactment of the Act and the grave consequences that would

ensue otherwise, suspension of registration under
Section 23(2)
of the Act serves as a deterrent. The individual cases cited by the

petitioner­Society cannot be a ground for passing blanket
90
directions, and the individuals have remedies under the law

which they can avail. Moreover, the concept of double jeopardy

would have no application here, as it provides that a person

shall not be convicted of the same offence twice, which is

demonstrably not the case here. Suspension is a step­in­aid to

further the intendment of act. It cannot be said to be double

punishment. In case an employee is convicted for an offence, he

cannot continue in service which can be termed to be double

jeopardy.
92.   Non maintenance of record is spring board for commission

of offence of foeticide, not just a clerical error. In order to

effectively implement the various provisions of the Act, the

detailed forms in which records have to be maintained have been

provided for by the Rules. These Rules are necessary for the

implementation of the Act and improper maintenance of such

record amounts to violation of provisions of
Sections 5
and
6
of

the Act, by virtue of proviso to
Section 4(3)
of the Act. In

addition, any breach of the provisions of the Act or its Rules

would attract cancellation or suspension of registration of

Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic
91
Clinic, by the Appropriate Authority as provided under
Section

20
of the Act.
93.   There is no substance in the submission that provision of
Section 4(3)
be read down. By virtue of the proviso to
Section

4(3)
, a person conducting ultrasonography on a pregnant

woman, is required to keep complete record of the same in the

prescribed manner and any deficiency or inaccuracy in the same

amounts to contravention of
Section 5
or
Section 6
of the Act,

unless the contrary is proved by the person conducting the said

ultrasonography.        The aforementioned proviso to
Section 4(3)
reflects the importance of records in such cases, as they are

often the only source to ensure that an establishment is not

engaged in sex­determination.
94.
Section 23
of the Act, which provides for penalties of

offences, acts in aid of the other Sections of the Act is quite

reasonable.      It   provides   for   punishment   for   any   medical

geneticist, gynecologist, registered medical practitioner or a

person who owns a Genetic Counselling Centre, a Genetic Clinic

or a Genetic Laboratory, and renders his professional or

technical services to or at said place, whether on honorarium
92
basis or otherwise and contravenes any provisions of the Act, or

the Rules under it.
95.   Therefore, dilution of the provisions of the Act or the Rules

would only defeat the purpose of the Act to prevent female

foeticide, and relegate the right to life of the girl child under
Article 21
of the Constitution, to a mere formality.
96.   In view of the above, no case is made out for striking down

the proviso to
Section 4(3)
, provisions of Sections 23(1), 23(2) or

to read down Section 20 or 30 of the Act. Complete contents of

Form ‘F’ are held to be mandatory.      Thus, the writ petition is

dismissed. No costs.
.……......................J.
                                            (Arun Mishra)



                                             .……......................J.
                                            (Vineet Saran)
New Delhi;
May 03, 2019