[Cites
22
, Cited by
29
]
Supreme Court of India
V K Naswa vs Home Secretary, Uoi And Ors on 9 January, 2012
Bench:
B.S. Chauhan
,
Swatanter Kumar
REPORTABLE


                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                  CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


              WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 533 OF 2011





V.K. Naswa                                                             ...


Petitioner





                                      Versus





Home Secretary, U.O.I. and Ors.                                          ...


Respondents





                                   O R D E R
1.     This   writ   petition   has   been   filed   making   grievance   that   the 


respondents,   namely,  Yog   Guru   Baba   Ramdev;   Shri   Anna   Hazare, 


Mrs. Kiran Bedi and others have, on several occasions insulted   the 


National Flag and violated the norms of waiving of National Flag, as 


provided   in   the   Flag   Code   2002.     Thus,   the   petitioner   has   sought 


relief   that   a   sum   of   Rs.10,00,000,00/-   (Rupees   Ten   crores)   be 


recovered from Baba Ramdev for misusing National Flag for gaining 


undue   mileage   benefiting   his   commercial   ends   (yoga   business)   as 


well as the political gain drive during agitations; Shri Anna Hazare 


and others be directed to pay a sum of Rs.1,00,000,00/- (Rupees Ten 


crores)   to   the   Prime   Minister's   Relief   Fund   for   using/misusing 


National Flag for gaining the political mileage during agitations, and 


further   to   issue   direction   to   the   Central   Government   through 


Ministry of Law & Justice to revise the Flag Code of India 2002 and 


amend   the   same   incorporating   the   amendment   suggested   by   the 


petitioner himself.
2.     The   petitioner   appears   in   person   and   on   being   asked   by   the 


court it has been pointed out by him that against the above referred 


respondents   he   has   filed   the   criminal   complaints   before   the   police 


authorities and he has been pursuing the said remedy simultaneously.
3.     The   issue   involved   in   the   case   has   been   dealt   with   by   this 


Court elaborately in
Union of India v. Naveen Jindal & Anr.
, AIR 


2004 SC 1559, interpreting the clauses contained in the Flag Code 


2002 and explained as under what circumstances and in what manner 


the National Flag can be hoisted by the individuals.  The Flag Code 


is divided into 3 parts. Part II provides for the mode and manner of 


hoisting/displaying/use   of   National   Flag   by   Members   of   Public, 


Private Organisations, Educational Institutions etc.  From reading of
2
clause   2.1   of   Section   1   appear   in   Part   II   of   the   Flag   Code,   it   is 


evident that there is no restriction on the display of National Flag by 


members   of   general   public,   private   organizations   and   educational 


institutions   etc.   except   to   the   extent   provided   in   the
Emblems   and 


Names   (Prevention   of   Improper   Use)   Act,   1950
and
Prevention   of 


Insults to National Honour Act, 1971
and any other law enacted on 


the subject.  This Court has further held that Flag Code is not the law 


within the meaning of
Article 13(3)(a)
of the Constitution of India.
However, right to fly National Flag is a fundamental right.   Further 


the Flag Code provides guidelines to be observed for preservation of 


dignity and respect to the National Flag.
4.      In view of the above, the National Flag is both a benediction 


and   a   beckoning.     Thus,   in   case   a   person   shows   any   kind   of 


disrespect   to   the   National   Flag   or   does   not   observe   the   terms 


contained in the Code, legal action may be taken against him under 


the relevant statutory provisions.   However, these are the questions 


of facts as to whether on a particular  event a particular  person has 


shown any kind of disrespect to the National Flag.  For that purpose, 


the   petitioner   has   already   filed   complaint   before   the   authorities 


concerned.     Thus,   he   cannot   pursue   the   remedy   simultaneously   by 


filing the writ petition and on that count the petition is liable to be
3
dismissed.  More so, such a factual controversy cannot be examined 


in a petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India.
5.      The   petitioner-in-person   has   emphasised   that   he   has 


approached this Court to issue directions to the Central Government 


through Ministry of Law & Justice to amend the law in this regard 


and   in   the   alternative,   this   court   itself   may   issue   appropriate 


directions in this regard.
It is a settled legal proposition that the court can neither  


legislate   nor   issue   a   direction   to   the   Legislature   to   enact   in   a 


particular manner.
6.      In  Mullikarjuna Rao & Ors. etc. etc. v.     State of Andhra 


Pradesh   &   Ors.  etc.   etc.,  AIR   1990   SC   1251;   and  V.K.   Sood   v.
Secretary, Civil Aviation & Ors., AIR 1993 SC 2285,    this Court 


has held that Writ Court, in exercise of its power under
Article 226
, 


has   no   power   even   indirectly   require   the   Executive   to   exercise   its 


law-making   power.   The   Court   observed   that   it   is   neither   legal   nor 


proper for the High Court to issue direction or advisory sermons to 


the Executive in respect of the sphere which is exclusively within the 


domain   of   the   Executive   under   the   Constitution.   The   power   under
Article   309
of   the   Constitution   to   frame   rules   is   the   legislative 


power. This power under the Constitution has to be exercised by the
4
President or the Governor of a State, as the case may be. The Courts 


cannot   usurp   the   functions   assigned   to   the   Executive   under   the 


Constitution   and   cannot   even   indirectly   require   the   Executive   to 


exercise   its   law-making   power   in   any   manner.   The   Courts   cannot 


assume to itself a supervisory role over the rule-making power of the 


Executive under
Article 309
of the Constitution.
7.      While deciding the said case,  the Court placed reliance on a 


large number of judgments, particularly M/s.
Narinder Chand Hem 


Raj   &   Ors.   v.   Lt.   Governor,   Administrator,   Union   Territory, 


Himachal Pradesh & Ors.
, AIR 1971 SC 2399, where it has been 


held that legislative power can be exercised only by the legislature or 


its delegate and none else.
8.
In
State of Himachal Pradesh v. A Parent
of a Student of 


Medical   College,   Shimla   &   Ors.,  AIR   1985   SC   910,  this   Court 


deprecated the practice adopted by the Courts to issue directions to 


the   legislature   to   enact   a   legislation   to   meet   a   particular   situation 


observing :
"...The direction given by the Division Bench was  

            really   nothing   short   of   an   indirect   attempt   to  

            compel the State Government to initiate legislation  

            with   a   view   to   curbing   the   evil   of   ragging,   for  

            Otherwise it is difficult to see why, after the clear  

            and   categorical   statement   by   the   chief   Secretary
5
on   behalf   of   the   State   Government   that   the  

         Government   will   introduce   legislation   if   found  

         necessary   and   so   advised,   the   Division   Bench  

         should   have   proceeded   to   again   give   the   same  

         direction. Thus the Division Bench was clearly not  

         entitled   to   do.   It   is   entirely   a   matter   for   the  

         executive   branch   of   the   Government   to   decided  

         whether   or   not   to   introduce   any   particular  

         legislation."
9.
In
Asif Hameed & Ors. v. State of Jammu & Kashmir & 


Ors.
,  AIR 1989 SC 1899,  this Court while dealing with a case like 


this at hand observed:
"While doing so, the Court must remain within  

         its self-imposed limits. The Court sits in judgment  

         on   the   action   of   a   co-ordinate   branch   of   the  

         Government.   While   exercising   power   of   judicial  

         review   of   administrative   action,   the   Court   is   not  

         an Appellate Authority. The Constitution does not  

         permit the Court to direct or advise the Executive  

         in   matter   of   policy   or   to   sermonize   qua   any  

         matter   which   under   the   Constitution   lies   within  

         the sphere of Legislature or Executive."
(Emphasis added)
10.
In
Union of India & Anr. v. Deoki Nandan Aggarwal
, AIR 


1992 SC 96, this Court similarly observed :
"It   is   not  the   duty   of  the   Court   either   to   enlarge  

         the   scope   of   the   legislation.....The   Court   cannot  

         rewrite,   recast   or   reframe   the   legislation   for   the  

         very good reason that it has no power to legislate.  

         The power to legislate has not been conferred on  

         the Court."
6
11.    Similarly   in
Ajaib   Singh   v.     Sirhind   Co-operative 


Marketing-cum-Processing   Service   Society   Ltd.   &   Anr.
,   AIR 


1999   SC   1351,  this   Court   held   that   Court   cannot   fix   a   period   of 


limitation,   if   not   fixed   by   the   legislature,   as   "the   Courts   can 


admittedly   interpret   the   law   and   do   not   make   laws."   The   Court 


cannot   interpret   the   statutory   provision   in   such   a   manner   "which 


would   amount   to   legislation   intentionally   left   over   by   the 


legislature".
12.    A similar view has been reiterated by this Court in
Union of 


India v. Association
for Democratic Reforms & Anr., AIR 2002 


SC   2112,  observing   that   the   Court   cannot   issue   direction   to   the 


legislature for amending the Act or Rules. It is for the Parliament to 


amend the Act or Rules.
13.    In District Mining Officer & Ors. v. Tata Iron & Steel Co.
& Anr., (2001) 7 SCC 358, this Court held that function of the Court 


is only to expound the law and not to legislate.
14.    Similarly,   in       Supreme   Court
Employees'   Welfare 


Association   v.   Union   of   India   &   Anr.
,   (1989)   4   SCC   187,    this 


Court   held   that   Court   cannot   direct   the   legislature   to   enact   a
7
particular law for the reason that under the constitutional scheme the 


Parliament   exercises   sovereign   power   to   enact   law   and   no   outside 


power or authority can issue a particular piece of legislation.
(See also:
State of Jammu & Kashmir v. A.R. Zakki & Ors.
, AIR 


1992 SC 1546).
15.
In
Union of India v. Prakash P. Hinduja & Anr.
, AIR 2003 


SC 2612,    this Court held that if the Court issues a direction which 


amounts   to   legislation   and   is   not   complied   with   by   the   State,   it 


cannot be held that the State has committed the Contempt of Court 


for   the   reason   that   the   order   passed   by   the   Court   was   without 


jurisdiction and it has no competence to issue a direction amounting 


to legislation.
16.     The   issue   involved   herein   was   considered   by   this   Court   in
University of Kerala v. Council, Principals', Colleges, Kerala & 


Ors.
, AIR 2010 SC 2532.  The Court elaborately explained the scope 


of   separation   of   powers   of   different   organs   of   the   State   under   our 


Constitution;   the   validity   of   judicial   legislation   and   if   it   is   at   all 


permissible,  its limits;  and the validity of judicial  activism and the 


need for judicial restraint, etc. The Court observed:
8
"At   the   outset,   we   would   say   that   it   is   not  

            possible for this Court to give any direction for  

            amending the Act or the statutory rules.  It is for  

            the Parliament to amend the Act and the Rules."
17.
In
State   of  U.P.   &  Ors.   v.   Jeet  S.   Bisht  &  Anr.
,  (2007)  6 


SCC   586,   this   Court   held   that   issuing   any   such   direction   may 


amount   to   amendment   of   law   which   falls   exclusively   within   the 


domain of the executive/legislature and the Court cannot amend the 


law.
18.
In
Delhi Jal Board v. National Campaign
for Dignity and 


Rights   of   Sewerage   and   Allied   Workers   &   Ors.,  (2011)   8   SCC 


568,   this   Court   while   dealing   with   the   issue   made   the   observation 


that   in   exceptional   circumstances   where   there   is   inaction   by   the 


executive, for whatever reason, the judiciary must step in, in exercise 


of its Constitutional obligations to provide a solution till such time 


the legislature acts to perform its role by enacting proper legislation 


to cover the field.
(See also:
Vishaka & Ors. v. State of Rajasthan & Ors.
AIR 1997 


SC 3011;
Common Cause (A Regd. Society) v. Union of India & 


Ors.
,  AIR 2008 SC 2116; and
Destruction of Public and Private 


Properties v. State of A.P. & Ors.
, AIR 2009 SC 2266)
9
19.            Thus, it is crystal clear that the Court has a very limited role 


and   in   exercise   of   that,   it   is   not   open   to   have   judicial   legislation.
Neither the Court can legislate, nor it has any competence to issue 


directions to the legislature to enact the law in a particular manner.
20.         In view of the above, the petition lacks merit.   Facts of the 


case do not warrant any interference by this Court.   In such a fact-
situation, no relief can be granted to the petitioner.  The writ petition 


is, accordingly, dismissed.
.............................
...J.

                                                            (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)





                                                            .............................
...J.

                                                            (SWATANTER 

KUMAR)

New Delhi,

January 9, 2012
10