[Cites
12
, Cited by
16
]
Supreme Court of India
Iq City Foundation vs Union Of India on 1 August, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2017 SC 103
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Amitava Roy
,
Dipak Misra
1


                                                                       REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 502 OF 2017


                         IQ City Foundation & Anr.                     Petitioner(s)

                                                    Versus

                         Union of India & Ors.                         Respondent(s)




                                               JUDGMENT
Dipak Misra, J.
In this Writ Petition preferred under
Article 32
of the

                         Constitution of India the petitioners have prayed for issue of

                         a writ of certiorari for quashment of the order dated

                         31.05.2017 passed under
Section 10-A
of the Indian

                         Medical Council Act, 1956 (for brevity, ‘the Act”) by the

                         Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the 1 st

                         respondent herein, and further issue a direction to the said

                         respondent to grant permission to the petitioner College for
Signature Not Verified   4th renewal for the academic year 2017-2018 to facilitate
Digitally signed by
GULSHAN KUMAR
ARORA
Date: 2017.08.01
11:31:01 IST
Reason:
admission of the 5th batch (150 students) MBBS Course.
2
2.   The expose’ of facts essential for adjudication of the

controversy are that IQ City Medical College attached to the

teaching hospital, namely, IQ City Narayana Multispecialty

Hospital was established in the year 2013 by the petitioners

with an intake of 150 (one hundred and fifty) seats MBBS

Course. The Medical Council of India (MCI) conducted an

inspection and granted the Letter of Permission (LOP) on

15.07.2013 for the establishment of the new medical college

at Burdwan, West Bengal with an annual intake of 150

students with effect from the academic year 2013-14. Vide

letters dated 04.07.2014, 10.06.2015 and 15.12.2015

renewals of permission for the 2 nd (1st renewal), 3rd (2nd

renewal) and 4th (3rd renewal) batches of MBBS students at

the petitioner College for the academic years 2014-15,

2015-16 and 2016-17 respectively were granted by the

respondent    No.   1.   On   06.07.2016,   petitioner-College

submitted its scheme along with the requisite fees for the 4 th

renewal for the academic year 2017-18 which pertains to

admission of the 5th batch of 150 students in MBBS course.

On 09.07.2016, the 2nd respondent informed the College

that the assessment for renewal of permission for the
3
academic year 2017-18 would be undertaken by the

Assessors appointed by it at any time after 15.07.2016 and

the petitioners were asked to fill in the Standard Inspection

Form A, Form B and Declaration Form for the academic

year 2017-18 and keep them ready for scrutiny at the time

of assessment. There was also a direction for submission of

the soft copies of the said Forms. As averred, the petitioners

duly submitted a compact disc containing soft copies of

Form A, Form B and Declaration Form and upon receipt of

the necessary documents, the 2nd respondent constituted a

team of Assessors and directed them to carry out the

assessment inspection of the College. The inspection team,

that is, the Assessors, conducted a surprise inspection of

the College on 03.11.2016 and 04.11.2016. The Assessors

pointed out certain deficiencies to the College and noted the

same in the assessment report dated 04.11.2016. It is put

forth in the Regular Inspection Report that the shortfall in

Teaching Faculty and Resident Doctors were only 4.5% and

3.50% respectively which were well within the prescribed

limit.   Two other deficiencies that were pointed out, as

asserted,   were   completely   remediable   and   were   duly
4
remedied by the College. On 22.12.2016 the Executive

Committee   of   the   respondent   No.    2    considered     the

Assessment Report of the Assessors and decided to

recommend to the respondent No. 1 not to renew the

permission to the College for the 4th renewal for the

academic year 2017-18
3.   As further set forth, the 1st respondent by its letter

dated   03.02.2017     communicated   to       the   College   the

recommendation dated 28.01.2017 of the respondent No. 2

for disapproving the permission to the College for the 4 th

renewal for the academic year 2017-18 and called upon the

College to submit a detailed point-wise compliance with

documentary evidence. The College was further intimated

about the hearing that was to be held on 09.02.2017 before

the Hearing Committee. A team of representatives of the

College appeared before the Hearing Committee on the date

fixed and submitted the compliance report of the remarks

and observations made by the Assessors of the respondent

No. 2. In the second week of March, 2017, the petitioners

received a copy of order dated 01.03.2017 issued by the 1 st

respondent recording the recommendations/order passed
5
by the Hearing Committee of the respondent No. 1 under
Section 10-A(4)
of the Act. The recommendation of the

Hearing Committee was to the effect that the deficiencies

pointed out by the 2nd respondent were not such to warrant

disapproval at that stage. Despite the aforesaid findings of

the Hearing Committee, the 1st respondent, instead of taking

a final decision, referred the matter back to the respondent

No.   2    to   review   the   same    in   the   light   of    the

recommendations/ findings of the Hearing Committee

alongwith documents submitted by the petitioners and to

furnish its recommendation.
4.    On   receipt of    the   said   communication,      the   2 nd

respondent on 17.03.2017 constituted a team to carry out a

Compliance Verification Assessment of the College. The

team of Assessors instead of carrying out a compliance

verification, on 21.03.2017 conducted a regular inspection

in a random manner and instead of limiting to their scope of

reviewing the compliance of the remarks/observations of the

Hearing Committee proceeded to make a different kind of

assessment.
6
5.    It is contended that though the Compliance Inspection

Report was submitted, the Assessors required the College to

submit a representation and accordingly, the College

submitted the necessary representation to the respondent

No. 2. The Assessors, as per the stand of the petitioners,

noted certain deficiencies in their Compliance Verification.

Executive Committee of the respondent No. 2 held its

meeting on 28.04.2017 but Minutes of the meeting were not

uploaded on the official website of the respondent No. 2

until 29.05.2017 and were not communicated to the

petitioners.
6.    It is the stand of the petitioners that on 20.05.2017,

the   petitioners   approached   the   1 st   respondent   and

submitted a detailed representation on that day with regard

to Compliance Verification and deficiencies found by the

Assessors appointed by the respondent No. 2. The 1 st

respondent, by the impugned order dated 31.05.2017,

accepted the recommendation of the 2nd respondent and

rejected the scheme of permission of renewal for the 4 th

renewal (admission of the 5th batch, 150 student) MBBS

Course for the academic year 2017-18. It is alleged that the
7
order dated 31.05.2017 was communicated to the College

on 30.06.2017.
7.    A counter affidavit has been filed by MCI contending,

inter alia, that if the permission is granted after 31.05.2017

it has to be for the subsequent academic year as per order

passed by the Court in
Dr. Ashish Ranjan and others v.

Union of India
& others1 and subsequent orders passed in

the said case. The Hearing Committee, according to MCI,

was constituted by the Central Government and its

members were eminent personalities and considering the

report of Assessors, LOP for the academic year 2017-18 has

been denied. The stand that the renewal has been illegally

rejected is not correct as there are gross deficiencies. It is

the stand of the MCI that question of “open remand” and

“limited remand” does not arise. Once an inspection is

conducted by the Assessors, it has to be done wholly and

appropriately so that the standard of an institution that

imparts medical education is maintained and the said

standard is non-variable. The stand that the Assessors

report dated 21.03.2017 pointed out certain deficiencies

1 (2016) 11 SCC 225
8
which were not mentioned in the previous assessment

report dated 04.11.2016 is neither acceptable nor tenable,

for the reason it is the solemn duty of the Assessors to

ensure that there is no deficiency in the medical college and

they cannot ignore the deficiencies and, therefore, the plea

that it exceeded the mandate is not only mercurial but

wholly inconceivable.
8.   We have heard Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned senior

counsel for the petitioners, Mr. Maninder Singh, learned

Additional Solicitor General for the Union of India and Mr.

Vikas Singh, learned senior counsel for the MCI.
9.   It is submitted by Mr. Rohatgi, learned senior counsel

for the petitioners that the 1st respondent could not have

sent back the matter to the MCI as it was obligatory on its

part to take the final decision and further, it should not

have agreed with the opinion of the Executive Committee, as

the Assessors transgressed the order of remand. That apart,

submits Mr. Rohatgi, there was no justification to take a

decision on the last date, that is, 31.05.2017.
9
10.   Mr. Singh, learned senior counsel appearing for the

MCI, referring to
Section 10-A
of the Act submits that an

institution has to       maintain consistency        in imparting

education and where major deficiencies are distinctly

evident during compliance verification, an institution cannot

be allowed to lean upon the earlier assessment report.

According to Mr. Singh, institution has to remain ever

compliant and it cannot be in an oscillating position.

According to him, one day it can have faculty members and

remain dutiful to the statute and another day in total

disregard play truant with the provision, for such a

situation    would   crucify   the   sanctity   of   the   medical

education.
11.   To have a complete projection of the factual matrix, we

think it necessary to refer to the opinion of the Executive

Committee     recorded    on   22.12.2016       on   the   Regular

Verification. The said report reads as follows:
“46. Renewal of permission for MBBS course for
      5th batch (150 students) IQ City Medical College,
      Burdwan, West Bengal under West Bengal
      University of Health Sciences, Kolkata
u/s 10A
of
      the IMC Act, 1956 for the academic year
      2017-18.
10
Read: the matter with regard to renewal of
permission for MBBS course for 5th batch (150
seats) of IQ City Medical College, Burdwan, West
Bengal under West Bengal under West Bengal
University of Health Sciences, Kolkata
u/s 10A
of
the IMC Act, 1956 for the academic year
2017-18.
The Executive Committee of the Council
considered the assessment report (3rd and 4th
November, 2016) and noted the following:-
1.    Although the number of patients admitted
amounted to the bed occupancy of 80% but on
actual verification most admissions were found to
be fresh and new.
2.  Central Library: It is not air-conditioned.
Reading room for Residents is not available.
3.    Students’ Hostel: In Boys’ hostel, Visitors’
room A.C. study room with Computer & Internet,
Recreation room are not available. Hygiene in
Girls’ is very poor.
4.    Residents’ Hostel: Available accommodation
is 48 against requirement of 85.
5.   Anatomy department: Available mounted
specimens are 45.
6.   Pharmacology    department:    In     1
Demonstration room, there are only 15 chairs
with tables.
7.    RHTC: Residential accommodation is not
available.
8.   Other deficiencies as pointed out in the
assessment report.
In view of above, the Executive Committee of
the Council decided to recommend to the Central
Govt. not to renew the permission for admission
of 5th batch of 150 MBBS students at IQ City
Medical College, Burdwan, West Bengal under
11
West Bengal under West Bengal University of
      Health Sciences, Kolkata
u/s 10A
of the IMC Act,
      1956 for the academic year 2017-18.”
12.   After receipt of the report of the Executive Committee,

the 1st respondent vide communication dated 03.02.2017

enclosing thereto the letter dated 28.01.2017 of respondent

No. 2, intimated the College that:
“Subject: Renewal of Permission for admission of
      5th batch of 150 MBBs students for the academic
      session 2017-18 – Hearing to the applicant u/s
      10A(4) of IMC, 1956 – reg.
Sir/Madam


           I am directed to forward herewith a copy of
      MCI’s letter dated 28.01.2017 recommending
      disapproval in respect of renewal permission at
      your College for the academic session 2017-18.
2.   In pursuance to the provisions contained in
Section 10A(4)
of IMC Act, 1956, it has been
      decided to grant you hearing on 09.02.2017 at
      10:30 AM by the Committee constituted by this
      Ministry for this purpose in Room No. 243,
      A-Wing, Nirman Bhawan, Maulana Azad Road,
      New Delhi.
3.   You are requested to appear in person or
      depute an authorized representative to present the
      case of     your Trust/Society       vis-à-vis the
      disapproval letter of the MCI alogwith the requisite
      information in the enclosed format on the specified
      date & time failing which the scheme will be
      decided ex-parte. You are also requested to bring
      two hard copies and one softcopy of the
      information/material you propose to present
12
before the committee in the attached format in MS
      Word. You are also requested to send a letter of
      confirmation   of     participation   by    e-mail
[email protected]
.”
13.   In pursuance of the communication made by the 1 st

respondent, a team of representatives of the petitioner

College     appeared   before   the    Hearing   Committee     on

09.02.2017 and clarified point-wise compliance of the

remarks/observations made by the Assessors and produced

documentary evidence in that regard. In the second week of

March, 2017, as stated earlier, the petitioners received the

letter dated 01.03.2017 issued by the 1 st respondent

recording    the recommendations/orders passed by the

Hearing Committee. Relevant extract of the communication

containing the recommendations of the Hearing Committee

is reproduced below:
“IQ     City   Medical          There      is      no
      College, Burwan, West           deficiency of faculty,
      Bengal, [Renewal of             residents and clinical
      Permission of 5th Batch         material.
      (150 seats)]
                                               Photographic
                                      evidence submitted
                                      by      the    college
                                      suggests that the
                                      deficiencies relating
                                      to air-conditioning in
13
Central    library   /
                                           student’s       hostel,
                                           resident
                                           hostel/RHTC
                                           accommodation and
                                           specimen have been
                                           rectified.

                                           The deficiencies are
                                           not such to warrant
                                           disapproval at this
                                           stage of college.”
14.   Though the Hearing Committee had sent the aforesaid

recommendation,      yet      the    1st     respondent    thought    it

appropriate to refer the matter back to MCI and the manner

of reference is as follows:
“4    IQ City Medical              There is no deficiency
      .     College,                     of faculty, residents
            Burdwan, West                and clinical material.
Bengal                       Photographic evidence
                                         submitted      by     the
            Renewal        of            college suggests that
            Permission of 5th            the          deficiencies
            batch (150 seats)            relating               to
                                         air-conditioning       in
                                         Central          library/
                                         student’s          hostel,
                                         resident     hostel     /
                                         RHTC accommodation
                                         and specimens have
                                         been rectified.
                                         The deficiencies are
                                         not such to warrant
                                         disapproval at this
                                         stage of college.
14
2.    In view of the above, MCI is requested to
      review the above schemes in light of the
      recommendations of Hearing Committee alongwith
      documents submitted by the applicant Colleges
      and furnish its recommendation accordingly to this
      Ministry. The compliance submitted by the
      applicant College are enclosed herewith in original.”
15.   It needs to be clarified that the communication also

referred to some other colleges but we are only concerned

with the petitioner College for which we have reproduced the

relevant extract.
16.   The team of Assessors who went for compliance

verification conducted a surprise verification on 21.03.2017

and noted certain deficiencies to which we shall refer to at a

later stage.
17.   After receipt of the said report, the 1st respondent on

31.05.2017 accepted the Report of the MCI and denied LOP

for the academic year 2017-18. It is the stand of the

petitioners that the said letter was received on 21.06.2017.

Whether letter was received on that day or not is not

relevant in praesenti. What is pertinent is to appreciate the

communication dated 31.05.2017. It reads as follows:
15
“To,


        The Principal/Dean,
        IQ City Medical College,
        Savapur, Bijra Road, Jemua, Durgapur,
        West Bengal- 713206

             Subject: Renewal of permission for MBBS
        course for 5th Batch of 150 students at IQ City
        Medical College, Burdwan, West Bengal for the
        academic session 2017-18
u/s 10A
of IMC Act,
        1956 – reg.
Ref No. 12012/127/2016-ME.I(FTS.3084749)
        dated 31st May, 2017.
Sir,

              Drawing reference to the above subject you
        are directed to submit a present status report of
        the deficiencies and recommendation of Medical
        Council of India that were not complied by your
        Institute and for which the Central Government
        has directed you NOT to admit any students in
        MBBS course for academic year 2017-18.
You are further directed to submit Action
        Taken Report in this regard immediately.”
18.
In
Dr. Ashish Ranjan and others
(supra), the Court,

dealing with establishment of medical college, has stated

thus:
“2. In the “Establishment of Medical College
        Regulations, 1999”, in “SCHEDULE FOR RECEIPT
        OF APPLICATIONS FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF
        NEW MEDICAL COLLEGES AND PROCESSING OF
        THE     APPLICATIONS        BY   THE      CENTRAL
        GOVERNMENT AND THE MEDICAL COUNCIL OF
        INDIA” the following shall be substituted as under:
16
TIME    SCHEDULE    FOR   RECEIPT  OF
  APPLICATIONS FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW
  MEDICAL      COLLEGES/RENEWAL      OF
  PERMISSION AND PROCESSING OF THE
  APPLICATIONS    BY     THE    CENTRAL
  GOVERNMENT AND THE MEDICAL COUNCIL
  OF INDIA

Sl.      Stage of processing           Last Date
Nos.
1.   Receipt of applications by Between          15th
     the Central Government        June to 7th July
                                   (both        days
                                   inclusive) of any
                                   year
2.   Forwarding application by By 15th July
     the Central Government to
     the Medical Council of
     India
3.   Technical           scrutiny, By            15th
     assessment               and December
     recommendations for letter
     of permission by the
     Medical Council of India
4.   Receipt                    of Two      months
     reply/compliance from the from receipt of
     applicant by the Central recommendatio
     Government        and     for n from MCI but
     personal hearing thereto, if not beyond 31st
     any, and forwarding of January
     compliance by the Central
     Government to the Medical
     Council of India
5.   Final recommendations for By 30th April
     the letter of permission by
     the Medical Council of
     India
6.   Issue     of     letter    of By 31st May
     permission by the Central
17
Government


        Note 1.- In case of renewal of permission, the
      applicants shall submit the application to the
      Medical Council of India by 15th July.”
19.   In Manohar Lal Sharma v. Medical Council of

India and others2, it has been held:
“19. MCI on the basis of the reports, regular and
      compliance, is legally obliged to form an opinion
      with regard to the capacity of the college to
      provide necessary facilities in respect of staff,
      equipments, accommodation, training and other
      facilities to ensure proper functioning of the
      medical college or for increase of admission
      capacity.”
20.   Thereafter, the Court referred to
Section 10-A
of the

Act and the Establishment of Medical College Regulations,

1999 framed thereunder and ruled:
“24. Surprise inspection, in this case, was
      conducted to ascertain whether compliance
      report could be accepted and to ascertain
      whether the deficiencies pointed out in the
      regular inspection were rectified or not. By
      pointing out the deficiencies, MCI is giving an
      opportunity to the College to rectify the
      deficiencies, if any noticed by the inspection
      team. It is the duty of the College to submit the
      compliance      report,   after   rectifying  the
      deficiencies. MCI can conduct a surprise
      inspection to ascertain whether the deficiencies

2 (2013) 10 SCC 60
18
had been rectified and the compliance report be
      accepted or not.”

 Eventually, the Court held:
“27. We are also of the view that such an order is
      not vitiated by violation of principles of natural
      justice, especially, when no allegation of bias or
      mala fide has been attributed against the two
      doctors who constituted the inspection team,
      which conducted the surprise inspection on
      6-7-2013. When the inspection team consists of
      two doctors of unquestionable integrity and
      reputation, who are experts in the field, there is
      no reason to discard the report of such
      inspection. In such circumstances, we are of the
      view that MCI has rightly passed the order
      rejecting the approval for renewal of permission
      for the third batch of 150 MBBS students granted
      for the academic year 2013-2014.”
21.
In
Medical Council of India v. Kalinga Institute of

Medical Sciences (KIMS
) and others3, the Court rejected

the stand of the respondents therein. It observed:
“24. Medical education must be taken very
      seriously and when an expert body certifies that
      the facilities in a medical college are inadequate,
      the courts are not equipped to take a different
      view in the matter except for very cogent
      jurisdictional reasons such as mala fides of the
      Inspection Team, ex facie perversity in the
      inspection report, jurisdictional error on the part
      of MCI, etc. Under no circumstance should the
      High Court examine the report as an appellate
      body — this is simply not the function of the High
      Court. In the present case there was no ground
3 (2016) 11 SCC 530
19
made out at law for setting aside the report of the
      Inspection Team.
x         x          x          x           x
26. It appears to us that both MCI and the
      Central     Government     each   having  twice
      considered the inspection report submitted by
      neutral Medical Professors, with the Central
      Government having given a personal hearing to
      KIMS on the second occasion (and perhaps on
      the first occasion as well) the matter ought to
      have been given a quietus by the High Court at
      least for the academic year 2015-2016.”
22.   Be it noted, in the said case, the two-Judge Bench took

note of the status of the Assessors and echoed the note that

was sounded in Manohar Lal Sharma (supra) which we

think it apt to reproduce:
“6. Our attention was also drawn to the decision
      of this Court in Manohar Lal Sharma v. Medical
      Council of India (supra) wherein it was held that
      since the inspection is taken by “doctors of
      unquestionable integrity and reputation, who are
      experts in the field, there is no reason to discard
      the report of such an inspection”. In the present
      appeal, there is no allegation made by KIMS of
      any mala fides of the inspection team or any
      perversity in the inspection report and hence,
      there is no question of challenging the
      conclusions of a neutral, randomly selected
      inspection team in its assessment.”
23.   In the case at hand, what is urged by Mr. Rohatgi,

learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners, is that
20
Assessors travelled beyond the order of remand and that

singularly makes the inspection perverse and thereby

vulnerable. At this juncture, it is seemly to refer the

remarks of the Assessors which relate to the following

aspects:
“a. Deficiency of faculty is 15.90% as detailed in
      the report.
b. Shortage of Residents is 25.88% as detailed in
      the report.
c. On the day of inspection the number shown is
      not tallying with number actually present in the
      hospital. At random verification at 3, OPD
      registration counters at 12.45 pm, is only 110
      (40,30 and 40 new patients). Many patients in
      the ward are admitted with minor complaints like
      cough, cold, itching, and the case sheets are not
      filled up, the bed occupancy is not tallying with
      number submitted.
d. Students’ Hostels: In Boys’ hostel, Visitors’
      room, A.C. Study room with Computer &
      Internet, Recreation room are not available.
      e. In Anatomy department, some specimens are
      not mounted but kept in buckets.”
24.   It has also found certain other deficiencies with regard

to casualty attendance, operating work, etc.     The College

has replied to the same which is as follows:
“In connection with the above subject I would like
      to submit the following paragraph for your kind
      consideration.
1.  That during the last MCI inspection held on
      3 and 4th Nov 2016 our Faculty & Resident
       rd
21
deficiency was 2.18 and 3.38 respectively.
However on 21.03.2017 surprise inspection and
     due to their personal commitment they could not
     come by 11 AM and could not appear before the
     assessors.
2.   Secondly, the State NEET Post Graduate
     counseling and the Diplomat in National Board
     (DNB) counseling in process, many of the senior
     and Junior Residents and few faculty members
     had gone to KOLKATA for their counseling hence
     were not able to appear in the inspection
     conducted on 21.03.2017.
3.   Thirdly most of these faculties and residents
     are working with us since long time and kind of
     documentary proof for the same can be
     submitted, but because of the counseling they
     were unable to make it.
4.   It will not be out of place to   mention here
     that our faculties and residents      had gone to
     attend medical camps in suburban      areas as such
     they could not reach by 11 AM to      appear before
     the assessors.
Hence their absence may kindly be considered to
     offset the faculty and resident deficiency.”
25. As the facts have unrolled, there is no dispute that the

petitioner College had submitted a scheme for 2017-18 for

intake of 150 candidates. There is also controversy that

there was an inspection and the Hearing Committee had

given certain recommendations and the Central Government

thought it appropriate to send it back to the MCI for the

compliance verification report.
Section 10-A
of the Act deals
22
with permission for establishment of new medical college,

new course of study, etc. and sub-section (7) thereof deals

with as to what steps have to be taken by MCI while making

its recommendation to the Central Government either

approving or disapproving. Sub-section (7) reads as follows:
“10-A. Permission for establishment of new
     medical college, new course of study, etc.—
     (1)-(6)     *    *     *
     (7)     The    Council,      while    making      its
     recommendations         under     clause   (b)     of
     sub-section (3) and the Central Government,
     while passing an order, either approving or
     disapproving the scheme under sub-section (4),
     shall have due regard to the following factors,
     namely—
(a) whether the proposed medical college or the
     existing medical college seeking to open a new or
     higher course of study or training, would be in a
     position to offer the minimum standards of
     medical education as prescribed by the Council
     under Section 19A or, as the case may be, under
Section 20
in the case of postgraduate medical
     education.
(b) whether the person seeking to establish a
     medical college or the existing medical college
     seeking to open a new or higher course of study
     or training or to increase its admission capacity
     has adequate financial resources;
(c) whether necessary facilities in respect of staff,
     equipment, accommodation, training and other
     facilities to ensure proper functioning of the
     medical college or conducting the new course or
     study or training or accommodating the
     increased admission capacity, have been
     provided or would be provided within the
     time-limit specified in the scheme;
23
(d) whether adequate hospital facilities, having
      regard to the number of students likely to attend
      such medical college or course of study or
      training or as a result of the increased admission
      capacity, have been provided or would be
      provided within the time-limit specified in the
      scheme;
(e) whether any arrangement has been made or
      programme drawn to impart proper training to
      students likely to attend such medical college or
      course of study or training by persons having the
      recognised medical qualifications;
(f) the requirement of manpower in the field of
      practice of medicine; and
(g) any other factors as may be prescribed.”
26.   In Manohar Lal Sharma (supra), the Court has

referred to
Indian Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 2010
which confers powers on the Board of Governors as per
Section 3-B(b)
. The said provision reads thus:
“3-B. Certain modifications of the Act.—
      During the period when the Council stands
      superseded—
                         * *     *
(b) The Board of Governors shall—
(i) exercise the powers and discharge the
      functions of the Council under this Act and for
      this purpose, the provisions of this Act shall have
      effect subject to the modification that references
      therein to the Council shall be construed as
      references to the Board of Governors;
(ii)   grant    independently    permission      for
      establishment of new medical colleges or opening
      a new or higher course of study or training or
      increase in admission capacity in any course of
      study or training referred to in Section 10A or
      giving the person or college concerned a
24
reasonable opportunity of being heard as
      provided under Section 10A without prior
      permission of the Central Government under that
      section, including exercise of the power to finally
      approve or disapprove the same; and
(iii) dispose of the matters pending with the
      Central Government under Section 10A upon
      receipt of the same from it.”
27.   Interpreting
Section 3-B(b)
, the Court held thus:
“22. MCI, with the previous sanction by the
      Central Government, in exercise of its powers
      conferred by
Sections 10-A
and
33
of the Indian
      Medical Council Act, 1956, made the Regulations
      known as the Establishment of Medical College
      Regulations, 1999.
Regulation 8
of the 1999
      Regulations deals with grant of permission for
      establishment of new college. Application/
      Scheme submitted by the applicants is evaluated
      and the verification takes place by conducting
      physical inspection by the team of inspectors of
      MCI. The Board of Governors may grant LoP to
      the applicant for making admissions in the first
      year of MBBS course in the medical college and
      the permission is renewed every year subject to
      the college achieving the yearly target mentioned
      in “Minimum Standard Requirements for the
      Medical College for 150 Admissions Annually
      Regulations,    1999”.    Schedule     I   of  the
      abovementioned       Regulation     provides    for
      accommodation in the medical college and its
      teaching hospital. Schedule II deals with
      equipment required for various departments in
      the college and hospital. The requirements are
      statutorily prescribed and, therefore, the Board of
      Governors has no power to dilute the statutory
      requirements mentioned in the abovementioned
      Regulations.”
25
28.   At this stage, we may usefully refer to the directions

enumerated in
Royal Medical Trust (Registered) and

another v. Union of India
and another4, wherein a

three-Judge Bench was dealing with justifiability of the

communications       issued   by   the   Central   Government

recommending disapproval of applications preferred in

respect of Medical Colleges of the applicants for the

academic year 2014-15. The Court, referring to
Section 10-A
of the Act and the Regulations framed by the MCI and

further adverting to various aspects, ruled:
“31. MCI and the Central Government have been
      vested with monitoring powers under Section 10A
      and the Regulations. It is expected of these
      authorities to discharge their functions well
      within the statutory confines as well as in
      conformity with the Schedule to the Regulations.
      If there is inaction on their part or
      non-observance of the time schedule, it is bound
      to have adverse effect on all concerned. The
      affidavit filed on behalf of the Union of India
      shows that though the number of seats had
      risen, obviously because of permissions granted
      for establishment of new colleges, because of
      disapproval of renewal cases the resultant effect
      was net loss in terms of number of seats available
      for the academic year. It thus not only caused
      loss of opportunity to the students community
      but at the same time caused loss to the society in
      terms of less number of doctors being available.
      MCI and the Central Government must therefore

4 (2015) 10 SCC 19
26
show due diligence right from the day when the
applications are received. The Schedule giving
various     stages    and    time-limits   must
accommodate every possible eventuality and at
the same time must comply with the
requirements of observance of natural justice at
various levels. In our view the Schedule must
ideally take care of:
(A) Initial assessment of the application at the
first level should comprise of checking necessary
requirements such as essentiality certificate,
consent for affiliation and physical features like
land and hospital requirement. If an applicant
fails to fulfil these requirements, the application
on the face of it, would be incomplete and be
rejected. Those who fulfil the basic requirements
would be considered at the next stage.
   (B) Inspection should then be conducted by
the Inspectors of MCI. By very nature such
inspection must have an element of surprise.
Therefore sufficient time of about three to four
months ought to be given to MCI to cause
inspection at any time and such inspection
should normally be undertaken latest by
January. Surprise inspection would ensure that
the required facilities and infrastructure are
always in place and not borrowed or put in
temporarily.
(C) Intimation of the result or outcome of the
inspection would then be communicated. If the
infrastructure and facilities are in order, the
medical college concerned should be given
requisite permission/renewal. However, if there
are any deficiencies or shortcomings, MCI must,
after pointing out the deficiencies, grant to the
college concerned sufficient time to report
compliance.
(D) If compliance is reported and the applicant
states that the deficiencies stand removed, MCI
must cause compliance verification. It is possible
27
that such compliance could be accepted even
      without actual physical verification but that
      assessment be left entirely to the discretion of
      MCI and the Central Government. In cases where
      actual physical verification is required, MCI and
      the Central Government must cause such
      verification before the deadline.
(E) The result of such verification if positive in
      favour of the medical college concerned, the
      applicant     ought    to    be    given   requisite
      permission/renewal. But if the deficiencies still
      persist or had not been removed, the applicant
      will stand disentitled so far as that academic year
      is concerned.”                    [Emphasis added]
29.   On a reading of
Section 10-A
of the Act, Rules and the

Regulations, as has been referred to in Manohar Lal

Sharma (supra), and the view expressed in
Royal Medical

Trust
(supra), it would be inapposite to restrict the power of

the MCI by laying down as an absolute principle that once

the Central Government sends back the matter to MCI for

compliance verification and the Assessors visit the College

they shall only verify the mentioned items and turn a

Nelson’s eye even if they perceive certain other deficiencies.

It would be playing possum. The direction of the Central

Government for compliance verification report should not be

construed as a limited remand as is understood within the

framework
of Code of Civil Procedure
or any other law. The
28
distinction between the principles of open remand and

limited remand, we are disposed to think, is not attracted.
Be it clearly stated, the said principle also does not flow

from the authority in
Royal Medical Trust
(supra). In this

context, the objectivity of the Hearing Committee and the

role of the Central Government assume great significance.

The real compliant institutions should not always be kept

under the sword of Damocles. Stability can be brought by

affirmative role played by the Central Government. And the

stability and objectivity would be perceptible if reasons are

ascribed while expressing a view and absence of reasons

makes the decision sensitively susceptible.
30.   Having said this, we are not inclined to close the

matter. The petitioners have been running the College since

2013-14. We have been apprised that students who have

been continuing their education shall continue for 2017-18.

As we find the order of the Central Government is not a

reasoned one. It is obligatory on its part to ascribe reasons.

For the said purpose, we would like the Central Government

to afford a further opportunity of hearing to the petitioners

and also take the assistance of the newly constituted
29
Oversight Committee as per the order dated July 18, 2017

passed by the Constitution Bench in Writ Petition (Civil) No.

408 of 2017 titled
Amma Chandravati Educational and

Charitable Trust and others v. Union of India and

another
and thereafter take a decision within two weeks.

Needless to say, the decision shall contain reasons.     We

repeat at the cost of repetition that the decision must be an

informed one.
31.   Before parting with the case for the present, it is

warrantable to state that “health”, a six letter word, when

appositely spelt and pronounced, makes the body and mind

holistic and an individual feels victorious. Apart from habit

and nature, some external aid is necessary.     And that is

why, it is essential to have institutions which are worthy to

impart medical education so that the society has not only

qualified doctors but doctors with impeccable and sensitive

qualities. A lapse has the potentiality to invite a calamity.

Not for nothing, Hippocrates had said, “A wise man ought to

realize that health is his most valuable possession.”

Therefore, the emphasis is on the compliant institutions

that can really educate doctors by imparting quality
30
education so that they will have the inherent as well as

cultivated attributes of excellence.
32.   List the matter on 24th August, 2017 awaiting the

decision of the Central Government.
………………………….J.
                                       (Dipak Misra)



                                        ………………………….J.
                                       (Amitava Roy)


                                       ………………………….J.
                                       (A.M. Khanwilkar)
New Delhi.
August 01, 2017