[Cites
20
, Cited by
27
]
Supreme Court of India
J. Vasanthi vs N. Ramani Kanthammal (D) Rep. By Lrs. on 10 August, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2017 SUPREME COURT 3813, 2017 (11) SCC 852, AIR 2017 SC (CIVIL) 2561, (2018) 1 MAD LW 351, (2018) 1 ORISSA LR 981, (2018) 1 ALLMR 423 (SC), (2017) 4 ICC 6, (2017) 3 ALL RENTCAS 33, (2018) 2 CIVLJ 828, (2017) 137 REVDEC 667, (2017) 4 RECCIVR 407, (2017) 8 SCALE 632, (2017) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 471, (2017) 177 ALLINDCAS 7 (SC), (2017) 124 ALL LR 590, (2017) 5 ALL WC 4892
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.3396 OF 2017
                                  (Arising out of SLP (C) No.33692 of 2016)


                         J. Vasanthi & Ors.                           … Appellant(s)

                                                   VERSUS

                         N. Ramani Kanthammal (D) Rep. by             …Respondent(s)
                         LRs. & Ors.



                                              JUDGMENT
Dipak Misra, J.
This appeal, by special leave, is at the instance of the

                         appellants calling in question the legal propriety of the

                         judgment and order dated 16 th March, 2016 passed by the

                         High Court of Judicature at Madras, Bench at Madurai in

                         C.R.P. (MD) No. 847 of 2015 (PD), whereby the High Court

                         has affirmed the order passed by the Principal District
Signature Not Verified
Judge, Dindigul in I.A. No. 94 of 2014 in Original Suit No. 20
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
of 2014 rejecting the prayer of the applicant/defendant for
Date: 2017.08.10
14:30:09 IST
Reason:
dismissal of the Original Suit on the ground of payment of
2
inadequate court fee by placing reliance on a wrong provision

of the
Tamil Nadu Court Fees and Suit Valuation Act, 1955
(for brevity, “the Act”).
2. The facts in a nutshell are that the “A Schedule property”,

as appended to the plaint, was purchased by the plaintiff’s

father, late Raja Chidambara Reddiyar from one Balasundara

Iyyer on 12.08.1943 through document No. 412/1943 and

also “B schedule property” was purchased by him from one

Swaminatha Iyyer on 09.08.1943 through document No.

238/1943. After the purchase, he got the patta transferred in

his name and paid the government taxes and enjoyed the

properties. On 21.02.1948 through document No. 596/1948

plaintiff’s father made a sale of the A and B Schedule

properties along with some other properties in favour of

Sellammal w/o Rangoon Krishnasamy Reddiyar. As averred

in the plaint, the A and B schedule properties and other

properties which were sold, were again purchased by the

father of the plaintiff on 19.04.1948 through document No.

1469/1948 from Sellammal and, thereafter, changed the

patta in his name bearing patta Nos. 621, 705, 2032 and

2133, and held the suit A and B Schedule properties during
3
his life time.     As pleaded, the plaintiff’s father died on

07.10.1986 leaving behind the plaintiff and her sister Gowri

as his legal heirs.     The 1st defendant is the son of the

plaintiff.   The 2nd defendant is the husband of the 3rd

defendant and the 4th defendant is their son. The 5th

defendant is the father of 3 rd and 6th defendants and

father-in-law of the 2nd defendant.     The suit was basically

filed for seeking declaration that the sale deeds dated

30.08.1991,      23.03.1993,    04.01.1994,    10.06.2002   and

11.03.2004 as per document Nos. Document Nos.922/1991,

Document         No.330/1993,       Document     No.2395/1994,

Document No.1239/2002 and Document No. 214/2004,

respectively as null and void and for permanent injunction.
3.    The further narration of the factual score is that as

regards the “A Schedule property”, the plaintiff asked for a

loan of Rs. 1 lakh from the 2 nd defendant, Janakiraman, who

in turn, suggested that an agreement for sale should be

made in favour of his brother-in-law, the 6 th defendant,

Saravanaprabhu. The plaintiff agreed to make an agreement

for sale as proposed by the 2 nd defendant. As per the said

agreement an amount of Rs. 50,000/- was received by the
4
plaintiff and her son, the 1 st defendant and executed an

agreement for sell.
4.   It is claimed that at that time, the 2 nd defendant

obtained signatures in blank papers. Since the document

was for security which was made in favour of the 6 th

defendant on the request of the 2 nd defendant, no action was

taken regarding document No. 805/91.             It is further

contended that the A and B Schedule properties were

maintained by the plaintiff and her sister in the name of their

father only. When the plaintiff was making arrangements for

partition of the A and B Schedule properties on 10.03.2011,

it came to their knowledge that the defendant Nos. 2 to 6 had

created fabricated documents on the basis of the document

No.805/91. It is urged in the plaint that the 2 nd defendant

was a Sub-Registrar and taking advantage of his position the

sale agreement made in favour of the 6 th defendant, who is

the brother-in-law of the 2 nd defendant, fabricated sale deeds

were created by the defendant Nos. 2 to 6 as if the plaintiff

had executed the sale deed in favour of the 6 th defendant.
5.   The defendants filed I.A. No.94 of 2014 in O.S. No.20 of

2014 praying for directing the plaintiff to pay the court fees
5
under
Section 40
of the Act failing which to reject the plaint

since     the    plaint     was     highly     undervalued.       The     said

application for rejection of the plaint preferred under
Order

VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure
was dismissed by

the     Principal      District    Judge,      Dindigul,   as    mentioned

hereinbefore.         The trial Judge, while dismissing the I.A.,

relied upon the decisions in G. Seethadevi v. R. Govindaraj

& Ors.1 , P. Thillai Selvan v. Shyna Paul & Anr.2, and

Siddha Construction (P) Ltd. Rep. By its Power Agent,

Anjay       Sharma,        No.32         Guruswamy       Road,     Chetpet,

Chennai – 600031 v. M. Shanmugam & Ors.3. Be it

clarified that the original plaintiff died during the pendency

of the case, i.e., on 15.01.2015, and her legal heirs have been

brought on record.
6.      Being     dissatisfied      with      the   aforesaid    order,   the

appellants preferred C.R.P. (MD) No. 847 of 2015 (PD). It was

contended before the High Court that the learned trial Judge

has completely erred by rejecting the prayer inasmuch as the

plaintiff was seeking declaration for cancellation of the sale

deeds and hence, she was liable to pay the court fee under
1       (2011) 6 MLJ 399
2       (2014) 7 MLJ 732
3       (5) CTC 255 : (2006) 4 MLJ 924
6
Section 40
of the Act and not under
Section 25 (d)
of the said

Act.   It was also urged that the trial court has completely

erred by placing reliance on Siddha Construction (supra).

The said stand of the revisionists was resisted by the

opposite parties contending, inter alia, that when a plea had

been advanced that she had not executed any sale deed and

the documents were fabricated, then the court fee is payable

as per
Section 25(d)
and
Section 40
of the Act is not

attracted. That apart, it was also urged that the payment of

the court fee is a mixed question of fact and law and,

therefore, the plaint was not liable to be rejected by

entertaining a petition as regards evaluation of the suit

property. It is worthy to mention here that the issue of

limitation was raised before the trial court which was not

accepted as a ground for rejection of the plaint and the High

Court concurred with the same. We do not intend to address

the issue of limitation as that can be dealt with at the stage

of trial of the suit.
7.     The High Court, as the impugned judgment would

show, referred to the averments in the plaint which were to

the effect that the sale deeds were not executed by their
7
predecessor-in-interest   and       she   had   not   received

consideration and, therefore, the principle enunciated in G.

Seethadevi (supra) is squarely applicable to them. The High

Court further observed that on a perusal of the plaint, it is

manifest that the plaintiff had denied execution of the sale

deeds and in that context the court fee payable could be

under
Section 25(d)
and not under
Section 40
of the Act.
8.
Ms. V. Mohana
, learned senior counsel appearing for

the appellants submits that the court fees has to be paid

under
Section 40
of the Act when the plaintiff has sought

declaration for treating the documents as null and void,

which basically amounts to seeking the relief of cancellation

of the said documents. It is urged by her that when the

requisite court fees as payable under the Act is not paid, the

court has no other option but to reject the plaint and the

said factum is obvious from the assertions in the plaint.
9.   Mr. G. Gowthaman and Mr. P. Soma Sundaram, learned

counsel for the respondent Nos. 1, 5, 6, 7 and 9 to 14 in

support of the order passed by the High Court contend that

the reasons ascribed by the High Court are absolutely

impregnable and in a case of the present nature, court fee
8
has to be paid under
Section 25(d)
of the Act. It is further

submitted by the learned counsel for the respondents that

the sale deeds executed in favour of the defendants were

fraudulent ones, for they were never executed by the original

plaintiff and hence, the court fees is required to be paid

under
Section 25(d)
of the Act.
10.
Section 40
of the Act reads as under:
“40. Suits for cancellation of decrees, etc.-- (1)
     In a suit for cancellation of a decree for money or
     other property having a money value, or other
     document which purports or operates to create,
     declare, assign, limit or extinguish, whether in
     present or in future, any right, title or interest in
     money, movable or immovable property, fee shall
     be computed on the value of the subject-matter of
     the suit, and such value shall be deemed to be--
if the whole decree or other document is
     sought to be cancelled, the amount or value of
     the property for which the decree was passed or
     other document was executed;
if a part of the decree or other document is
     sought to be cancelled, such part of the amount
     or value of the property.
(2) If the decree or other document is such that
     the liability under it cannot be split up and the
     relief claimed relates only to a particular item of
     property belonging to the plaintiff or to the
     plaintiff's share in any such property, fee shall be
     computed on the value of such property or share
     or on the amount of the decree, whichever is less.
Explanation.-- A suit to set aside an award shall
9
be deemed to be a suit to set aside a decree
     within the meaning of this section.”
                                   [Emphasis added]
11. The singular issue that gains significance in this case is

that the original plaintiff was a party to the transaction.
Section 40
of the Act, as we notice, provides that in a suit for

cancellation of a document, the court fee has to be computed

on the value of the subject-matter of the suit and such value

shall be deemed to be the whole decree or other document

which is sought to be cancelled, the amount or value of the

property for which the decree was passed or other document

was executed. It also spelt out that a part of the decree or

other document is to be cancelled, such part of the amount

or value of the property. On a careful scrutiny of the

provision, it is limpid that it refers to the decree or other

document and in that context, it uses the word “value”. The

stand of the respondents before the High Court as well as

before this Court is that the documents were sought to be

declared as null and void on the ground of fraud and,

therefore,
Section 40
of the Act would not be attracted. In

this regard, we may notice certain decisions of the High

Court of Madras.
10
12. In Siddha Construction (supra), the learned single

Judge has opined that for the value of the Court Fee payable

by the plaintiff the averments in the plaint alone are to be

considered. In the said case, it was observed that the plain-

tiffs had not executed the sale deed and did not receive any

sale consideration and they had not alienated the property in

favour of any one. In the said case, the third defendant was

the petitioner in the revision petition. The suit was filed to

declare that the sale deed executed by the first defendant in

favour of the third defendant was null and void. The High

Court referred to the decision in Alamelu v. Manickammal4

wherein it has been held that the plaintiff is not a party to

the sale deed and when he seeks only a declaration that the

impugned sale deed is null and void, it is subject to the value

of the suit under
Section 25(d)
of the Act. The learned single

Judge also quoted a passage from Gnanambal Ammal v.

Kannappa Pillai5 wherein it has been held:
“Where a plaintiff's case is that a document is sham
     and nominal, it need not be set aside, and the suit
     for relief on that footing is not one for cancellation,
     so as to attract the application of Section 40 of the
     Madras Court-fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1955.
     But even in such a case, if the plaintiff sues for can-
4    1979 (II) M.L.J. 8
5    1959(I) M.L.J. 353
11
cellation he would have to pay Court-fee on that re-
lief, whether it is necessary to have the deed can-
        celled or not.”
13. The learned counsel for the appellant would submit that

the said decision is distinguishable as in the said case the

plaintiffs were not parties to the impugned sale deed.
14.     In G. Seethadevi (supra), the High Court followed the

principle stated in Siddha Construction (supra) and held

thus:
“In the case on hand, it is to be seen that the case of
        the Petitioner is that she has not executed Power of
        Attorney in favour of one Bhaskaran so as to exe-
        cute the sale deed in favour of third parties. That
        apart, it is contended that the said Bhaskaran is
        unknown to the Petitioner and he is an employee of
        the first Respondent in his petrol bunk. When such
        statement has been made in the plaint, the court fee
        that has to be payable on the relief that has been
        sought for by the Petitioner viz., for declaration that
        the sale deed dated 25.04.2008 is null and void and
        not binding on the Petitioner, under
Section 25(d)
of
        the Act and not under
Section 40
of the Act. The Pe-
        titioner has not admitted the execution of Power of
        Attorney. The court below is not justified in direct-
        ing the Petitioner to pay the court fee under
Section
        40
of the Act. In the case relied on by the Respon-
dents, the Power of Attorney was admitted by the
        Respondents/Plaintiffs therein and hence, this
        Court in the said decision has directed the party to
        pay the Court Fee under
Section 40
of the Act.”
12
15.
In
K. Palaniswamy and another v. S.B. Subramani
and another6, the learned single Judge took note of the facts

that the plaintiff had filed a suit for declaring the sale deeds

executed by the first defendant in favour of the second and

third defendants as null and void and unenforceable and

would not bind the plaintiff and for consequential permanent

injunction   and an application under Order VII Rule 11 of

Civil Procedure Code (
CPC
) was filed as proper court fee had

not been paid and the suit was not properly valued and it de-

served to be rejected.   In the said case, the second respon-

dent was the power of attorney of the first respondent and af-

ter revocation of power of attorney, he had executed the sale

deed in favour of the defendants. The High Court took note

of the fact that when the first respondent was not a party to

the document, the relief sought for in the suit would not

come under
Section 40
of the Act and accordingly, dismissed

the civil revision.
16.
Chellakannu v. Kolanji7
, dealt with a civil revision

that was filed by the plaintiff assailing the order of the trial

court directing the plaintiff to pay the court fee under
Section

6
2007 (1) CTC 300
7    AIR 2005 Mad 405
13
40 of the Act. The narration of the facts in the plaint was ad-

verted to by the High Court and for proper appreciation of

the controversy that has been raised in the instant case, we

may reproduce the same:
“… the Suit Property belonged to his Father-
     Pichamuthu. Pichamuthu had two wives, through
     whom he had Three Sons. Earlier, there was Parti-
     tion in the family of the Plaintiff on 04.08.1971
     wherein the Plaintiff and the Sons through the First
     Wife have partitioned the family properties. There
     was further partition between the Plaintiff and his
     Brothers in 1977. Item 1 of the Suit Property was
     allotted to one Poomalai. Items 2 and 4 -
     S.Nos.155/3 and 339/13A were allotted to the
     Plaintiff. First Defendant is the Wife of Shanmugam.
     Third Defendant has been keeping the First Defen-
     dant as his concubine. The Third Item was allotted
     to the Plaintiff's Sister. The Third Defendant is the
     Third Party. With the help of the First Defendant,
     the Third Defendant secured the Suit Properties -
     Item Nos.1 to 3 under a false representation that
     the Plaintiff is executing a Will in favour of the First
     Defendant. On that mis-representation, Plaintiff's
     thumb impression was obtained and two Sale Deeds
     dated 05.06.1995 and 23.08.1995 are said to have
     been obtained. Those Sale Deeds obtained from the
     Plaintiff under false representation is not binding on
     the Plaintiff. Hence, the Plaintiff has filed the Suit
     for Declaration that the Sale Deeds are not binding
     on him and for Permanent Injunction, restraining
     the Defendants from in any way interfering with the
     Plaintiff's peaceful possession and enjoyment of the
     Plaint Schedule Items I, II and IV.”
17. The further stand taken by the plaintiff was that the

sale deeds were obtained from him under fraud and hence,
14
suit had been filed for declaration that the sale deeds were

not binding on the plaintiff and since the suit was not filed

for cancellation of the sale deeds, the defendants could not

insist the plaintiff to pay the court fee under
Section 40
of

the Act. The trial court recorded a find that the sale deeds

had been executed by the plaintiff himself and prima facie

the sale deeds were binding on the executants and when

there is a prayer to declare the sale deeds as invalid, it tanta-
mounts to seeking cancellation of sale deeds and therefore,

court fee payable would be governed by
Section 40
of the Act.
18. The High Court posed two questions, namely, (i)

whether in the Suit filed for Declaration that the Sale Deeds

are invalid, Court Fee paid under
Section 25(d)
of the Act is

incorrect and (ii) whether the impugned order directing the

Plaintiff to pay the Court Fee under
Section 40
of the Act suf-

fers from any infirmity warranting interference. Dealing with

the factual matrix, the High Court observed:
“Thus, the Plaintiff himself is a party to the Sale
     Deed; when the Party himself seeks to get rid of the
     Sale Deeds in substance it amounts to Cancellation
     of Decree. The Plaintiff might seek to avoid the Sale
     Deeds if he is not a party to the Sale Deeds. But,
     since the Plaintiff himself is a party to the Sale
     Deeds before he is suing for any relief, the Plaintiff
15
must first obtain the cancellation of the Sale
     Deeds.”

And again:
“The word "Cancellation" implies that the persons
     suing should be a party to the document. Strangers
     are not bound by the documents and are not
     obliged to sue for cancellation. When the party to
     the document is suing, challenging the document,
     he must first obtain cancellation before getting any
     further relief. Whether cancellation is prayed for or
     not or even it is impliedly sought for in substance,
     the Suit is one for cancellation. in the present case,
     when the Plaintiff attacks the Sale Deeds as having
     been obtained from him under fraud and mis-repre-
     sentation the Plaintiff cannot seek for any further
     relief without setting aside the Sale Deeds.
x          x         x          x         x

     The allegation on the Plaint in substance mounts to
     cancellation of the document. Though the prayer is
     couched in the form of seeking declaration that the
     document is not valid and not binding, the relief in
     substance indirectly amounts to seeking for cancel-
     lation of the Sale Deed. Learned District Munsif was
     right in ordering payment of Court Fee under Sec-
     tion 40 of the Act. This Revision Petition has no
     merits and is bound to fail.”


     Being of this view, the High Court dismissed the civil re-
vision and directed the plaintiff to pay court fee with further

stipulation that unless paid, plaint would stand rejected.
19. To appreciate the decision in P. Thillai Selvan (supra),

we have carefully gone through the same and we find the
16
High Court has referred to
Order VII Rule 11 CPC
, adverted

to the issue of payment of court fee both as a question of fact

and law and opined that the trial court has rightly rejected

the petition. Thus, the said decision does not really deal with
Section 40
of the Act.
20.
In this context, we may profitably refer to the pro-

nouncement of this Court in Suhrid Singh alias
Sardool

Singh v. Randhir Singh and others
8. In the said case, the

Court referred to several elaborate prayers contained in the

plaint and summarized the same. The Court took note of the

fact that the issue had come before the trial court which had

come to hold that prayers relating to the sale deeds

amounted to seeking cancellation of the sale deeds and,

therefore, ad volerem court fee was payable on the sale con-

sideration in respect of the sale deeds. The said view was af-

firmed in the revision. The Court addressed the core issue

pertaining to court fee payable in regard to the prayer for a

declaration that the sale deeds were void and not “binding on

the coparcenary”, and for the consequential relief of joint

possession and injunction. After referring to the provisions

8    (2010) 12 SCC 112
17
of the
Court Fees Act, 1870
as amended in Punjab (as the

controversy arose from the High Court of Punjab and

Haryana), the Court held:
“Where the executant of a deed wants it to be an-
     nulled, he has to seek cancellation of the deed. But
     if a non-executant seeks annulment of a deed, he
     has to seek a declaration that the deed is invalid, or
     non est, or illegal or that it is not binding on him.
     The difference between a prayer for cancellation and
     declaration in regard to a deed of transfer/con-
     veyance, can be brought out by the following illus-
     tration relating to A and B, two brothers. A executes
     a sale deed in favour of C. Subsequently A wants to
     avoid the sale. A has to sue for cancellation of the
     deed. On the other hand, if B, who is not the execu-
     tant of the deed, wants to avoid it, he has to sue for
     a declaration that the deed executed by A is
     invalid/void and non est/illegal and he is not bound
     by it. In essence both may be suing to have the deed
     set aside or declared as non-binding. But the form
     is different and court fee is also different. If A, the
     executant of the deed, seeks cancellation of the
     deed, he has to pay ad valorem court fee on the con-
     sideration stated in the sale deed. If B, who is a
     non-executant, is in possession and sues for a dec-
     laration that the deed is null or void and does not
     bind him or his share, he has to merely pay a fixed
     court fee of Rs. 19.50 under
Article 17(iii)
of the Sec-
     ond
Schedule of the Act
. But if B, a non-executant,
     is not in possession, and he seeks not only a decla-
     ration that the sale deed is invalid, but also the con-
     sequential relief of possession, he has to pay an ad
     valorem court fee as provided under
Section 7(iv)(c)
of the Act.
Section 7(iv)(c)
provides that in suits for a
     declaratory decree with consequential relief, the
     court fee shall be computed according to the
18
amount at which the relief sought is valued in the
     plaint. The proviso thereto makes it clear that where
     the suit for declaratory decree with consequential
     relief is with reference to any property, such valua-
     tion shall not be less than the value of the property
     calculated in the manner provided for by clause (v)
     of
Section 7
.”
21. On the basis of the aforesaid analysis, the Court opined

that the view expressed by the trial court and the High Court

was not justified in holding that the court fee is required to

be paid on the sale consideration mentioned in the sale

deeds.
22.
In
Shailendra Bhardwaj and others v. Chandra Pal
and another9, the Court was dealing with an issue whether

suit filed seeking a declaration that a will and a sale deed are

void resulting in their cancellation fell under
Section 7
(iv-
A)

of the Court Fees Act, 1870
as amended by the U.P. Amend-
ment Act (Act 19 of 1938) or
Article 17(iii)
of
Schedule II of

the Court Fees Act, 1870
for the purpose of valuation. Be it

noted, in the said case the trial court had taken the view that

the court fee had to be paid under
Section 7
(iv-A) and the

High Court has concurred with the same.         The two-Judge

Bench took note of the provisions of the
Court Fees Act, 1870
9    (2013) 1 SCC 579
19
as amended by the U.P. Amendment Act (Act 19 of 1938) and

after referring to the same in detail, held thus:
“On comparing the abovementioned provisions, it is
     clear that
Article 17(iii)
of
Schedule II of the Court
     Fees Act
is applicable in cases where the plaintiff
     seeks to obtain a declaratory decree without any
     consequential relief and there is no other provision
     under the Act for payment of fee relating to relief
     claimed.
Article 17(iii)
of
Schedule II of the Court
     Fees Act
makes it clear that this article is applica-
     ble in cases where the plaintiff seeks to obtain a
     declaratory decree without consequential reliefs
     and there is no other provision under the Act for
     payment of fee relating to relief claimed. If there is
     no other provision under the
Court Fees Act
in case
     of a suit involving cancellation or adjudging/declar-
     ing void or voidable a will or sale deed on the ques-
     tion of payment of court fees, then
Article 17(iii)
of
     Schedule II shall be applicable. But if such relief is
     covered by any other provisions of the
Court Fees
     Act
, then
Article 17(iii)
of Schedule II will not   be
     applicable. On a comparison between the
Court
     Fees Act and the U.P. Amendment Act
, it is clear
     that
Section 7
(iv-A) of the U.P. Amendment Act cov-
     ers suits for or involving cancellation or
     adjudging/declaring null and void decree for money
     or an instrument securing money or other property
     having such value.”
23. The Court took note of the fact that the suit was filed af-
ter the death of the testator and, therefore, on that basis ob-

served that the suit property covered by the will was required

to be valued. The Court further opined that since
Section

7
(iv-A) of the U.P. Amendment Act specifically provides that
20
payment of court fee in case where the suit is for or involving

cancellation or adjudging/declaring null and void decree for

money or an instrument,
Article 17(iii)
of
Schedule II of the

Court Fees Act
would not apply. The U.P. Amendment Act,

therefore, is applicable in the said case, despite the fact that

no consequential relief has been claimed. Consequently, in

terms of
Section 7
(iv-A) of the U.P. Amendment Act, the court

fees have to be computed according to the value of the sub-

ject-matter and the trial court as well as the High Court have

correctly held so.     The two-Judge Bench distinguished

Suhrid Singh’s case by expressing thus:
“10. We are of the view that the decision of this
     Court in
Suhrid Singh
(supra) is not applicable to
     the facts of the present case. First of all, this Court
     had no occasion to examine the scope of the U.P.
     Amendment Act. That was a case in which this
     Court was dealing with
Sections 7(iv)(c)
, (v) and
     Schedule II
Article 17(iii)
, as amended in the State of
     Punjab. The position that we get in the State of Pun-
     jab is entirely different from the State of U.P. and
     the effect of the U.P. Amendment Act was not an is-
     sue which arose for consideration
in that case
. Con-
     sequently, in our view
,
the said judgment
would not
     apply to the present case.
11. The plaintiff, in the instant case, valued the suit
     at Rs 30 lakhs for the purpose of pecuniary jurisdic-
tion. However, for the purpose of court fee, the
     plaintiff paid a fixed court fee of Rs 200 under Arti-
     cle 17(iii) of
Schedule II of the Court Fees Act
. The
     plaintiff had not noticed the fact that the abovemen-
21
tioned article stood amended by the State, by
      adding the words “not otherwise provided for by this
      Act”. Since
Section 7
(iv-A) of the U.P. Amended Act
      specifically provides for payment of court fee in case
      where the suit is for or involving cancellation or ad-
      judging/declaring void or voidable an instrument
      securing property having money value,
Article 17(iii)
of
Schedule II of the Court Fees Act
shall not be ap-
      plicable.”
24.   The decisions in
Suhrid Singh
(supra) and Shailen-

dra
Bhardwaj
(supra) have to be understood in their proper

perspective.
There was U.P. Amendment in
Shailendra

Bhardwaj
(supra).
In
Suhrid Singh
(supra) the Court was

dealing with a different situation. Be that as it may, the val-

uation of a suit and payment of court fee shall depend upon

the special provision in a State if provided for.
The view taken

by the Madras High Court in
Chellakannu
(supra), in our

considered opinion, is the correct exposition of law.
25. Another aspect needs to be noted. As we notice from

the impugned judgment, the High Court has expressed the

view that payment of the court fee is a mixed question of fact

and law and that has to be decided on the basis of evidence.
26.
In this context, we have been commended to the deci-

sion in
A. Nawab John and others v. V.N. Subra-
22
maniyam10. On a careful perusal of
the said decision
, we

find that the said authority nowhere addresses the issue that

is involved in the case at hand. Proper valuation of the sub-

ject matter or under valuation is an aspect which can be con-

tested by the defendant, but the said contest is limited.
In

this regard, the two-Judge Bench has reproduced two pas-

sages from Rathnavarmaraja v. Vimla11 which we think

seemly to reproduce:
“
The Court Fees Act
was enacted to collect revenue
     for the benefit of the State and not to arm a contest-
     ing party with a weapon of defence to obstruct the
     trial of an action. By recognising that the defendant
     was entitled to contest the valuation of the proper-
     ties in dispute as if it were a matter in issue be-
     tween him and the plaintiff and by entertaining peti-
     tions preferred by the defendant to the High Court
     in exercise of its revisional jurisdiction against the
     order adjudging court fee payable on the plaint, all
     progress in the suit for the trial of the dispute on
     the merits has been effectively frustrated for nearly
     five years. We fail to appreciate what grievance the
     defendant can make by seeking to invoke the revi-
     sional jurisdiction of the High Court on the question
     whether the plaintiff has paid adequate court fee on
     his plaint. Whether proper court fee is paid on a
     plaint is primarily a question between the plaintiff
     and the State. How by an order relating to the ade-
     quacy of the court fee paid by the plaintiff, the de-
     fendant may feel aggrieved, it is difficult to appreci-
     ate. Again, the jurisdiction in revision exercised by
     the High Court under
Section 115
of the Code of
     Civil Procedure is strictly conditioned by clauses (a)
10   (2012) 7 SCC 738
11   AIR 1961 SC 1299
23
to (c) thereof and may be invoked on the ground of
refusal to exercise jurisdiction vested in the subor-
dinate court or assumption of jurisdiction which the
court does not possess or on the ground that the
court has acted illegally or with material irregularity
in the exercise of its jurisdiction. The defendant who
may believe and even honestly that proper court fee
has not been paid by the plaintiff has still no right
to move the superior courts by appeal or in revision
against the order adjudging payment of court fee
payable on the plaint. But counsel for the defendant
says that by Act 14 of 1955 enacted by the Madras
Legislature which applied to the suit in question,
the defendant has been invested with a right not
only to contest in the trial court the issue whether
adequate court fee has been paid by the plaintiff,
but also to move the High Court in revision if an or-
der contrary to his submission is passed by the
court. Reliance in support of that contention is
placed upon sub-section (2) of
Section 12
. That sub-
section, insofar as it is material, provides:
x           x          x          x
But this section only enables the defendant to raise
a contention as to the proper court fee payable on a
plaint and to assist the court in arriving at a just de-
cision on that question. Our attention has not been
invited to any provision of the Madras Court Fees
Act or any other statute which enables the defen-
dant to move the High Court in revision against the
decision of the court of first instance on the matter
of court fee payable in a plaint.
The Act
, it is true by
Section 19
provides that for the purpose of deciding
whether the subject-matter of the suit or other pro-
ceeding has been properly valued or whether the fee
paid is sufficient, the court may hold such enquiry
as it considers proper and issue a commission to
any other person directing him to make such local
or other investigation as may be necessary and re-
port thereon. The anxiety of the legislature to collect
court fee due from the litigant is manifest from the
detailed provisions made in
Chapter III of the Act
,
but those provisions do not arm the defendant with
24
a weapon of technicality to obstruct the progress of
      the suit by approaching the High Court in revision
      against an order determining the court fee payable.”
                                    (emphasis supplied)
27.    On a perusal of the decision in Rathnavarmaraja

(supra), we find the controversy had arisen with regard to

proper valuation and the stand of the defendant was that the

court fee had not been properly paid and in that context, the

Court has held what as we have reproduced hereinabove.

The issue being different, the said decision is distinguishable.

We may reiterate that proper valuation of the suit property

stands on a different footing than applicability of a particular

provision of an Act under which court fee is payable and in

such a situation, it is not correct to say that it has to be de-

termined on the basis of evidence and it is a matter for the

benefit of the revenue and the State and not to arm a con-

testing party with a weapon of defence to obstruct the trial of

an action. It is because the Act empowers the defendant to

raise the plea of jurisdiction on a different yardstick.
28.    In the ultimate anlaysis, we arrive at the conclusion

that the appeal is to be allowed, the impugned orders passed

by the trial court and the High Court, being unsustainable
25
are to be set aside and we so direct.              The trial court is

directed to grant three months time to the plaintiff to pay the

requisite court fee. There shall be no order as to costs.
.….............................................J.
                                [Dipak Misra]



                                .…..............................................J.
                                [A.M. Khanwilkar]



                               ...….....................................J.
                               [Mohan M. Shantanagoudar]
New Delhi;
August 10, 2017.