[Cites
11
, Cited by
19
]
Supreme Court of India
R.K.Barwal . vs The State Of Himachal Pradesh on 25 August, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 403, 2017 (16) SCC 803, AIR 2018 SC 403, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 916, (2017) 4 SCT 402, (2017) 10 SCALE 274, 2018 (128) ALR SOC 42 (SC), 2018 (184) AIC (SOC) 29 (SC), 2018 (2) KCCR SN 176 (SC)
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                                  REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 011060 OF 2017
                                  (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 8710 OF 2009)

     R. K. BARWAL AND OTHERS                                              .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                     VERSUS

     THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH                                     .....RESPONDENT(S)
     AND OTHERS

                                                      WITH

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 011061 OF 2017
                                 (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 14361 OF 2009)

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 011062 OF 2017
                                 (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 19750 OF 2011)

                              SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) No.22416 OF 2017
                              (ARISING OUT OF SLP(C).......D. NO. 20104 of 2017)

                                                       AND

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 657 OF 2016


                                               JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
Leave granted in Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos. 8710 of 2009,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
14361 of 2009 and 19750 of 2011.
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2018.02.24
11:13:57 IST
Reason:
2) In all these appeals, issue relates to the validity of ‘Demobilized

                           Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Himachal
2
Pradesh State Non-Technical Services) Rules, 1972 (hereinafter

  referred to as the ‘1972 Rules’).     These 1972 Rules provide for

  reservation to the Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel in

  non-technical services in the State of Himachal Pradesh. Provision is

  also made in the 1972 Rules for conferring the benefit of counting

  approved military service of such Released Armed Forces Personnel

  for the purpose of fixation of their seniority and pay in civil

  employment. It is the validity of these Rules which is the subject

  matter in most of these appeals.         However, for the sake of

  convenience and better understanding, we would take note of the

  events from Civil Appeal No.____ of 2017 @ SLP (C) No. 8710 of

  2009.
3) The appellants in these appeals are Released Armed Forces

  Personnel. They were initially taken in the Army where they served

  for few years and after serving for certain years, they were released

  from the Army. Still young and far away from the age of retirement

  that is prescribed for civilian post, they applied for the post of

  Assistant District Attorney in the State of Himachal Pradesh

  (hereinafter referred to as the ‘State’) and were successful in getting

  appointment as Assistant District Attorneys with the Department of

  Prosecution of the State. In terms of 1972 Rules, they were accorded

  the benefit of their approved military service for the purposes of
3
fixation of their pay and seniority as Assistant District Attorneys.

              Details of appointments of these appellants are as under:
Appellant’s     Date    of     Date    of       Date       of   Date          of   Deemed date of
Name            Joining        release          joining civil   acquiring          appointment
                Armed          from Armed       employment      essential
                Forces and     forces and       (prosecution    qualification
                rank           rank             department)

R.K. Barwal     24.04.1981     10.09.1997       28.12.2001      1991 (LLB) + 2     20.03.1989
(Appellant      (As Airman)    (As              (Appointed      years              (By    giving 12
No. 1)                         Sergeant)        as ADA/APP)     experience         years antedated
                                                                                   seniority)

D.S. Parmar     21.06.1986     21.07.2001       19.10.2006      1991 (LLB) + 2     09.09.1991  (By
(Appellant      (As Havaldar   (As              (Appointed      years              giving 15 years
No. 2)          Clerk)         Naib-Subed       as ADA/APP)     experience         antedated
                               ar)                                                 seniority)

S.S.            16.01.1980     28.02.1999       18.11.2003      1997 (LLB) + 2     29.08.1986
Pathania        (As Seaman)    (As Master       (Appointed      years              (By    giving    17
(Appellant                     At Arms)         as ADA/APP)     experience         years seniority)
No. 3)
N.S. Verma      08.01.1974     31.01.1989       20.09.1996      1984 (LLB) + 2     20.03.1989
(Appellant      (As Seaman)    (As      Petty   (Appointed      years              (By    giving    12
No. 4)                         Officer)         as ADA/APP)     experience         years seniority)



                As is clear from the aforesaid chart, though these appellants joined

       as Assistant District Attorneys with the State on later dates, they were

       given the seniority from the back/earlier date with the application of 1972

       Rules by counting their approved military service. Their pay was also

       fixed accordingly.
4) At this stage, we may reproduce the relevant provisions of 1972

              Rules. Primarily, we are concerned with Rules 3(1) and 5 (1). The

              Preamble as well as the aforesaid Rules of the 1972 Rules read as

              under:
“Preamble

                    No. 11-76/71-GA-A—In exercise of the powers conferred by
4
the proviso to
Article 309
of the Constitution of India, and all
        other powers enabling him in this behalf, the Governor,
        Himachal Pradesh, hereby makes the following Rules
        regulating the reservation of vacancies in Himachal State,
        Non-Technical Services, for the Demobilised Emergency
        Commission Officers, Short Service Regular Commission
        Officers, Junior Commissioned Officers, Non-Commissioned
        Officers and other Ranks of the Armed Forces of the Indian
        Union (hereinafter called the Released Indian Armed Forces
        Personnel), and the recruitment of such officers/personnel on
        such vacancies, namely:
3. Reservation of vacancies:
(1) Fifteen percent vacancies in respect of all posts, viz.,
           Class I, II, III and IV to be filled up through direct
           recruitment shall be reserved for being filled up by the
           released Indian Armed Forces Personnel or ex-servicemen
           who joined service or were commissioned on or after the
           1st day of November, 1962 and are released any time
           thereafter....”
5. Seniority and Pay:
(1) Only the period of approved military service rendered after
           attaining the minimum age prescribed for appointment to
           the service concerned by the candidates appointed against
           reserved vacancies under the relevant rules, shall count
           towards fixation of pay and seniority in that service. (This
           benefit shall however be allowed at the time of first civil
           employment only and it shall not be admissible in
           subsequent appointments of ex-servicemen who are
           already employed under State/Central Govt. against
           reserved posts).”
5) It may also be mentioned here that the State Government has framed

  similar Rules conferring this kind of benefit on the Released Armed

  Forces Personnel in Administrative Services as well. These Rules

  were framed in the year 1974 and are called the ‘Demobilised Armed

  Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Himachal

  Pradesh Administrative Services) Rules, 1974 (hereinafter referred to
5
as the ‘1974 Rules’). Though, the 1974 Rules are not the subject

  matter of these appeals, purpose for referring to these Rules is that

  the validity of these Rules was also challenged and the matter had

  come up to this Court.     To that extent, reference to these Rules

  becomes relevant and the outcome of the proceedings would be

  mentioned at the appropriate stage.
6) When the seniority of the appellants was fixed in the aforesaid

  manner as given in the table above, the result was that they were

  given seniority over and above some of those appointees who came

  in the general category and even when they were appointed as

  Assistant District Attorneys, prior in point of time.   These persons,

  naturally, felt aggrieved by this favourable treatment accorded to the

  appellants, Respondent Nos. 3 to 5 herein as well as two other

  Assistant   District   Attorneys,   thus,    approached     the   State

  Administrative Tribunal by filing Original Application (OA), inter alia,

  challenging the vires of Rule 5(1) of 1972 Rules insofar as it

  conferred benefit of counting of approved military service upon the

  appellants towards fixation of their seniority. They prayed for striking

  down Rule 5(1) to the extent it confers seniority upon such Released

  Armed Forces Personnel with a specific prayer that deemed dates of

  appointment assigned to the appellants be declared as illegal. They

  also prayed for issuance of directions to the effect that these
6
appellants be given seniority from the actual date of appointment as

      Assistant District Attorneys or alternatively from the dates they

      acquired eligibility for the post, viz., degree of Ll.B. Here, we may

      mention that these appellants had obtained LL.B. degree later on, but

      they were law graduates as on the date when they applied for the

      post of District Attorney and were eligible to be considered for the

      said post. However, the grievance of Respondent Nos. 3-5 was that

      seniority is given to them, by counting military service, from the dates

      when they were not law graduates and thus not even eligible for the

      post, for want of requisite qualifications, on that date.
7) The State Administrative Tribunal, after hearing the parties, dismissed

      the OA filed by the Respondent Nos. 3-5 vide judgement dated

      January 12, 2001, thereby upholding the validity of Rule 5(1) of 1972

      Rules.
8) These    respondents    challenged      the   decision     of   the   State

      Administrative Tribunal by filing writ petitions in the High Court. The

      High Court has, vide impugned judgment, partially struck down Rule

      5(1) of the 1972 Rules. Relying upon the decision of this Court in
Ram Janam Singh vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and another
1, the

      High Court has held that such a benefit of counting past service

      rendered in the armed forces would be admissible only to those

      personnel who had joined the forces during the period of Emergency

1                           (1994) 2 SCC 622
7
and would be inadmissible in case of ex-servicemen who had joined

  the armed forces at the time of peace.
9) The result of the aforesaid judgment of the High Court is that the

  appellants stand deprived of the period of service rendered by them

  in armed forces for the purposes of seniority as they had not joined

  the said service during the period of emergency. Since, the High

  Court has rested its decision by relying upon
Ram Janam Singh1
case and few other cases to the same effect, before proceeding

  further we would like to discuss these judgments and law laid down

  therein.
10) Ram Janam Singh1 was a case wherein the judgment of the

  Allahabad High Court was called into question. It pertained to U.P.

  Non-Technical (Class-II) Services (Reservation of Vacancies for

  Demobilised Officers) Rules, 1973. Under these Rules, benefit was

  confined to those ex-servicemen who had joined service in the armed

  forces during the period when the country was under the state of

  emergency. One person who had joined service in the armed forces

  during the period when the Emergency was not in operation

  challenged the non-grant of the benefit of Rules to him on the ground

  that there was no reasonable or rational basis for excluding the

  period from January 10, 1969 when the Emergency was lifted till

  December 03, 1971 when the same was re-imposed.             The writ
8
petition was allowed by the Allahabad High Court. Thereafter, Ram

Janam Singh      filed an appeal before the Apex Court which was

allowed. The Apex Court held as follows:-
“10. From time to time controversy regarding inter se seniority
     is raised between persons recruited from, different sources to
     the same service. In past, notional seniority used to be given
     to one group of officers, purporting to mitigate their hardship
     or to rectify any alleged wrong done to them in the process of
     recruitment or promotion. Ultimately, it was realised that if
     liberty is given to fix seniority of an officer or group of officers
     belonging to a particular category with reference to a notional
     date, that will lead to great uncertainty in public service. The
     date of entry into a particular service was considered to be
     the most safe rule to follow while determining the inter se (sic)
     one officer or the other or between one group of officers and
     the other recruited from the different sources. After referring
     to different judgments of this Court, a Constitution Bench in
     the case of Direct Recruitment Class II Engineering
     Officer’s
Association v. State of Maharashtra
[(1980) 2
     SCC 715]: (AIR 1990 SC 1607), came to the same
     conclusion.
The same has been reiterated in the case of
State of West Bengal v. Aghore Nath Dev
[(1993) 3 SCC
     371]. It is now almost settled that seniority of an officer in
     service is determined with reference to the date of his entry in
     the service, which will be consistent with the requirement of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution. Of course, if the
     circumstances so require a group of persons can be treated a
     class separate from the rest, for any preferential or beneficial
     treatment while fixing their seniority. But, whether such,
     group of persons belong to a special class for any special
     treatment, in matters of seniority has to be decided on
     objective consideration and on taking into account relevant
     factors which can stand the test of
Articles 14
and
16
of the
     Constitution. Normally, such classification should be by
     statutory rule or rules framed under
Article 209
of the
     Constitution. The far-reaching implication of such Rules need
     not be impressed, because they purport to affect the seniority
     of persons, who are already in service. For promotional
     posts, generally the rule regarding merit and ability or
     seniority-cum-merit is flawed in most of the services. As such
     the seniority of an employee in the later case is material and
     relevant to further his career, which can be affected by
     factors, which can be held to be reasonable and rational.
9
11. It appears that the framers of the Rules 1973 and 1980,
while treating the persons, who had been commissioned on or
after November 1, 1962 but before January 10, 1968 and
again on or after December 03, 1971, took into account the
circumstances and the background in which such persons
were commissioned in Armed Forces, i.e., when the nation
was faced with foreign aggressions and the cry of the time
was that persons should join Armed Forces to defend the
integrity and sovereignty of the nation. It is well-known that
many persons in such situation are not inclined to join Armed
Forces and only those with feeling for the honour of the nation
rise to such occasions. In this background, if such persons
have been treated as a separate class for extending any
benefit in the matter of seniority, none can make any
grievance and their classification can be upheld even in the
light of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution.
12. But, we fail to understand as to how persons, who joined
after the emergency was over, i.e., after January 10, 1968
and before December 03, 1971, when another emergency
was imposed in view of the foreign aggression can be treated
at par or on the same level. It needs to be pointed out that
such persons were in look out of a career and joined the
Armed Forces of their own volition. It can be presumed that
they were prepared for the normal risk in the service of the
Armed Forces. Those who joined Armed Forces after
November 1, 1962 or December 3, 1971, not only joined
Armed forces but joined a war which was being fought by the
nation. If the benefits extended to such persons, who were
commissioned during national emergencies are extended
even to the members of the Armed Forces who joined during
normal times, members of the Civil services can make
legitimate grievance that their seniority is being affected by
persons recruited to the service after they had entered in the
said service without there being any rational basis for the
same.
13.       xxx   xxx    xxx
14.       Can it be said that the persons who had joined army after
the declaration of emergency due to foreign aggression and those
who joined after the war came to an end stand on the same
footing? Those who joined Army after revocation of emergency
joined army as a career. It is well known that many persons, who
joined army service during the foreign aggression could have opted
for other career or service. But the nation itself being under peril,
impelled by the spirit to serve the nation, they opted for joining
Army where then risk was writ large. No one can dispute that such
persons formed a class by themselves and by Rules aforesaid an
10
attempt has been made to compensate those who returned from
            war if they compete in different service. According to us, the plea
            that even persons, who joined army service after cessaion of
            foreign aggression and revocation of emergency, have to be
            treated like persons, who have joined army service during
            emergency, due to foreign aggression is a futile plea and should
            not have been accepted by the High Court. It need not be
            impressed that whenever any particular period spent in any other
            service by a person is added to the service to which such person
            joins later, it is bound to affect the seniority of person who have
            already entered in the service. As such any period of earlier
            service should be taken into account for determination of seniority
            in the later service only for some very compelling reasons, which
            stand the test of reasonableness and on examination can be held
            to be free from arbitrariness.”
                                                             (Emphasis supplied)
11) This dictum was reiterated in
Chittranjan Singh Chima and

      Another v. State of Punjab and Others2
wherein this Court has held

      that the person appointed to defence services under the normal

      recruitment, before the proclamation of (External Emergency on

      26.10.1962, were not covered under the expression “military service”

      as   defined in the Punjab            Government       National Emergency

      (Concession) Rules, 1965. Hence, the appellants who were enrolled

      in Indian Air Force on December 07, 1957 and September 03, 1959

      respectively and were released in 1974 on completion of 15 years of

      service, held not entitled to the benefit of this service for seniority and

      other consequential benefits because they were not appointed during

      emergency but in the regular process.
12) Another case taken note of by the High Court is
Narendra Nath

      Pandey and Other vs. State of U.P. and others
3. In this case, Rule

2                            (1997) 11 SCC 447
3                            AIR (1988) SC 1648
11
6 of the aforesaid U.P. Rules of 1973 was being dealt with, the

  relevant portion whereof is as under:
“R. 6 Seniority and pay—

        (1) Seniority and pay of candidates appointed against the
           vacancies reserved under sub-rule (1) of Rule 3, shall be
           determined on the assumption that they entered the
           service concerned at their second opportunity, of
           competing for recruitment, and they shall be assigned the
           same year of allotment as successful candidates of the
           relevant competitive examination.”

     The issue before the Court was as to whether such ex-service

personnel could be given the seniority even when they failed in first

attempt in securing civil employment and further whether the benefit of

service rendered in armed forces could be given even if there was a

significant time lag between release of such personnel by the army and

securing the civil employment. Interpreting the aforesaid Rule, these

questions were answered in the following manner:
“13. It is true that Rule 6 does not provide for the period
        between the demobilisation and recruitment of a war service
        candidate in the civil service. Nor does it forbid consideration
        of such period. It cannot, however, be denied that after the
        discharge from war service, there will be some lapse of time
        for the recruitment of a candidate in the Provincial Civil
        Service. There is a question of competing in the examination.
        Rule 6 does not provide for any gap to be taken into
        consideration, yet it is apparent that some reasonable period
        has to be allowed to a candidate so as to enable him to avail
        himself of the opportunity of appearing at the competitive
        examination for his recruitment in the Provincial Civil Service.
        It cannot be gain said that to compete in the examination, a
        candidate has to make preparation for that competitive
        examinations are generally difficult and, in our opinion, at
        least two years’ time should be allowed to a candidate, after
        his discharge, for his preparation for the competitive
        examination and that will arise in the next year, that is, in the
12
third year of his discharge from the armed forces. In other
words, he should be allowed three years for competing in the
relevant examination for recruitment in the civil service.
14.       Even after he becomes successful, he is not
recruited immediately. There is question of availability of
vacancies and posting. It is common knowledge that some
time is taken for posting. On a proper construction of Rule 6,
the period spent by a candidate for competition in the
examination which, in our opinion, will not be more than three
years, and the period of time taken for his recruitment or
posting will also be taken into consideration for the purpose of
computing the seniority of a war service candidate. Thus, if a
candidate is discharged in the year 1968, he should be given
three years’ time to avail himself of the opportunity of
competing in the examination. Suppose, he is successful in
the examination in 1971 and posted in 1973. In view of Rule
6, he would be deemed to have entered service at the second
opportunity of competing for recruitment and the entire period
from the date of assumed entry in the service up to his
recruitment in 1973 shall be taken into account for the
purpose of computing seniority and pay. If, however, a
candidate does not avail himself of the opportunity within
three years of his discharge from war service or takes the
examination but not avail himself of the opportunity within
three years of his discharge from war service or takes the
examination but becomes unsuccessful, the period between
his discharge and subsequent recruitment will not be taken
into account for the purpose of computing the seniority. Rule
6 should be given a reasonable interpretation. We do not find
any reason to interpret Rule 6 in a way which will be doing
injustice to the appellants who have been recruited under the
Service Rules after competing successfully in the
examination.
15. We agree with the High Court that the 1973 Rules as also
the 1980 Rules are quite legal and valid. We are, however, of
the view that under Rule 6 of the 1973 Rules or Rule 5 of the
1980 Rules only a reasonable period, namely, the period of
three years, required for taking the examination and the time
taken for recruitment or posting, as discussed above, along
with the period of war service, but no other period, will be
taken into consideration for the purpose of computing the
seniority and pay. The impugned seniority list prepared in
1976 and also that prepared subsequently in the year 1980
cannot be sustained, as they have been prepared by taking
into consideration the entire period between the discharge
and the recruitment without any reservation for computing the
13
seniority.
(Emphasis Supplied)”
13) Dicta
laid down in
the aforesaid judgments of this Court are

  apparent and explicit.     The Court has held that there exists an

  intelligible criterion for providing quota to ex-servicemen. The object

  is to rehabilitate the ex-servicemen which can be achieved by

  providing reservations to them. Therefore, insofar as provision made

  in the Rules reserving a particular quota, within reasonable limits is

  concerned that is permitted and does not offend the provisions of
Article 14
of the Constitution. There is an intelligible differentia having

  nexus with the objective sought to be achieved. Likewise, provision

  in the Rules for protecting the pay is also held to be permissible.
14) The bone of contention, however, is in respect of grant of benefit of

  seniority to these ex-servicemen on joining civilian service, by

  counting the service rendered in the armed forces for the purpose of

  seniority in the department which these ex-servicemen join. Here

  there is a conflict of interest that arises between those civilians who

  join a particular service earlier than ex-servicemen but are rendered

  juniors to the ex-servicemen joining later for the reason that

  ex-servicemen are benefited with their past service in the armed

  forces.   As far as this aspect is concerned, the judgments noted

  above have held that provision in the Rules giving benefit of service

  in armed forces to those ex-servicemen who joined during
14
Emergency, are perfectly justified. It is based on the rationale that

  sacrifice of such personnel in armed forces who joined the service in

  war times is much more than those persons who joined the armed

  forces during peace period. Reasoning proceeds on the basis that

  when a state of Emergency is declared and the nation is at war or

  facing the threat of aggression some young persons out of a feeling

  of patriotism join the armed forces knowing fully well that they are

  putting their lives at stake. They give up their chance to join civil

  service and live a comfortable life in the main cities of the country.

  Drawing this distinction, this Court has granted the benefit of service

  rendered by these ex-servicemen while in armed forces, is held to be

  valid when they were recruited during Emergency.        However, the

  Court has held that such a benefit should not be available to those

  who join the armed forces at a period when the country was not in

  conflict with any other country/enemy country. The denial of benefit

  to such persons is on the premise that these persons stand on a

  totally different footing from those who join service during emergency

  period. These persons weigh all the pros and cons and after taking

  into consideration all factors come to the conclusion that they have a

  good future in the armed forces. They join the armed forces as a

  profession like any other.
15) On this premise, the Court has held that the two categories of
15
ex-servicemen formed two separate classes and are not equal to

  each other. Thus, latter category is not entitled to counting of their

  service rendered in armed forces for the purpose of their seniority on

  joining the civilian post.     Following this dicta
laid down in
the

  aforesaid judgments, the High Court has read down the rule

  in-question by limiting the benefit of seniority only to that class of

  ex-servicemen which joined armed forces during the period of

  Emergency.
16) This position is summed up by the High Court in the following

  manner:
“We are of the view that such benefit should have been
       limited to those persons who joined during the period of
       emergency only.         Otherwise the Rules would become
       unconstitutional. The Apex Court in a number of cases
       including those quoted above has clearly held that efficiency
       should not suffer on account of reservation. Reservation can
       be held to be reasonable as long as efficiency does not suffer.
       It is also well settled that the seniority of an officer in service
       is determined with reference to the date of entry in the
       service. This is consistent with
Articles 14
& 16
of the
       Constitution.     Exceptions can be made only in special
       circumstances. However, who are entitled to such benefits
       has to be decided objectively. Therefore, the rules in this
       behalf must be framed by taking into consideration the effect
       which such reservation will have on efficiency of the service
       and the manner in which it will affect the seniority of persons
       who are already in service.
We may approach this issue from another angle. The Apex
       Court both in Ram Janam Singh’s case as well as in
       Chittranjan Singh Chima’s case clearly held that the
       ex-serviceman who joined the armed forces during normalcy
       could not be equated with ex-servicemen who joined the
       armed forces during emergency. The Rule under challenge in
       fact equates these two. Therefore, two unequals have been
       treated as equals. What may be valid or reasonable for the
16
ex-servicemen who stand on higher pedestal, i.e.,
        ex-servicemen who joined during emergency may not be
        necessarily be valid or legal for those who stand on a lower
        footing. The civil servants who are placed lower to such
        ex-servicemen can genuinely complaint that they are the
        victims of arbitrary discrimination as clearly pointed out in
        Ram Janam Singh’s case. Efficiency of the service is also
        bound to suffer if all ex-servicemen are given this benefit.”
17) It becomes apparent from the aforesaid discussion that while

  deciding against the appellants, the High Court has followed the

  judgments of this Court and the ratio has also been applied correctly.
Therefore, the judgment of the High Court cannot be faulted with.

  Though, Mr. Paramjeet Singh Patwalia, learned senior counsel for the

  appellant had tried to distinguish the decision of this Court in Ram

  Janam Singh and Chittranjan Singh Chima cases, with the

  submission that the Rules in those two cases were different, however,

  it is difficult to accept this contention of the appellant having regard to

  the clear dicta and the ratio behind the said judgments which has

  already been discussed above.
18) Faced with this, another fervent plea made by the learned senior

  counsel is to the effect that going by the prevailing conditions in the

  country and the manner in which armed forces personnel have to

  perform their duties, there is hardly any difference between the

  emergency and the peace time. It was submitted that post 1971 war,

  Pakistan has waged proxy war against India which continues

  unabated. Life risk and casualties of soldiers during peace time are
17
more as compared to the casualties in the war.           Insurgency like

  conditions existed earlier in Punjab and now continues in Kashmir

  Valley besides in North Eastern States. Almost every day there are

  casualties of the personnel deployed in such affected areas. Besides

  fighting insurgency conditions and terrorism, soldiers have to

  participate in various operations like Operation Vijay (Kargil

  Operation),      Megadoot, Pawan, Prakaram, Rakshak, Bombay

  Operation etc. which take place during non-emergency period and

  risk to life and fatalities of soldiers during such operations is also as

  high as during the wars.
19) In a nutshell, the submission is that the distinction which was

  drawn by this Court between those persons who joined armed forces

  in peace time and those who joined during emergency is totally

  blurred. Emphasis of Mr. Patwalia was that even during the so-called

  peace time, armed forces are faced with warlike situations and,

  therefore,    they   should   now   be   treated   at   par   with   those

  ex-servicemen who joined the military service during the period of

  emergency. On that basis, it was submitted that the cases decided

  by this Court and
referred to above
need reconsideration.
20) Insofar as official respondents, State of Himachal Pradesh and

  Secretary Personnel to the Government of Himachal Pradesh

  (Respondent Nos. 1 and 2) are concerned, they have supported the
18
arguments of the appellants. In fact, even State has challenged the

  impugned judgment and its appeal is numbered as Civil Appeal No.

  ________ of 2017 (@ SLP(Civil) No. 14361 of 2009). These appeals

  were primarily contested by the private respondents who are civilians

  and were appointed to these posts on various dates and had filed the

  writ petition in the High Court which has been allowed by the High

  Court. In addition, an intervention application is filed by some other

  persons belonging to this very class and they have also supported

  the impugned judgment.
21) Insofar as private respondents, namely, Respondent nos. 4 and 5

  as well as interveners are concerned, submission of the learned

  counsel appearing on their behalf was that the judgment of the High

  Court was in accord with the law
laid down by
this Court and,

  therefore, there was no reason to interfere with the same. It was

  submitted that the background in which 1972 Rules were framed had

  to be kept in mind. In this behalf, their submission was that China had

  attacked the Nation on October 20, 1962 and proclamation of

  Emergency was made on October 26, 1962. It was found that there

  was acute shortage of young personnel in the Armed Forces who

  could defend the country and accordingly a number of concessions

  were announced by the Central and the State Governments for those

  persons who joined these forces including reservation of posts,
19
counting of the period served in the military for seniority and

      protection of pay and pension in the civil posts.
22) He further stated that after Indo-China and Indo-Pak wars, a

      review of the manpower required by the armed forces was made in

      the year 1968 and all those persons who were in excess were

      “Demobilised” in a phased manner. To rehabilitate the demobilised

      person Central and the State Governments had framed Rules.

      Demobilisation was onetime operation and demobilisation was

      stopped by 1975. It was pointed out that the first such Rules were

      framed by Punjab as Punjab National Emergency Concession Rules,

      1965 and notified on July 20, 1965 as has been mentioned in

      Ex-Capt.
K.C. Arora and Another Vs. State of Haryana and

      Others4
.
23) These respondents, thus, supported the rationale by drawing

      distinction between the two classes of ex-servicemen, namely, those

      who had joined armed forces during Emergency and those who had

      not and it is only the first category which could be entitled to the

      benefit of past service. It was also submitted that if such a benefit of

      past service is given, many such ex-servicemen would become

      entitled to seniority from a date when they were not even possessing

      a degree in law or having any experience or practice as a lawyer

      which is required for the post. It was also submitted that some of

4                               (1984) 3 SCC 281
20
these ex-servicemen would be getting seniority from the dates on

  which they were not even enrolled as advocates with the Bar Council

  and had not completed experience of three years’ practice as

  advocates which could not be countenanced. It was, thus, submitted

  that if the benefit under the 1972 Rules is extended to all

  ex-servicemen, it would, undoubtedly, affect the efficiency of service.

  Furthermore, the same would also cause heart burn and affect the

  morale of the competent       persons who joined the services much

  earlier and are still placed much lower in seniority to the

  ex-servicemen, who invariably get seniority, from the date when they

  did not even possess the bare minimum eligibility for appointment. It

  was submitted that Rule for reservation of vacancies may not be

  stretched so far as to include seniority, pay-scale (Rule 5.1) and

  provision of vacancies to the dependents and continued reservation

  of vacancies (Rule 3.1) of the Demobilised Rules. Will these Rules

  made under Article 309 of the Constitution stand the test of Article 16

  of the Constitution to which Article 309 is subject to?
24) It was pointed out that a number of ex-servicemen had superseded

  these respondents and interveners which had a cascading effect on

  the service career of the direct recruits. It was specifically pointed out

  that Sh. Purander Sharma was the topper of the batch and was

  appointed as Assistant District Attorney on July 20, 1990 along with
21
the other direct recruits, intervener No. 2 Sh. Ravi Kant Kaushal

  while, the ex-servicemen, Sh. Dharam Pal Sharda, Sh. Sansar

  Chand, Sh. Narain Singh Verma, Sh. Gian Chand Rana and Sh. R.K.

  Barwal were appointed on much later dates.             However, these

  ex-servicemen were given the benefit of Rule 5(1) of the 1972 Rules

  and were assigned a deemed date of appointment on a much earlier

  date. Consequently, Sh. Purander Sharma (Respondent No. 5) and

  other similar situate persons, were placed much lower in the seniority

  to these ex-servicemen, who got seniority from the date when they

  did not even possess the bare minimum eligibility for appointment. It

  was emphasized that Sh. Purander Sharma got promoted to the post

  of Deputy District Attorney in the year 2005 after serving as Assistant

  District Attorney for a period of more than 15 years against minimum

  requirement of seven years, while, Sh. R.P. Sharma, Sh. Dharam Pal

  Sharda, Sh. Sansar Chand, Sh. Narain Singh Verma, Sh. Gian

  Chand Rana and Sh. R.K. Barwal (Ex-servicemen) were promoted

  thrice within a period of 15 years from the date of their actual

  appointments, i.e., on July 10, 1998, June 01, 1994, June 14, 1993,

  September 20, 1996, May 26, 1999 and December 28, 2001

  respectively.
25) On that basis, it was argued that there was no reason to take a

  different view or refer the matter to a larger Bench for consideration.
22
26) After giving our due consideration to the respective submissions

  and minutely going through the judgments of this Court discussed

  above, which have been relied upon by the High Court, we do not see

  any reason to deviate therefrom nor do we find any justification in

  referring the issue to the larger Bench.
27) No doubt, Mr. Patwalia is right in pointing out that those who are

  joining military service even in ‘peace times’ are faced with difficult

  situations of proxy war and have also to deal with insurgency and

  terrorism. It is also a matter of common knowledge that these military

  personnel are risking their life while dealing with the aforesaid difficult

  situations and, in fact, the casualties and fatalities of the soldiers are

  on the rise.      When they leave the military service, as an

  ex-serviceman, they not only get the benefit of appointment to the

  civilian post against the quota earmarked for them, they are also

  getting the benefit of counting of military service when their pay is

  fixed on their appointment to the civilian post. However, benefit of

  counting of military service rendered by these ex-servicemen for the

  purpose of seniority cannot be extended to them. Such a benefit is

  restricted by this Court only to those who joined armed forces during

  emergency due to foreign aggression.         This special category was

  carved in the
judgments
referred to above
. This Court, while doing

  so, categorically and repeatedly held that the call of service to nation
23
during war period is on a totally different footing than joining army

when the country is not facing any such foreign aggression. The

Court pointed out that persons who were commissioned in armed

forces when the nation was faced with foreign aggression and the cry

of the time was that persons should join armed forces to defend the

integrity and sovereignty of the nation, it was stressed that many

persons in such situations are not inclined to join the armed forces

and only those with the feeling for the honour of the nation rise to

such occasions. For this reason, such persons joining armed forces

at that time, sacrificing their career, had to be treated as a separate

class by extending them the benefit in the matter of seniority as well.

However, those who joined the armed forces otherwise, they do so in

look out of a career and joined such services of their own volition.

They are prepared for the normal risk in service of the armed forces.

Therefore, benefit of service rendered in armed forces cannot be

extended to such a class for the purposes of seniority.              The

circumstances pointed out by Mr. Patwalia are nothing but those risks

which are very well known and prevalent. Fact remains that these

persons joined the service to make their career and on their own

volition, exercising it as a matter of choice.        Their cases are,

therefore, on a different footing altogether. After all, if the benefit of

armed force services rendered is extended to each and every
24
ex-serviceman for the purpose of seniority, it may result in far

      reaching implications.     Examples in this behalf are given by the

      private respondents, as noted above. This Court cannot shy away

      from the normal rule of fixing the seniority, as enunciated in the cases

      of Direct Recruitment Class II Engineering Officer’s Association

      as well as Aghore Nath Dev, i.e. the seniority of an officer in service

      is determined with reference to the date of his entry in the service,

      which is consistent with the requirement of
Articles 14
and
16
of the

      Constitution. There have to be very weighty reasons for departure

      from this rule. Otherwise, it may disturb the equilibrium by making

      many direct recruits junior to such ex-servicemen even when such

      direct recruits joined the services in civil posts much earlier than the

      ex-servicemen. Thus, an exceptional category carved out for giving

      such a benefit only to those who were commissioned in armed forces

      during   war   time   cannot     be      extended   to   each   and   every

      ex-serviceman merely because he has served in armed forces.
28) We, therefore, are of the considered opinion that there is no

      reason to deviate from the principle
laid down by
this Court in Ram

      Janam Singh and Chittranjan Singh Chima. This contention of the

      appellant is, thus, rejected.
29) Mr. Patwalia also submitted that this Court in its decision in the

      case of
State of H.P. vs. P.D. Attri5
has also held that each State

5                           (1999) 3 SCC 217
25
has its own individualistic way of governance under the Constitution.

  One State is not bound to follow the Rules and Regulations

  applicable to the employees of other State and it is not bound to

  follow every change brought in the Rules and Regulations in other

  State even if the same were adopted initially. In this hue, it was

  submitted    that   presently    the   percentage     of   reservation    of

  ex-servicemen under the Rules of 1972 is to the extent of 15% in

  respect of all posts viz. class I, II, III and IV (Rule 3(1) of 1972 Rules).

  The 1972 Rules apply to each and every department of State

  Government except the administrative services, judiciary and

  technical services for which there are separate rules.          There are

  approximately more than 2 lac employees in the State of H.P. who

  are governed by the 1972 Rules. Thus, approximately there would

  be 30,000 to 35,000 ex-servicemen who have been conferred the

  benefit of seniority under the Rules of 1972.
This contention, however, needs to be rejected in view of the

detailed discussion carried out hereinabove.
30) In the impugned judgement, the High Court has pointed out one

  more pertinent aspect. It is mentioned that the benefit of past service

  rendered in armed forces is even given to those persons who did not

  even fulfil the minimum educational criteria for the service which is

  otherwise mandatory. Discussion in this behalf is as follows:
26
“In our considered opinion, the State Government did not at
        all take into consideration these aspects of the matter. No
        material has been placed on record to show whether such
        objective criteria were followed while framing the Rules. We
        also find that in the State of Himachal Pradesh benefit of past
        service rendered in the armed forces is even given to those
        persons who did not even fulfil the minimum educational
        criteria for the service which is otherwise mandatory. Take for
        example the present case. According to the R&P Rules
        relating to District Attorneys, the minimum eligibility criteria is
        a degree in law with three years experience as a lawyer.
        Ex-servicemen who were not even possessing a degree in
        law nor having any experience of practice are being given the
        benefit of the past service rendered in the Army. Immediately
        on joining the service they become senior to persons who
        have come from the general category and joined service
        much earlier to them. This is bound to affect the efficiency in
        the service. This will also cause heart burning. Competent
        persons who joined from the general category are placed
        lower in seniority to those who may have become eligible to
        even join service much after they joined.
xxx              xxx          xxx

        A person who does not have the minimum educational
        qualification would not be even eligible to apply for the post.
        When the person is not even eligible to apply for the post it
        does not stand to reason that he can be given benefit of
        service rendered in the Army in such a post. The purpose of
        the Rules is to rehabilitate the army man. The rehabilitation is
        done by providing them reservation but when it comes to
        giving them the benefit of seniority the Rule becomes
        unconstitutional if the candidate being given the benefit is
        ineligible to hold the post. Even the State is not clear as to
        from which date this benefit is to be given. In some cases like
        in the case of respondent No. 4 and Sh. G.C. Rana the
        benefit of past service has been given only from the date
        these persons acquired the minimum qualifications but in the
        cases of some other persons this benefit has been given
        regardless of this date. This practice is also discriminatory
        and violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.”
31) Thus, grant of benefit of military service even in respect of those

  who join the armed forces during the emergency, is to be given only

  from the date when they attained the minimum eligibility criteria
27
prescribed in the Rules for the post to which such persons are

  appointed.
32) Since we have already held that insofar as these appellants are

  concerned, they are not entitled to get the period served in armed

  forces counted for the purpose of seniority as Assistant District

  Attorney, this question does not arise for consideration in these

  cases.
33) As a result, Civil Appeal No. 011060 of 2017 arising out of SLP(C)

  8710 of 2009, Civil Appeal No. 011061 of 2017 arising out of SLP(C)

  14361 of 2009 and Civil Appeal No. 011062 of 2017 arising out of

  SLP(C) 19750 of 2017 are dismissed.
34) Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 22416 2017 (arising out of

  SLP(C) ….D. No. 20104 of 2017) is also filed by ex-servicemen who

  have joined Department of Prosecution of the State. They are five in

  number. However, they have challenged earlier judgment of the High

  Court, pronounced in Civil Writ No. 620 of 2003 on November 16,

  2007. We do not see any reason to entertain this Special Leave

  Petition as it is filed after a period of 10 years. In any case, the

  petitioners herein have raised the same issues which are raised by

  the appellants in the aforesaid appeals and those appeals have been

  dismissed finding no merit therein. Accordingly, this special leave

  petition is also dismissed both on limitation as well as on merits.
28
Civil Appeal No. 657 of 2016
35) Insofar as Civil Appeal No. 657 of 2016 is concerned, it is filed by

  State of Himachal Pradesh against the respondent who was an

  ex-serviceman appointed as Peon against unreserved post with effect

  from January 01, 1975. The issue
in that case
was different though

  he was not given the benefit of Army service towards seniority, it was

  primarily for the officer that the respondent was appointed against

  unreserved post and on that basis the Government took the view that

  he could not be given the benefit available to the ex-servicemen

  under the 1972 Rules. Respondent approached the Administrative

  Tribunal, Himachal Pradesh and his O.A. was allowed. Against the

  judgment of the Tribunal, State filed writ petition which has been

  dismissed by the High Court vide judgment dated May 22, 2014

  against which the aforesaid appeal is preferred by the State.       A

  perusal of the judgment of the High Court would reveal that the

  administrative instructions issued by the Government that when a

  released Army Personnel has been appointed against the general

  un-reserved vacancy in the first instance, he should be given an

  option at the time of first appointment to accept a reserved vacancy,

  even if it occurs subsequent to his appointment. The High Court

  noted that such an option was never provided to the respondent. The
29
vacancy became available after the appointment of respondent as

      Peon on January 01, 1975 and since the State Government was

      required to give option to the respondent at the time of initial

      appointment to be considered against the post reserved for

      ex-servicemen, which was not done and, therefore, respondent could

      not be made to suffer due to reminiscence on the part of the State

      Government. In the aforesaid factual background, we do not find any

      error in the judgment of the High Court and, therefore, dismiss, this

      appeal.
.............................................J.
                                                                         (A.K. SIKRI)


                                             .............................................J.
                                                           (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 25, 2017
30
ITEM NO.1501                 COURT NO.6                   SECTION XIV
(FOR JUDGMENT)
                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C)      No(s).    8710/2009
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 29-12-2008
in CWP No. 488/2001 passed by the High Court Of Himachal Pradesh At
Shimla)

R.K.BARWAL. & ORS.                                    Petitioner(s)

                                  VERSUS

THE STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH & ORS.                   Respondent(s)

([HEARD BY : HON. A.K. SIKRI AND HON. ASHOK BHUSHAN, JJ.])


WITH
C.A. No. 657/2016 (XIV)
SLP(C) No. 14361/2009 (XIV)
SLP(C) No. 19750/2011 (XIV)
SLP(C)... Diary No. 20104/2017.
Date : 25-08-2017 These matters were called on for pronouncement of
judgment today.
CORAM :   HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.K. SIKRI
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ASHOK BHUSHAN


For Petitioner(s)    Mr. Paramjeet Singh, Patwalia, Sr. Adv.
Mr. Vikas Mahajan, Adv.
Mr. Vinod Sharma, Adv.
Mr.Vishal Mahajan, Adv.
Mr. S.S. Rai, Adv.
Mr. Varinder Kumar Sharma, AOR

                     Ms. Pragati Neekhra, AOR

                     Mr. Bhaskar Y. Kulkarni, AOR

                     Mr. Rajeev Sharma, AOR

                     Mr. Naresh K. Sharma, AOR

                     Mr. Sahil Bhalaik, AOR

For Respondent(s)    Mr. Rajeev Kumar Bansal, Adv.
31
Mr. Brahma Prakash, Adv.
Mr. Akshay K. Ghai, Adv.
Mr. Balraj Dewan, AOR

                      Mr. Naresh K. Sharma, AOR


                      Mr. Himinder Lal, AOR

                      Mr. Aditya Dhawan, Adv.
Ms. Kiran Dhawan, Adv.
Hon'ble Mr. Justice A.K. Sikri pronounced the judgment of the

Bench   comprising   His   Lordship    and    Hon'ble   Mr.   Justice    Ashok

Bhushan.
Leave granted in Special Leave Petition (C) Nos. 8710 of 2009,

14361 of 2009 and 19750 of 2011.
The appeals      and Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. ____ 2017

(arising out of SLP(C) ….D. No. 20104 of 2017) are dismissed in

terms of the signed reportable judgment.
Pending      application(s),      if     any,   stands    disposed      of

accordingly.
(Ashwani Thakur)                    (MADHU NARULA)
              COURT MASTER                       COURT MASTER
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)