[Cites
3
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajasthan State Road Transport ... vs Smt. Mohani Devi on 15 April, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 2118, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 462
Author:
A.S. Bopanna
Bench:
A.S. Bopanna
,
R. Banumathi
NON­REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2236 OF 2020
                                (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No.5650 of 2019)


                         Rajasthan State Road Transport             .… Appellant(s)
                         Corporation Ltd. & Ors.

                                                    Versus

                         Smt. Mohani Devi & Anr.                 …. Respondent(s)




                                            JUDGMENT
A.S. Bopanna,J.
Leave granted.
2.    The respondent herein was the Petitioner in S.B

                         Civil Writ Petition No. 2839/2012 filed before the

                         Rajasthan High Court. The brief facts that led to the filing

                         of the Writ Petition is that respondent herein had claimed
Signature Not Verified
the retiral benefits of her late husband who was
Digitally signed by
SUSHMA KUMARI
appointed in the post of conductor on 15.03.1979 at
BAJAJ
Date: 2020.04.15
14:26:51 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 13
Alwar        Depot   of    the    Appellant   Road   Transport

    Corporation. The benefits were claimed on the basis that

    her husband be deemed to have voluntarily retired from

    service instead of having resigned.
3.         In the course of service, respondent’s husband had

    moved an application seeking voluntary retirement from

    service on 28.07.2005 indicating health reasons. No

    order was passed on the said application for voluntary

    retirement and the respondent’s husband continued to

    remain in service.
4.         Subsequently,    the   respondent’s   husband   on

    03.05.2006 submitted his resignation as he claimed to be

    under depression and his health condition had further

    deteriorated. The resignation was accepted by the

    authorities on 31.05.2006, he was relieved of his duties

    and the benefits were paid.
5.         Thereafter, the respondent’s husband is stated to

    have immediately submitted an application pointing out

    that he had erred in mentioning ‘resignation’ and he
Page 2 of 13
desired to retire in view of his earlier application for

    voluntary retirement. The application also mentioned that

    no decision had been taken by authorities on his first

    application dated 28.07.2005 and therefore he should be

    treated as having voluntarily retired with consequent

    retiral benefits. The respondent after her husband’s

    death approached the High Court with such prayer.
6.         The    learned      Single     Judge    held      that    the

    respondent’s        husband       had     moved     an    application

    indicating deteriorating health and forcing such employee

    to work would be an act of oppression. Additionally, it

    was held that the voluntary retirement application was

    not decided within the period prescribed as per the

    Clause 19­ D(2) of the Pension Scheme and reliance was

    placed on Clause 18­D(2) of RSRTC Standing Orders as

    per which an employee of the Corporation who had

    rendered         pensionable    service    was    entitled    to    seek

    voluntary retirement. It held that the respondent’s

    husband would be deemed to have retired even though

    he had moved another application terming his retirement
Page 3 of 13
as resignation in view of the law laid down in
Sheel

    Kumar Jain vs. The New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
2012 (1) SLR 305. Thus, the appellants were directed to

    treat respondent’s husband as having voluntarily retired

    and release the retiral benefits to which he was entitled.
7.         Aggrieved, an appeal was filed by the appellants

    herein in D.B Special Appeal Writ No. 1261/2018.

    However, no infirmity was found by the Division Bench in

    the reasoning of the learned Single Judge and the learned

    Division Bench dismissed the appeal. The same has been

    assailed by the appellants herein in this appeal.
8.         In the above background we have heard Dr. Ritu

    Bhardwaj, learned counsel for the appellants, Mr. S.

    Mahendran, learned counsel for the respondents and

    perused the appeal papers.
9.         The short question that arises for consideration

    herein is as to whether the husband of the respondent

    had acquired an indefeasible right to seek for voluntary

    retirement from service and in that       light whether the
Page 4 of 13
High Court was justified in arriving at the conclusion that

    the subsequent resignation dated 03.05.2006 submitted

    by the husband of the respondent be considered as an

    application      for   voluntary   retirement   and   treat   the

    cessation of the jural relationship of employer/employee

    under the provision for Voluntary Retirement.
10.        In order to consider the above aspect, a perusal of

    the factual matrix in the instant case would indicate that

    the respondent’s husband had joined the service of the

    Appellant Transport Corporation at Alwar Depot on

    15.03.1979. The application seeking voluntary retirement

    was submitted on 28.07.2005 by which period the

    respondent’s husband no doubt had put in more than 25

    years of service. Insofar as the eligibility to apply seeking

    voluntary retirement in view of the completed length of

    service, the respondent’s husband had acquired such

    right. The Appellant Transport Corporation however, did

    not think it appropriate to accept the application and

    grant the voluntary retirement. In that circumstance the

    husband of the respondent submitted his resignation on
Page 5 of 13
03.05.2006       which      was   accepted      by     the    Appellant

    Transport Corporation and was relieved on 31.05.2006.

    The respondent contends that immediately thereafter an

    application      was     made      indicating     that       the    word

    ‘resignation’    was     inadvertently        mentioned       and        the

    intention of the respondent’s husband was to renew his

    request    for     voluntary       retirement.       However,            the

    consideration of such subsequent application by the

    Appellant Transport Corporation did not arise and as

    indicated, the respondent’s husband had been relieved on

    31.05.2006 and all the service benefits payable in respect

    of an employee who had resigned from service was paid,

    which was accepted by the respondent’s husband. The

    undisputed       position    is   also   that    the     respondent’s

    husband       subsequently        died   on     14.04.2011.         It    is

    subsequent to the death of the husband, the respondent

    had filed the writ petition before the High Court of

    judicature for Rajasthan, Bench at Jaipur in S.B. Civil

    Writ Petition No.2839/2012. The learned Single Judge

    while considering the case of the respondent merely took
Page 6 of 13
note of the legal position which had been enunciated by

    this Court in the facts of those cases which had been

    referred and with a bare reference to Clause 19D(2) of the

    Rules arrived at the conclusion that the application for

    voluntary retirement was deemed to have been accepted

    and therefore, directed that the appellants to treat the

    respondent’s husband to have retired from service on the

    date he was relieved and pay the retiral benefits. The

    Division Bench has reiterated the said position.
11.        Having heard the learned counsel for the parties,

    we find that the factual aspects which were relevant for

    decision making in the instant case has not been referred

    by the High Court during the course of its order but has

    merely assumed that the voluntary retirement application

    should be deemed to have been accepted when there was

    no rejection.      As noticed from the objection statement

    filed by the respondent herein herself, the right to seek

    for voluntary retirement is stipulated in Rule 50 of

    Rajasthan Civil Services Pension Rules, 1996.            As

    indicated above, since the same provides for 20 years of
Page 7 of 13
qualifying    service,     the   respondent’s   husband   had

    qualified to apply. However, what is relevant to take note

    is that sub­Rule(2) thereof provides that the notice of

    voluntary retirement given by the employee shall require

    acceptance by the appointing authority. In the instant

    case, the undisputed position is that there was no

    acceptance and in that circumstance the husband of the

    respondent had submitted his resignation on 03.05.2006.

    Though       the    High    Court    has   indicated   deemed

    acceptance, the same would not be justified in the

    instant facts since the position which has not been taken

    note by the High Court is that as on the date when the

    husband of the respondent had made the application for

    voluntary retirement on 28.07.2005 the husband of the

    respondent had already been issued              Charge­Sheets

    bearing No.7352 dated 16.12.2004 and bearing No.4118

    dated 11.07.2005 alleging           misconduct. Though the

    respondent,        through the objection statement seeks to

    contend that the charge alleged against her husband was

    not justified, that aspect of the matter would not be
Page 8 of 13
germane to the present consideration since the position

    of law is well established that pending disciplinary

    proceedings if an application for voluntary retirement is

    submitted there would be no absolute right seeking for

    acceptance since the employer if keen on proceeding with

    the inquiry would be entitled not to consider the

    application for voluntary retirement. Hence there would

    be no obligation to accept. In the instant facts the

    proceedings relating to the charge sheet was taken

    forward and completed through the final order dated

    03.09.2005. The punishment of withholding of the

    increment was imposed. In such circumstance the non­

    consideration of the application for voluntary retirement

    would be justified.
12.        Be that as it may, as noted the inquiry had been

    completed and thereafter when the respondent’s husband

    submitted the resignation on 03.05.2006, the same was

    processed, accepted, he was relieved on 31.05.2006 and

    the payment of terminal benefits were made which had

    been accepted by him. During his lifetime up to
Page 9 of 13
14.04.2011 the husband did not raise any issue with

    regard to the same. It is only thereafter the respondent

    has filed the writ petition before the High Court. Primarily

    it is to be noticed that when the application for voluntary

    retirement was filed on 28.07.2005 and had not been

    favourably   considered by the employer, instead of

    submitting the resignation on 03.05.2006, if any legal

    right was available the appropriate course ought to have

    been to seek for acceptance of the application by

    initiating appropriate legal proceedings. Instead the

    respondent’s husband had yielded to the position of non­

    acceptance of the application for voluntary retirement

    and has thereafter submitted his resignation. The

    acceptance of the resignation was acted upon by

    receiving the terminal benefits. If that be the position,

    when the writ petition was filed belatedly in the year

    2012 and that too after the death of the employee who

    had not raised any grievance during his life time,

    consideration of the prayer made by the respondent was
Page 10 of 13
not justified. The High Court has, therefore, committed

    an error in passing the concurrent orders.
13.     The learned counsel for the respondent would

    submit that even if it is a case of resignation the deceased

    husband of the respondent was entitled to the payment of

    gratuity as he had put in the qualifying service. The

    learned counsel for the appellant would contend that the

    gratuity amount had been paid. In that regard, the

    reference made to para 9 of the writ appeal filed before

    the High Court would however indicate that though

    reference is made to the payment disbursed to the

    respondent’s husband while accepting the resignation,

    the same does not disclose that the gratuity amount has

    been paid. Further, in the appeal filed before this Court

    the appellants have sought to justify the non­payment of

    the gratuity as the husband of the respondent had

    resigned from service. As rightly pointed out by the

    learned counsel for the respondents,
Section 4(1)(b)
of the

    Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 provides that the gratuity

    shall be payable if the termination of employment is after
Page 11 of 13
5 years of continuous service and such termination

    would include resignation as well. In that view, if the

    gratuity amount has not been paid to the respondent’s

    husband, the liability to pay the same would subsist and

    the respondent No.1 will be entitled to receive the same

    in accordance with the provisions of the Act. In that

    regard it is directed that the appellants shall accordingly

    calculate    the   gratuity   and   pay   the   same   to   the

    respondent No.1, if already not paid. Such payment shall

    be made within four weeks from this date.
14.     In the result, the appeal is allowed. The judgment

    dated 19.11.2018 passed in D.B. Special Appeal(W)

    No.1261/2018 upholding the order dated 01.11.2017 in

    S.B. Civil Writ Petition No.2839 of 2012 is set aside. The

    gratuity amount as directed above shall be paid to

    respondent No.1 in terms of the provisions of the
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
within four weeks from

    this date.
Page 12 of 13
15. Pending application, if any, shall stand disposed of.
………….…………….J.
                                        (R. BANUMATHI)



                                       ………….…………….J.
                                        (A.S. BOPANNA)

    New Delhi,
    April 15, 2020
Page 13 of 13