[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
In Re Guidelines For Court Functioning ... vs Unknown on 6 April, 2020
Author:
Chief Justice
Bench:
L. Nageswara Rao
,
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
S.A.Bobde
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                       SUO MOTU WRIT (CIVIL) NO.5/2020


                         IN RE: GUIDELINES FOR COURT FUNCTIONING THROUGH VIDEO
                         CONFERENCING DURING COVID-19 PANDEMIC




                                                    O R D E R
1.   The recent outbreak of COVID-19 (Coronavirus) in

                         several countries, including India, has necessitated the

                         immediate    adoption     of       measures     to     ensure    social

                         distancing in order to prevent the transmission of the

                         virus. The Supreme Court of India and High Courts have

                         adopted   measures   to   reduce      the     physical     presence   of

                         lawyers, litigants, court staff, para legal personnel

                         and representatives of the electronic and print media in

                         courts across the country and to ensure the continued

                         dispensation of justice.
2.   Every   individual    and      institution      is    expected   to

                         cooperate in the implementation of measures designed to
Signature Not Verified
reduce the transmission of the virus. The scaling down
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2020.04.06
15:09:59 IST
Reason:                  of   conventional    operations       within     the      precincts   of

                         courts is a measure in that direction. Access to justice
1
is   fundamental      to    preserve         the   rule     of    law   in    the

democracy envisaged by the Constitution of India. The

challenges occasioned by the outbreak of COVID-19 have

to   be   addressed        while   preserving         the     constitutional

commitment to ensuring the delivery of and access to

justice to those who seek it. It is necessary to ensure

compliance with social distancing guidelines issued from

time to time by various health authorities, Government

of India and States. Court hearings in congregation must

necessarily become an exception during this period.
3.    Modern technology has enabled courts to enhance the

quality    and   effectiveness            of    the     administration         of

justice. Technology has facilitated advances in speed,

accessibility        and      connectivity            which      enable      the

dispensation     of    justice          to     take    place      in    diverse

settings and situations without compromising the core

legal principles of adjudication.                     Indian courts have

been proactive in embracing advancement in technology in

judicial     proceedings.          The         Indian       judiciary         has

incorporated     Information           and     Communication       Technology

systems    through    the     e-Courts         Integrated        Mission     Mode

Project (e-Courts Project) as part of the National e-

Governance    Plan    (NeGP).          The   robust     infrastructure         in
2
place        has   reduced      conventional         impediments      and    legal

        uncertainty surrounding the use of virtual courts. ICT

        enabled infrastructure is available across all courts

        including the district judiciary which constitutes the

        initial interface of the court system with the citizen.
4.      The use of technology found judicial recognition in

        precedent of this Court in
State of Maharashtra v Praful

        Desai1
.            This    Court   held       that    the     term    ‘evidence’

        includes electronic evidence and that video conferencing

        may     be     used       to   record       evidence.    It    observed      that

        developments              in   technology        have        opened     up     the

        possibility          of    virtual      courts       which    are    similar   to

        physical courts. The Court held:
“Advances in science and technology have
                     now, so to say, shrunk the world. They now
                     enable one to see and hear events, taking
                     place far away, as they are actually taking
                     place…Video conferencing is an advancement
                     in science and technology which permits one
                     to see, hear and talk with someone far away,
                     with the same facility and ease as if he is
                     present before you i.e. in your presence… In
                     fact he/she is present before you on a
                     screen. Except for touching one can see,
                     hear and observe as if the party is in the
                     same room. In video conferencing both
                     parties are in presence of each other…
                     Recording of such evidence would be as per
                     “procedure established by law”.”

1 (2003) 4 SCC 601
3
5.     Faced        with    the       unprecedented           and     extraordinary

outbreak of a pandemic, it is necessary that Courts at

all levels respond to the call of social distancing and

ensure that court premises do not contribute to the

spread of virus.            This is not a matter of discretion but

of     duty.         Indeed,          Courts      throughout           the   country

particularly at the level of the Supreme Court and the

High     Courts       have        employed        video        conferencing       for

dispensation          of    Justice         and        as     guardians      of   the

Constitution         and    as     protectors          of     individual     liberty

governed by the rule of law. Taking cognizance of the

measures adopted by this court and by the High Courts

and District Courts, it is necessary for this court to

issue directions by taking recourse to the jurisdiction

conferred by
Article 142
of the Constitution.
6.     Therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred on

the    Supreme       Court       of    India      by
Article    142
of   the

Constitution         of     India      to    make       such     orders      as   are

necessary for doing complete justice, we direct that:
i.      All measures that have been and shall be taken
               by    this    Court         and    by    the     High    Courts,   to
               reduce the need for the physical presence of
               all stakeholders within court premises and to
4
secure the functioning of courts in consonance
      with    social     distancing       guidelines           and       best
      public health practices shall be deemed to be
      lawful;
ii.   The Supreme Court of India and all High Courts
      are authorized to adopt measures required to
      ensure the robust functioning of the judicial
      system through the use of video conferencing
      technologies; and
iii. Consistent        with       the   peculiarities               of    the
      judicial       system       in    every         state     and       the
      dynamically            developing           public             health
      situation, every High Court is authorised to
      determine the modalities which are suitable to
      the temporary transition to the use of video
      conferencing technologies;
iv.   The concerned courts shall maintain a helpline
      to ensure that any complaint in regard to the
      quality     or     audibility         of        feed     shall       be
      communicated           during      the          proceeding           or
      immediately after its conclusion failing which
      no     grievance       in    regard        to     it     shall       be
      entertained thereafter.
v.    The District Courts in each State shall adopt
      the mode of Video Conferencing prescribed by
      the concerned High Court.
vi.   The Court shall duly notify and make available
      the facilities for video conferencing for such
      litigants who do not have the means or access
      to     video     conferencing          facilities.                   If
      necessary,       in    appropriate         cases       courts       may
      appoint     an        amicus-curiae         and        make        video
5
conferencing facilities available to such an
           advocate.
vii. Until appropriate rules are framed by the High
           Courts,    video      conferencing      shall      be   mainly
           employed for hearing arguments whether at the
           trial stage or at the appellate stage. In no
           case shall evidence be recorded without the
           mutual consent of both the parties by video
           conferencing.       If   it    is    necessary     to   record
           evidence in a Court room the presiding officer
           shall     ensure    that      appropriate     distance      is
           maintained between any two individuals in the
           Court.
viii. The presiding officer shall have the power to
           restrict entry of persons into the court room
           or the points from which the arguments are
           addressed      by     the     advocates.     No    presiding
           officer shall prevent the entry of a party to
           the case unless such party is suffering from
           any infectious illness.               However, where the
           number    of   litigants       are    many   the   presiding
           officer shall have the power to restrict the
           numbers. The presiding officer shall in his
           discretion adjourn the proceedings where it is
           not possible to restrict the number.
7.     The above directions are issued in furtherance of

the    commitment    to    the      delivery      of    justice.      The

cooperation of all courts, judges, litigants, parties,

staff and other stakeholders is indispensable in the
6
successful   implementation       of   the   above   directions    to

ensure   that   the   judiciary    rises     to   face   the   unique

challenge presented by the outbreak of COVID-19.                These

directions shall operate until further orders.
8.   List the matter after four weeks.
……………………………………………CJI
                                                    [ S.A.BOBDE ]




                                             ………………………………………………J.
                                             [ D.Y. CHANDRACHUD ]




                                              ……………………………………………J.
                                             [ L. NAGESWARA RAO ]

NEW DELHI;
APRIL 06, 2020.
7