[Cites
10
, Cited by
63
]
Supreme Court of India
Emil Webber vs Commissioner Of Income Tax, V And M, ... on 19 February, 1993
Equivalent citations: 1993 AIR 1466, 1993 SCR (2) 27, AIR 1993 SUPREME COURT 1466, 1993 (2) SCC 453, 1993 AIR SCW 1341, 1993 TAX. L. R. 475, (1993) 2 JT 555 (SC), 1993 (2) JT 555, (1993) 2 SCR 27 (SC), (1993) 67 TAXMAN 532, 1993 KERLJ(TAX) 253, (1993) 2 COMLJ 21, (1993) 110 CURTAXREP 257, (1993) 2 MAD LJ 112, (1993) 1 MAD LW 703, (1993) 200 ITR 483, (1993) 113 TAXATION 214
Author:
B.P.  Jeevan Reddy
Bench:
B.P.  Jeevan Reddy
,
N Venkatachala
PETITIONER:
EMIL WEBBER

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, V AND M, NAGPUR

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/02/1993

BENCH:
JEEVAN REDDY, B.P. (J)
BENCH:
JEEVAN REDDY, B.P. (J)
VENKATACHALA N. (J)

CITATION:
 1993 AIR 1466		  1993 SCR  (2)	 27
 1993 SCC  (2) 453	  JT 1993 (2)	555
 1993 SCALE  (1)659


ACT:
Income	Tax  Act
1961 :
Sections 2(24)
,
14
,
17
,
56
,
195-
'Income' Meaning of-Amount paid by way of tax on the  salary
amount of assessee on his behalf-Whether assessee's  Income-
Whether taxable under the heading "other sources".



HEADNOTE:
Ballarpur,  a public limited company undertook to set  up  a
caustic soda/chlorine manufacturing plant.  It entered	into
an  agreement with a French concern for purchase of  certain
machinery and equipment.
In  another  agreement with Ballarpur,	the  French  concern
agreed	 to  provide  services	of  certain  personnel	 and
Ballarpur  agreed to pay salaries and other emoluments	free
of any Indian tax or duty to the personnel.
The French concern entered into an arrangement with a  Swiss
concern	 for  supply  of  certain  machinery  and  to	make
available services of certain personnel.
The  assessee-appellant	 was one such person.	He  came  to
India and started working in connection with the setting  up
of the plant.
In  addition to daily allowances and other  facilities,	 the
assessee-appellant was paid Rs. 3,82, 481 and Rs. 67,200 for
the assessment years, 1974-75 and 1975-76, respectively.
Before	the Income Tax Officer, the assessee contended	that
he  was	 not liable to pay tax.	 The I.T.O. did	 not  agree.
Ballarpur paid the tax amount of Rs. 3,23,400 and Rs. 35,546
for the assessment years respectively.
The  Income  Tax  Officer treated the  tax  amount  paid  by
Ballarpur  as a perquisite and added the same to the  salary
amount of the assessee.
The  assessee questioned the action of the I.T.O. in  appeal
before the A.A.C., which was dismissed.
28
The  appeal  flied before the Tribunal was  also  dismissed,
whereupon  the assessee obtained a reference to be  answered
by the High Court.
The High Court answered the reference, "whether on the facts
and in the circumstances of the case the amount of tax	paid
by  Ballarpur on behalf of the assessee in assessment  years
1974-  75  and 1975-76 is income taxable under	the  heading
'other sources'," against the assessee.
Hence  these  appeals by the assessee  contending  that	 the
amount	paid by way of tax could not be treated as  'Income'
of  assessee; that as the assessee did not receive the	said
amount from Ballarpur, it could not constitute his income.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court,
HELD:	  1.01. The definition of 'Income' in clause (24) of
Section	 2
of the Act is an inclusive definition.   It	adds
several	 artificial categories to the concept of income	 but
on  that account the expression 'income' does not  lose	 its
natural	 connotation.	It  is repeatedly said	that  it  is
difficult  to  define  the expression  'income'	 in  precise
terms.	 Anything which can properly be described as  income
is  taxable under the Act unless, of course, it is  exempted
under one or the other provision of the Act. [31D]
1.02.	  The amount paid by Ballarpur by way of tax on	 the
salary amount received by the assessee can be treated as the
income	of the assessee.  The said amount is nothing  but  a
tax upon the salary received by the assessee.  By virtue  of
the  obligation	 undertaken by Ballarpur to pay tax  on	 the
salary	received by the assessee among others, it  paid	 the
said tax.  The said payment is, therefore, for and on behalf
of the assessee.  It is not a gratuitous payment But for the
said  agreement and but for the said payment, the  said	 tax
amount	would  have been liable to be paid by  the  assessee
himself.  He could not have received the salary which he did
but for the said payment of tax.  The obligation placed upon
Ballarpur  by  virtue of
Section 195
of the Income  Tax	 Act
cannot	also  be  ignored  in this  context.   It  would  be
unrealistic  to	 say that the said payment had	no  integral
connection with the salary received by the assessee. [31E-G]
1.03.	  Inasmuch  as	the assessee is not an	employee  of
Ballarpur,  which  made the payment, it	 cannot	 be  brought
within	the  purview  of
Section 17
of	the  Act.   It	must
necessarily be placed under sub-section (1)
29
of
Section 56
, 'income from other sources'.   According  to
the  said sub-section, income of every kind which is not  to
be  excluded  from the total income under the Act  shall  be
chargeable  to income tax under the head 'income from  other
sources', if it is not chargeable to income tax under any of
the other heads specified in
Section 14
, Items A to E. [32A-
B]
N-4.   Modi v. S.A.L., Narayana Rao, 61 ITR 428 SC; C.L	 T.,
Bombay	v. Smt.	 T.P. Sidhwa, 133 ITR 840 and  Mrs.   Sheela
Kaushish v. C.I. T. Delhi 131 [TR 435 SC, distinguished.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 3115-16  of
1980.
From  the Judgment and Order dated 15.6.1978 of	 the  Bombay
High Court in I.T. Ref.	 No. 458 of 1976.
V.U.  Eradi and Suman J. Khaitan for Khaitan & Co.  for	 the
Appellant.
S. Rajappa for Ms. A. Subhashini for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
B.P.  JEEVAN  REDDY, J. Assessee is the	 appellant.   He  is
aggrieved by the decision of the Bombay High Court in Income
Tax  Reference	No.  458 of  1976  answering  the  following
question, which was referred to it at his instance,  against
him:  "whether on the facts and in the circumstances of	 the
case  the amount of tax paid by Ballarpur on behalf  of	 the
assessee  in assessment years 1974-75 and 1975-76 is  income
tax ore under the heading 'other sources"'.
The   Ballarpur	  Paper	 and  Straw  Board   Mills   Limited
(Ballarpur)  is	 a  public limited company  engaged  in	 the
manufacture  of paper and straw board.	It undertook to	 set
up   a	 caustic  soda/chlorine	  manufacturing	  plant	  at
Ballarpur.For  this  purpose, it entered into  an  agreement
with  Krebs,  a	 French concern,  for  purchase	 of  certain
machinery  and	equipment.   There was	a  second  agreement
between	 Ballarpur and Krebs whereunder Krebs  undertook  to
provide	 services of certain personnel	including  engineers
for  setting  up the plant at Ballarpur.   Krebs,  in  turn,
entered	 into  an arrangement with a Swiss  concern,  Escher
Wyas  Eurich,  for supply of certain machinery and  also  to
make available services of certain personnel.  The
30
assessee,  Emil Webler, was one such person provided by	 the
Swiss concern The assessee came to India and worked here  in
connection with the setting up of the plant.
According  to the agreement between Ballarpur and Krebs	 the
former	undertook  to pay salaries and other  emoluments  to
personnel  provided by Krebs in accordance with the  formula
contained  in  the agreement.  Inter alia, it  was  provided
that  'salaries	 are understood free of any  Indian  tax  or
duty'.	 For  the  assessment year  1974-75,  the  assessee-
appellant  was	paid  a	 sum of Rs.  3,82,481  and  for	 the
assessment year 1975-76, a sum of Rs. 67,200 in addition  to
daily allowances and other facilities.
The assessee contended before the Income Tax Officer that he
was  not liable to pay tax He also filed  returns  affirming
the  said  stand.   The stand taken by	him  was  negatived,
whereupon  Ballarpur  paid the tax of Rs. 3,23,400  and	 Rs.
35,546	for the said two assessment years respectively.	  In
his  assessment	 orders,  the I.T.O. treated  the  said	 tax
amount	as  a perquisite and added the same  to	 the  salary
amount	received  by the assessee.  The	 said  addition	 was
questioned by the assessee in appeal, before the A.A.C.	 but
without	 success.   The	 matter	 was  then  carried  to	 the
Tribunal.    The  Tribunal  too	 did  not  agree  with	 the
assessee's contention and dismissed his appeal whereupon  he
obtained the aforesaid reference which, as stated above, has
been answered against him by the Bombay High Court.
For a proper appreciation of the question arising herein, it
is necessary to notice certain factual statements  contained
in  the	 Statement  of	the Case.   It	is  stated  therein:
"according  to	this  agreement,  Ballarpur  were  under  an
obligation  to	pay  by the device  of	delegation  invoices
opened	with a bank in France certain amount of salaries  at
agreed	rates  to Krebs and Cis.  Paris for setting  up	 the
plant  at  the town of	Ballapur.............  The  Tribunal
clarified that there was no dispute between the parties that
the amounts of Rs. 3,82,481 and Rs. 67,200 paid by Ballarpur
through Krebs to the assessee for services rendered by it in
the  two  respective years were taxable	 under	the  heading
'Salary'.   It further clarified that there was	 no  dispute
between	 the parties, that the relationship of the  employer
and  employee  did  not	 exist	between	 Ballarpur  and	 the
assessee.   The	 Tribunal held as below: (1)  Ballarpur	 was
under  a legal obligation to pay the tax if any,  levied  on
the assessee; (2) Ballarpur paid the tax by virtue of such a
legal obligation ...........
31
The facts found by the Tribunal thus show that the assessee-
appellant  was paid certain salary free of tax but that	 the
tax payable in that behalf was to be and was in fact paid by
Ballarpur.   The  assessment  was  made	 upon  the  assessee
directly.   The question is whether the said  tax  component
paid by Ballarptir can be included within the income of	 the
assessee.  The first contention of' the learned counsel	 for
the assessee is that the amount paid by Ballarpur by way  of
tax  cannot be treated as 'income' of assessee at all.	 His
second	contention is that the assessee did not receive	 the
said amount and, therefore, it cannot constitute his income.
Indeed,	 the learned counsel sought to argue that  Ballarpur
was under no obligation to pay the said tax amount  relating
to  the salary amount received by the assessee.	 We find  it
difficult to agree with the learned counsel.
The  definition of 'income' in clause (24) of
Section  2
of
the  Act  is  an  inclusive  definition.   It  adds  several
artificial  categories to the concept of income but on	that
account	 the expression 'income' does not lose	its  natural
connotation.   Indeed,	it  is repeatedly said	that  it  is
difficult  to  define  the expression  'income'	 in  precise
terms.	 Anything which can properly be described as  income
is  taxable under the Act unless, of course, it is  exempted
under one or the other provision of the Act.  It is from the
said  angle that we have to examine whether the amount	paid
by Ballarpur by way of tax on the salary amount received  by
the  assessee can be treated as the income of the  assessee.
It cannot be overlooked that the said amount is nothing	 but
a  tax upon the salary received by the assessee.  By  virtue
of the obligation undertaken by Ballarpur to pay tax on	 the
salary	received by the assessee among others, it  paid	 the
said tax.  The said payment is, therefore, for and on behalf
of  the assessee.  It is not a gratuitous payment.  But	 for
the  said agreement and but for the said payment,  the	said
tax amount would have been liable to be paid by the assessee
himself	 He could not have received the salary which he	 did
but for the said payment of tax.  The obligation placed upon
Ballarpur  by  virtue of
Section 195
of the Income  Tax	 Act
cannot	also  be  ignored  in this  context.   It  would  be
unrealistic  to	 say that the said payment had	no  integral
connection  with  the salary received by the  assessee.	  We
are,  therefore, of the opinion that the High Court and	 the
authorities  under  the Act were right in holding  that	 the
said  tax amount is liable to be included in the  income  of
the assessee during the said two assessment years.
The  question then arises under which head of income  should
the said
32
income	be  placed.   Inasmuch as the  assessee	 is  not  an
employee of Ballarpur, which made the payment, it cannot  be
brought	 within	 the purview of
Section 17
of the  Act.	  It
must necessarily be placed under sub-section (1) of
Section
56
, 'income from other sources'.  According to the said sub-
section,  income of every kind which is not to	be  included
from  the total income under the Act shall be chargeable  to
income tax under the head 'income from other sources', if it
is not chargeable to income tax under any of the other heads
specified in
Section 14
, Items A to E. It is not the case of
the assessee that any provision of the Act exempts the	said
income from the liability to tax
The  learned counsel for the assessee-appellant relied	upon
certain	 decisions in support of his contention.  The  first
is  the	 decision  of  this court in  N.A.  Modi  v.  S.A.L.
Narayana Rao, 61 ITR 428 SC.  An advocate was appointed as a
Judge.	He received certain income after his appointment  as
a Judge in lieu of the professional service rendered by	 him
before	his appointment.  The question was whether the	said
amount is taxable.  It was held that it was not (in view  of
the provisions of the Act as it then stood).  The basis	 for
the  said  decision is that the assessee therein  cannot  be
said to be carrying on the profession of an advocate at	 the
time he received the said income.  We are unable to see	 how
the said decision helps the assessee herein.  Indeed, in the
said  decision	this  court  emphasised	 that  the  question
whether	 an income falls under one head or the other has  to
be decided according to the common notion of practical	men,
inasmuch  as  the Act does not provide any guidance  in	 the
matter.	  It was observed that the heads of income  must  be
decided on the nature of income by applying practical common
notions and not by reference to the assessee's treatment  of
income.	  The  application of said test does  not  certainly
help the assessee herein.
The  second  decision cited is of the Bombay High  Court  in
CLT.
Bombay v. Smt.  T.P. Sidhwa
, 133 ITR 840.	The question
was whether the income from property received by an assessee
of  which he is not the owner can be taxed as 'income'	from
other  'sources'.  It was held that it cannot be  so  taxed.
We do not see any anology between the facts and principle of
that  case  and	 those	of this	 case.	 Here  the  integral
connection  between the salary received by the assessee	 and
the tax payable thereon, paid by Ballarpur in pursuance of a
legal  obligation,  cannot be overlooked.
The	 third	case
cited is in
Mrs. Sheela Kaushish v. C.I.T, Delhi
, 131 I.T.R.
435
33
S.C. In this case, it was held that determination of  annual
value under
Section 23
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 should be
done by taking the standard rent as the basis even where the
assessee  is receiving rent higher than the  standard  rent.
Again we must say, we see no relevance of the said principle
of this case to the facts of this case.
For  the above reasons, the appeals fail and are  dismissed.
No costs.
V.P.R.			 Appeals dismissed.
34