[Cites
19
, Cited by
63
]
Supreme Court of India
Prakash Cotton Mills Pvt. Ltd vs Commissioner Of Income Tax (Central) ... on 6 April, 1993
Equivalent citations: 1993 AIR 2174, 1993 SCR (2) 983, AIR 1993 SUPREME COURT 2174, 1993 (3) SCC 452, 1993 AIR SCW 2412, 1993 TAX. L. R. 826, (1993) 67 TAXMAN 546, (1993) 2 JT 619 (SC), (1993) 2 SCR 983 (SC), (1993) 2 MAD LW 44, (1993) 111 CURTAXREP 389, (1993) 82 FJR 546, (1993) 67 FACLR 189, (1993) 201 ITR 684, (1993) 2 MAD LJ 115, (1993) 114 TAXATION 322
Author:
N Venkatachala
Bench:
N Venkatachala
,
B.P.  Jeevan Reddy
PETITIONER:
PRAKASH COTTON MILLS PVT.  LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX (CENTRAL) BOMBAY

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/04/1993

BENCH:
VENKATACHALA N. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATACHALA N. (J)
JEEVAN REDDY, B.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1993 AIR 2174		  1993 SCR  (2) 983
 1993 SCC  (3) 452	  JT 1993 (2)	619
 1993 SCALE  (2)425


ACT:
Income Tax Act, 1961
--A.Y. 1966-67--Allowance under
section
37(1)
of interest paid by assessee for delayed	 payment  of
Sales  Tax under Bombay Sales Tax Act and damages  paid	 for
delayed	 payment  of  contribution  under
Employees   State
Insurance Act, 1947
Allowance under
section 37 (2)
of entertainment expenditure.



HEADNOTE:
The appellant paid Rs.19635 in the accounting year for	A.Y.
1966-67, on account of interest, under Bombay Sales Tax Act,
1951, for delay in payment of sales tax, and for damages for
delayed	 payment  of  contribution  under
Employees   State
Insurance  Act, 1947
.  The assessee-appellant in the  return
of  income,  claimed the amount as allowance  under
section
37(1)
of I.T. Act.  The appellant, also claimed the  entire
entertainment  expenses, amounting to Rs.3865  as  allowance
under
section 37(2)
of the I.T. Act The Income-tax  Officer
treated	 the  payment  of Rs.19635  as	penal  interest	 and
disallowed it as allowance under
section 37(1)
of I.T.	Act.
Out  of	 the entertainment, expenses, amounting	 to  Rs.3865
incurred  by  the  Directors of the  assessee  company,	 for
entertainment  at  the	Diners club and	 C.C.1,	 the  I.T.O.
regarded Rs.1365 only as permissible deduction under
section
37(2)
of I.T. Act, taking the view that the remaining sum of
Rs.2500	 was  attributable  to	personal  expenses  of	 the
Directors   of	 the   assessee	  company   and	   therefore
impermissible deduction under
section 37(2)
of the I.T. Act.
The  Assessee  appellant did not succeed in  appeals  before
the  A.A.C.  and in the Income Tax  Tribunal.	Applications
under
section 256 (1)
of the I.T. Act before  the  Tribunal
and under
section 256 (2)
in  Bombay  High	Court	were
rejected.
The assessee filed appeal by special leave in Supreme Court.
This Court allowed the appeal partly and,
HELD:  'Mat the authority concerned has to  allow  deduction
under
section 37(1)
of the I.T. Act, wherever the  concerned
impost is purely 983
984
compensatory in nature.	 Wherever such impost is found to be
of  a  composite  nature, that is  partly  compensatory	 and
partly penal, the authorities are obligated to bifurcate the
two  components	 of the impost and given  deduction  to	 the
component,  which is compensatory in nature and	 refuse	 the
deduction  for	the  component which  is  penal	 in  nature.
Therefore, whenever any statutory impost paid by assessee by
way  of	 damages  or penalty or	 interest  is  claimed,	 the
assessing authority is required to examine the scheme of the
provisions of the relevant statute providing for payment  of
such impost, notwithstanding the nomenclature of the  impost
as given by the statute to find, whether it is	compensatory
or  penal in nature.  Ibis Court agreed with the view  taken
in earlier decisions by this Court and by the Andhra Pradesh
High Court, which settle the law as to when any amount	paid
as  interest  damages  or  penalty  could  be  regarded	  as
compensatory  (reparatory) as would entitle the assessee  to
claim allowance under
section 37 (1)
of I.T. Act This  Court
concluded that the question whether the impost is in essence
compensatory  or  is by way of penalty, has  to	 be  decided
having	regard to the relevant provisions of the  law  under
which it is imposed, the reasons given in the order imposing
and  quantifying  the damages or  penalty.   The  imposition
though	 called	 a  penalty  may  be  composite	 in   nature
comprising  penalty  as	 well as  compensation	for  delayed
payment.  The nomenclature of the levy as interest,  damages
or penalty is not conclusive.
[991-B, 990-H, 991-A]
Mahalakshmi  Sugar Mills Co. v. Commissioner of	 Income	 Tax
Delhi,	[1980] 123 I.T.R. 429 S.C.; Commissioner  of  Income
Tax v. Hyderabad Allwyn Metal Works Ltd., (1988) 172 ITR 113
(H.CA.P.) and Organo Chemical Industries v. Union of  India,
A.I.R. 1979 S.C. 1803.
This  Court, remitted the matter of the Tribunal  concerned,
so  far	 as it related to deduction under
section  37(1)
of
I.T.  Act, regarding impost of interest for delayed  payment
of sales tax and impost of damages for delayed	contribution
under
Employees State  Insurance Act
, as the I.T.O. and	 the
appellate  authority had refused the allowance	without	 any
examination  of the schemes of the provisions of the  Bombay
Sales Tax Act and the Provident Fund Act. [991-D]
This Court further held that the question as to what portion
of   expenses,	 claimed,   is	 deductible    entertainment
expenditure, has to be
985
decided by the fact finding authorities, while assessing the
relevant  materials placed before them.	 No question of	 law
arises,	 particularly when the fact finding authorities	 had
recorded  concurrent findings on consideration	of  relevant
material.   Hence  the	question  was  decided	against	 the
assessee  appellant [992-B]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION	:  Civil  Appeal  No.	1279
(NT)/1977.
From  the Judgment and Order dated 17.6.1976 of	 the  Bombay
High Court in I.T. Application No.63 of 1976.
Mrs. A.K Verma, Mrs. S.V. Pathak (For J.B. Dadachanji & Co.)
for the Appellant.
P.S.  Poti  Ms.	 A Subhashini (NP) and	R.  Satish  for	 the
Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
VENKATACHALA,  J. Two questions are raised for our  decision
in  this appeal.  First, whether the appellant was  entitled
to claim as allowance under
Section 37(1)
of the  Income-tax
Act, 1961 (the
I.T. Act
) the interest paid by it for delayed
payment	 of sales tax under the Bombay Sales Tax  Act,	1951
(the BST Act) and the damages paid by it for delayed payment
of  contribution under
Employees' State Insurance Act,	1947
(the
ESI Act
.) Second, whether the appellant was entitled to
claim  as allowance under
Section 37(2)
of the I.T. Act	 the
entire expenses incurred by it as entertainment expenses.
The  appellant is a company carrying on the business in	 the
manufacture  of textile goods.	It is the assessee.  In	 the
income-tax  return of the assessee for the  Assessment	Year
1966-67	 (the previous accounting year being from 1st  July,
1964  to 30th June, 1965), the interest and, the damages  of
Rs. 19,635 paid by if for delayed payment of sales tax under
the  BST Act and for delayed payment of	 contribution  under
the
ESI Act
, was claimed as revenue expenditure,  allowable
under
Section	37(1)
of the I.T. Act.	So also the  sum  of
Rs3,865 paid by it for entertainment expenses was claimed as
revenue	 expenditure, allowable under
Section 37(2)
of	 the
I.T. Act.  The I.T.O., in his assessment order made on	that
return, treated the said item of expenditure of Rs.19,635 as
penal  interest	 and  disallowed  it.  As  to  the  item  of
expenditure of Rs.3,865, he disallowed Rs.2,500 treating  it
as exclusive expenditure incurred on its Directors.  Appeals
preferred before
986
the A.A.C. and the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal  (Tribunal)
questioning  the disallowance of claims of the appellant  by
the  I.T.O.,  did  not succeed.	  Application  made  by	 the
assessee  under
Section 256(1)
of the I.T. Act	 before	 the
Tribunal  to raise the questions covering the  said  matters
and  get them referred for decision by the High Court,	also
did  not  meet with success.  Again,  the  application	made
thereafter by the assessee under
Section 256(2)
of the	I.T.
Act  before the Bombay High Court to obtain a  reference  on
the questions relating to the said matters for its decision,
was rejected.  Hence, the assessee has filed this appeal  by
special leave, questioning the aforesaid orders made by	 the
authorities  and  the High Court.  Reference  sought  to  be
obtained  from the Tribunal for decision by the High  Court,
was on the following questions:-
1. Whether the sum of Rs.19,635 debited in the
	      interest	account paid by way of interest	 for
	      delayed  payment of sales tax  and  Employees'
	      State Insurance contribution could be said  to
	      have not been incurred, wholly and exclusively
	      for the purpose of business?
2.   Whether   an	 the  facts   and   in	 the
	      circumstances   of  the  case,  the   sum	  of
	      Rs.19,635	  claimed   by	the   assessee	 was
	      an .allowable expenditure under the
Income-tax
	      Act, 1961
?
3.   Whether   on	 the  facts   and   in	 the
	      circumstances,  the Tribunal was justified  in
	      holding that the disallowance' of Rs.2,500 out
	      of  expenditure  incurred by the	assessee  at
	      Diners  Club  and C.C.I. could  be  disallowed
	      even though the said expenditure was less than
	      the expenditure allowable under
Section  37(2)
of the I.T. Act?
4. Whether there was any evidence or  material
	      before   the   Tribunal  to  hold	  that	 the
	      expenditure  to  the  extent  of	Rs.2,500  at
	      Diners Club and C.C.I. was not laid wholly and
	      exclusively  for the purposes of	business  of
	      the assessee-company'.?
Questions  1 & 2 are covered by First Question indicated  at
the outset.  So also, questions 3 & 4 are covered by  Second
Question  indicated  at the outset.  Indeed,  after  hearing
counsel	 for the parties we were inclined to think that	 the
said questions ought to be remitted to the High Court for
987
its  opinion  under
Section 256
of the I.T.  Act.   In	 the
normal course, we would have done so and left the  questions
to  be answered by the High Court.  But, regard being  given
to the fact that the questions relate to a 25 year old	case
of the Assessment Year 1966-67 and the fact that they  could
be  considered by us on the facts found in the order of	 the
Tribunal  we consider it most appropriate to deal  with	 the
question's  ourselves  and  answer  them.   Such  course  is
resorted  to by us not merely because of the  said  peculiar
facts  and circumstances of this case, but also	 because  of
our inclination to remit the First Question with our  answer
thereon for a final decision by the Tribunal.
First Question:
Section	 37(1)
of  the	 I.T.  Act  corresponds	 to  Section
10(2)(XV) of Predecessor Indian Income-Tax Act of 1922	(the
I.T. Act
of 1922), is
undisputed.
In
Mahalakshmi Sugar Mills Co. v. Commissioner	 of  Income-
tax, Delhi, (1980) 123 ITR 429, this Court had to decide the
question whether the interest paid by the appellant-assessee
therein	 under
Section 3(3)
of the U.P. Sugarcane Cess	Act,
1956  for delayed payment of cess payable thereunder was  an
allowable  expenditure under
Section 10(2)(XV)
of  the	I.T.
Act  of	 1922.	 For  deciding	that  question,	 this  Court
examined  the provisions of
Sugarcane Cess Act,	 1956
which
provided  for  taking of several kinds of action  against  a
person	who defaulted in payment of the cess  imposed  under
that Act.
Section 4
was found to make the defaulter  liable
to imprisonment or fine or both.
Section 3(5)
was found  to
make the defaulter liable for payment of penalty, an  amount
which  far exceeded the amount of cess.	 Then,
Section	3(3)
was  found  to	make the defaulter  liable  for	 payment  of
interest  at 6 per cent per annum from the date	 of  default
till  the date of payment.  On an analytical examination  of
the said provisions, this Court took the view that  interest
paid under
Section 3(3)
by the defaulter for delayed payment
of the cess could not be described as a penalty imposed upon
him for infringement of the law but ought to be regarded  as
an amount of compensation paid by him to the Government	 for
delayed	 payment  of the cess levied against him  under	 the
Act.   In that view of the matter, this Court held that	 the
interest  paid by the appellant assessee on delayed  payment
of cess was an allowable expenditure under
Section 10(2)(XV)
of the I.T. Act of 1922.
988
In  Commissioner of Income.
Tax v. Hyderabad  Allwyn  Metal
Works  Limited
, (1988) 172 ITR 113, a Division Bench of	 the
Andhra	Pradesh High Court had to decide two questions;	 (i)
whether	 the  damages paid by the  respondent-asseswe  under
Section	  14B
of  the	 Employees'  Provident	 Funds	 and
Miscellaneous	Provisions  Act,  1952,	 was  an   allowable
deduction  under
Section 37(1)
of I.T. Act and (ii)  whether
the interest paid under the BST Act, for delayed payment  of
sales  tax  thereunder,	 was an	 allowable  deduction  under
Section	 37(1)
of the I.T. Act.
For deciding question	(i),
the Division Bench, referred to the view of A.P. Sen, J.  of
this Court found in a passage of his concurring judgment  in
Organo	Chemical  Industries v. Union of India
AIR  1979  SC
1803,  on the expression 'damages' occurring in Section	 14B
of Central Act of 1952, which read thus:-
"The expression 'damages' occurring in section
	      14B is, in substance, a penalty imposed on the
	      employer	for  the  breach  of  the  statutory
	      obligation.   The	 object	 of  imposition	  of
	      penalty under s. 14B is not merely 'to provide
	      compensation  for	 the  employees'.   We	 are
	      clearly of the opinion that the imposition  of
	      damages under s.14B serves both the  purposes.
	      It  is meant to penalise defaulting  employers
	      as  also to provide reparation for the  amount
	      of loss suffered by the employees.  It is	 not
	      only a warning to employers in general not  to
	      commit a breach of the statutory	requirements
	      of
section 6
, but at the same time it is meant
	      to  provide  compensation or  redress  to	 the
	      beneficiaries,   i.e.,   to   recompense	 the
	      employees	 for  the loss. sustained  by  them.
	      There  is nothing in the section to show	that
	      the damages must bear relationship to the loss
	      which is caused to the beneficiaries under the
	      Scheme.  The word 'damages' in section 14B  is
	      related to the word 'default'.  The words used
	      in section 14B are 'default in the payment  of
	      contribution'   and,   therefore,	  the	word
	      ,default'	 must be construed in the  light  of
	      para.38 of the Scheme which provides that	 the
	      payment of contribution has got to be made  by
	      the   15th   of  the  following	month	and,
	      therefore,  the word 'default' in section	 14B
	      must mean 'failure in performance' or 'failure
	      to act'.	At the same time, the imposition  of
	      damages  under  section  14B  is	to   provide
	      reparation for the amount of loss suffered
989
by the employees."
The  Division Bench, having regard to the said view  of	 the
expression  damages  occurring in
section 14B
of  Provident
Fund  Act,  found that such damages paid  by  the  concerned
assessee-respondent  could  not	 have been  treated  by	 the
Tribunal  as  purely  compensatory.   While  recording	such
finding, the real distinction that exists between an  impost
which  is compensatory and an impost which is a penalty,  is
pointed out, thus:-
"The  question whether any such impost  is  in
	      essence  compensatory or is by way of  penalty
	      will  have to be decided having regard to	 the
	      relevant provisions of the law under which  it
	      is  imposed and the circumstances under  which
	      it has been imposed.  The mere nomenclature as
	      interest,	 penalty or damages in the  Act	 may
	      not conclusive for the purpose of allowing  it
	      as  a  deduction	under  the
Income-tax	Act
.
	      Similarly, the circumstance that a fixed	rate
	      of  interest  has to be paid also may  not  be
	      conclusive.
Section 14B
of the Act  provides
	      for  levy of damages for delayed payment as  a
	      percentage   of  the  amount  due	 up   to   a
	      prescribed  maximum.  Such a determination  is
	      to be done by the appropriate authority  after
	      giving an opportunity to the employer.   Thus,
	      the  levy will be by a speaking order  of	 the
			    authority  fixing quantum of damages.  As  hel
d
	      by   the	Supreme	 Court,	 the   said   amount
	      comprises	 both  an element of penal  levy  as
	      well as compensatory payment.  It will be	 for
	      the  authority  under the
Income-tax  Act
to
	      decide with reference to the provisions of the
Employees' Provident Funds Act
and the reasons
	      given  in the order imposing  and	 quantifying
	      the  damages  to	determine  what	  proportion
	      should be treated as penal and what proportion
	      as  compensatory.	 The entire sum can  neither
	      be  considered  as mere penalty  nor  as	mere
	      interest."
Then,  dealing with question (ii) relating to interest	paid
by the concerned respondent assessee under the BST Act which
the  Tribunal  had treated as an allowable  deduction  under
Section 37(1)
of the I.T. Act, the Division Bench considered
the relevant provisions of the BST Act bearing
990
on the question and held, thus:-
'From  a  reading  of the aforesaid  provision	and  in	 the
background  of	the  various sections  mentioned  above,  it
cannot	be  said that the levy under
section  36(3)
,  though
called a penalty, is merely compensatory or in the shape  of
interest for delayed payment or penal in character.
The Act
does  not provide for automatic payment of interest  due  to
delay in payment.  The levy under sub-section (3) of
section
36
is to be made after giving notice to the dealer and after
recording  reasons  for it where the tax has not  been	paid
within	the time contemplated for payment by the  Act.	 The
Commissioner  has also the power to remit the whole  or	 any
part  of the interest calculated in the manner mentioned  in
it  which can be only on relevant grounds.  Sub-section	 (5)
of
Section  36
, which is extracted  above,  indicates	that
after  the  levy  of  this  amount  under  sub-section	(3),
immunity  is  granted from prosecution on  the	same  facts.
These indicate that the imposition, though called a penalty,
is  a  composite  one  comprising  both	 a  penalty  and   a
compensation for delayed payment.  The Tribunal,  therefore,
was  not  right	 in treating the entire	 payment  as  merely
interest  for delayed payment.	As already  indicated  while
discussing question No.(1), the nomenclature of the levy  as
interest, damages or penalty may not be conclusive."
The  decision  of  this Court, in
Mahalakshmi	Sugar  Mills
Company
(supra) and the decision of the Division  Bench  of
the Andhra Pradesh High Court in
Hyderabad AIN" Metal  Works
Ltd.
(supra)  with the views of which we  are	in  complete
agreement,  are, in our opinion, decisions which settle	 the
law on the question as to when an amount paid by an assessee
as  interest  or  damages  or  penalty	could  regarded	  as
compensatory  (reparatory)  in character  as  would  entitle
'such assessee to claim it as an allowable expenditure under
Section	 37(1)
of the I.T. Act.   Therefore,  whenever	 any
statutory  impost paid by an assessee by way of	 damages  or
penalty or interest, is claimed as an allowable	 expenditure
under
section 37(1)
of the I.T. Act, the assessing authority
is  required to examine the Scheme of the provisions of	 the
relevant statute providing for payment of
991
such  impost notwithstanding the nomenclature of the  impost
as given by the statute, to find whether it is	compensatory
or  penal, in nature.  The authority has to allow  deduction
under
Section	37(1)
of  the	I.T.  Act,  whereever	such
examination  reveals  the  concerned  impost  to  be  purely
compensatory  in nature.  Whereever such impost is found  to
be  of a composite nature, that is, partly  of	compensatory
nature	and  partly  of penal nature,  the  authorities	 are
obligated to bifurcate the two components of the impost	 and
give  deduction to that component which is  compensatory  in
nature and refuse to give deduction to that component  which
is penal in nature.
The facts of the case under our consideration disclose	that
the  I.T.O.  and the Appellate authorities have	 refused  to
allow the claims made by the assessee under
Section 37(1)
of
the  I.T. Act, without any examination of the Scheme of	 the
provisions  of the BST Act, to find whet her impost  of	 the
interest  paid by the assessee for delayed payment of  sales
tax  was  compensatory	in nature as would  entitle  it	 for
deduction under
Section 37(1)
of the I.T. Act.	The same  is
the  position as regards the impost of damages paid  by	 the
assessee under the
Provident Fund Act
for delayed payment of
contribution thereunder.  Hence, we consider it necessary to
remit  the question to the concerned Tribunal  for  deciding
the assessee's claims for deduction of interest and  damages
under
Section	37(1)
of the I.T. Act.	 First	Question  is
answered accordingly.
Second Question:
Miscellaneous expenses claimed by the assessee as deductible
expenditure  allowable under
Section 37(2)
of the  I.T.	 Act
related	 to a sum of Rs.3,865 incurred by the  Directors  of
the  assessee-company for entertainment at the	Diners	Club
and C.C.I., The I.T.O. regarded a sum of Rs.1,365 out of the
said sum of Rs.3,865 as permissible deduction under
Section
37(2)
of the I.T. Act, while he regarded the remaining	 sum
of  Rs.2,500 as impermissible deduction under
Section  37(2)
of  the	 I.T.  Act  taking  the	 view  that  the  same	 was
attributable  to personal expenses of the Directors  of	 the
assessee-company.  The A.A.C. in dealing with the said claim
for  deduction	in the appeal of the assessee  filed  before
him,   held  the  entire  expenses  claimed  as	  deductible
expenditure under
Section 37(2)
of the I.T. Act could not be
regarded  as  having been laid out or  expended	 wholly	 and
exclusively for the purpose of the business of the assessee.
He, therefore,
992
refused	 to interfere with the order of the I.T.O.  made  in
that  regard.  The Tribunal which considered the  matter  in
the  appeal of the assessee before it, affirmed the view  of
the  A.A.C.  in	 the  matter.  As to  what  portion  of	 the
miscellaneous	 expenses   claimed,   is    a	  deductible
entertainment expenses of the assessee being a matter to  be
decided by the fact finding authorities while assessing	 the
relevant  materials placed before them, no question  of	 law
could  arise  in that regard, particularly,  when  the	fact
finding	 authorities have recorded their concurrent  finding
on  consideration  of  the relevant  material.	 Hence,	 the
question  under	 consideration	is devoid of  merit  and  is
answered against the assessee.
In  the	 result, we allow that appeal partly and  remit	 the
case  relating to appellant-assessee's claim  for  deduction
under
Section 37(1)
of the Income-tax Act, 1961 to  Income-
tax  Appellate	Tribunal, Bombay for being, decided  in	 the
light  of  our answer to the First Question and	 decide	 the
appeal of the assessee, accordingly.  No costs.
I.S.G.
			       Appeal allowed partly.
993