[Cites
10
, Cited by
136
]
Supreme Court of India
Associated Cement Company Ltd vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax Bihar, ... on 23 March, 1993
Equivalent citations: 1993 AIR 2281, 1993 SCR (2) 538, AIR 1993 SUPREME COURT 2281, 1993 (2) SCC 556, 1993 AIR SCW 1798, 1993 TAX. L. R. 633, (1993) 67 TAXMAN 346, (1993) 2 SCR 538 (SC), 1993 KERLJ(TAX) 263, (1993) 2 JT 411 (SC), (1993) 201 ITR 435, (1994) 1 PAT LJR 48, (1993) 114 TAXATION 55, (1993) 111 CURTAXREP 165
Author:
N Venkatachala
Bench:
N Venkatachala
,
B.P.  Jeevan Reddy
PETITIONER:
ASSOCIATED CEMENT COMPANY LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX BIHAR, PATNA AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/03/1993

BENCH:
VENKATACHALA N. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATACHALA N. (J)
JEEVAN REDDY, B.P. (J)

CITATION:
 1993 AIR 2281		  1993 SCR  (2) 538
 1993 SCC  (2) 556	  JT 1993 (2)	411
 1993 SCALE  (2)161


ACT:
Income tax Act 1961.
Section	  194C-Sub-section  (1)-Scope  of-Contract   between
Contrator and specified organisations for carrying out	"any
work"-Expression "any work" has a wide import and cannot  be
restricted  to	works  contract-Payment	 to  Contractor	 for
carrying out "any work"-Sum credited or paid to	 Contractor-
Liability  of  payer  to  deduct  two  percent	tax  is	 not
confined to Contractor's income component.



HEADNOTE:
The  appellant-Company	issued a letter	 to  its  Contractor
containing the terms and conditions of a contract of loading
packed	cement bags from its Packing Plants Into  wagons  or
trucks.	  Under Clause 12 there was a stipulation  that	 the
Contractor  shall be paid a sum for his work at a flat	rate
of  41	paise for each tonne of cement	handled	 In  Packing
Plant No.1 and 30 paise for each tonne of cement handled  in
Packing	 Plant	No.2 Clause 13 thereof,	 which	contained  a
recital	 that  the  rate of loading in Clause  12  had	been
worked	out  on the basis of daily basic  wages	 of  Rs.2.35
paise,	DA of Rs.1.21 paise and H.R.A of Rs.0.50  paise	 per
day  per worker, stipulated a terms of reimbursement by	 the
appellant to the Contractor of the difference in DA over the
amount	of Rs.1.21 paise and annual increment  etc.  payable
from mouth to month to every worker by him.  The  Contractor
carried out his work and the appellant made payments of	 the
sums  payable to him under the contract.  But no  deductions
of  tax	 were made under
Section 194C(1)
of the	 Income	 Tax
Act, 1961.  The Income Tax Officer served two notices	One
in  respect of assessment years 1973-74 and 1974-75 and	 the
other for 1974-75 to 1977-78 on the principal officer of the
appellant-Company to show cause as to why action should	 not
be  taken  against  the appellant  for	non-compliance	with
Section	 194C(1)
.The appellant filed a Writ Petition  before
the High Court of Patna seeking the quashing of the  notices
but the same was dismissed.
In  appeal to this Court it was contended on behalf  of	 the
appellant 538
539
that  (1) the 'work' for the carrying of  which the  sum  is
required  to  be  credited to the account of or	 paid  to  a
Contractor   under
Section 194C(1)
of, the Act' is  only  a
'works	contract'  and	 hence deduction  "under  that	sub-
section	 could arise only     to  the extent where  the	 sum
credited  to  the account of or paid to	 a  Contractor	for,
executing  such works contract' is comprised of the  element
of Income of the Contractor, (2) that the words 'on  income.
comprised  therein ',appearing immediately after the  words'
deduct an amount equal to two per cent of such sum as income
tax in the concluding part of the sub-section must be  taken
to  mean  the  percentage amount deductible  on	 the  Income
received by the Contractor under the contract and not on the
sum credited 'to the account of 'or paid to the Contractor.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
HELD.-	1.  Them is nothing fit sub-section (1)	 of
Section
194C
to show that the contract to carry out a work  or	 the
contract  to  supply labour to carry out a  work  should  be
confined to 'works contract'.There is no mason to curtail or
to  cut	 down  the  meaning  of	 plain	words  used  in	 the
Section.  .Any	work'  means  any  work	 and  not  &."works-
contract',  which has a special connotation in the tax	law.
'Work' envisaged In the sub- section, therefore has. a	wide
import	and covers 'any work' which one or the other of	 the
organisations  specified in the sub-section can get  carried
out  through  a Contractor under a contract and	 further  It
includes  obtaining by any of such organisations  supply  of
labour	under a contract with a Contractor for carrying	 out
its  work which, would have fallen outside the	'work',	 but
forks specific inclusion in the sub-section. [544 B-E]
Brij  Bhushan Lal Parduman Kumar etc. v. C.I.  T.,  Haryana,
Himachal   Pradesh  and	 New  Delhi  [1979]  2	S.C.R.	 16,
distinguished.
2.   The  words	 in the	 sub-section  'on  income  comprised
therein'  appearing Immediately after the words	 'deduct  an
amount equal to two per cent of such sum as income tax' from
their purport, cannot be understood as the percentage amount
deductible from the income of the Contractor out of the	 sum
credited  to his account or paid to him in pursuance of	 the
co   Moreover	 the  concluding  part	of  the	  sub-section
requiring  deduction of an amount equal to two per  cent  of
such  sum  as  income-tax by, use of the  words	 'on  income
comprised  therein' makes It obvious that the  amount  equal
to-two per cent of the sum required to be deducted Is a
540
deducts	 at source.  Hence on the express language  employed
in  the	 sub-section,  it, is impossible to  hold  that	 the
amount of the two per cent   required to be deducted by	 the
prayer out of the sum credited to the account of or paid  to
the  Contractor has to	be confined to his income  component
out of that sum, [545 D-G]
2.1. There is also	nothing in the language of the	sub-
section which permits exclusion of, an amount paid on behalf
of the organisaiton to the  Contractor according  to,	 the
termsand conditions	ofthe	   contract	 in
reimbursement, of. the	 amount paidby to workers,from,
the sum	 envisaged therein. [545 G-H, 546-A]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2860(NT)  of
1979.
From  the  Judgment and Order dated 8.3.1979 of	 the,  Patna
High  Court  in Civil	 writ jurisdiction case	 No.2909  of
1978.
V.A. Babde, R.F. Nariman and Ms. Kamakshi (For Gagrat & Co.)
for the appellant.
Dr.  S.	 Narayan P. Parmeshwaran and Manoj  Prasad  for	 the
Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by,
VENKATACHALA,  J.  The	short,	question  which	 needs	 our
decision in this appeal by special leave is whether a person
who  credits to the account of or pays to a  contractor	 any
sum payable by any of the organisations specified in
section
194C(1)
of Income Tax Act, 1961	 'the Act' for carrying out
any   work including supply of labour for carrying  out	 any
work) in pursuance of a contract between the contractor	 and
the specified organisation is liable to deduct two per	cent
of  such  sum  as income tax as	 required  under  that	sub-
section.
The  facts 'which, have lad to the need for our decision  on
the said question are briefly these.  The Associated  Cement
Company	 Ltd.  the  appellant, issued  a  letter  dated	 5th
November, 1973 to Mr.S.P Nag contractor Jhiakpani Containing
the  terms  and conditions of a contract of  leading  packed
cement bags,from its Packing Plants.  Nos.1 & 2 into  wagons
or trucks.  Under clause. 12 of those terms and	 conditions,
there
541
was  a stipulation that the contractor shall be paid  a	 sum
for  his work at a flat rate of 41 paise for such  tonne  of
cement	handled	 in  Packing Plant No.1. and  30  paise	 for each, tonne o
f cement handled in Packing Plant No.2. Clause
13  thereof,  which  contained a recital that  the  rate  of
loading	 in  clause 12 had been worked out on the  basis  of
daily basic wages of Rs.2.35 paise, D.A. of Rs. 1.21  paise
and H.R.A. of Rs.0.50 paise, per day per worker stipulated a
term  of reimbursement by the appellant to the contract	 of
the difference in D.A. over the amount of Rs.1.21 paise	 and
annual	increment etc. payable from month to month to  every
worker	by him as per the Second Wage Board  Recommendation.
As  the	 contractor carried out his work  according  to	 the
terms and conditions in the contract during the years  1973-
74  and	 1974-75, the appellant made payments  of  the	sums
payable to him under clause 12 of the contract and the	sums
reimbursable  to  him  under  clause  13  thereof  But	 the
deductions  made  'under
section 194C(1)
of the Act  by	 the
appellant  out	of  the	 sums  paid  or	 reimbursed  to	 the
contractor fell short of the deductions required to be	made
thereunder.  As the appellant took the stand that it was not
liable to deduct any amount under
section 194(1)
, out of the
sums paid on its behalf to the contractor as per clauses
12 & 13 of the contract, the Income Tax	 Officer,  Jamshedpur,
served	on the principal officer of the appellant  a  notice
dated 30th March, 1978 to show cause as to why action should
not  be taken against the appellant under
sections  276B(1)
,
281
and
221
of the Act in respect of assessment years  1973-
74 and 1974-75 for short deductions out of the sums paid  to
contractor  without  observing the  requirement	 of
section
194C(1)
of  the  Act.	  Another  notice  dated  8th	May,
1978.relating to the assessment years 1974-75 to 1977-78  of
a  similar nature, was also served on the principal  officer
of the appellant.  The appellant, although impugned both the
said notices in a Writ Petition filed under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution before the High Court of  Judicature
at Patna, that Writ Petition was dismissed by the High Court
by  its	 order dated 8th March, 1979.	The  appellant	has,
therefore,  filed this appeal by special leave	before	this
Court  seeking	the  quashing of the notices  which  it	 had
unsuccessfully	impugned before the High Court, in its	Writ
Petition.
It was argued by Mr. V.A. Bobde, the learned senior  counsel
appearing  for	the appellant, that  the  amount  deductible
under
section	194C(1)
out of the  sums  credited  to	 the
account	 of  or paid to a contractor would arise  only	when
such  sums are paid, on account of a contractor executing  a
works  contract,  that	is,  a	contract  which	 produces  a
tangible property.
542
According  to him, the 'work' for the the carrying of  which
the sum is required to be credited to the account of or paid
to  a contractor under
section 194C(1)
of the Act is only  a
'works contract' and hence deduction under that	 sub-section
could arise only to the extent where the sum credited to the
account of or paid to a contractor for executing such 'works
contract' is comprised of the element of income (profit)  of
the  contractor, as held by this Court in Brij	Bhushan	 Lal
Parduman  Kumar etc. v. Commissioner of Income Tax  Haryana,
Himachal Pradesh and New Delhi-III, [1979] 2 SCR 16 and	 not
otherwise.   It was also his argument that the words in	 the
sub-section   'on  income  comprised   therein',   appearing
immediately  after the words 'deduct an amount equal to	 two
per cent of such sum as income-tax' found in the  concluding
part  of  that	sub-section,  must  be	taken  to  mean	 the
percentage  amount deductible on the income received by	 the
contractor under the contract and not on the sum credited to
the account of or paid to the contractor in pursuance of the
contract.   These arguments were, however, strongly  refuted
by Dr. S. Narayan, the learned counsel for the Revenue.	  It
is  how,  the  question mentioned at the  outset  needs	 our
decision.
Section	 194C(1)
of  the  Income  Tax	Act  on	 the  proper
construction of which the decision on the aforesaid question
should necessarily rest, runs thus:
'194C(1).	  Any person responsible for  paying
	      any  sum	to any resident (hereafter  in	this
	      section  referred	 to as the  contractor)	 for
	      carrying	out  any work (including  supply  of
	      labour for carrying out any work) in pursuance
	      of a contract between the contractor and
(a)   the	 Central  Government  or  any  State
			    Government; or
(b)   any local authority; or
(c)   any corporation established by or  under
	      a Central, State or Provincial Act; or
(d)   any company-, or
(e)   any co-operative society-, or
(f)   any	 authority, constituted in India  by
	      or under any  law,
543
engaged either for the purpose of dealing with
	      and   satisfying	 the   need   for    housing
	      accommodation or for the purpose of  planning,
	      development  or improvement of  cities,  towns
	      and villages, or for both; or
(g)   any	  society   registered	 under	 the
	      Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of  1860)
	      or under any law corresponding to that Act  in
	      force in any part of India; or
(h)   any trust; or
(i)   any	    University	  established	  or
	      incorporated  by or under a Central, State  or
Provincial Act
and an institution declared  to
	      be  a  University	 under
section	 3
of	 the
	      University  Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3  of
	      1956 ,
	      shall,  at the time of credit of such  sum  to
	      the  account of the contractor or at the	time
	      of  payment thereof in cash or by issue  of  a
	      cheque   or  draft  or  by  any  other   mode,
	      whichever	 is earlier, deduct an amount  equal
	      to  two per cent of such sum as income-tax  on
	      income comprised therein."
No  ambiguity  is  found in the	 language  employed  in	 the
subsection.   What  is	contained  in  the  sub-section,  as
appears	 from  its plain reading and analysis admit  of	 the
following formulations:
(1)   A  contract may be entered into  between
	      the contractor and   any of the  organisations
	      specified in the sub-section.
(2)   Contract  in Formulation  1	 could	not
	      only be for carrying out any work but also for
	      supply of labour for carrying out any work.
	      (3)   Any	 person responsible for	 paying	 any
	      sum  to  a  contractor  in  pursuance  of	 the
	      contract in Formulations 1 and 2, could credit
	      that sum to his account or make its payment to
	      him in any other manner.
(4)   But,  when	the person  referred  to  in
	      Formulation-3 either credits the sum  referred
	      to therein to the account
544
of  or  pays it to the  contractor,  he  shall
	      deduct out of that sum an amount equal to	 two
	      per  cent	 as income-tax on  income  comprised
	      therein.
Thus,  when  the percentage amount required to	be  deducted
under  the sub-section as income-tax is on the sum  credited
to the account of or paid to a contractor in pursuance of  a
contract  for  carrying out a work or supplying	 labour	 for
carrying  out a work, of any of the organisations  specified
therein,  there	 is nothing in the sub-section	which  could
make  us hold that the contract to carry out a work  or	 the
contract  to  supply labour to carry out a  work  should  be
confined to 'works contract' as was argued on behalf of	 the
appellant.   We see no reason to curtail or to cut down	 the
meaning	 of  plain words used in the  Section.	 "Any  work"
means  any  work  and not a 'works-contract",  which  has  a
special	 connotation  in the tax law.  Indeed, in  the	sub-
section,  the 'work' referred to therein expressly  includes
supply	of  labour  to	carry out a work.   It	is  a  clear
indication of legislature that the 'work' in sub-section  is
not  intended  to  be confined to or  restricted  to  'works
contract'.  'Work' envisaged in the sub-section,  therefore,
has wide import and covers 'any work' which one or the other
of  the organisations specified in the sub-section  can	 get
carried	 out  through  a contractor  under  a  contract	 and
further	 it includes obtaining by any of such  organisations
supply	of  labour under a contract with  a  contractor	 for
carrying  out its work which, would have fallen outside	 the
'work', but for its specific inclusion in the sub-section.
In  Brij Bhushan (supra) this Court was concerned  with	 the
question  whether  the	cost of materials  supplied  by	 the
Government for being used in execution of works is liable to
be  taken into consideration while estimating the income  or
profits of a contractor.  That question was answered by this
Court, thus:
"It  is  true  that ordinarily  when  a  works
	      contract	is  put through or  completed  by  a
	      contractor  the income or profits	 derived  by
	      the   contractor	 from	such   contract	  is
	      determined  on the value of the contract as  a
	      whole and cannot be determined by	 considering
	      several  items that go to form such  value  of
	      the  contract  but in our view  where  certain
	      stores/material is supplied at fixed rates  by
	      the  Department to the Contractor	 solely	 for
	      being used or
545
fixed or incorporated in the works  undertaken
	      on  terms and conditions mentioned above,	 the
	      real total value of the entire contract  would
	      be   the	 value	minus  the  cost   of	such
	      stores/material so supplied.  Therefore, since
	      no  element  of  profit was  involved  in	 the
	      turnover	 represented   by   the	  cost	  of
	      stores/material supplied by the M.E.S. to	 the
	      assessee firms, the income or profits  derived
	      by the assessee firms from such contracts will
	      have  to	be determined on the  basis  of	 the
	      value of the contracts represented by the cash
	      payments	received by the assessee firms	from
	      the M.E.S. Department exclusive to the cost of
	      the material'/stores received for being  used,
	      fixed or incorporated in the works  undertaken
	      by them."
The  above decision cannot be of any help to  the  appellant
for  it	 does  not  lay	 down  that  the  percentage  amount
deductible under
section 194C(1)
should be out of the income
of  the	 contractor  from the sum or sums  credited  to	 the
account of or paid to him.  The words in the sub-section 'on
income	comprised therein' appearing immediately  after	 the
words deduct an amount equal to two per cent of such sum  as
income-tax' from their purport, cannot be understood as	 the
percentage   amount  deductible	 from  the  income  of	 the
contractor out of the sum credited to his account or paid to
him in pursuance of the contract.  Moreover, the  concluding
part  of  the sub-section requiring deduction of  an  amount
equal  to two per cent of such sum as income-tax, by use  of
the  words  'on income comprised therein' makes	 it  obvious
that the amount equal to two per cent of the sum required to
be deducted is a deduction at source.  Indeed, it is neither
possible nor permissible to the payer to determine what part
of the amount paid by him to the contractor constitutes	 the
income of the latter.  It is not also possible to think that
the  Parliamer' could have intended to cast such  impossible
burden	upon the payer nor could it be attributed  with	 the
intention  of  enacting such an impractical  and  unworkable
provision.   Hence, on the express language employed in	 the
sub-section, it is impossible to hold that the amount of two
per cent required to be deducted by the payer out of the sum
credited to the account of or paid to the contractor has  to
be confined to his income component, out of that sum.  There
is  also  nothing in the language of the  sub-section  which
permits	 exclusion  of	an  amount paid	 on  behalf  of	 the
Organisation to the contractor according to clause 13 of the
terms and conditions of the contract in reimbursement of the
amount
546
paid  by him to workers, from the sum envisaged therein,  as
was suggested on behalf of the appellant.
For  the  foregoing reasons, our decision  on  the  question
under  consideration,  is  held in the	affirmative  and  in
favour of the Revenue.
In the result, this appeal fails and is dismissed  directing
the  appellant	to  pay the costs of the  respondent   the
Revenue in this appeal.	 Advocate's fee is fixed at Rs-3000.
T.N.A.			    Appeal dismissed.
547