[Cites
4
, Cited by
1804
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India And Ors vs S.L. Abbas on 27 April, 1993
Equivalent citations: 1993 AIR 2444, 1993 SCR (3) 427, AIR 1993 SUPREME COURT 2444, 1993 (4) SCC 357, 1993 AIR SCW 1753, 1993 LAB. I. C. 1311, 1993 (2) UJ (SC) 324, (1993) 2 APLJ 49.1, 1993 UJ(SC) 2 324, 1994 (1) ALL CJ 201, (1993) 3 JT 678 (SC), 1994 SCC (L&S) 230, (1994) 1 PAT LJR 1, (1993) 83 FJR 38, (1993) 67 FACLR 293, (1993) 2 LABLJ 626, (1993) 2 LAB LN 473, (1994) 1 MAD LW 220, (1995) 4 SCT 455, (1993) 2 SERVLR 585, (1993) 25 ATC 844, (1993) 2 CURLR 168
Author:
B.P.  Jeevan Reddy
Bench:
B.P.  Jeevan Reddy
,
Jagdish Saran  Verma
PETITIONER:
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
S.L. ABBAS

DATE OF JUDGMENT27/04/1993

BENCH:
JEEVAN REDDY, B.P. (J)
BENCH:
JEEVAN REDDY, B.P. (J)
VERMA, JAGDISH SARAN (J)

CITATION:
 1993 AIR 2444		  1993 SCR  (3) 427
 1993 SCC  (4) 357	  JT 1993 (3)	678
 1993 SCALE  (2)718


ACT:
%
Civil Services:
Fundamental  Rules  11	and  15-Transfer  of  a	  Government
servant-When   can  be	questioned  in	 a   Court/Tribunal-
Guidelines  issued  by	Government-Whether  have   statutory
force.
Constitution of India,1950/
Central Administrative  Tribunals
Act, 1985
:
Article	   323-A/Section    14-Jurisdiction    of    Central
Administrative	Tribunal-Exercise  of-Whether  Tribunal	 can
interfere with an order of Transfer.



HEADNOTE:
The  respondent,  a  Central Government	 employee,  who	 was
transferred from one place to another, challenged the  order
of transfer on the grounds that: his wife was also  employed
at  the	 same  place in a  Central  Government	office;	 his
children  were also studying there; he himself had  suffered
backbone  fracture  injuries some time ago;  the  guidelines
contained in Government of India O.M. dated 3.4.1986 had not
been  kept in mind while ordering his transfer;	 some  other
officials,  who	 had been serving at the same  place  for  a
longer	period	than  the respondent  had  been	 allowed  to
continue  and  his transfer was due to the mischief  of	 his
Controlling Officer.
In  the	 counter-affidavit filed by the appellants,  it	 was
submitted  that the transfer was ordered  on  administrative
grounds and was unexceptionable.,
A  Single  Member  of the  Central  Administrative  Tribunal
quashed	 the order of transfer on the ground that the  power
of transfer was not an unfettered one, but was circumscribed
by   various   circulars/  guidelines	contained   in	 the
administrative instructions issued by the Government and  an
order	of   transfer  could  be  interdicted  if   it	 was
discriminatory,	 that in the matter of considering  transfer
of  an	individual  officer,  the  Office  Memorandum  dated
3.4.1986, educational dislocation of the children and health
ground,if  present deserved special consideration  and	that
in  view  of  the facts and circumstances of  the  case	 the
transfer order in question in respect of the respondent	 was
mala fide.
428
Allowing  the  appeal, preferred by the Union of  India	 and
others, this Court,
HELD:	  1.1  An  order  of transfer  is  an  incidence  of
Government  servie.   Who should be transferred where  is  a
matter for the appropriate authority to decide.	 Unless	 the
order  of  transfer is vitiated by malafides or is  made  in
violation   of	statutory  provisions,	the   Court   cannot
interfere  with it.  There is no doubt that, while  ordering
the transfer the authority must keep in mind the  guidelines
issued	by the Government on the subject.  Similarly,  if  a
person	 makes	any  representation  with  respect  to	 his
transfer,  the appropriate authority must consider the	same
having	regard	to the exigencies  of  administration.	 The
guidelines say that as far as possible, the husband and	 the
wife must be posted at the same place.	The said  guideline,
however,  does	not confer upon the  government	 employee  a
legally enforceable right.  Executive instructions issued by
the Government are in the nature of guidelines.	 They do not
have statutory force. [430-C-E]
1.2. There  is no dispute that the respondent is  liable  to
transfer  anywhere  in	India.	It is not the  case  of	 the
respondent  that the order of his transfer was	vitiated  by
mala  fides on the part of the authority making	 the  order,
though	 the  Tribunal	says  so,  merely  because   certain
guidelines  issued  by	the  Central  Government  were	 not
followed.   The	 immediate superior of	unit,  against	whom
mischief had been attributed by the respondent, has  nothing
to do with his transfer. [430-F]
2.1. The jurisdiction of the Central Administrative Tribunal
is akin to the jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article
226
of the Constitution of India in service matters, as  is
evident	 from
Article	323-A
of  the	Constitution.	 The
constraints  and norms which the High Court  observes  while
exercising  the	 said  jurisdiction  apply  equally  to	 the
Tribunal  created  under
Article  323A.
The  Administrative
Tribunal  is not an Appellate Authority sitting in  judgment
over  the order; of transfer.  It cannot substitute its	 own
judgment  for that of the authority competent  to  transfer.
[430-H,431 -A]
2.2. In	 the instant case, the Tribunal has dearly  exceeded
its jurisdiction in interfering with the order of  transfer.
The  order  of the Tribunal reads as if it were	 sifting  in
appeal	over  the  order  of transfer  made  by	 the  Senior
Administrative Officer (competent authority). [431-B]
Bank  of India v. Jagjit Singh Mehta, [1992] 1	S.C.C.	306,
explained.
429



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2348 of 1993.
From  the Judgment and Order dated 13.7.1992 of the  Central
Administrative Tribunal, Guahati in O.A. No. 33/91.
Ms.  K. Amareswari, B.P. Sarathy and C.V. Subba Rao for	 the
Appellants.
P.K.  Goswami,	Kailash	 Vasdev, Ms. Lira  Goswami  and	 Ms.
Alpana Poddar for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
B.P. JEEVAN REDDY, J. Heard counsel for the parties.   Leave
granted.
Respondent  is	a  Garden  Curator  in	the  Office  of	 the
Scientist-SE,  Botanical  Survey of India,  Eastern  Circle,
Shillong.    By	 order	dated  January	29,  1991   he	 was
transferred  from Shillong to Pauri (Uttar Pradesh)  by	 the
Senior	Administrative	Officer,  office  of  the  Director,
Botanical  Survey  of India, (Ministry	of  Environment	 and
Forests,  Government of India).	 As many as 19 persons	were
transferred  under the said order including the	 respondent.
The  respondent has been working in Shillong since the	year
1979.
The  respondent approached the Gauhati Bench of the  Central
Administrative	Tribunal  (Original Application	 No.  33  of
1991)  questioning the order of his transfer.  He  submitted
that his wife is also employed at Shillong in and off-ice of
the  Central Government, that his children are	studying  at
Shillong and further that he himself had suffered  back-bone
fracture  injuries  some  time ago. He	submitted  that	 the
guidelines  contained  in  Government of  India	 O.M.  dated
3.4.1986  have	not  been kept in mind	while  ordering	 his
transfer. tie complained that some other officials who	have
been  serving  at Shillong for a longer	 period,  have	been
allowed	 to continue at Shillong.  He attributed  'mischief'
to   his  Controller  Officer,	Shri  B.M.   Wadhwa   (third
respondent in the O.M.).
In  the	 counter affidavit filed by  the  respondents,	they
submitted  that the transfer was ordered  on  administrative
grounds and is unexceptionable.
The  learned  Single Member of	the  Central  Administrative
Tribunal  quashed  the order of transfer  on  the  following
reasoning:  the decisions of the Courts establish  that	 the
power	of  transfer  is  not  an  unfettered  one  but	  is
circumscribed  by various circulars/guidelines contained  in
the administrative instructions issued
430
by the Government.  An order of transfer can be	 interdicted
if it is discriminatory.  The said principles are applicable
to  the case of the respondent.	 Further "in the  matter  of
considering  transfer of an individual officer,	 the  Office
Memorandum  dated 3.4.1986, educational dislocation  of	 the
children and health ground, if all present, deserve  special
consideration  not  to pass the order." Having said  so	 the
learned	 Member recorded the following finding: "In view  of
the  above facts and circumstances and findings it  is	held
unhesitatingly	that the transfer order no.   BSI.  80/5/80-
Estt. dated 29.1.1991 in respect of applicant S.L.Abbas	 was
malafide  and liable to be quashed." The Union of India	 has
preferred this appeal.
An  order of transfer is an incident of Government  Service.
Fundamental  Rule  11  says  that  "the	 whole	time  of   a
Government  servant  is at the disposal	 of  the  Government
which pays him and he may be employed in any manner required
by  proper authority".	Fundemental Rule 15 says  that	"the
President may transfer a government servant from one post to
another".   That  the  respondent  is  liable  to   transfer
anywhere in India is not in dispute.  It is not the case  of
the  respondent	 that order of his transfer is	vitiated  by
mala  fides on the part of the authority making the  order,-
though	the  Tribunal  does say so  merely  because  certain
guidelines   issued  by	 the  Central  Government  are	 not
followed,  with	 which	finding we  shall  deal	 later.	 The
respondent attributed"mischief"to his immediate superior who
had nothing to do with his transfer. All he says is that  he
should not be transferred     because his wife is working at
shillong,  his children are studying there and also  because
his health had suffered a set-back some time ago. He  relies
upon certain executive instructions issued by the Government
in  that  behalf. Those instructions are in  the  nature  of
guidelines. They do not have statutory force.
Who  should  be	 transferred  where, is	 a  matter  for	 the
appropriate  authority	to  decide.  Unless  the  order	  of
transfer is vitiated by malafides or is made in violation of
any  statutory provisions, the Court cannot  interfere	with
it.  While  ordering the transfer, there is  no	 doubt,	 the
authority must keep in mind the guidelines issued      by
the  Government on the subject. Similarly if a person  makes
any  representation  with  respect  to	his  transfer,	 the
appropriate  authority must consider the same having  regard
to the exigencies of administration. The guidelines say that
as  far as possible, husband and wife must be posted at	 the
same place. The said guideline however does not confer	upon
the government employee a legally enforceable right.
The   jurisdication  of  the   Central   Administrative
Tribunal is akin to the jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226
of the constitution of India in service matters.
This  is  evident  from a persual of
Article  323-A
of	 the
constitution. The constraints and norms which the High Court
observes while exercising the
431
said  jurisdiction  apply equally to  the  Tribunal  created
under  Article	323-A. (We find it all the  more  surprising
that the learned Single Member who passed the impugned order
is a former Judge of the High Court and is thus aware of the
norms  and  constraints	 of  the  writ	jurisdiction.)	 The
Administrative	Tribunal  is  not  an  Appellate   Authority
sitting in judgment over the orders of transfer.  It  cannot
substitute  its	 own  judgment for  that  of  the  authority
competent  to  transfer.   In this  case  the  Tribunal	 has
clearly	 exceeded its jurisdiction in interfering  with	 the
order of transfer.  The order of the Tribunal reads as if it
were  sitting in appeal over the order of transfer  made  by
the Senior Administrative Officer (competent authority).
Shri Goswami, learned counsel for the respondent relies upon
the decision of this Court in
Bank of India v. Jagjit  Singh
Mehta
[1992] 1 S.C.C.306 rendered by a Bench of which one of
us  (J.S.  VermaJ.)  was  a member.  On	 a  perusal  of	 the
judgment, we do not think it supports the respondent in	 any
manner.	 It is observed therein:
"There	can  be	 no  doubt that ordinarily  and	 as  far  as
practicable  the  husband  and wife who	 are  both  employed
should be posted at the same station even if their employers
be different.  The desirability of such a course is obvious.
However,  this	does not mean that their  place	 of  posting
should invariably be one of their choice, even though  their
preference  may	 be  taken into	 account  while	 making	 the
decision  in accordance with the administrative	 needs.	  In
the case of all-India services, the hardship resulting	from
the   two  being  posted  at  different	 stations   may	  be
unavoidable  at	 times	particularly  when  they  belong  to
different services and one of them cannot be transferred  to
the place of the other's posting.  While choosing the career
and  a particular service, the couple have to bear  in	mind
this  factor and be prepared to face such a hardship if	 the
administrative	needs and transfer policy do not permit	 the
posting	 of  both  at one place	 without  sacrifice  of	 the
requirements  of  the  administration  and  needs  of  other
employees.   In	 such a case the couple have to	 make  their
choice at the threshold between career prospects and  family
life.	After giving preference to the career  prospects  by
accepting  such	 a promotion or any appointment in  an	all-
India service with the incident of transfer to any place  in
India, subordinating the need of the couple living  together
at one station,'they cannot as-of right claim to be relieved
of  the	 ordinary incidents of all-India service  and  avoid
transfer to a different place on the ground that-the spouses
	      thereby	 would-be   posted   at	   different
	      places............................................
	      No doubt
432
the guidelines requires the two spouses to he posted at	 one
pi"  as	 far  as  practicable, but that does not enable	 any
	      spouse to claim such a posting as of right  if
	      the  departmental authorities do not  consider
	      it feasible.  The only thing required is	that
	      the  departmental authorities should  consider
			    this  aspect  along	 with  the  exigencies	of
	      administration  and enable the two spouses  to
	      live together at one station if it is possible
	      without  any detriment to	 the  administrative
	      needs and the claim of other employees."
(emphasis added)
The   said  observations  in  fact  tend  to  negative	 the
respondent's  contentions instead of supporting	 them.	 The
judgment  also does not support the Respondents'  contention
that  if  such	an order is questioned in  a  Court  or	 the
Tribunal,  the authority is obliged to justify the  transfer
by adducing the reasons therefor.  It does not also say that
the  Court or the Tribunal can quash the order of  transfer,
if any of the administrative instructions/guidelines are not
followed,  much less can it be charactrised as malafide	 for
that  reason.	To reiterate, the order of transfer  can  be
questioned  in a court or Tribunal only where it  is  passed
malafide  or where it is made in violation of the  statutory
provisions.
For the above reasons, the appeal is allowed.  The  judgment
under  appeal is set aside.  There shall be no order  as  to
costs.
N.P.V.					    Appeal Allowed.
433