[Cites
12
, Cited by
42
]
Supreme Court of India
Md. Ashif & Ors vs State Of Bihar & Ors on 6 May, 2010
Equivalent citations: 2010 AIR SCW 3875, 2011 (1) AIR JHAR R 774, 2010 LAB IC 2783, (2010) 125 FACLR 1010, (2010) 3 LAB LN 10, (2010) 4 SCT 595, 2010 (5) SCC 475, (2011) 5 SERVLR 241, (2010) 3 ALLMR 925 (SC), (2010) 5 SCALE 217, (2010) 3 JCR 4 (SC), (2011) 1 SERVLJ 134, (2010) 3 ALL WC 2754, (2010) 2 CURLR 485
Author:
T.S. Thakur
Bench:
T.S. Thakur
,
J.M. Panchal
Reportable


               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICITION

             CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4256-4257 2010
     (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) Nos.21558-21559 OF 2003)


Md. Ashif & Ors.                             ...Appellants


      Versus


State of Bihar & Ors.                        ...Respondents



                        JUDGMENT
T.S. THAKUR, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.    These appeals by special leave arise out of an order

passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Patna

whereby Letters Patent Appeal Nos.33 and 540 of 2002 have

been allowed, the order passed by the learned Single Judge
2
set aside and Writ Petitions No.11701 and 9024 of 2001

dismissed.
3.   The appellants in these appeals were in June 1985

appointed     as    Voluntary   Health   Workers   in   State    run

dispensaries within the district of Darbhanga in the State of

Bihar. In lieu of their services they were paid a monthly

honorarium of Rs.50/- only. Less than five months after

their initial appointment they were absorbed as Primary

Health Workers by the Chief Medical Officer which carried a

pay scale of Rs.535-765. It is not in dispute that the

appellants continued to work for nearly 15 years as Primary

Health Workers, till their services were terminated by an

order dated 20th February, 2001 on the ground that their

promotion/absorption as Primary Health Workers was illegal

and contrary to the rules. The termination, it appears, came

pursuant to an enquiry regarding procedure followed in the

making of the appointments to class III posts. The enquiry

revealed     that    the   appointments    were    in   breach    of
3
circular/instructions dated 3rd December, 1980 issued by the

Chief Secretary of the State of Bihar pointing out that

appointment to Class-3 posts had been made in violation of

procedure laid down by the State Government in terms of

two circulars dated 10th July, 1980 and 26th September,

1980. The Government, therefore, directed all the Heads of

the Departments, Divisional Commissioners and the District

Magistrates to review the system and to send their reports

to ensure that action for filling up of the vacant posts is

taken in accordance with the prescribed procedure. It was

further directed that appointments made in violation of the

prescribed procedure would not only call for action against

those   who   make   such   appointments    but   render   the

appointments liable to be cancelled.
4.   Aggrieved by the termination of their services as

Primary Health Workers and reversion to Voluntary Health

Workers the appellants filed Writ Petitions No.11701 and

9024 of 2001 in the High Court of Patna, inter alia, asserting
4
that the appointments of the petitioners (appellants herein)

had been made after a proper advertisement and that the

termination of their services 15 years after the commission

of the alleged irregularity in making the appointments was

unfair and legally impermissible. By an order dated 9th

November, 2001 a Single bench of the High Court of Patna

held the termination of the services of the appellants to be

illegal inasmuch as the same was based on an alleged

irregularity committed 15 years earlier. Reliance in support

was placed upon the decisions of this Court in
Roshni Devi

and Ors. Vs. State of Haryana and Ors.
(1998) 8 SCC

59 and Union of India & Ors. Vs. Kishorilal Bablani

(AIR 1999 SC 517).
5.   The order passed by the learned Single Judge was,

assailed before a Division bench in Letters Patent Appeal

Nos.33 and 540 of 2000 filed by the State of Bihar. The

Division Bench opined that since the initial appointment of

the appellants herein was illegal the very fact that the

appellants had worked for a long period did not cure that
5
defect so as to justify their reinstatement in service.
In

support of that view the Division Bench placed reliance upon

the decisions of this Court in
Ashwani Kumar & Ors. Vs.

State of Bihar & Ors.
(
AIR 1997 SC 1628), State of

Madhya Pradesh & Anr. Vs. Dharam Bir
(
1998) 6 SCC

165 and Subedar Singh & Ors. Vs. District Judge,

Mirzapur & Anr.
(AIR 2001 SC 201). The present appeals

call in question the correctness of the said order as already

noticed above.
6.   We have heard learned counsel for the parties at

considerable length. The legal position regarding the right of

an employee to seek regularisation of his services stands

settled by a long line of the decisions of this Court.
In
Ashwani Kumar
's case (supra) this Court declared that the

question of regularisation of the services of an employee

may arise in two contingencies. It may arise firstly in

situations where against an available clear vacancy an

appointment is made on ad hoc or daily-wage basis by an

authority competent to do so and such appointment is
6
continued from time to time without any artificial break in

service. Any such appointment may be regularized giving

him security of tenure. The all important condition precedent

for such regularization is that   the initial entry of such an

employee must be made against a sanctioned vacancy and

by following the rules and regulations governing such entry.
7.   The second situation in which regularization could be

granted was where the initial entry of the employee against

an available vacancy was found suffering from some flaws in

the procedure in making the appointment though the person

appointing was competent to make such initial recruitment

and had otherwise followed the procedure prescribed for

such recruitment. A need may then arise for regularization

of the initial appointment by the competent authority with a

view to curing the irregularity if any in the same and with a

view to granting security of tenure to the incumbent. It is

necessary in such situations that the initial entry of the
7
employee is not totally illegal or in breach of the established

rules and regulations governing such recruitment.
8.   The law regarding regularization of employees was on a

comprehensive     review    authoritatively    declared   by    a

Constitution Bench of this Court in Secretary, State of

Karnataka & Ors. Vs. Uma Devi (3) & Ors. (2006) 4

SCC 1. This Court in that case drew a distinction between

an irregularity and an illegality in the making of an

appointment and declared that where the due process of

appointment    has   been   deviated   from,   the   Court     can

regularize the same.   In   cases where the process itself is

completely violative of the constitutional scheme underlying

public employment and no procedure has been followed

while granting such appointments the Court cannot allow

such an illegality to continue irrespective of the length of

time for which it has continued.
Relying upon the decision of

this Court in
Ashwani Kumar
's case (supra) this Court in

Uma Devi's case (supra) observed:
8
"Thus, it is clear that adherence to the rule
of equality in public employment is a basic
feature of our Constitution and since the rule
of law is the core of our Constitution, a court
would certainly be disabled from passing an
order upholding a violation of
Article 14
or in
ordering the overlooking of the need to
comply with the requirements of
Article 14
read with
Article 16
of the Constitution.
Therefore, consistent with the scheme for
public employment, this Court while laying
down the law, has necessarily to hold that
unless the appointment is in terms of the
relevant rules and after a proper competition
among qualified persons, the same would not
confer any right on the appointee. If it is a
contractual appointment, the appointment
comes to an end at the end of the contract, if
it were an engagement or appointment on
daily wages or casual basis, the same would
come to an end when it is discontinued.
Similarly, a temporary employee could not
claim to be made permanent on the expiry of
his term of appointment. It has also to be
clarified that merely because a temporary
employee or a casual wage worker is
continued for a time beyond the term of his
appointment, he would not be entitled to be
absorbed in regular service or made
permanent, merely on the strength of such
continuance, if the original appointment was
not made by following a due process of
selection as envisaged by the relevant rules.
It is not open to the court to prevent regular
recruitment at the instance of temporary
employees whose period of employment has
come to an end or of ad hoc employees who
by the very nature of their appointment, do
not acquire any right. The High Courts acting
under
Article 226
of the Constitution, should
not ordinarily issue directions for absorption,
regularisation, or permanent continuance
unless the recruitment itself was made
regularly and in terms of the constitutional
scheme. Merely because an employee had
continued under cover of an order of the
court, which we have described as "litigious
employment" in the earlier part of the
judgment, he would not be entitled to any
right to be absorbed or made permanent in
the service. In fact, in such cases, the High
Court may not be justified in issuing interim
9
directions, since, after all, if ultimately the
         employee approaching it is found entitled to
         relief, it may be possible for it to mould the
         relief in such a manner that ultimately no
         prejudice will be caused to him, whereas an
         interim direction to continue his employment
         would hold up the regular procedure for
         selection or impose on the State the burden
         of paying an employee who is really not
         required. The courts must be careful in
         ensuring that they do not interfere unduly
         with the economic arrangement of its affairs
         by the State or its instrumentalities or lend
         themselves the instruments to facilitate the
         bypassing of the constitutional and statutory
         mandates."
9.   The above decision has been followed by this Court in
Mohd. Abdul Kadir & Anr. Vs. Directorate General of

Police, Assam & Ors.
(2009) 6 SCC 611, where this

Court held that employees who were recruited in connection

with a scheme could not claim continuance or regularization

in service even when they may have worked on ad hoc basis

for as long as two decades.
The decision of this Court in
State of Karnataka and Ors. Vs.          G.V. Chandrashekar
(2009) 4 SCC 342, once more reiterated the legal position

and declared that the observations made by a three-Judge

Bench of this Court in
U.P. State Electricity Board Vs.

Pooran Chandra Pandey and Ors.
(2007) 11 SCC 92,
10
were only in the nature of obiter dicta.
In
Pooran Chandra

Pandey
's case (supra) a two-Judge Bench of this Court had

tried to distinguish the ratio of the decision of this Court in

Uma Devi's case (supra) and held that the said decision

had to be read in conformity with
Article 14
of the

Constitution and that the same could not be applied

mechanically.
The decision in
G.V. Chandrashekar
's case

(supra) did not find that reasoning to be correct as is

evident from the following passage appearing in
the said

decision
:
"90. We are distressed to note that despite
            several pronouncements on the subject,
            there is substantial increase in the number of
            cases involving violation of the basics of
            judicial discipline. The learned Single Judges
            and Benches of the High Courts refuse to
            follow and accept the verdict and law
laid
            down by
coordinate and even larger Benches
            by citing minor difference in the facts as the
            ground for doing so. Therefore, it has
            become necessary to reiterate that disrespect
            to the constitutional ethos and breach of
            discipline have grave impact on the credibility
            of judicial institution and encourages chance
            litigation. It must be remembered that
            predictability and certainty is an important
            hallmark of judicial jurisprudence developed
            in this country in the last six decades and
            increase in the frequency of conflicting
            judgments of the superior judiciary will do
            incalculable harm to the system inasmuch as
            the courts at the grass roots will not be able
            to decide as to which of the judgments lay
11
down the correct law and which one should
         be followed.
91. We may add that in our constitutional set
         up every citizen is under a duty to abide by
         the Constitution and respect its ideals and
         institutions. Those who have been entrusted
         with the task of administering the system
         and operating various constituents of the
         State and who take oath to act in accordance
         with the Constitution and uphold the same,
         have to set an example by exhibiting total
         commitment to the constitutional ideals. This
         principle is required to be observed with
         greater rigour by the members of judicial
         fraternity who have been bestowed with the
         power     to   adjudicate    upon    important
         constitutional and legal issues and protect
         and preserve rights of the individuals and
         society as a whole. Discipline is sine qua non
         for effective and efficient functioning of the
         judicial system. If the courts command
         others to act in accordance with the
         provisions of the Constitution and the rule of
         law, it is not possible to countenance
         violation of the constitutional principle by
         those who are required to lay down the law.
92.
In the light of what has been stated
         above, we deem it proper to clarify that the
         comments and observations made by the
         two-Judge Bench in
U.P. SEB v. Pooran
         Chandra Pandey
(2007) 11 SCC 92 should be
         read as obiter and the same should neither
         be treated as binding by the High Courts,
         tribunals and other judicial foras nor they
         should be relied upon or made basis for
         bypassing the principles
laid down by
the
         Constitution Bench."
10. Reference at this stage may also be made to the

decisions of this Court in
Pinaki Chatterjee Vs. Union of

India & Ors.
(
2009) 5 SCC 193 and General Manager,
12
Uttaranchal Jal Sansthan Vs. Laxmi Devi & Ors.
(2009)

7 SCC 205 where this Court has followed Uma Devi's case

(supra) and declared that regularization cannot be granted if

the same would have the effect of violating
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution.
11. Applying the test laid down by this Court in Uma

Devi's case (supra) and the cases referred to above, to the

case at hand, there is no gainsaying that the appointments

of the appellants as Primary Health Workers were totally

illegal and violative of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution

which guarantee equality of opportunity to all those who

were otherwise eligible for such appointments.         The Chief

Medical Officer who had made the appointments was not

vested with the power to do so nor were the claims of other

candidates eligible for appointments against the posts to

which    the    appellants   were    appointed,    considered.

Surprisingly,   the   appointments   had   come   by    way   of

absorption of the appellants who were working as Voluntary
13
Health Workers on a monthly honorarium of Rs.50/- only.

The High Court has, in our opinion, correctly held that there

was no cadre of Voluntary Health Workers who were working

on an honorarium in State run dispensaries. The very nature

of the appointment given to the appellants as Voluntary

Health Workers was honorary in nature which entitled them

to the payment of not more than Rs.50/- per month. It is

difficult to appreciate how the Chief Medical Officer could

have regularized/absorbed such Voluntary Health Workers

doing honorary service against the post of Primary Health

Workers which carried a regular pay-scale and which could

be filled only in accordance with the procedure prescribed for

that purpose. The appointment of the appellants against the

said posts was thus manifestly illegal and wholly undeserved

to say the least. Inasmuch as these appointments came to

be cancelled pursuant to the said directions no matter nearly

a decade and a half later the termination could not be said

to be illegal so as to warrant interference of a writ court for

reinstatement of those illegally appointed. The High Court
14
was, in that view of the matter, justified in declining

interference with the order of cancellation and dismissing

the writ petitions.
12. We see no reason to interfere with the order of Division

Bench of the High Court. These appeals accordingly fail and

are hereby dismissed. No costs.
.................................J.
                                   (J.M. PANCHAL)



                                   .................................J.
                                   (T.S. THAKUR)
New Delhi
May 6, 2010