[Cites
14
, Cited by
39
]
Supreme Court of India
Amar Chakravarty & Ors vs Maruti Suzuki India Limited on 29 November, 2010
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2010 SC 173
Author:
D.K. Jain
Bench:
H.L. Dattu
,
D.K. Jain
REPORTABLE
                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
             CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 10135 OF 2010
           (Arising out of S.L.P (C) Nos. 7187-7194 of 2008)

AMAR CHAKRAVARTY & ORS.                      --     APPELLANTS

                                 VERSUS

MARUTI SUZUKI INDIA LTD.                     --     RESPONDENT

                                   WITH

                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10144            OF 2010
                    (Arising out of S.L.P (C) No. 9604 of 2008)
                                      &
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10143 OF 2010
                   (Arising out of S.L.P (C) No. 21919 of 2008)


                             JUDGMENT
D.K. JAIN, J.:
Leave granted.
2. These appeals, by special leave, are directed against the judgments

  delivered by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, whereby it

  dismissed the writ petitions of the appellants herein, holding that the

  Labour Court was correct in shifting the burden on the workmen-

  appellants to prove that their termination was unjustified.
1
3. Since the question of law arising in all the appeals is the same, these are

   being disposed of by this common judgment. However, a brief reference

   to the facts in S.L.P (C) No.7187 of 2008 would be expedient in order to

   appreciate the controversy at hand.
4. On 23rd November, 2000, the respondent-management dismissed the

   appellant without holding an enquiry mainly on the allegations that he

   had been participating in tool down strike; had been exhorting other

   workers to slow down the work so that there is fall in production of cars;

   had indulged in holding demonstrations within the factory premises and

   raised derogatory and offensive slogans against the management; and

   was threatening the supervisors etc. The relevant portion of the dismissal

   order reads thus:
"In view of the situation created by you, Management finds that
      it is not reasonably practical to hold an enquiry. In view of the
      gravity of the misconduct thus committed by you, you are
      hereby dismissed from service."
5. The appellant having raised an industrial dispute, the State Government

   referred the same to the Labour Court, Gurgaon under
Section 10(1)(c)
of

   the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short "the Act"). The terms of

   reference for the adjudication were:
"Whether the termination of service of Shri Amar Chakarvarty
      was justified and in order, if not, to what relief is he entitled?"
2
6. On 13th May, 2002, the Labour Court framed the following issues:
"1. Whether the termination of the services of the petitioner
      is justified and if not to what relief he is entitled to? OPM
2.     Whether the petitioner is gainfully employed?
3.     Relief."
It is manifest that in relation to issue No. 1, the Labour Court had placed the

onus of proof on the management.
7. Thereafter, the appellants preferred an application before the Labour

   Court for framing additional issues and disposal of the reference by

   treating them as preliminary issues. One of the proposed additional issue

   was with reference to the violation of Standing Order No. 21.3, which

   stipulates that no order of dismissal shall be made except after holding an

   enquiry against the workman concerned in respect of the alleged

   misconduct. However, the Labour Court, vide order dated 12th August,

   2003, dismissed the application, observing as under:
"It is for the management to prove, by adducing cogent evidence,
    that the order of dismissal passed against the workman was
    perfectly legal. For that the management is required to adduce
    evidence. The matter cannot be cut short (sic) by disallowing the
    management to adduce any evidence and by holding the order of
    dismissal as illegal, being violative Standing Order 21.3. The
    additional issues sought (sic) to be framed by the workman, stand
    clearly covered in issue no.1 framed in this case. The workman can
3
lead evidence in rebuttal on issue no.1 to prove those facts which
    he wants to bring on record by getting additional issues framed."
( emphasis supplied by us )

The Labour Court thus, held that in the first instance, it was for the

management to prove, by adducing cogent evidence, that the order of

dismissal passed against the workman was legal.
8. However, on a motion being made by the management, the Labour Court,

   vide a short order dated 31st January, 2006, shifted the onus of proof in

   relation to the afore-extracted issue No. 1 on the workman. The order

   reads as follows:
"In view of the latest law on the point. I hereby shift the onus to
      prove issue no. 1 from the management to the workman. To
      come up on 11.01.2007 for the evidence of the workman."
9. Being aggrieved by the said order, the appellant preferred a writ petition

   before the High Court. As afore-mentioned, the High Court, vide

   judgment dated 22nd January, 2008 has dismissed the writ petition of the

   appellant, inter alia, observing that onus of establishing a plea of

   victimization or that he had completed 240 days of service in the last

   calendar year, in order to avail of the benefit of
Sections 25F
,
25G
and
25H
of the Act, is on the workman. The High Court held that the order of
4
the Labour Court cannot be said to be perverse or illegal warranting its

      interference.
10.Hence, the present appeals.
11.Mr. Jitendra Sharma, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants

      in S.L.P. (C) Nos. 7187-7194 of 2008 and S.L.P. (C) No. 9604 of 2008

      while assailing the impugned order contended that in light of the

      decisions of this Court in
Karnataka State Road Transport Corpn. Vs.

      Lakshmidevamma (Smt.) & Anr.1 and The Workmen
of M/s
Firestone

      Tyre & Rubber Co. of India (Pvt.) Ltd. Vs. The Management & Ors.2
,

      it is a settled principle that when a domestic enquiry is found to be

      irregular or improper or is not at all conducted on the ground that it is not

      practical to hold it because of some compelling circumstances, the onus

      to prove that the termination was justified is on the management. It was

      asserted that the order passed by the Labour Court on 31st January, 2006

      is per se illegal and therefore, the High Court erred in not reversing the

      same.
12.Per contra, Mr. Altaf Ahmed, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf

      of the respondent, urged that the impugned order deserves to be affirmed
1
(2001) 5 SCC 433
2
(1973) 1 SCC 813
5
in light of the decisions of this Court in
Manager, Reserve Bank of

    India, Bangalore Vs. S. Mani & Ors.3
and
Talwara Cooperative Credit

    and Service Society Limited Vs. Sushil Kumar4
wherein it has been held

    that the burden of proving that the termination was unjustified lies on the

    workman. Learned counsel also submitted that since both the parties have

    already filed affidavits by way of evidence, these appeals have been

    rendered infructuous.
13.In our opinion, in light of the settled legal position on the point, the

    judgment of the High Court is clearly indefensible. Whilst it is true that

    the provisions of the
Evidence Act, 1872
per se are not applicable in an

    industrial adjudication, it is trite that its general principles do apply in

    proceedings before the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour Court, as the

    case may be. (See:
Municipal Corporation, Faridabad Vs. Siri Niwas5
).
In any proceeding, the burden of proving a fact lies on the party that

    substantially asserts the affirmative of the issue, and not on the party who

    denies it. (See:
Anil Rishi Vs. Gurbaksh Singh6
) Therefore, it follows

    that where an employer asserts misconduct on the part of the workman

    and dismisses or discharges him on that ground, it is for him to prove
3
(2005) 5 SCC 100
4
(2008) 9 SCC 486
5
(2004) 8 SCC 195
6
(2006) 5 SCC 558
6
misconduct by the workman before the Industrial Tribunal or the Labour

      Court, as the case may be, by leading relevant evidence before it and it is

      open to the workman to adduce evidence contra. In the first instance, a

      workman cannot be asked to prove that he has not committed any act

      tantamounting to misconduct.
14.In Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation
(supra) relied upon by

      learned counsel for the appellant, a Constitution Bench of this Court

      affirmed the decision of this Court in
Shambu Nath Goyal Vs. Bank of

      Baroda & Ors.7
, wherein the issue for consideration was as to at what

      stage, the management is entitled to seek permission to adduce evidence

      in justification of its decision to terminate the services of an employee. It

      was held that the right of the employer to adduce additional evidence, in

      a proceeding before the Labour Court under
Section 10
of the Act,

      questioning the legality of the order terminating the service must be

      availed of by the employer by making a proper request at the time when

      it files its statement of claim or written statement. It was observed that:
"The management is made aware of the workman's contention
          regarding the defect in the domestic enquiry by the written
          statement of defence filed by him in the application filed by the
          management under
Section 33
of the Act. Then, if the
          management chooses to exercise its right it must make up its
7
(1983) 4 SCC 491
7
mind at the earliest stage and file the application for that
          purpose without any unreasonable delay."
15.Similarly, in The Workmen of M/s Firestone Tyre & Rubber Co.
(supra), this court observed that:
"Even if no enquiry has been held by an employer or if the
          enquiry held by him is found to be defective, the Tribunal in
          order to satisfy itself about the legality and validity of the order,
          had to give an opportunity to the employer and employee to
          adduce evidence before it. It is open to the employer to adduce
          evidence for the first time justifying his action, and it is open to
          the employee to adduce evidence contra." (See also: United
          Bank of India Vs. Tamil Nadu Banks Deposit Collectors
          Union & Anr.8; Engineering Laghu Udyog Employees' Union
          Vs. Judge, Labour Court and Industrial Tribunal & Anr.9

                                             (emphasis supplied by us)
16.In our opinion, the decisions in
Manager, Reserve Bank of India
(supra)

      and
Talwara Cooperative Credit and Service Society Limited
(supra)

      relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent have no bearing on

      the issue at hand in as much as the said decisions deal with the onus of

      proof in relation to proving 240 days of continuous service and

      entitlement to back wages respectively, for which the claims were made

      by the workmen, which is not the case here. In the present case, as stated

      above, the assertion to the effect that it was not practical to hold domestic

      enquiry to prove the misconduct of the workman was by the employer
8
(2007) 12 SCC 585
9
(2003) 12 SCC 1
8
and therefore, the assertion has to be proved by the employer and not by

   the workman.
17.In view of the aforesaid position in law, the inevitable conclusion is that

   when no enquiry is conducted before the service of a workman is

   terminated, the onus to prove that it was not possible to conduct the

   enquiry and that the termination was justified because of misconduct by

   the employee, lies on the management. It bears repetition that it is for the

   management to prove, by adducing evidence, that the workman is guilty

   of misconduct and that the action taken by it is proper. In the present

   case, the services of the appellants-workmen having been terminated on

   the ground of misconduct, without holding a domestic enquiry, it would

   be for the management to adduce evidence to justify its action. It will be

   open to the appellants-workmen to adduce evidence in rebuttal.

   Therefore, the order passed by the Labour Court, shifting the burden to

   prove issue No. 1 on the workmen is fallacious and the High Court

   should have quashed it.
18.For the foregoing reasons, the appeals are allowed; the impugned

   judgments are set aside and the Labour Court is directed to dispose of the

   references expeditiously. The appellants will also be entitled to costs,

   quantified at ` 10,000/- for each set of appeals.
9
...........................................
(D.K. JAIN, J.)



                    ............................................
                    (H.L. DATTU, J.)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 29, 2010
AR
1