[Cites
5
, Cited by
102
]
Supreme Court of India
Ramesh Kumar vs High Court Of Delhi & Anr on 1 February, 2010
Equivalent citations: AIR 2010 SUPREME COURT 3714, 2010 (3) SCC 104, 2010 AIR SCW 946, 2010 LAB. I. C. 1075, (2010) 124 FACLR 1050, (2010) 1 SCT 717, (2010) 2 SERVLJ 183, (2010) 3 MAD LJ 332, (2010) 2 LAB LN 109, (2010) 2 ESC 170, (2010) 167 DLT 98, (2010) 2 SERVLR 144, 2010 (2) SCALE 86, (2010) 2 SCALE 86
Author:
B.S. Chauhan
Bench:
K.G. Balakrishnan
,
Deepak Verma
,
B.S. Chauhan
REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                  CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

               WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.57 OF 2008


Ramesh Kumar                                               ... Petitioner

         Vs.

High Court of Delhi & Anr.                                 ... Respondents

(With W.P. (C) No.66/2008)




                              JU DGMENT


Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN, J


1.    These two petitions have been filed under
Article 32
of the

Constitution of India for seeking directions to the respondents i.e. the High

Court of Delhi and Govt. of NCT of Delhi to offer appointment to the

petitioners on the posts in the cadre of District Judge.



2.    The facts and circumstances giving rise to these petitions are that in

order to fill up 20 vacancies in the cadre of District Judge in Delhi, the

Respondent No.1, the High Court of Delhi issued an advertisement on
19.5.2007. Out of these 20 vacancies, 13 were to be filled up from the

General Category candidates, 3 from Scheduled Castes candidates and 4

from Scheduled Tribes candidates. The petitioners who belong to Scheduled

Castes category faced the selection process. The result was declared on

3.1.2008. All the three vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes candidates

could not be filled up as the Respondent No. 1 found only one person

suitable for the post. The two petitioners herein were found unsuitable on the

ground that they did not secure the required minimum marks in interview.

Hence, these petitions.



3.    Shri V. Shekhar, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners

has submitted that in view of decision taken by the Respondent No. 1, a

candidate belonging to Scheduled Castes Category would be called for

interview provided he secured 45% marks in written test. Only three

candidates belonging to the said category stood qualified in the written test,

thus, they could have been offered the appointment without asking them to

complete the formality of facing the interview. It was not permissible for

the Respondent No. 1 to fix minimum Bench Marks at the interview level

also for the purpose of selection. The petitions deserve to be allowed and

the respondents be directed to offer the appointment to the petitioners.



                                      2
4.    Per contra, Shri A. Mariarputham, learned senior counsel appearing

for the respondents has vehemently opposed the petitions contending that

mere passing the written test is not sufficient for appointment as some of the

required qualities of a candidate can be assessed only in viva-voce/oral

examination. The competent authority is permitted in law to fix the

minimum marks at interview level also. In case, the candidate does not

secure the marks so fixed, the candidate cannot claim the appointment to the

post. Decision for fixing the cut-off marks in the written test and further for

securing the minimum Bench Marks in the interview had been taken prior to

initiation of selection process and was made public at the same time. The

petitioners did not challenge the said criteria at the appropriate stage. Once

they had appeared in the examination and could not succeed, petitioners

cannot be permitted to take U-turn and challenge the selection process on

this ground at all. The petitions lack merit and are liable to be dismissed.



5.    We have considered the rival submissions made by learned counsel

for the parties and perused the record.



6.    The advertisement dated 19.5.2007 provided that selection process

      would be in two stages as it would comprise of written examination



                                       3
      carrying 750 marks and Viva-Voce carrying 250 marks. Respondent

      No.1, the Delhi High Court furnished detailed information about the

      pattern of selection process in the instructions annexed to the

      application form. It provided 50% minimum qualifying marks in the

      written examination as well as in the interview for General Category

      candidates and 45% for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes

      candidates.



      The relevant part of the said instruction reads as under:

      "A candidate shall be eligible to appear in the viva-voce only
      in case he secures 50% marks in the written examination i.e.
      aggregate of both parts (objective/descriptive) in the case of
      general category, and 45% marks in the case of reserved
      category.

      Interview/viva-voce will carry 250 marks. A candidate of
      general category must secure a minimum of 50% marks and a
      candidate of reserved category must secure a minimum, of 45%
      marks in the viva-voce".


      It was also provided that final merit list will be drawn up from among

the candidates who have secured the stipulated minimum marks in the

written examination and also the stipulated minimum marks in the viva-voce

by adding up the marks in the written examination and the viva-voce.




                                      4
     RESULT OF THE PETITIONERS REMAINED AS UNDER

 Name              Marks          Marks       Grand total Result
                   obtained in    obtained in
                   written test   interview
                   Out of 750     Out of 250  Out of 1000
 Ramesh Kumar      357.50         105.00      462.50      Not qualified in
                                                          interview
 Desh Raj Chalia 341.50            83.00      424.50      Not qualified in
                                                          interview


      It is thus evident that the petitioners were found unsuitable on the

ground that they failed to secure minimum Bench Marks i.e. 112.50 in

interview.



7.    As per the submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the

Respondent No.1, the High Court of Delhi had fixed the said criteria being

empowered by the statutory provisions contained in The Delhi Higher

Judicial Service Rules, 1970 (hereinafter called `the Rules").        Rule 10

thereof reads as under:

            "The High Court shall before making recommendations
      to the Administrator invite applications by advertisement and
      may require the applicants to give such particulars as it may
      prescribe and may further hold such tests as may be
      considered necessary." ( Emphasis added)




                                       5
8.    The aforesaid statutory provision undoubtedly does not fix any

particular criteria or minimum Bench Marks either in the written test or in

interview for the purpose of selection. Rule 10 provides that the High Court

"may hold such tests as may be considered necessary", it impliedly

provides for requirement necessary for assessment of suitability of a

candidate. There is no challenge to the validity of Rule 10 in these writ

petitions. The question does arise as to whether the Rules enabled the High

Court to fix the minimum Bench Marks for interview?



9.    In State of U.P. v. Rafiquddin & Ors., AIR 1988 SC 162; Dr.

Krushna Chandra Sahu & Ors. v. State of Orissa & Ors. AIR 1996 SC

352; Majeet Singh, UDC & Ors. v. Employees' State Insurance

Corporation & Anr. AIR 1990 SC 1104; and K.H. Siraj v. High Court of

Kerala & Ors. AIR 2006 SC 2339, this Court held that Commission/Board

has to satisfy itself that a candidate had obtained such aggregate marks in the

written test as to qualify for interview and obtained "sufficient marks in viva

voce" which would show his suitability for service.         Such a course is

permissible for adjudging the qualities/capacities of the candidates. It may

be necessary in view of the fact that it is imperative that only persons with a

prescribed minimum of said qualities/capacities        should be selected as

                                      6
otherwise the standard of judiciary would get diluted and sub-standard stuff

may get selected. Interview may also be the best mode of assessing the

suitability of a candidate for a particular position as it brings out overall

intellectual qualities of the candidates. While the written test will testify the

candidate's academic knowledge, the oral test can bring out or disclose

overall intellectual and personal qualities like alertness, resourcefulness,

dependability, capacity for discussion, ability to take decisions, qualities of

leadership etc. which are also essential for a Judicial Officer.



10.       Re-iterating similar views, this Court has given much emphasis on

interview in Lila Dhar v. State of Rajasthan & Ors., AIR 1981 SC 1777; and

Ashok Kumar Yadav & Ors. v. State of Haryana & Ors. AIR 1987 SC 454

stating     that   interview can evaluate a candidate's initiative, alertness,

resourcefulness, dependableness, co-operativeness, capacity for clear and

logical presentation, effectiveness in discussion, effectiveness in meeting and

dealing with others, adaptability, judgment, ability to make decision, ability to

lead, intellectual and moral integrity with some degree of error.



11.       In Shri Durgacharan Misra v. State of Orissa & Ors. AIR 1987 SC

2267, this Court considered the Orissa Judicial Service Rules which did not



                                       7
provide for prescribing the minimum cut-off marks in interview for the

purpose of selection. This Court held that in absence of the enabling

provision for fixation of minimum marks in interview would amount to

amending the rules itself. While deciding the said case, the Court placed

reliance upon its earlier judgments in B.S. Yadav & Ors. v. State of

Haryana & Ors. AIR 1981 SC 561; P.K. Ramachandra Iyer & Ors. v

Union of India & Ors. AIR 1984 SC 541; and Umesh Chandra Shukla v.

Union of India & Ors. AIR 1985 SC 1351, wherein it had been held that

there was no "inherent jurisdiction" of the Selection Committee/Authority

to lay down such norms for selection in addition to the procedure prescribed

by the Rules. Selection is to be made giving strict adherence to the statutory

provisions and if such power i.e. "inherent jurisdiction" is claimed, it has to

be explicit and cannot be read by necessary implication for the obvious

reason that such deviation from the rules is likely to cause irreparable and

irreversible harm.



12.    Similarly, in K Manjusree v. State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.

AIR 2008 SC 1470, this Court held that selection criteria has to be adopted

and declared at the time of commencement of the recruitment process. The

rules of the game cannot be changed after the game is over. The competent



                                      8
authority, if the statutory rules do not restrain, is fully competent to prescribe

the minimum qualifying marks for written examination as well as for

interview. But such prescription must be done at the time of initiation of

selection process. Change of criteria of selection in the midst of selection

process is not permissible.



13.   Thus, law on the issue can be summarised to the effect that in case the

statutory rules prescribe a particular mode of selection, it has to be given

strict adherence accordingly. In case, no procedure is prescribed by the rules

and there is no other impediment in law, the competent authority while

laying down the norms for selection may prescribe for the tests and further

specify the minimum Bench Marks for written test as well as for viva-voce.



14.   In the instant case, the Rules do not provide for any particular

procedure/criteria for holding the tests rather it enables the High Court to

prescribe the criteria. This Court in All India Judges' Association & Ors.

v Union of India & Ors. AIR 2002 SC 1752 accepted Justice Shetty

Commission's Report in this regard which had prescribed for not having

minimum marks for interview. The Court further explained that to give

effect to the said judgment, the existing statutory rules may be amended.



                                       9
However, till the amendment is carried out, the vacancies shall be filled as

per the existing statutory rules. A similar view has been reiterated by this

Court while dealing with the appointment of Judicial Officers in Syed T.A.

Naqshbandi & Ors. v. State of J & K & Ors. (2003) 9 SCC 592; and

Malik Mazhar Sultan & Anr. v. Union Public Service Commission

(2007) 2 SCALE       159.   We have also accepted the said settled legal

proposition while deciding the connected cases, i.e., Civil Appeals @ SLP

(Civil) Nos..... in CC 14852-14854 of 2008 (Rakhi Ray & Ors. v. The High

Court of Delhi & Ors.) vide judgment and order of this date. It has been

clarified in Ms. Rakhi Ray (supra) that where statutory rules do not deal with

a particular subject/issue, so far as the appointment of the Judicial Officers

is concerned, directions issued by this Court would have binding effect.



15.   The view taken hereinabove is in conformity with the law laid down

by this Court in Nand Kishore v. State of Punjab (1995) 6 SCC 614,

wherein it has been observed as under :-

      "Their Lordship's decisions declare the existing law but do not
      enact any fresh law, is not in keeping with the plenary function
      of the Supreme Court under
Article 141
of the Constitution, for
      the Court is not merely the interpreter of the law as existing but
      much beyond that. The Court as a wing of the State is by itself
      a source of law. The law is what the Court says it is."




                                      10
16.   These cases are squarely covered by the judgment of this Court in

Hemani Malhotra v. High Court of Delhi AIR 2008 SC 2103, wherein it

has been held that it was not permissible for the High Court to change the

criteria of selection in the midst of selection process. This Court in All

India Judges' case (supra) had accepted Justice Shetty Commission's

Report in this respect i.e. that there should be no requirement of securing

the minimum marks in interview, thus, this ought to have been given effect

to. The Court had issued directions to offer the appointment to candidates

who had secured the requisite marks in aggregate in the written examination

as well as in interview, ignoring the requirement of securing minimum

marks in interview.

17.   In pursuance of those directions, the Delhi High Court offered the

appointment to such candidates. Selection to the post involved herein has

not been completed in any subsequent years to the selection process under

challenge.   Therefore, in the instant case, in absence of any statutory

requirement of securing minimum marks in interview, the High Court ought

to have followed the same principle. In such a fact-situation, the question of

acquiescence would not arise.

18.   In view of the above, as it remains admitted position that petitioner

Ramesh Kumar had secured 46.25% marks in aggregate and as he was



                                     11
required only to have 45% marks for appointment, writ petition No.57 of

2008 stands allowed. The connected writ petition filed by Desh Raj Chalia

as he failed to secure the required marks in aggregate, stands dismissed. The

respondents are requested to offer appointment to petitioner Ramesh Kumar,

at the earliest, preferably within a period of two months from the date of

submitting the certified copy of this order before the Delhi High Court. It is,

however, clarified that he shall not be entitled to get any seniority or any

other perquisite on the basis of his notional entitlement. Service benefits

shall be given to him from the date of his appointment. No costs.



                                               ................................CJI.




                                             .................................... J.
                                             (DEEPAK VERMA)


                                             . .................................... J.
                                             (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)

New Delhi,
February 1, 2010.




                                      12
                                                            REPORTABLE


                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

               CIVIL APPEAL NOS.                  OF 2010
(Arising out of SLP (C) Nos. .......... Of 2008 in CC 14852-14854/2008)




Rakhi Ray & Ors.                                       ... Appellants

           Vs.

The High Court of Delhi & Ors.                         ... Respondents



                             JU DGMENT

Dr. B.S. Chauhan, J.

1.    Applications for permission to file Special Leave Petitions are

granted.

2.    Leave granted.

3.    These appeals have been filed for seeking directions to the

respondents i.e. the High Court of Delhi and the Lt. Governor of Delhi to

offer the appointment to the appellants on the posts in the cadre of District

Judges in Delhi Judicial Service.

4.    Facts and circumstances giving rise to these appeals are that in order

to fill up 20 vacancies in the cadre of District Judge in Delhi, the respondent
No.1, the High Court of Delhi, issued an advertisement dated 19.5.2007.

Out of these 20 vacancies, 13 were to be filled up from the General Category

candidates; 3 from Scheduled Castes; and 4 from Scheduled Tribes.

Appellants who belong to General Category, faced the selection process.

The result was declared on 3.1.2008. Appellants found place in the merit list

but much below. All the 13 vacancies in the said category were filled

according to the merit list of General Category candidates. However, two

posts reserved for Scheduled Castes candidates and four posts meant for

Scheduled Tribes candidates could not be filled up for non availability of

suitable candidates.



5.    Certain unsuccessful candidates approached the Delhi High Court by

filing Writ Petition Nos. 2688/2008, 2913/2008 and 3932/2008 on the

ground that 13 vacancies came into existence between 29.2.2008 and

23.5.2008 i.e. during the pendency of the selection process which could have

also been filled up from the said select list in view of the judgment of this

Court in Malik Mazhar Sultan & Anr. v. U.P. Public Service

Commission & Ors. (2007) 2 SCALE 159. The High Court disposed of all

the petitions vide its judgment and order dated 3.10.2008 taking a view that

only three vacancies came into existence subsequent to the date of

Advertisement which could have been filled up from the said list. Out of the
said three vacancies, two could be offered to General Category candidates

and one to the Scheduled Caste candidate and issued direction to appoint

two more candidates whose names appeared at Serial Nos.14 and 15 in

General Category Merit List. Hence, these appeals are for seeking directions

to the respondents for offering appointment to the appellants also.



6.    Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants

has submitted that the judgment in Malik Mazhar Sultan's case (supra)

was delivered by this Court on 4.1.2007. A large number of directions had

been issued in the said case       and it also formulated the calendar for

conducting the examinations for filling up the vacancies in the Judicial

Service. It also provided that while determining the number of vacancies,

the concerned Authority would also consider alongwith the existing

vacancies, as what would be the anticipated vacancies that may arise within

one year due to retirement, due to elevation to the High Court, death or

otherwise,    say 10% of the number of posts; and to take note of the

vacancies arising out of deputation of Judicial Officers to other departments.

It also provided that the select list so prepared shall be valid till new select

list is published. The examination is to be conducted every year. The High

Courts were directed to give strict adherence to the aforesaid schedule fixed

by this Court. So far as the Delhi High Court was concerned, it was provided
that the High Court would amend its calendar accordingly. In view of the

above, it has been submitted that while making the advertisement, the Delhi

High Court had not taken note of the anticipated vacancies which could be

available during the next year. As per the direction of this Court, as 13 more

vacancies came into existence, those vacancies must be filled up from the

select list so prepared. As the appellants are in the select list they should be

offered appointments.



7.      On the contrary, Shri A. Mariarputham, learned senior counsel

appearing for the respondents has vehemently opposed the appeals

contending that the law does not permit filling up the vacancies over and

above    the number of vacancies advertised.       Thirteen vacancies of the

General Category were advertised; the same had been filled up according to

merit, therefore, selection process in that respect stood exhausted.        The

waiting list does not survive.      The appellants had not challenged the

advertisement in spite of the fact that the judgment in Malik Mazhar

Sultan's case (supra)     was delivered on 4.1.2007 and vacancies were

advertised on 19.5.2007. The appellants were not aggrieved for not offering

the appointment to them, as they did not even approach the High Court for

any relief. The Special Leave Petitions were filed at much belated stage on

24.10.2008, though the result had been declared on 3.1.2008, and
appointments had been made on 3.4.2008. The directions of the Court could

not supersede the statutory rules as there was a direction to fill up the

vacancies as per the existing statutory rules. Appointments had been made

according to law. Thus, the appeals have no merit and are liable to be

dismissed.



8.    We have considered the rival submissions made by learned counsel

for the parties and perused the record.



9.    It is a settled legal proposition that vacancies cannot be filled up over

and above the number of vacancies advertised as "the recruitment of the

candidates in excess of the notified vacancies is a denial and deprivation of

the constitutional right under
Article 14
read with
Article 16(1)
of the

Constitution", of those persons who acquired eligibility for the post in

question in accordance with the statutory rules subsequent to the date of

notification of vacancies.     Filling up the vacancies over the notified

vacancies is neither permissible nor desirable, for the reason, that it amounts

to "improper exercise of power and only in a rare and exceptional

circumstance and in emergent situation, such a rule can be deviated and

such a deviation is permissible only after adopting policy decision based on

some rational", otherwise the exercise would be arbitrary. Filling up of
vacancies over the notified vacancies amounts to filling up of future

vacancies and thus, not permissible in law. (Vide Union of India & Ors. v.

Ishwar Singh Khatri & Ors. (1992) Supp 3 SCC 84; Gujarat State

Deputy Executive Engineers' Association v. State of Gujarat & Ors.

(1994) Supp 2 SCC 591; State of Bihar & Ors. v. The Secretariat

Assistant S.E. Union 1986 & Ors AIR 1994 SC 736; Prem Singh & Ors.

v. Haryana State Electricity Board & Ors. (1996) 4 SCC 319; and Ashok

Kumar & Ors. v. Chairman, Banking Service Recruitment Board &

Ors. AIR 1996 SC 976).



10.   In Surinder Singh & Ors. v. State of Punjab & Ors. AIR 1998 SC

18, this Court held as under:


              "A waiting list prepared in an examination conducted by
      the Commission does not furnish a source of recruitment. It is
      operative only for the contingency that if any of the selected
      candidates does not join then the person from the waiting list
      may be pushed up and be appointed in the vacancy so caused
      or if there is some extreme exigency the Government may as a
      matter of policy decision pick up persons in order of merit
      from the waiting list. But the view taken by the High Court
      that since the vacancies have not been worked out properly,
      therefore, the candidates from the waiting list were liable to
      be appointed does not appear to be sound. This practice, may
      result in depriving those candidates who become eligible for
      competing for the vacancies available in future. If the waiting
      list in one examination was to operate as an infinite stock for
      appointment, there is a danger that the State Government may
      resort to the device of not holding an examination for years
      together and pick up candidates from the waiting list as and
      when required. The constitutional discipline requires that this
      Court should not permit such improper exercise of power
      which may result in creating a vested interest and perpetrate
      waiting list for the candidates of one examination at the cost of
      entire set of fresh candidates either from the open or even from
      service.....Exercise of such power has to be tested on the touch-
      stone of reasonableness....It is not a matter of course that the
      authority can fill up more posts than advertised."
                                                     (Emphasis added)



11.   Similar view has been re-iterated in Madan Lal v. State of J & K &

Ors. AIR 1995 SC 1088; Kamlesh Kumar Sharma v. Yogesh Kumar

Gupta & Ors. AIR 1998 SC 1021; Sri Kant Tripathi v. State of U.P. &

Ors. (2001) 10 SCC 237; State of J & K v. Sanjeev Kumar & Ors.

(2005) 4 SCC 148; State of U.P. v. Raj Kumar Sharma & Ors. (2006) 3

SCC 330; and Ram Avtar Patwari & Ors. v. State of Haryana & Ors.

AIR 2007 SC 3242).




12.   In State of Punjab v. Raghbir Chand Sharma & Ors. AIR 2001 SC

2900, this Court examined the case where only one post was advertised and

the candidate whose name appeared at Serial No. 1 in the select list joined

the post, but subsequently resigned. The Court rejected the contention that

post can be filled up offering the appointment to the next candidate in the

select list observing as under:-
      "With the appointment of the first candidate for the only post in
      respect of which the consideration came to be made and select list
      prepared, the panel ceased to exist and has outlived its utility and
      at any rate, no one else in the panel can legitimately contend that
      he should have been offered appointment either in the vacancy
      arising on account of the subsequent resignation of the person
      appointed from the panel or any other vacancies arising
      subsequently."


13.   In Mukul Saikia & Ors. v. State of Assam & Ors. AIR 2009 SC

747, this Court dealt with a similar issue and held that "if the requisition and

advertisement was only for 27 posts, the State cannot appoint more than the

number of posts advertised". The Select List "got exhausted when all the 27

posts were filled".    Thereafter, the candidates below the 27 appointed

candidates have no right to claim appointment to any vacancy in regard to

which selection was not held. The "currency of Select List had expired as

soon as the number of posts advertised are filled up, therefore, the

appointments beyond the number of posts advertised would amount to filling

up future vacancies" and said course is impermissible in law.



14.   In view of above, the law can be summarised to the effect that any

appointment made beyond the number of vacancies advertised is without

jurisdiction, being violative of
Articles 14
and
16(1)
of the Constitution of

India, thus, a nullity, inexecutable and unenforceable in law. In case the

vacancies notified stand filled up, process of selection comes to an end.
Waiting list etc. cannot be used as a reservoir, to fill up the vacancy which

comes into existence after the issuance of notification/advertisement. The

unexhausted select list/waiting list becomes meaningless and cannot be

pressed in service any more.



15.   In the instant case, as 13 vacancies of the General Category had been

advertised and filled up, the selection process so far as the General Category

candidates is concerned, stood exhausted and the unexhausted select list is

meant only to be consigned to record room.



16.   So far as the submission made by Shri Ranjit Kumar that directions

issued by this Court in Malik Mazhar Sultan (supra) had to be given effect

to is concerned, the same requires consideration elaborately.



17.   In All India Judges' Association & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.

AIR 1993 SC 2493, several directions had been issued by this Court in

respect of the service conditions of the Judicial Officers. In view thereof, a

notification dated 21st March, 1996 was issued appointing Justice K.J. Shetty

Commission to consider about their service conditions.
18.   In All India Judges' Association & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.

AIR 2002 SC 1752, this Court considered various aspects of Justice Shetty

Commission Report and approved the same. However, the question arose as

to whether the recommendations so accepted by this Court could be

implemented as such or was it required to be incorporated in the statutory

rules governing the service conditions of the Judicial Officers or alteration of

the rules applicable to them? This Court held as under:

      "We are aware that it will become necessary for service and
      other rules to be amended so as to implement this judgment...."


19.   In Syed T.A. Naqshbandi & Ors. v. State of J & K & Ors. (2003) 9

SCC 592, this Court reconsidered the same issue while examining the

appointments to the post of District & Sessions Judges (Selection Grade) in

the State of Jammu & Kashmir and relying upon its earlier judgment in All

India Judges' Association (supra) held as under:

             "Reliance placed upon the recommendations of Justice
      Jagannatha Shetty Commission or the decision reported in
      All India Judges' Assn. v. Union of India or even the
      resolution of the Full Court of the High Court dated 27-4-
      2002 is not only inappropriate but a misplaced one and the
      grievances espoused based on this assumption deserve a mere
      mention only to be rejected. The conditions of service of
      members of any service for that matter are governed by
      statutory rules and orders, lawfully made in the absence of
      rules to cover the area which has not been specifically
      covered by such rules, and so long as they are not replaced or
      amended in the manner known to law, it would be futile for
      anyone to claim for those existing rules/orders being ignored
         yielding place to certain policy decisions taken even to alter,
         amend or modify them. Alive to this indisputable position of
         law only, this Court observed at SCC p. 273, para 38, that "we
         are aware that it will become necessary for service and other
         rules to be amended so as to implement this judgment".
         Consequently, the High Court could not be found at fault for
         considering the matters in question in the light of the Jammu
         and Kashmir Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1983 and the
         Jammu and Kashmir District and Sessions Judges (Selection
         Grade Post) Rules, 1968 as well as the criteria formulated by
         the High Court. Equally, the guidelines laid down by the High
         Court for the purpose of adjudging the efficiency, merit and
         integrity of the respective candidates cannot be said to be
         either arbitrary or irrational or illegal in any manner to
         warrant the interference of this Court with the same. Even de
         hors any provision of law specifically enabling the High Courts
         with such powers in view of
Article 235
of the Constitution of
         India, unless the exercise of power in this regard is shown to
         violate any other provision of the Constitution of India or any
         of the existing statutory rules, the same cannot be challenged
         by making it a justiciable issue before courts. The grievance of
         the petitioners, in this regard, has no merit of acceptance".
                                                        (Emphasis added)


20.      In Malik Mazhar Sultan's case (supra), this Court made it clear that

appointments in Judicial Service have to be made as per the existing

statutory rules. However, direction was issued to amend the rules for future

selections.    This Court considered the correspondences between various

authorities of the States and also the decision taken in the conference of the

Chief Ministers and Chief Justices held on 11.3.2006, and observed as

under:

         "... Before we issue general directions and the time schedule to
         be adhered to for filling vacancies that may arise in
      subordinate courts and district courts, it is necessary to note
      that selections are required to be conducted by the concerned
      authorities as per the existing Judicial Service Rules in the
      respective States/Union Territories...... As already indicated,
      the selection is to be conducted by authorities empowered to do
      so as per the existing Rules. ... In view of what we have
      already noted about the appointments to be made in
      accordance with the respective Judicial Services Rules in the
      States, the apprehension of interference seems to be wholly
      misplaced...." (Emphasis added).



21.   Therefore, it is clear that this Court clarified that selection was to be

made as per the existing Rules and direction was issued for amending the

existing laws to adopt the recommendations of Justice Shetty Commission

as approved by this Court for the future.



22.   So far as the judgment of this Court in Hemani Malhotra v. High

Court of Delhi & Ors. AIR 2008 SC 2103 is concerned, the facts are quite

distinguishable. The Delhi High Court did not frame any statutory rule

providing for cut-off marks in interview for assessing the suitability for

selection. After the selection process had been initiated, such a resolution

was adopted. Therefore, the basic issue for consideration before this Court

had been as to whether it was permissible for the High Court to change the

selection criteria at the midst of the selection process. The Court placing

reliance upon its earlier judgments held that once the selection process starts,
it is not permissible for the competent authority to change the selection criteria

and in that view observation was made that a fresh merit list is to be prepared

ignoring the said resolution of the High Court taking cut-off marks in

interview.    Undoubtedly, the Court had taken note of Justice Shetty

Commission Report in this regard and held that such a criteria could not have

been provided. In absence of any statutory rule governing a particular issue,

directions issued by this Court would prevail.



23.   Therefore, it is evident from the aforesaid judgment that in spite of

acceptance of the recommendations made by Justice Shetty Commission,

this Court insisted that the existing law/statutory rules in making the

appointment of Judicial Officers be amended accordingly. In Syed

T.A.Naqshbandi (supra), this Court repealed the contention which is being

advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioners therein and the Court in

crystal clear words held that appointments have to be made giving strict

adherence to the existing statutory provisions and not as per the

recommendations made by Justice Shetty Commission.                Of course, in

absence of statutory rule to deal with a particular issue, the High Courts are

bound to give effect to the directions issued by this Court.
24.   The appointments had to be made in view of the provisions of the

Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1970.        The said rules provide for

advertisement of the vacancies after being determined.       The rules further

provide for implementation of reservation policies in favour of Scheduled

Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes. As the reservation

policy is to be implemented, a number of vacancies to be filled up is to be

determined, otherwise it would not be possible to implement the reservation

policy at all.   Thus, in view of the above, the question of taking into

consideration the anticipated vacancies, as per the judgment in Malik

Mazhar Sultan (supra), which had not been determined in view of the

existing statutory rules could not arise.



25.   In view of above, we do not find any force in the submissions that the

High Court could have filled vacancies over and above the vacancies

advertised on 19.5.2007, as per the directions issued by this Court in Malik

Mazhar Sultan's case (supra). More so, no explanation could be furnished

by Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned senior counsel for the appellants as to why the

appellants could not challenge the advertisement itself, if it was not in

conformity with the directions issued by this court in the said case.
26.   It has further been submitted on behalf of the appellants that the Delhi

High Court vide its judgment and order dated 3.10.2008 had issued

directions to offer appointment to two persons implementing the said

judgment in Malik Mazhar Sultan's case (supra) whose names appeared in

select list at SI. Nos. 14 and 15, and, as the High Court had implemented the

said directions, the appellants could not be treated with such         hostile

discrimination. Undoubtedly, the directions had been issued to fill up two

vacancies over and above the vacancies notified. However, that part of the

judgment is not under challenge before us. In such a fact situation, it is

neither desirable nor permissible in law to make any comment on that. A

person whose name appears in the select list does not acquire any

indefeasible right of appointment. Empanelment at the best is a condition of

eligibility for purpose of appointment and by itself does not amount to

selection or create a vested right to be appointed. The vacancies have to be

filled up as per the statutory rules and in conformity with the constitutional

mandate. In the instant case, once 13 notified vacancies were filled up, the

selection process came to an end, thus there could be no scope of any

further appointment.
27.    In view of the above, we do not find any force in these appeals which

are accordingly dismissed.



                                             ....................................
CJI.



                                      ........................................J.
                                      (DEEPAK VERMA)


                                      .........................................J.
                                      (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)

New Delhi,
February 1, 2010.
                                                                   REPORTABLE


                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION(C) NO. 28488 OF 2008


Navin Kumar Jha                                              ... Petitioner

         Vs.

Lt. Governor & Ors.                                          ... Respondents

                                   With
                           SLP(C) No. 29248 of 2008

                                    JUDGMENT
Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN, J.
In view of our judgment pronounced today in CA Nos........ of 2010 @ SLP(C)

Nos........ @CC Nos. 14852-14854 of 2008 (Rakhi Ray & Ors. vs. High Court of Delhi

& Ors.), these Special Leave Petitions are dismissed.
................................CJI.
.................................... J.
                                                  (DEEPAK VERMA)


                                                  . .................................... J.
                                                  (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)

New Delhi,
February 1, 2010.