[Cites
3
, Cited by
350
]
Supreme Court of India
Amalendu Sahu vs Oriental Insurance Co.Ltd on 25 March, 2010
Equivalent citations: AIR 2010 SUPREME COURT 2090
Bench:
Asok Kumar Ganguly
,
G.S.Singhvi
NON-REPORTABLE

              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


            CIVIL APPEAL NO.2703 OF 2010
        (Arising out of SLP(C) No.11227/2009)




Amalendu Sahoo                                 ..Appellant(s)



                             Versus



Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.                    ..Respondent(s)




                       J U D G M E N T
GANGULY, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   This   appeal     has   been      filed    challenging       the

     judgment    and    order       dated    13.10.2008    of     the

     National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission

     (hereinafter,       `National          Commission')        which

     upheld the concurrent finding of the District

     and State Consumer Forums that the car at the
1
time of the accident was being driven on hire

     and   was   outside    the      scope   of   the    insurance

     policy.
3.   The appellant who is the original complainant

     had taken a comprehensive insurance policy in

     respect of his private car being No. WB-34C/1919

     vide policy No.311701/3/99/7172 of 1999 and the

     complainant paid the insurance premium duly.
4.   As per the complainant, United Bank of India's

     regional office is his tenant and many of its

     employees    are    known       to    him.    One    of   its

     employees had approached the complainant to hand

     over the aforesaid vehicle for a few hours for

     urgent use by the employees of the Bank.                  The

     complainant handed the aforesaid vehicle by way

     of a good gesture and did not take any rent from

     the Bank in this regard.              The vehicle met with

     an    accident     during       the   subsistence    of   the

     policy.
5.   The complainant had lodged a claim before the

     respondent but it       refused to allow the claim
2
inter alia on the ground that the vehicle was

     given on hire and as per the policy terms such

     use was not permitted and the insured was not

     entitled     to      any           compensation            for       such

     unauthorised use.
6.   The     District     Forum          vide        its    order       dated

     19.06.2003        dismissed             the      claim        of       the

     complainant after going through the policy.                            The

     Forum held that there is a clear condition as to

     the mode of use of the insured vehicle.                                The

     policy was not applicable in case of use of the

     vehicle    for    hire,    reward          or    organized         racing

     speed     testing        and       carriage           of     goods      in

     connection with any trade or business by any

     third party.       Reliance was placed on the report

     of the office-in-charge of the police station

     according to which the accident occurred because

     of the negligence of the driver who had a valid

     driving licence.           Even though no payment was

     proved, the Forum held that the use of private

     car    without    payment          of   charges       could      not    be

     imagined.    It was coupled with the fact that the

     Bank    Manager     of    the       aforesaid         Bank    was      not
3
examined as a witness by the complainant.                  The

     report of the surveyor was that the vehicle was

     given on a hire basis.          However, that report was

     apparently prepared ex-parte.
7.   Aggrieved      by    the       aforesaid      order,      the

     complainant    preferred       an   appeal   to    the   State

     Consumer     Disputes      Redressal    Commission       which

     vide its order dated 16.01.2004 dismissed the

     appeal as devoid of any merits.               It was held

     that from the documents and circumstances it was

     established that the car was given on a hire.

     According      to    the       State    Commission,        the

     surveyor's    report    was     not    challenged    by   the

     complainant.
8.   Against the order of the State Commission, a

     revision     was    preferred       before   the    National

     Commission and the same was dismissed vide order

     dated   13.10.2008.     According       to   the    National

     Commission there was concurrent finding on the

     fact that at the time of the accident the car

     was used for hire and it was not given as a
4
gesture of goodwill. As such repudiation by the

     insurance company was upheld.
9.   This Court cannot, however, uphold the aforesaid

     stand taken by the insurance company, which has

     been affirmed by all the fora below.
10. It   is   not   in   dispute   that   the   appellant   has

     taken a comprehensive insurance policy nor is it

     in dispute that the accident took place during

     the subsistence of the policy.          The policy was,

     therefore, valid on the date of the accident.
11. What is disputed by the insurance company is

     that the vehicle was not used for personal use

     but was used by way of being hired, though no

     payment for hiring charges was proved.          However,

     according to the insurance company, by using the

     vehicle on hire, the appellant had violated the

     terms of the insurance policy and on that basis

     the insurance company was within its right to

     repudiate the claim.
5
12.   Reference    in     this   case   may    be   made    to   the

      decision of National Commission rendered in the

      case of
United India Insurance Company Limited

      v.   Gian   Singh
reported     in   2006   CTJ    221   (CP)

      (NCDRC).      In    that   decision      of   the    National

      Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (NCDRC)

      it has been held that in a case of violation of

      condition of the policy as to the nature of use

      of the vehicle, the claim ought to be settled on

      a non-standard basis.
The said decision of the

      National Commission has been referred to by this

      Court in the case of
National Insurance Company

      Limited v. Nitin Khandelwal
reported in 2008 (7)

      SCALE 351.
In paragraph 13 of the judgment, in

      the case of
Nitin Khandelwal
(supra) this Court

      held:-
"..The appellant Insurance Company is
      liable to indemnify the owner of the
      vehicle when the insurer has obtained
      comprehensive policy for the loss caused
      to the insurer. The respondent submitted
      that even assuming that there was a
      breach of condition of the insurance
      policy, the appellant Insurance Company
      ought to have settled the claim on non-
      standard basis."
6
13.
In    the    case    of
Nitin       Khandelwal
(supra)   the

      State Commission allowed 75% of the claim of the

      claimant on non-standard basis.                 The said order

      was upheld by the National Commission and this

      Court refused to interfere with the decision of

      the National Commission.
14.
In this connection reference may be made to a

      decision of National Commission in the case of
New India Assurance Company Limited v. Narayan

      Prasad Appaprasad Pathak
reported in (2006) CPJ

      144 (NC). In that case also the question was,

      whether the insurance company can repudiate the

      claims      in   a   case    where      the   vehicle   carrying

      passengers and the driver did not have a proper

      driving licence and met with an accident.                    While

      granting         claim      on       non-standard    basis     the

      National Commission set out in its judgment the

      guidelines issued by the insurance company about

      settling all such non-standard claims.                  The said

      guidelines are set out below:-
Sr.         Description                    Percentage         of
      No.                                        settlement
7
(i)       Under declaration        Deduct 3 years'
                of licensed              differene in
                carrying capacity        premium from the
                                         amount of claim
                                         or deduct 25% of
                                         claim amount,
                                         whichever is
                                         higher.

      (ii)      Overloading of           Pay claims not
                vehicles beyond          exceeding 75% of
                licensed carrying        admissible claim.
                capacity

      (iii)     Any other breach         Pay upto 75% of
                of warranty/             admissible claim.
                condition of
                policy including
                limitation as to
                use
15. From a perusal of the aforesaid guidelines it is

      clear that one of the cases where 75% claim of

      the     admissible   claim   was   settled   was   where

      condition of policy including limitation as to

      use was breached.
16.    In the instant case the entire stand of the

      insurance company is that claimant has used the

      vehicle for hire and in the course of that there

      has been an accident. Following the aforesaid

      guidelines, this Court is of the opinion that
8
the insurance company cannot repudiate the claim

    in toto.
17. For the reasons stated, we cannot affirm the

    order    of      the    fora       below.       We    direct      the

    respondent        insurance           company        to     pay     a

    consolidated       sum   of        Rs.2,50,000/-     even    though

    compensation claimed is Rs.5,00,000/-.
18. In the facts and circumstances of this case, the

    said sum is to be paid to the appellant by the

    insurance company without any interest within a

    period of six weeks from date. However, if the

    insurance company delays the aforesaid payment

    beyond six weeks, then this amount will carry an

    interest of 9% from the date of the expiry of

    the period of six weeks till the date of actual

    payment.
19. The     appeal     is    thus       allowed     to    the    extent

    indicated above.
.......................J.
                                       (G.S.SINGHVI)
9
.......................J.
                      (ASOK KUMAR GANGULY)

New Delhi
March 25, 2010
10