[Cites
30
, Cited by
122
]
Supreme Court of India
Bhagwan Das & Ors vs State Of.U.P. & Ors on 26 February, 2010
Equivalent citations: AIR 2010 SUPREME COURT 1532, 2010 AIR SCW 1629, 2010 (3) ALL LJ 96, (2010) 2 RECCIVR 290, (2011) 3 KER LJ 9, (2010) 88 ALLINDCAS 238 (SC), (2010) 2 CIVLJ 913, (2010) 1 LANDLR 10, (2010) 110 REVDEC 126, (2010) 4 MAH LJ 564, (2010) 79 ALL LR 904, (2010) 3 RAJ LW 2707, (2010) 1 CURCC 245, (2010) 3 MPLJ 251, (2010) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 386, (2010) 1 CLR 744 (SC), (2010) 3 ALL WC 2600, (2010) 2 ICC 608, 2010 (2) SCALE 661, 2010 (3) SCC 545, (2010) 2 SCALE 661, (2010) 4 ANDHLD 1
Author:
R. V. Raveendran
Bench:
K S Radhakrishnan
,
R V Raveendran
Reportable
                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

              CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2069-2070 OF 2010
             [Arising out of SLP(C) Nos.24191-92 of 2008]


Bhagwan Das & Ors.                                ....Appellants
                                versus

State of UP & Ors.                                ...Respondents
                                 With

              CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2071-2072 OF 2010
             [Arising out of SLP(C) Nos.24193-94 of 2008]


Nayantara Gupta & Ors.                            ....Appellants
                                versus

State of UP & Ors.                                ...Respondents



                           JUDGMENT
R. V. RAVEENDRAN, J.
Leave granted.
2.    The lands of appellants within the municipal limits of Bisanda

were acquired for establishing a Upmandi by Krishi Utpadan Mandi

Samiti under preliminary notification dated 31.01.2004 and final

notification dated 20.03.2006. An award was made by the Land

Acquisition Collector on 14.03.2007. The appellants were served a notice
2
on 25.10.2007 by the office of the Collector to appear and receive the

compensation. The respondents made enquiries and on 16.11.2007 learnt

that an award had been made on 14.3.2007. Immediately they made an

application seeking a reference under
section 18
of the Land Acquisition

Act, 1894 (`Act' for short) to the civil court for determination of

compensation. The Collector, Banda vide his order dated 19.12.2007

rejected the application seeking reference, on the ground that it was made

beyond a period of six months from the date of the award, prescribed

under
Section 18(2)
of the Act. The appellants filed a writ petition for

quashing the said order dated 19.12.2007 and seeking a direction to the

Land Acquisition Collector to refer their claim for increase in

compensation to the civil court. The writ petition was dismissed on

17.01.2008 as not maintainable, on the ground that an alternative remedy,

by way of an appeal under
section 54
of the Act, was available against

the order dated 19.12.2007 passed by the Land Acquisition Officer. The

appellants filed a review petition pointing out that
Section 54
of the Act

was inapplicable as it only provides for appeals against awards of courts.

The review petition was dismissed by order dated 5.5.2008, on the

ground that the appellants ought to have filed an application for

condonation of delay along with the application for reference, before the
3
Land Acquisition Collector. The appellants have challenged the said

orders dated 17.01.2008 and 05.05.2008 in these appeals by special

leave.
3.       The following questions arise for consideration, on the contentions

urged :
(a)   Whether an appeal would lie under
Section 54
of the Act
               against the order of the Collector refusing to make a
               reference?
(b)   Whether the Collector can condone the delay in filing an
               application seeking reference, if sufficient cause is shown?
(c)   Whether the period of six months under clause (b) of the
               proviso to
section 18
of the Act should be reckoned from the
               date of knowledge of the award of the Collector or from the
               date of award itself?
(d)   Whether the appellants were entitled to relief?
4.       We may, to begin with, refer to the provisions of the Act which are

relevant for considering these questions.
Section 11
of the Act provides

for an enquiry into objections and making of an award by the Collector.

Sub-Section (2) of
Section 12
requires the Collector shall give immediate

notice of his award to such of the persons interested as were not present

personally or by their representatives when the award was made.
Section

18
providing for Reference to Court is extracted below:-
4
"18. Reference to Court -
(1) Any person interested who has not accepted the award may,
        by written application to the Collector, require that the matter be
        referred by the Collector for the determination of the Court,
        whether his objection be to the measurement of the land, the
        amount of the compensation, the persons to whom it is payable or
        the apportionment of the compensation among the persons
        interested.
(2)      The application shall state the grounds on which
        objection to the award is taken:
Provided that every such application shall be made,---
(a)      if the person making it was present or represented before
        the Collector at the time when he made his award, within six
        weeks from the date of the Collector's award;
(b)      in other cases, within six weeks of the receipt of the
        notice from the Collector under
Section 12
, sub-section (2), or
        within six months from the date of the Collector's award,
        whichever period shall first expire".
(emphasis supplied)
Section 54
of the Act providing for appeals. The said section reads:
"54. Appeals in proceedings before court -
Subject to the provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908,
        applicable to appeals from original decrees, and notwithstanding
        anything to the contrary in any enactment for the time being in
        force, an appeal shall only lie in any proceedings under this Act
        to the High Court from the award, or from any part of the award,
        of the Court and from any decree of the High Court passed on
        such appeal as aforesaid an appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court
        subject to the provisions contained in
Section 110
of the Code of
        Civil Procedure, 1908 and in Order XLIV thereof".
Re : Question (a)
5.
Section 54
of the Act provides for an appeal from the award of

the court in any proceedings under the Act to the High Court, and from
5
the decree of the High Court to the Supreme Court.
Section 3(d)
of the

Act defines the expression "court" to mean a principal civil court of

original jurisdiction, unless the appropriate Government has appointed a

special officer within any specified local limits to perform functions of

the court under the Act. On the other hand, the expression "Collector" is

defined in
section 2(c)
of the Act as the Collector of a district, and

includes a Deputy Commissioner and any officer specially appointed by

the appropriate Government to perform the functions of a Collector under

the Act. The decision of the Collector made after an enquiry under
section 11
with the previous approval of the appropriate Government or

its authorized officer is termed as the `award of the Collector'. The

determination by a court under
section 26
of the Act in a reference by the

Collector is termed as an `award of the court' which shall be deemed to

be a decree. Thus there is a difference between an `award of the

Collector' which is an offer of compensation by the Collector as the agent

of the Government, and `an award of the court' which is a determination

of the compensation by a civil court on a reference by the Collector.

Further, the Collector can either make a reference or refuse to make a

reference to the court under
section 18
of the Act or under
section 30
of

the Act, and such orders of the Collector are merely acts of a Statutory
6
Authority in exercise of statutory functions and are not adjudicatory in

nature. Such orders are not awards. The Land Acquisition Collector is not

a Court, nor his award or order, an award of the Court. While the

proceedings of a court resulting in an award of the court are judicial

proceedings, neither the proceedings of the Collector under
section 11
of

the Act resulting in an award of the Collector, nor the proceedings

relating to an application seeking reference, are judicial proceedings.
Section 54
does not provide for appeals against the awards or orders of

Land Acquisition Collector. Hence the assumption of the High Court that

an order of the Collector refusing to refer a claim for increase in

compensation to the civil court under
section 18(1)
of the Act, is an

`award of the court' appealable under
section 54
of the Act, is wholly

erroneous.
Re : Question (b)
6.     The proviso to
section 18
requires that an application by a person

interested, to the Collector, seeking reference of his claim for higher

compensation for determination by the Court, shall be made within six

weeks from the date of the Collector's award, if such person was present

or represented before the Collector, at the time when the award was
7
made. If not, the application for reference shall have to be made within

six weeks of the receipt of the notice of the Collector under
Section 12(2)
or within six months from the date of the Collector's award, whichever

period shall first expire.
7.
In Officer on
Special Duty (Land Acquisition) & Anr. v. Shah

Manilal Chandulal & Ors.
[1996 (9) SCC 414], this Court held that in

view of the special limitation provided under the proviso to
section 18
of

the Act,
section 29(2)
of the Limitation Act, cannot be applied to the

proviso to
section 18
of the Act; and therefore, the benefit of
sections 4
to
24
of Limitation Act 1963, will not be available in regard to applications

under
section 18(1)
of the Act. It was also held that as the Collector is not

a court when he discharges his functions as a statutory authority under
section 18(1)
of the Act,
section 5
of the Limitation Act 1963 cannot be

invoked for extension of the period of limitation prescribed under the

proviso to
section 18(2)
of the Act. As the Collector is not a civil court

and as the provisions of
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, 1963 have not

been made applicable to proceedings before the Collector under the Act,

and as there is no provision in the Act enabling the Land Acquisition

Collector to extend the time for making an application for reference, the
8
Collector cannot entertain any application for extension, nor extend the

time for seeking reference, even if there are genuine and bonafide

grounds for condoning delay.
This view was reiterated in
Steel Authority

of India Ltd. vs. S.U.T.N.I. Sangam and others
[2009 (16) SCC 1].

Therefore, the observation of the High Court that an application for

condonation of delay could have been made by the person interested, is

incorrect.
We should however notice that there is an apparent inconsistency in two

observations of this Court in
S.U.T.N.I. Sangam
(supra). In the earlier part

of the decision, this Court observed : "The proceedings under the Land

Acquisition Collector is of an administrative nature and not of a judicial

or quasi judicial character." However, in a latter part of
the said decision
(at para 75 of the report), this Court observed : "Land Acquisition

Collector is a statutory authority. The proceeding before the Land

Acquisition Collector is a quasi-judicial proceeding."        As the said

inconsistency has no bearing upon the issue on hand, we do not propose

to consider it in this case, but leave the clarification to be done in an

appropriate decision.
9
Re : Question (c)
8.      Clause (b) of the proviso to
section 18
requires a person

interested who has not accepted the award, to make an application to the

Collector requiring him to refer the matter for determination of the court,

within six weeks of the receipt of the notice from the Collector under
section 12(2)
or within six months from the date of the Collector's award

whichever period first expires, if he or his representative was not present

before the Collector at the time of making of the award.
9.      The reason for providing six months from the date of the award

for making an application seeking reference, where the applicant did not

receive a notice under
section 12(2)
of the Act, while providing only six

weeks from the date of receipt of notice under
section 12(2)
of the Act for

making an application for reference where the applicant has received a

notice under
section 12(2)
of the Act is obvious. When a notice under
section 12(2)
of the Act is received, the land owner or person interested is

made aware of all relevant particulars of the award which enables him to

decide whether he should seek reference or not. On the other hand, if he

only comes to know that an award has been made, he would require

further time to make enquiries or secure copies so that he can ascertain
10
the relevant particulars of the award.
10.     The term 'date of the Collector's award' occurring in clause (b) of

the proviso, has been interpreted by this Court in several cases. We may

refer to a few of them.
10.1)   In
Raja Harish Chandra Raj Singh v. Dy. Land Acquisition

Officer
[AIR 1961 SC 1500], this Court held :
"Therefore, if the award made by the Collector is in law no more
        than an offer made on behalf of the Government to the owner of
        the property then the making of the award as properly understood
        must involve the communication of the offer to the party
        concerned. That is the normal requirement under the contract law
        and its applicability to cases of award made under the Act cannot
        be reasonably excluded. Thus considered the date of the award
        cannot be determined solely by reference to the time when the
        award is signed by the Collector or delivered by him in his
        office; it must involve the consideration of the question as to
        when it was known to the party concerned either actually or
        constructively. If that be the true position then the literal and
        mechanical construction of the words 'the date of the award'
        occurring in the relevant section would not be appropriate.
There is yet another point which leads to the same conclusion. If
        the award is treated as an administrative decision taken by the
        Collector in the matter of the valuation of the property sought to
        be acquired it is clear that
the said decision
ultimately affects the
        rights of the owner of the property and in that sense, like all
        decisions which affect persons, it is essentially fair and just that
the said decision
should be communicated to the said party. The
        knowledge of the party affected by such a decision, either actual
        or constructive, is an essential element which must be satisfied
        before the decision can be brought into force. Thus considered
        the making of the award cannot consist merely in the physical
11
act of writing the award or signing it or even filing it in the
        office of the Collector; it must involve the communication of the
        said award to the party concerned either actually or
        constructively. If the award is pronounced in the presence of the
        party whose rights are affected by it it can be said to be made
        when pronounced. If the date for the pronouncement of the
        award is communicated to the party and it is accordingly
        pronounced on the date previously announced the award is said
        to be communicated to the said party even if the said party is not
        actually present on the date of its pronouncement. Similarly if
        without notice of the date of its pronouncement an award is
        pronounced and a party is not present, the award can be said to
        be made when it is communicated to the party later. The
        knowledge of the party affected by the award, either actual or
        constructive, being an essential requirement of fair play and
        natural justice the expression 'the date of the award' used in the
        proviso must mean the date when the award is either
        communicated to the party or is known by him either actually or
        constructively. In our opinion, therefore, it would be
        unreasonable to construe the words 'from the date of the
        Collector's award' used in the proviso to
Section 18
in a literal or
        mechanical way."
(emphasis supplied)


10.2)   In
State of Punjab v. Mst
.
Qaisar Jehan Begum & Anr. [AIR

1963 SC 1604], this Court reiterated the principles stated in
Raja Harish

Chandra Raj Singh
(supra) and further held as follows :
"It seems clear to us that the ratio of the decision in
Harish
        Chandra
's case (supra) is that the party affected by the award
        must know it, actually or constructively, and the period of six
        months will run from the date of that knowledge. Now,
        knowledge of the award does not mean a mere knowledge of the
        fact that an award has been made. The knowledge must relate
        to the essential contents of the award. These contents may be
        known either actually or constructively. If the award is
        communicated to a party under
S. 12(2)
of the Act, the party
        must be obviously fixed with knowledge of the contents of the
        award whether he reads it or not. Similarly when a party is
12
present in court either personally or through his representative
        when the award is made by the Collector, it must be presumed
        that he knows the contents of the award. Having regard to the
        scheme of the Act we think that knowledge of the award must
        mean knowledge of the essential contents of the award."
(emphasis supplied)


10.3)   In
Parsottambhai Maganbhai Patel & Ors. vs. State of Gujarat
through Dy. Collector Modasa & Anr. [2005 (7) SCC 431] and in
Steel

Authority of India Ltd. vs. S.U.T.N.I Sangam
[2009 (16) SCC 1], the

aforesaid principles were followed and reiterated by this Court.
11.     When a land is acquired and an award is made under
section 11
of the Act, the Collector becomes entitled to take possession of the

acquired land. The award being only an offer on behalf of the

Government, there is always a tendency on the part of the Collector to be

conservative in making the award, which results in less than the market

value being offered. Invariably the land loser is required to make an

application under
section 18
of the Act to get the market value as

compensation. The land loser does not get a right to seek reference to the

civil court unless the award is made. This means that he can make an

application seeking reference only when he knows that an award has been

made. If the words six months from the `date of the Collector's award'
13
should be literally interpreted as referring to the date of the award and not

the date of knowledge of the award, it will lead to unjust and absurd

results. For example, the Collector may choose to make an award but not

to issue any notice under
section 12(2)
of the Act, either due to

negligence or oversight or due to any ulterior reasons. Or he may send a

notice but may not bother to ensure that it is served on the land owner as

required under
section 45
of the Act. If the words `date of the Collector's

award' are literally interpreted, the effect would be that on the expiry of

six months from the date of award, even though the claimant had no

notice of the award, he would lose the right to seek a reference. That will

lead to arbitrary and unreasonable discrimination between those who are

notified of the award and those who are not notified of the award. Unless

the procedure under the Act is fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory, it

will run the risk of being branded as being violative of
Article 14
as also
Article 300A
of the Constitution of India. To avoid such consequences,

the words `date of the collector's award' occurring in proviso (b) to
section 18
requires to be read as referring to the date of knowledge of the

essential contents of the award, and not the actual date of the Collector's

award.
14
12.     The following position therefore emerges from the interpretation

of the proviso to
section 18
of the Act :
(i)     If the award is made in the presence of the person interested (or
his authorised representative), he has to make the application within six
weeks from the date of the Collector's award itself.
(ii)    If the award is not made in the presence of the person interested
(or his authorised representative), he has to make the application seeking
reference within six weeks of the receipt of the notice from the Collector
under
section 12(2)
.
(iii)   If the person interested (or his representative) was not present
when the award is made, and if he does not receive the notice under
Section 12(2)
from the Collector, he has to make the application within
six months of the date on which he actually or constructively came to
know about the contents of the award.
(iv)    If a person interested receives a notice under
section 12(2)
of the
Act, after the expiry of six weeks from the date of receipt of such notice,
he cannot claim the benefit of the provision for six months for making the
application on the ground that the date of receipt of notice under
section
12(2)
of the Act was the date of knowledge of the contents of the award.
A person who fails to make an application for reference within the time
15
prescribed is not without remedy. It is open to him to make an application

under
section 28A
of the Act, on the basis of an award of the court in

respect of the other lands covered by the same acquisition notification, if

there is an increase. Be that as it may.
13.     When a person interested makes an application for reference

seeking the benefit of six months period from the date of knowledge, the

initial onus is on him to prove that he (or his representative) was not

present when the award was made, that he did not receive any notice

under
Section 12(2)
of the Act, and that he did not have the knowledge of

the contents of the award during a period of six months prior to the filing

the application for reference. This onus is discharged by asserting these

facts on oath. He is not expected to prove the negative. Once the initial

onus is discharged by the claimant/person interested, it is for the Land

Acquisition Collector to establish that the person interested was present

either in person or through his representative when the award was made,

or that he had received a notice under
Section 12(2)
of the Act, or that he

had knowledge of the contents of the award. Actual or constructive

knowledge of the contents of the award can be established by the

Collector by proving that the person interested had received or drawn the
16
compensation amount for the acquired land, or had attested the Mahazar/

Panchnama/proceedings delivering possession of the acquired land in

pursuance of the acquisition, or had filed a case challenging the award or

had acknowledged the making of the award in any document or in

statement on oath or evidence. The person interested, not being in

possession of the acquired land and the name of the state or its transferee

being entered in the revenue municipal records coupled with delay, can

also lead to an inference of constructive knowledge. In the absence of any

such evidence by the Collector, the claim of the person interested that he

did not have knowledge earlier will be accepted, unless there are

compelling circumstances to not to do so.
Re : Question (d)
14.     In this case, it is not in dispute that the award was not made in the

presence of the claimant-land owner. The claimant has asserted that the

award was not made in the presence of either himself or his

representative, and no notice of the award under
section 12(2)
of the Act

was tendered to him. He has also asserted that he became aware of the

award only when he received the notice dated 25.10.2007 calling upon

him to receive the payment of the award. The respondents contend that a
17
notice dated 30.3.2007 was issued under
section 12(2)
of the Act, to all

the interested land-owners including the appellants. But it is admitted that

the said notice was not sent by post nor served on the land-owners. There

is also no evidence that the said notice was tendered personally to them or

that they refused to accept it. The respondent has produced a copy of a

notice dated 30.3.2007 with an endorsement of the person who was sent

to serve the notice which reads as under : "As per your order I went to

village Bishanda and informed the farmers but they refused to put their

signatures. Report is submitted." A vague endorsement that the person

who had to serve the notice went to village and informed the farmers, is

not the same as notice being specifically tendered to the person

concerned. The endorsement-cum-report does not mention or identify the

farmers to whom he spoke or which of them refused to put their

signatures. In the absence of any evidence placed by the Collector to

show knowledge on the part of the appellants, the claim of the appellants

that they became aware that an award was made only when the notice

dated 25.10.2007 was tendered to them and they became aware of the

contents of the award only on 16.11.2007 has to be accepted. In the

circumstances, the date of the award should be taken as 16.11.2007. The

application filed on 16.11.2007 was therefore in time. The Land
18
Acquisition Collector ought to have entertained the application seeking

reference. The High Court, instead of directing the Collector to make a

reference, wrongly rejected the writ petition on the ground that an appeal

is maintainable under
section 54
of the Act and also wrongly rejected the

review petition on the ground that they could have made an application

for condonation of delay before the Land Acquisition Collector.
15.     In view of the above, the appeals are allowed, the orders of the

High Court dated 17.1.2008 and 5.5.2008 are set aside, the writ petition is

allowed and the Collector is directed to make a reference to the civil court

under
section 18
of the Act, without any delay, not later than two months.
..........................................J.
                                         (R V Raveendran)



New Delhi;                               .......................................J.
February 26, 2010.                       (K S Radhakrishnan)