[Cites
17
, Cited by
21
]
Supreme Court of India
Nagbhai Najbhai Khackar vs State Of Gujarat on 9 September, 2010
Equivalent citations: 2010 AIR SCW 5860, 2010 (10) SCC 594 (2010) 9 SCALE 242, (2010) 9 SCALE 242
Author:
S. H. Kapadia
Bench:
Swatanter Kumar
,
K.S. Radhakrishnan
,
S. H. Kapadia
1

              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
              CIVIL APPEAL NO.7519 OF 2010
        (Arising out of SLP(C) No. 14245 of 2004)

Nagbhai Najbhai Khackar          .... Appellant(s)

               Versus

State of Gujarat                 ....Respondent(s)
                           with
CIVIL APPEAL No.7520 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.14182 of
2004),
CIVIL APPEAL No.7521 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.14248 of
2004),
CIVIL APPEAL No.7522 of 2010 ((@ S.L.P. (C) No.14249 of
2004),
  C.A. No.7523 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.26879 of 2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7524 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.14947 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7525 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.26880 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7526 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.26881 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7527 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.14949 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7528 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.26882 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7529 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.15022 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7530 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.26883 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7531 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.26884 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7532 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.15020 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7533 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.26885 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7534 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.14940 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7535 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.26886 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7536 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.14946 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7537 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.14950 of
                                                                           2

2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7538 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.14965 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7539 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.14993 of
2004),
  CIVIL APPEAL No.7540 of 2010 (@ S.L.P. (C) No.15029 of
2004).


                            J U D G M E N T
S. H. KAPADIA, CJI

        Leave granted.
2.      A short question which arises for determination in

this batch of cases is whether bid lands were required to

be   taken    into   consideration      for   the    purpose      of   land

ceiling under the
Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling Act,

1960
, as amended vide Act 2 of 1974, which came into force

from 1.4.1976.
3.      At the outset, we may state that writ petitions were

filed    in   the    High    Court    inter   alia    challenging       the

provisions     of    the
Gujarat    Agricultural       Lands   Ceiling

Amendment Act
2 of 1974 as violative of
Articles 14
and
19
of the Constitution. We may state that
Amending Act
2 of

1974    has   been   included    as   Item    No.    71   in   the     Ninth

Schedule to the Constitution of India by the
Constitution

Thirty-fourth Amendment Act
. That inclusion was challenged

before the Constitution Bench of this Court on the ground

that Thirty-fourth Amendment to the Constitution violated
3
the basic structure of the Constitution which challenge

has now been given up in view of the judgment of this

Court in the case of I.R. Coelho (Dead) by Lrs.                            v.

State of Tamil Nadu reported in 2007 (2) SCC 1.
4.      As regards the question of includability of the bid

lands in the lands ceiling is concerned, the case of the

appellant(s) before us was, that bid lands held by the

appellant(s) being uncultivable waste lands; being rocky

and stony were not included in the definition of "land" in

the 1960 Act as originally enacted; that "bid lands" held

by the appellant(s) were sought to be included in the

total holding of the appellant(s) to determine the ceiling

under the 1960 Act only by reason of Amendment Act 2 of

1974.    At   this   stage,      it    may   be    noted    that   the   said

Amendment     Act    2   of    1974,   which      came    into   force   from

1.4.1976, was challenged only for the reason that under
Section   5(1)(a)
of   Saurashtra     Estates     Acquisition     Act,

1952    ("1952   Act"     for    short)      no   bid    lands   which   were

uncultivable waste vested in the State Government, which

bid lands are now sought to be covered by 1960 Act on

account of the impugned Amendment Act 2 of 1974. According

to the appellant(s), once such "bid lands" stood excluded

from vesting under the 1952 Act, the same could not be
4
included for calculating the total holding to determine

the ceiling limit under the 1960 Act, as amended. It was

contended on behalf of the appellant(s) that bid lands

which     were    also    uncultivable        waste     lands   cannot     be

included for computing the total holding under the 1960

Act, as amended, as the object of the Ceiling Act was to

impose       ceiling     on    lands     held    for     cultivation       or

agricultural purposes. It was further submitted on behalf

of the appellant(s) that bid lands cannot fall within the

definition of dry crop land in clause (e) of Explanation I

to
Section 2(6)
as only "grass lands" which abound in

grass grown naturally and which are capable of being used

for     agricultural     purposes       could    be    included   in     such

definition of "dry crop" land and since the "bid lands"
did not fall in any "class of land" under
Section 2(6)
,

such    land     could   not    be    included    for    calculating      the

ceiling limit under
Section 6
of the 1960 Act, as amended.

In    this   connection,       Shri    R.F.   Nariman,    learned      senior

counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant(s), submitted

that the Act of 1960 (Unamended) was a useful guide in

interpreting the definition of "dry crop land" under the

Act. According to the learned counsel, the simple meaning

of the said definition made it clear that "dry crop land"
5
has been defined to include "grass land", that is to say,

land which abounds in grass grown naturally and which is

capable of being used for agricultural purposes. According

to the learned counsel, unwittingly, the word "includes"

occurring in the unamended definition of `dry crop land'

was left out of the amended definition. Such omission,

according to the learned counsel, can always be supplied

by the Court. Since, the lands specified in paras (a) to
(c),    to   wit,    perennially       irrigated    land,       seasonally

irrigated land and superior dry crop land are all lands on

which    agricultural        operations     are    capable      of     being

performed the expression "other than the land specified in

paras (a) to (c)" obviously refers to lands other than

those stated in paras (a) to (c) but which are capable of

being   used   for    agricultural    purposes.     According        to    the

learned counsel, the appellant(s) had specifically pleaded

that their lands were barren, rocky and uncultivable but

the Authorities proceeded on the basis that the said fact

was    irrelevant    in   view   of   the   definition     of    the      word

"land" under
Section 2(17)
of the 1960 Act. According to

the learned counsel, even as per the revenue records, the

subject lands have been described as "Pot Kharaba" i.e.

waste    lands,     barren   lands    or    uncultivable     lands        and,
6
consequently, the same cannot fall within the definition

of dry crop land under
Section 2(6)(iv)
. According to the

learned counsel, the said Act had to be interpreted in the

context of agricultural land ceiling and in the context of

the   said     1960    Act    being      part       of   agrarian         reforms     and

unless lands were capable of being used for agricultural

purposes, the bid lands which were also uncultivable waste

lands    cannot       fall    within      the       ambit     of    the    1960     Act.

According to the learned counsel, the impugned judgment of

the     High     Court       was        erroneous        as        it     has   placed

interpretation on the proviso to
Section 5(1)
and so read

the High Court has held that even desert and hilly areas

where    no    cultivation         is    possible        can   be       subjected     to

ceiling.       According      to    the    learned          counsel,
Section     5
states that lands in deserts or hilly areas must first be

dry crop lands as defined under Explanation I(e) after

which    such    lands       falling      in    a    desert        or   hill    may   be

accorded a larger ceiling area by the State Government. In

any event, according to the learned counsel,
Section 5(1)
proviso has no bearing on the definition of dry crop land

except to the extent that the dry crop land may also fall

in hilly or desert areas; example, hilly or desert areas

which abounds in grass and which are capable of being used
7
for agricultural purposes. Consequently, hilly or desert

areas which do not abound in grass or which are incapable

of being used for agricultural purposes are not covered by

the    Ceiling    Act,       1960.      Thus,      according      to    the    learned

counsel, bid lands are excluded from the definition of dry

crop    land     and    they       do     not      fall    within       any    of    the

categories       of     classes         of      land      under    the    Act       and,

therefore, cannot be subjected to ceiling under the 1960

Act.
5.      Shri Preetesh Kapur, learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the State of Gujarat, submitted that it has been

the    admitted       case    of    the      appellant(s)         all   through      the

proceedings that the lands in question were in fact bid

lands; that, only argument raised before the Tribunal as

well    as     the     High    Court,          besides      the     constitutional

challenge, was two-fold; (i) that the subject lands were

not fit for "agriculture" and since the 1960 Act is an

agricultural         ceiling       Act,      the   subject     lands     had    to    be

excluded from the purview of the Act;                                    (ii) that,

the definition of "dry crop land" did not specifically

cover bid lands and must be construed to cover only such

bid lands as "abound in grass"                      and, therefore, the lands

in question stood outside the Ceiling Act. According to
8
the    learned     counsel,    the      definition        of    "land"        stood

specifically amended by the Amendment Act (No. 2 of 1974)

to include "bid lands" of Girasdars and Barkhalidars in
Section 2(17)(ii)(c)
. According to the learned counsel,

the    Statement    of   Objects     and    Reasons      for    enacting        the
Amending Act
also made it clear that the Amendment Act

stood enacted for including the bid lands of Girasdars and

Barkhalidars within the definition of "land". Therefore,

according to the learned counsel once the definition of

"land" stood specifically amended to include "bid lands",

without limiting the same to cultivable bid lands, the

specific intention of the Legislature must be given its

full meaning. By the said
Amending Act
No. 2 of 1974,

according    to    the    learned    counsel,       a    proviso       was     also

inserted after Section 5 which increased the ceiling limit

in respect of "desert" and hilly areas by 12 = per cent

which indicates that even deserts and hilly areas have

been    sought     to    be   brought      within       the    ambit     of     the

Agricultural       Ceiling    Act.    Therefore,         the    said     proviso

negates the contentions of the appellant(s) that only such

bid lands which were "capable of agriculture" or which

abound in grass alone were meant to be covered under the

Act. It was further submitted that the lands in question
9
are    in     fact       "agricultural"       lands.      They        survived

acquisition under the earlier three Acts only because they

were "bid lands" which by definition under those Acts were

lands "being used" by Girasdars/Barkhalidars for grazing

cattle. That, under the Ceiling Act,
Section 2(1)
defines

the use of land for the purposes of grazing cattle as

agricultural purpose and thus, according to the learned

counsel, by their very definition "bid lands" are capable

of being used for agricultural purpose, namely, grazing

cattle.     On    the    question     of    classification       of    lands,

learned counsel submitted that
Sections 4
and 5 of the

1960 Act expressly made two-fold division by dividing the

State into local areas as well as classes of lands. For

the ceiling area in Schedule I, the land had to fall under

one of the classes, namely, perennially irrigated land,

seasonally irrigated land, superior dry crop land and dry

crop land which have been defined in Explanation I to
Section 2(6)
of the Act. Learned counsel submitted that

there is no merit in the argument of the appellant(s) that

"bid land" is not specified in the class of lands under
Section 2(6)
and that even if bid lands were included in

"dry   crop      land"   it   must   be    only   such   bid   lands    which

"abound in grass" which would fall under the 1960 Act.
10
According      to    the      learned      counsel      the     argument      of   the

appellant(s) is fallacious as it overlooks the specific

legislative intent. In this connection, learned counsel

submitted that from a bare reading of the definition of

"dry crop lands" in Explanation I(e) it was clear that the

said    definition       stood      in    two    parts,       namely,    (i)     "land

other than the land specified in paragraphs (a) to (c)

and" (ii) "grass land". Thus, according to the learned

counsel, the first part of the definition included all

lands other than those specified in paragraphs (a) to (c)

provided      they     fall    under      the    definition       of    land     under
Section       2(17)
.    According         to     the    learned       counsel,     the

reason why "grass land" had to be separately defined in

clause (e) was because under the proviso to Section 5 a

further distinction was made between grass land included

within "dry crop land" and other barren/desert/drought-

prone    areas       which     also      fell     within       "dry    crop    land".

Further, according to the learned counsel, under clause
(f) to the said Explanation under
Section 2(6)
, "grass

land" and not all "dry crop lands" were deemed to be rice

lands    in    certain        situations        which    also     necessitated       a

separate       definition       of       grass    lands.       Finally,       learned

counsel    submitted         that     once      bid    lands    fall    within     the
11
ambit of the Agricultural Ceiling Act by virtue of the

specific inclusion of all bid lands in
Section 2(17)
, the

ambit of inclusion should not be read down by reference to

the classification under
Section 2(6)
of the 1960 Act.
6.            For         deciding            this         matter,          we      quote        hereinbelow
Section 2(6)
of 1960 Act (unamended) in juxtaposition with

the 1960 Act (as amended by the
Amending Act
2 of 1974):
"
Gujarat Agricultural Lands Ceiling Act, 1960
Unamended Act (Pre - 1974)
Amended Act
(Post - 1974)
                                                                      (Inserted by Guj. 2 of 1974)
2. Definitions- In this Act, unless the context          2. Definitions- In this Act, unless the context
requires otherwise-                                      requires otherwise-

(6) "class of land" means any of the following           (6)"class of land" means any
classes of land, that is to say :-                       of the following classes of
                                                         land, that is to say:-
(i) perennially irrigated land;
(ii) seasonally irrigated land;
(iii) dry crop land;                                   (i) perennially irrigated
(iv) rice land;                                        land;
                                                       (ii) seasonally irrigated
Explanation--For the purpose of this Act-              land;
(d) rice land means rice land situated in a local area (iii) superior dry crop land;
where the average rainfall is not less than 35 inches (iv) dry crop land;
a year, such average being calculated on the basis of
the rainfall in that area during the five years          Explanation I-For the purpose
immediately preceding the year 1959 but does not
include perennially or seasonally irrigated land used    of this Act -
for the cultivation of rice;
(d) "rice land" means land
                                                         which is situated in a local
                                                         area   where     the     average
(e) "dry crop land" means land other than                rainfall is not less than 89
perennially or seasonally irrigated or rice land and     centimeters   a     year    such
includes grass land, that is to say, land which          average being calculated on
abounds in grass grown naturally and which is            the basis of rainfall in that
capable of being used for agricultural purposes;
area during the five years
                                                         immediately   preceding      the
(f) grass land referred to in paragraph (e) shall,       year 1959 and which is used
notwithstanding anything contained in that               for the cultivation of rice
paragraph, be deemed to be rice land, if, is it
situated in a local area referred to in clause (d) and
                                                         or which, in the opinion of
in the opinion of the State Government it is fit for     the State Government, is fit
the cultivation of rice."                                for the cultivation of rice
                                                         but    does     not      include
                                                         perennial    or      seasonally
                                                         irrigated land used for the
12
cultivation of rice;
(e) "dry crop land" means
                              land other than the land
                              specified in paragraphs (a)
                              to (c) and grass land, that
                              is to say, land which abounds
                              in grass grown naturally and
                              which is capable of being
                              used      for    agricultural
                              purposes;
(f) "grass land" referred to
                              in   paragraph   (e)   shall,
                              notwithstanding      anything
                              contained in that paragraph,
                              be deemed to be rice land if
                              it is situated in a local
                              area referred to in paragraph
(d) and in the opinion of the
                              State Government it is fit
                              for the cultivation of rice;"
7.     We also quote hereinbelow the relevant provisions of
Section 2(17)
of the 1960 Act (Post-1974) which reads as

follows:
"2(17) "land" means-
(i)    in relation to any period prior to the
     specified date, land which is used or capable of
     being used for agricultural purpose and includes
     the sites of farm buildings appurtenant to such
     land;
(ii)   in relation to any other period, land which
     is used or capable of being used for agricultural
     purposes, and includes -
(b)    the lands    on   which   grass    grows
           naturally;

           (c)   the bid lands held by the Girasdars
or Barkhalidars under the Saurashtra Land
13
Reforms Act, 1951 (Sau. Act XXV of 1951),
           the Saurashtra Barkhali Abolition Act,
           1951 (Sau. Act XXVI of 1951), or the
Saurashtra Estates Acquisition Act, 1952
(Sau. Act III of 1952), as the case may
           be."
8.      We also quote hereinbelow Section 5 of the 1960 Act

(Post-1974) with the proviso which was not there prior to

the amendment:
"5. - Ceiling areas

     (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), in relation to each
     class of local area as specified in Schedule I, the ceiling area with
     reference to each class of land shall be as specified in the said schedule
     against the respective class of local area;
Provided that in areas which in the opinion of the State
     Government are desert or hill areas of drought-prone areas and which
     are specified by the State Government from time to time, by
     notification in the Official Gazette, as such areas, the ceiling area with
     reference to dry crop land shall be such area as is twelve and a half
     percent more than the ceiling area as specified with reference to dry
     crops land against the class of local area in which the said areas fall,
     provided however that such ceiling area shall in no case exceed an
     area of 21.85 hectares (54 acres), and for the purpose of determining
     whether any area is a desert or hill area or a drought-prone area,
     regard shall be had to the soil classification of the land, the climate
     and rainfall of the area, the extent of irrigation facilities in the area,
     the average yield of crop and the agricultural resources of the area,
     the general economic conditions prevalent therein and such other
     factors.
(2) Where a person holds land consisting of different classes in the same
     class of local area, then for determining the question whether the total land
     held by him is less than, equal to, or more than, the ceiling area, the
     acreage of each class of land held by such person shall be converted into
     the acreage of dry crop land on the basis of the proportion which the
     ceiling area for the class of land to be so converted bears to the ceiling area
     for dry crop land.
14
(3) Where a person holds, lands, whether consisting of different classes of
      land or not, in different classes of local areas, the question whether the
      total land held by him is less than, equal to, or more than, the ceiling area,
      shall be determined as follows, that is to say--
(i) the acreage of each class of land held by the person in each class
            of local area shall be first converted into the acreage of dry crop land
            in that local area in accordance with sub-section (2) and the total
            acreage so arrived at shall be expressed in terms of a multiple or, as
            the case may be, fraction of such ceiling area;
(ii) the multiple or fraction so expressed in the case of each of the
            local areas shall be added together:
(iii) the person shall be deemed to hold land
            less than equal to, or more than, the ceiling
            area according as the sum total of the
            multiples and fractions under clause (ii) is
            less than equal to, or more than one"
(emphasis supplied)
9.       The short question which is inborn in this batch of

cases concerns applicability of the Gujarat Agricultural

Lands Ceiling Amendment Act, 1972 which came into force

w.e.f. 1.4.1976 to the "bid lands".                      It is the case of the

appellants         before      us     that      the     "bid      lands"       of      the

appellants do not fall within the definition of "dry crop

land" under Explanation I(e) to
Section 2(6)
of the 1960

Act   principally         because       the    said      definition        under       the

unamended Act included grass lands, that is to say, lands

which    "abounds        in    grass     grown      naturally        and    which       is

capable       of     being       used      for      agricultural           purposes".

According to the appellants, in the amended Act, through
15
over-sight, the word "includes" in Explanation I(e), which

defines "dry crop land" stood omitted and, therefore, this

Court could always fill in the omission by reading the

word "includes" in the said clause.                             According to the

appellants, the legislative intent behind enacting clause
(e) of Explanation I was to include only cultivable lands

in the definition of "dry crop lands" as the ultimate

object of the 1960 Act is to fix a ceiling on lands held

for   agricultural          purpose       and     consequently          "bid    lands"
which are uncultivable waste lands cannot be included in

Explanation I(e).           We find no merit in this argument.                       The

definition      of     "land"       is     specifically          amended       by    the

Amendment      Act     2    of     1974     to    include        "bid    lands"       of

Girasdars or Barkhalidars in
Section 2(17)(ii)(c)
.                                   The

Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Amending Act also

makes    it    clear       that    there    was     a     specific      legislative

intent    of     including          "bid         lands"     of     Girasdars          or

Barkhalidars         within       the    definition        of    "land".            This

inclusion does not make any distinction between cultivable

and uncultivable bid lands.                The insertion of bid lands in
Section       2(17)
is     without        any      such     qualification.

Therefore, this specific intent of the Legislature must be

given its full meaning.                 If the argument of the appellants
16
is to be accepted, it would defeat the very purpose of the

1960 Act because in that event a holder could hold lands

to    an    unlimited          extent      by    including         waste     lands       in

drought-prone           areas,      hill   areas       and   waste     lands      within

their      holdings.           There       is    one    more       reason     for       not

accepting the argument of the appellants.                               The subject

lands survived acquisition under the 1952 Act only because

they were "bid lands" which by definition under those Acts

were treated as lands being used by the Girasdars for

grazing cattle (see
Section 2(a)
of the 1952 Act).                                   Now,

under the present Ceiling Act,
Section 2(1)
defines the

use   of    land    for     the      purpose      of    grazing      cattle       as     an

agricultural        purpose.             Thus,     "bid       lands"       fall     under

Section 2(1) of the Ceiling Act.                       This is one more reason

for   coming       to    the     conclusion       that       the    Ceiling       Act    as

amended applies to "bid lands".                        It is also important to

note that under Section 5(1) of the 1952 Act all lands

saved from acquisition had to be "bid lands" which by

definition under
Section 2(a)
of the 1952 Act were the

lands      being    used       by    a   Girasdar       or    a    Barkhalidar          for

grazing cattle or for cutting grass.                               If the lands in

question were put to any other use, they were liable to

acquisition under Section 5(2).                    Because the subject lands
17
were used for grazing cattle, they got saved under the

1952    Act    and,       therefore,          it    is     now    not     open    to     the

appellants         to    contend        that   the        subject       lands     are    not

capable of being used for agricultural purpose.
10.      Now, coming to the question of interpretation of the

definition of the words "dry crop land" in Explanation

I(e), one finds that the definition has two parts, namely,
(i) "land other than the land specified in paragraphs (a)

to    (c)"    and       (ii)    "grass    land".           Thus,       the    first     part

includes       all        lands        other       than        those     specified       in

paragraphs (a) to (c).                   Therefore, once the subject land

falls in the first part of definition of the word "dry

crop land" which land comes under
Section 2(17)
and which

falls outside paragraphs (a) to (c) then such lands would

fall within the definition of the words "dry crop land".

Further,      there       are     two    reasons         why     "grass      land"    stood

separately defined in Explanation I(e).                                 Firstly, under

the proviso to Section 5, which is also inserted by the
Amending Act
, a distinction is made between "grass lands"
included within "dry crop land" and "grass lands" falling

in the desert or hill areas of drought-prone areas for

fixing       the    ceiling       of    dry    crop       land     in     those      areas.

Secondly, under clause (f) to Explanation I, "grass land"
18
and not all "dry crop land" is deemed to be rice land in

certain situations.           The proviso to Section 5 itself makes

it clear that by the
Amending Act
of 1974 the Legislature

was placing a ceiling even on desert and hill areas.                                The

proviso      inter    alia    states       that    the    ceiling      limit    with

reference to "dry crop land" shall be 12 = per cent more

than that specified in the Schedule which makes it clear

that the Legislature intended to include even desert and

hills in drought-prone areas within the definition of "dry

crop    land".        Once   such    lands        are    used    for   grazing       of

cattle, Section 2(1) of the Ceiling Act would kick in and

consequently the "bid lands" would stand covered by the

Ceiling Act.          The definition of "dry crop land" under
Section 2(6)
is relevant for the purpose of ascertaining

the    extent    of    ceiling      limit    under       Schedule      I.      It    is

important to note that the subject lands got saved from

acquisition under the 1952 Act only because the appellants

were the holders of "bid lands" which were put to use for

grazing of cattle or cutting of grass.                          It is these very

lands which are now sought to be covered by the 1960 Act,

as amended.
11.     We    also     do    not    find    any     merit       in   the    argument

advanced on behalf of the appellants that the Legislature
19
unwittingly        through         over-sight        left      out         the     word

"includes"        in     the     definition     of    "dry         crop    land"     in

Explanation I(e).              If one looks at the Pre-1974 Act under
Section 2(6)
which defined "class of land", it covered

four items, namely, perennially irrigated land, seasonally

irrigated land, dry crop land and rice land, whereas under
the Post-1974 Act, rice land has been deleted from the

"class of land".             Under the Pre-1974 Act, "dry crop land"
was defined by clause (e) of Explanation to mean "land

other than perennially or seasonally irrigated or dry crop

land or rice land" and it included "grass land", whereas

under Post-1974 Act, not only the word "includes" but even

the words "rice land" do not find place in the definition

of "dry crop land" in clause (e) of Explanation I.                               One of

the reasons for this structural change is indicated by the

judgment     of        the     Gujarat   High    Court        in     the    case     of
Krishnadas Vithaldas Sanjanwala v. The State of Gujarat

and Ors.
[(1966) 7 GLR 244] in which it has been laid down

that ordinarily "grass lands" would be "dry crop lands"
within the meaning of clause (e) of Explanation to Section

2(6) of Pre-1974 Act as the definition of "dry crop land"
included   "grass            land",   however,       in   a    given       case     the

Tribunal could promote the grass land by declaring it to
20
be    a    rice    land       falling       under
Section     2(6)(iv)
(see

Explanation I(f) to Section 2(6) of the Pre-1974 Act).

According         to
the        said        decision
,      which      has     been

consistently followed thereafter, "grass land" of the kind

mentioned in clause (e) could be promoted to the category

of rice land if the Tribunal found that such grass land

was situated in a local area referred to in clause (d) and

if in the opinion of the State Government such land was

found      fit    for     cultivation            of    rice.       Therefore,       the

promotion of the grass land to the category of rice land,

according to
the said decision
of the High Court, was

dependent upon an objective fact which was justiciable and

the    determination           of    a     subjective       fact    by    the     State

Government.            Consequently, clause (d) and clause (e) of

the    Post-1974        Act    are       drastically        different      from     the

structure of the said clauses in the Pre-1974 Act.                              There

is    no   merit,       therefore,         in    the   contention        advanced    on

behalf of the appellants that the Legislature had through

over-sight omitted the word "includes" from Explanation

I(e).
12.        For the afore-stated reasons, we find no merit in

this batch of cases.                Accordingly, the same are dismissed

with no order as to costs.
21
.........................CJI
                           (S. H. Kapadia)


                                  .............................J.
                    (K.S. Radhakrishnan)


                                   .............................J.
                      (Swatanter Kumar)
New Delhi;
September 9, 2010