[Cites
18
, Cited by
1362
]
Supreme Court of India
Balwant Singh (Dead) vs Jagdish Singh & Ors on 8 July, 2010
Equivalent citations: AIR 2010 SUPREME COURT 3043, 2010 (8) SCC 685, 2010 AIR SCW 4848, (2010) 5 MAD LW 27, (2010) 4 PUN LR 271, (2011) 1 ALL WC 98, 2010 (6) SCALE 749, (2010) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 527, (2010) 6 ALLMR 480 (SC), (2010) 4 CIVLJ 475, (2010) 5 ANDHLD 97, (2010) 2 RENCR 137, (2010) 82 ALL LR 264, (2010) 4 RAJ LW 3517, (2010) 92 ALLINDCAS 103 (SC), (2010) 3 RECCIVR 856, (2011) 1 CLR 596 (SC), (2010) 3 ALL RENTCAS 1, (2010) 4 CIVILCOURTC 551, (2010) 6 SCALE 749
Author:
Swatanter Kumar
Bench:
B.S. Chauhan
,
Swatanter Kumar
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                  CIVIL APPEAL No. 1166 OF 2006


Balwant Singh                                  ....Petitioner

                             Versus

Jagdish Singh & Ors.                         ...Respondents




                           JUDGMENT
Swatanter Kumar, J.
1.      The Learned Single Judge of the High Court of Punjab

and Haryana at Chandigarh vide its Judgment dated 21 st May,
2003 set aside the concurrent Judgment passed by the Appellate

Authority, Ambala, dated 11th December, 2001 and that of the

Rent Controller dated 27th September, 2000, passing an order of

ejectment against the respondents in exercise of the powers

conferred under
Section 15
of the Haryana Urban Rent (Control of

Rent and Eviction) Act, 1973 (for short `the Act'). The petition had

been instituted by the landlord against the tenant on the ground of

non-payment of rent. The tenant had denied the relationship of

landlord and tenant and even claimed title to the said property on

the basis of an agreement dated 21st November, 1953 entered into

between the predecessor in interest of the petitioner. The ground

taken for ejectment of the tenant in the eviction petition was non-

payment of rent which was only Rs. 200/- per month. As already

noticed, the judgment of the Appellate Authority was set aside by

the High Court vide its judgment dated 21st May, 2003 and it is this

judgment of the High Court which has been assailed by way of a

Special Leave Petition before this Court. The leave to appeal was

granted by the Court vide order dated 13th February, 2006.
2.   During the pendency of the appeal on 28th November, 2007,

the sole petitioner died. From the record, it appears that no steps
2
were taken to bring on record the legal representatives of the

deceased appellant for a considerable period of time on record.

Somewhere on 15th April, 2010, I.A. No. 1 of 2010 has been filed

along with I.A. No. 2 of 2010 praying for condonation of delay in

filing the application for bringing the legal heirs on record. As is

evident from the above narrated facts, the appellant died on 28th

November, 2007 while the present applications have been filed on

or about 15th April, 2010. Thus, there is delay of 778 days in filing

these applications. The application for condonation of delay was

seriously contested on behalf of the non-applicants. It was argued

that no sufficient cause or even a reasonable cause has been

shown for condoning the delay of more than two years and the

appeal has already abated. The application, besides being vague

at the face of it, contains untrue averments. As such, it is prayed

that the application should be dismissed and consequently, the

appeal would not survive for consideration.
3.    Firstly, we have to deal with I.A. No. 2 of 2010, which is an

application for condonation of delay in filing the application for

bringing the legal representatives on record.         The Learned

Counsel appearing for the applicant stated that though no specific
3
provision had been stated in the headings of any of the

applications, I.A. No. 1 of 2010 should be treated as an

application under Order 22 Rule 3 read with
Section 151
, of Code

of Civil Procedure (hereinafter referred to as `
CPC
') while I.A. No.

2 of 2010 should be treated as an application under Order 22 Rule

9 read with
Section 5
of the Limitation Act, 1962.
4.    At the very outset, we may notice that the delay in filing the

application I.A. No. 1 of 2010 is considerable and it cannot be

disputed that the onus to show that sufficient cause exists for

condonation of delay lies upon the applicant.
5.    It is obligatory upon the applicant to show sufficient cause

due to which he was prevented from continuing to prosecute the

proceedings in the suit or before the higher Court. Here there is

admittedly, a delay of 778 days in filing the application for bringing

the legal representative on record.      To explain this delay, the

applicant has filed a one page application stating that they were

not aware of the pendency of the appeal before the Court and

came to know, only in March, 2010 from their counsel that the

case would be listed for final disposal during the vacations in May,
4
2010. Then the applications, as already noticed, were filed on 15 th

April, 2010. In order to examine the reliability and worthiness of

the alleged sufficient cause for condonation of delay, it will be

appropriate to refer to paragraph 2 of the application which is the

only relevant paragraph out of the four paragraph application:
"That the LRs. of the applicants are residing
           on different addresses because the LRs. of
           the appellant/deceased are in service and
           they were not aware of the pendency of any
           appeal before this Hon'ble Court. However,
           when the letter from the counsel for Sh.
           Balwant Singh were received at home at
           Ambala that the appeal is being listed for final
           hearing during vacation in the month of May,
           2010 then these LRs. came to know about the
           pendency of the appeal. Thereafter these
           LRs. contacted the counsel in the month of
           March, 2010 to find out the position of the
           case. When they contacted the counsel at
           New Delhi these LRs. the counsel was told
           about the death of Sh. Balwant Singh which
           had taken place in November, 2007. It was
           further pointed out to the counsel that the
           LRs. were not aware about the pendency of
           the appeal in this Court or about the
           requirement of law to bring the LRs. on record
           after the death of Balwant Singh. It is now
           they have come to know that the LRs. of
           Balwant Singh are required to be brought on
           record otherwise the appeal would abate."
6.   It is clear from the bare reading of the above paragraph that

the applicants were totally callous about pursuing their appeal.
5
They have acted irresponsibly and even with negligence. Besides

this, they have not approached the Court with clean hands. The

applicant, who seeks aid of the Court for exercising its

discretionary power for condoning the delay, is expected to state

correct facts and not state lies before the Court. Approaching the

Court with unclean hands itself, is a ground for rejection of such

application. In para 2 of the I.A. NO. 1 of 2010, it has been shown

that all the legal representatives of the deceased are residents of

9050/5, Naya Bas, Ambala City, (Haryana) and that there are no

other legal heirs of the deceased. However, in para 4 of the I.A.

No. 2 of 2010, it has been stated that the LRs. of the deceased

were in service and were not aware of the pendency of the appeal,

implying that they were living at different places and the letter of

the lawyer was received at their residential address of Ambala.

The stand taken in one application contradicts the stand taken in

the other application. Furthermore, it is stated that they were not

aware of the pendency of the appeal.        This, again, does not

appear to be correct inasmuch as one of the legal representatives

of the deceased, namely Har-Inder Singh was examined in the

Trial Court as AW4, who is the son of the deceased. It is difficult
6
for the Court to believe that the person who has been examined

as a witness did not even take steps to find out the proceedings

pending before the highest Court of the land.        Even the letter,

alleged to have been written by the counsel, has not been placed

on record and the application ex facie lacks bona fide. There is

no explanation on record as to why the application was not filed

immediately in March 2010, as they had come to know that the

appeal was to be listed for hearing in the month of May, and still,

till 15th April, 2010, no steps were taken to file the application. The

cumulative effect of the above conduct of the legal representatives

of the sole deceased, appellant clearly shows that they have acted

with callousness, irresponsibly and have not even stated true facts

in the application for condonation of delay. The approach and

conduct of the applicants certainly would invite criticism.

Moreover, it will be difficult for the Court to exercise its

discretionary power in favour of the applicants. There is not even

a whisper in the entire application as to why, right from the death

of the deceased in November, 2007, the appellant did not take

any steps whatsoever till 15th April, 2010 to inform their counsel

about the death of the deceased and to bring the legal
7
representatives on record.
7.    The counsel appearing for the applicant, while relying upon

the judgment of this Court in the case of
Ram Sumiran v. D.D.C.
[(
1985) 1 SCC 431], Mithailal Dalsangar Singh v. Annabai Devram

Kini
, [(
2003) 10 SCC 691] and Ganeshprasad Badrinarayan Lahoti

v. Sanjeevprasad Jamnaprasad Chourasiya
[(2004) 7 SCC 482]

argued that this Court should take a liberal view and should

condone the delay, irrespective of the above facts and in all these

judgments the delay has been condoned by the Court. As per

contra, the submission of the counsel for the non-applicants is that

the appeal has abated and no cause, much less sufficient, has

been shown for setting aside the abatement. A right accrues in

favour of the respondents in appeal and it will be unfair and unjust

to take away their vested right on such flimsy and baseless

grounds. It is a settled position of law that a suit or an appeal

abates automatically if the legal representatives, particularly of the

sole plaintiff or appellant, are not brought on record within the

stipulated period. Rule 1 of
Order 22, CPC
mandates that the

death of a defendant or a plaintiff shall not cause the suit to abate

if the right to sue survives. In other words, in the event of death of
8
a party, where the right to sue does not survive, the suit shall

abate and come to an end. In the event the right to sue survives,

the concerned party is expected to take steps in accordance with

provisions of this Order.      Order 22 Rule 3,
CPC
therefore,

prescribes that where the plaintiff dies and the right to sue has

survived, then an application could be filed to bring the legal

representatives of the deceased plaintiff/appellant on record within

the time specified (90 days). Once the proceedings have abated,

the suit essentially has to come to an end, except when the

abatement is set aside and the legal representatives are ordered

to be brought on record by the Court of Competent jurisdiction in

terms of Order 22 Rule 9 (3),
CPC
. Order 22 Rule 9 (3)
of the

CPC
contemplates that provisions of
Section 5
of the Indian

Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to an application filed under Sub

Rule 2 of Rule 9 of
Order 22, CPC
. In other words, an application

for setting aside the abatement has to be treated at par and the

principles enunciated for condonation of delay under
Section 5
of

the Limitation Act are to apply para materia.
Section 3
of the

Limitation Act requires that suits or proceedings instituted after the

prescribed period of limitation shall be dismissed. However, in
9
terms of
Section 5
, the discretion is vested in the Court to admit

an appeal or an application, after the expiry of the prescribed

period of limitation, if the appellant shows `sufficient cause' for not

preferring the application within the prescribed time.            The

expression `sufficient cause' commonly appears in the provisions

of Order 22 Rule 9 (2),
CPC
and
Section 5
of the Limitation Act,

thus categorically demonstrating that they are to be decided on

similar grounds. The decision of such an application has to be

guided by similar precepts. It will be appropriate for us to trace

the law enunciated by this Court while referring, both the

provisions of Order 22 Rule 9,
CPC
and
Section 5
of the Limitation

Act.
In the case of
Union of India v. Ram Charan
, [AIR 1964 SC

215], a three Judge Bench of this Court was concerned with an

application filed under Order 22 Rule 9,
CPC
for bringing the legal

representatives of the deceased on record beyond the prescribed

period of limitation.   The Court expressed the view that mere

allegations about belated knowledge of death of the opposite party

would not be sufficient.      The Court applied the principle of

`reasonable time' even to such situations. While stating that the

Court was not to invoke its inherent powers under
Section 151
,
10
C.P.C. it expressed the view that the provisions of Order 22 Rule

9,
CPC
should be applied. The Court held as under:
"8. There is no question of construing
           the expression `sufficient cause' liberally
           either because the party in default is the
           Government or because the question arises in
           connection with the impleading of the legal
           representatives of the deceased respondent.
           The provisions of the Code are with a view to
           advance the cause of justice. Of course, the
           Court, in considering whether the appellant
           has established sufficient cause for his not
           continuing the suit in time or for not applying
           for the setting aside of the abatement within
           time, need not be over-strict in expecting such
           proof of the suggested cause as it would
           accept for holding certain fact established,
           both because the question does not relate to
           the merits of the dispute between the parties
           and because if the abatement is set aside, the
           merits of the dispute can be determined while,
           if the abatement is not set aside, the appellant
           is deprived of his proving his claim on account
           of his culpable negligence or lack of vigilance.
           This, however, does not mean that the Court
           should readily accept whatever the appellant
           alleges to explain away his default. It has to
           scrutinize it and would be fully justified in
           considering the merits of the evidence led to
           establish the cause for the appellant's default
           in applying within time for the impleading of
           the legal representatives of the deceased or
           for setting aside the abatement.
xxx                  xxx            xxx
10....The procedure, requires an application
           for the making of the legal representatives of
11
the deceased plaintiff or defendant a party to
the suit. It does not say who is to present the
application. Ordinarily it would be the plaintiff
as by the abatement of the suit the defendant
stands to gain. However, an application is
necessary to be made for the purpose. If no
such application is made within the time
allowed by law, the suit abates so far as the
deceased plaintiff is concerned or as against
the deceased defendant. The effect of such
an abatement on the suit of the surviving
plaintiffs or the suit against the surviving
defendants depends on other considerations
as held by this Court in State of Punjab v.
Nathu Ram, [AIR 1962 SC 89 and Jhanda
Singh v. Gurmukh Singh, C.A. No. 344 of
1956, D/- 10-4-1962 (SC). Any way, that
question does not arise in this case as the
sole respondent had died.
xxx                 xxx             xxx
12....The legislature further seems to have
taken into account that there may be cases
where the plaintiff may not know of the death
of the defendant as ordinarily expected and,
therefore, not only provided a further period of
two months under
Art. 171
for an application
to set aside the abatement of the suit, but
also made the provisions of
Section 5
of the
Limitation Act applicable to such applications.
Thus the plaintiff is allowed sufficient time to
make an application to set aside the
abatement which, if exceeding five months,
be considered justified by the Court in the
proved circumstances of the case. It would
be futile to lay down precisely as to what
considerations would constitute `sufficient
cause' for setting aside the abatement or for
the plaintiff's not applying to bring the legal
12
representatives of the deceased defendant on
            the record or would be held to be sufficient
            cause for not making an application to set
            aside the abatement within the time
            prescribed. But it can be said that the delay
            in the making of such applications should not
            be for reasons which indicate the plaintiff's
            negligence in not taking certain steps which
            he could have and should have taken. What
            would be such necessary steps would again
            depend on the circumstances of a particular
            case and each case will have to be decided
            by the court on the facts and circumstances of
            the case.       Any statement of illustrative
            circumstances or facts can tend to be a curb
            on the free exercise of its mind by the Court in
            determining       whether    the   facts   and
            circumstances of a particular case amount to
            `sufficient cause' or not. Courts have to use
            their discretion in the matter soundly in the
            interests of justice."
8.
In the case of
P.K. Ramachandran v. State of Kerala
,

[(1997) 7 SCC 556] where there was delay of 565 days in filing the

first appeal by the State, and the High Court had observed, "taking

into consideration the averments contained in the affidavit filed in

support of the petition to condone the delay, we are inclined to

allow the petition". While setting aside this order, this Court found

that the explanation rendered for condonation of delay was neither

reasonable nor satisfactory and held as under:
13
"3. It would be noticed from a perusal of
the impugned order that the court has not
recorded any satisfaction that the explanation
for delay was either reasonable or
satisfactory, which is an essential prerequisite
to condonation of delay.
4. That apart, we find that in the
application filed by the respondent seeking
condonation of delay, the thrust in explaining
the delay after 12.5.1995 is:
".....at that time the Advocate General's office
was fed up with so many arbitration matters
(sic) equally important to this case were
pending for consideration as per the
directions of the Advocate General on
2.9.1995."
5. This can hardly be said to be a
reasonable, satisfactory or even a proper
explanation for seeking condonation of delay.
In the reply filed to the application seeking
condonation of delay by the appellant in the
High Court, it is asserted that after the
judgment and decree was pronounced by the
learned Sub-Judge, Kollam on 30-10-1993,
the scope for filing of the appeal was
examined by the District Government Pleader,
Special Law Officer, Law Secretary and the
Advocate General and in accordance with
their opinion, it was decided that there was no
scope for filing the appeal but later on,
despite the opinion
referred to above
, the
appeal was filed as late as on 18.1.1996
without disclosing why it was being filed. The
High Court does not appear to have examined
the reply filed by the appellant as reference to
the same is conspicuous by its absence from
the order. We are not satisfied that in the
facts and circumstances of this case, any
14
explanation, much less a reasonable or
           satisfactory one had been offered by the
           respondent-State for condonation of the
           inordinate delay of 565 days.
6. Law of limitation may harshly affect a
           particular party but it has to be applied with all
           its rigour when the statute so prescribed and
           the courts have no power to extend the period
           of limitation on equitable grounds.          The
           discretion exercised by the High Court was,
           thus, neither proper nor judicious. The order
           condoning the delay cannot be sustained.
This appeal, therefore, succeeds and the
           impugned order is set aside. Consequently,
           the application for condonation of delay filed
           in the High Court would stand rejected and
           the miscellaneous first appeal shall stand
           dismissed as barred by time. No costs."
9.
In the case of
Mithailal Dalsangar Singh
(supra), a Bench of

this Court had occasion to deal with the provisions of Order 22

Rule 9,
CPC
and while enunciating the principles controlling the

application of and exercising of discretion under these provisions,

the Court reiterated the principle that the abatement is automatic

and not even a specific order is required to be passed by the

Court in that behalf.
It would be useful to reproduce paragraph 8

of the said judgment which has a bearing on the matter in

controversy before us:
15
"8. Inasmuch as the abatement results
in denial of hearing on the merits of the case,
the provision of abatement has to be
construed strictly. On the other hand, the
prayer for setting aside an abatement and the
dismissal consequent upon an abatement,
have to be considered liberally. A simple
prayer for bringing the legal representatives
on record without specifically praying for
setting aside of an abatement may in
substance be construed as a prayer for
setting aside the abatement. So also a prayer
for setting aside abatement as regards one of
the plaintiffs can be construed as a prayer for
setting aside the abatement of the suit in its
entirety. Abatement of suit for failure to move
an application for bringing the legal
representatives on record within the
prescribed period of limitation is automatic
and specific order dismissing the suit as
abated is not called for. Once the suit has
abated as a matter of law, though there may
not have been passed on record a specific
order dismissing the suit as abated, yet the
legal representatives proposing to be brought
on record or any other applicant proposing to
bring the legal representatives of the
deceased party on record would seek the
setting aside of an abatement. A prayer for
bringing the legal representatives on record, if
allowed, would have the effect of setting
aside the abatement as the relief of setting
aside abatement though not asked for in so
many words is in effect being actually asked
for and is necessarily implied. Too technical
or pedantic an approach in such cases is not
called for."
16
10.   Another Bench of this Court in a recent judgment of
Katari

Suryanarayana v. Koppisetti Subba Rao
, [AIR 2009 SC 2907]

again had an occasion to construe the ambit, scope and

application of the expression `sufficient cause'. The application for

setting aside the abatement and bringing the legal heirs of the

deceased on record was filed
in that case
after a considerable

delay. The explanation rendered regarding the delay of 2381 days

in filing the application for condonation of delay and 2601 days in

bringing the legal representatives on record was not found to be

satisfactory.
Declining the application for condonation of delay,

the Court, while discussing the case of
Perumon Bhagvathy

Devaswom v. Bhargavi Amma
[(2008) 8 SCC 321] in its para 9

held as under:
"11. The words "sufficient cause for not
            making the application within the period of
            limitation" should be understood and applied
            in a reasonable, pragmatic, practical and
            liberal manner, depending upon the facts and
            circumstances of the case, and the type of
            case. The words `sufficient cause' in
Section
            5
of Limitation Act should receive a liberal
            construction so as to advance substantial
            justice, when the delay is not on account of
            any dilatory tactics, want of bona fides,
            deliberate inaction or negligence on the part
            of the appellant."
17
11.   The Learned Counsel appearing for the applicant, while

relying upon the cases of
Ram Sumiran, Mithailal Dalsangar Singh

and Ganeshprasad Badrinarayan Lahoti
(supra), contended that

the Court should adopt a very liberal approach and the delay

should be condoned on the mere asking by the applicant. Firstly,

none of these cases is of much help to the applicant.
Secondly, in

the case of
Ram Sumiran
(supra), the Court has not recorded any

reasons or enunciated any principle of law for exercising the

discretion. The Court, being satisfied with the facts averred in the

application and particularly giving benefit to the applicant on

account of illiteracy and ignorance, condoned the delay of six

years in filing the application. This judgment cannot be treated as

a precedent in the eyes of the law. In fact, it was a judgment on

its own facts.
12.
In the case of
Ganeshprasad Badrinarayan Lahoti
(supra),

the High Court had rejected the application, primarily, on the

ground that no separate application had been filed for substitution

and for setting aside the abatement.      The Court held that the

principles of res judicata were not applicable and the application
18
could be filed at a subsequent stage.           Thus, the delay was

condoned.
We must notice here that the earlier judgments of the

equi benches and even that of larger benches (three Judge

Bench) in the case of
Ram Charan
(supra) were not brought to the

notice of the Court.
Resultantly, the principles of law stated by

this Court in its earlier judgments were not considered by the

Bench dealing with the case of
Ganeshprasad Badrinarayan

Lahoti
(supra).
13.   As held by this Court in the case of
Mithailal Dalsangar

Singh
(supra), the abatement results in the denial of hearing on

the merits of the case, the provision of abatement has to be

construed strictly. On the other hand, the prayer for setting aside

an abatement and the dismissal consequent upon an abatement,

have to be construed liberally. We may state that even if the term

`sufficient cause' has to receive liberal construction, it must

squarely fall within the concept of reasonable time and proper

conduct of the concerned party. The purpose of introducing liberal

construction      normally   is   to    introduce   the   concept   of

`reasonableness' as it is understood in its general connotation.

The law of limitation is a substantive law and has definite
19
consequences on the right and obligation of a party to arise.

These principles should be adhered to and applied appropriately

depending on the facts and circumstances of a given case. Once

a valuable right, as accrued in favour of one party as a result of

the failure of the other party to explain the delay by showing

sufficient cause and its own conduct, it will be unreasonable to

take away that right on the mere asking of the applicant,

particularly when the delay is directly a result of negligence,

default or inaction of that party. Justice must be done to both

parties equally. Then alone the ends of justice can be achieved. If

a party has been thoroughly negligent in implementing its rights

and remedies, it will be equally unfair to deprive the other party of

a valuable right that has accrued to it in law as a result of his

acting vigilantly. The application filed by the applicants lack in

details. Even the averments made are not correct and ex-facie

lack bona fide. The explanation has to be reasonable or plausible,

so as to persuade the Court to believe that the explanation

rendered is not only true, but is worthy of exercising judicial

discretion in favour of the applicant. If it does not specify any of

the enunciated ingredients of judicial pronouncements, then the
20
application should be dismissed.       On the other hand, if the

application is bona fide and based upon true and plausible

explanations, as well as reflect normal behaviour of a common

prudent person on the part of the applicant, the Court would

normally tilt the judicial discretion in favour of such an applicant.

Liberal construction cannot be equated with doing injustice to the

other party.
In the case of
State of Bihar v. Kameshwar Prasad

Singh
[(2000) 9 SCC 94], this Court had taken a liberal approach

for condoning the delay in cases of the Government, to do

substantial justice. Facts of that case were entirely different as

that was the case of fixation of seniority of 400 officers and the

facts were required to be verified. But what we are impressing

upon is that delay should be condoned to do substantial justice

without resulting in injustice to the other party. This balance has

to be kept in mind by the Court while deciding such applications.
In the case of
Ramlal and Others v. Rewa Coalfields Ltd.
, [AIR

1962 SC 361] this Court took the view:
"7. In construing
Section 5
it is relevant
            to bear in mind two important considerations.
            The first consideration is that the expiration of
            the period of limitation prescribed for making
            an appeal gives rise to a right in favour of the
            decree holder to treat the decree as binding
21
between the parties. In other words, when
           the period of limitation prescribed has expired
           the decree-holder has obtained a benefit
           under the law of limitation to treat the decree
           as beyond challenge, and this legal right
           which has accrued to the decree holder by
           lapse of time should not be light heartedly
           disturbed. The other consideration which
           cannot be ignored is that if sufficient cause for
           excusing delay is shown discretion is given to
           the Court to condone delay and admit the
           appeal. This discretion has been deliberately
           conferred on the Court in order that judicial
           power and discretion in that behalf should be
           exercised to advance substantial justice. As
           has been observed by the Madras High Court
           in Krishna v. Chathappan, ILR 13 Mad 269.
It is however, necessary to emphasize
           that even after sufficient cause has been
           shown a party is not entitled to the
           condonation of delay in question as a matter
           of right. The proof of a sufficient cause is a
           condition precedent for the exercise of the
           discretionary jurisdiction vested in the court by
Section 5
. If sufficient cause is not proved
           nothing further has to be done; the application
           for condoning delay has to be dismissed on
           that ground alone. If sufficient cause is
           shown then the Court has to enquire whether
           in its discretion it should condone the delay.
           This aspect of the matter naturally introduces
           the consideration of all relevant facts and it is
           at this stage that diligence of the party or its
           bona fides may fall for consideration;..."
14.   In the case of Union of India v. Tata Yodogawa Ltd., [1988

(38) Excise Law Times 739 (SC)], this Court while granting some
22
latitude to the Government in relation to condonation of delay, still

held that there must be some way or attempt to explain the cause

for such delay and as there was no whisper to explain what legal

problems occurred in filing the Special Leave Petition, the

application for condonation of delay was dismissed.
Similarly, in

the case of
Collector of Central Excise, Madras v. A.MD. Bilal &

Co.
, [1999 (108) Excise Law Times 331 (SC)], the Supreme Court

declined to condone the delay of 502 days in filing the appeal

because there was no satisfactory or reasonable explanation

rendered for condonation of delay. The provisions of Order 22

Rule 9,
CPC
has been the subject matter of judicial scrutiny for

considerable time now. Sometimes the Courts have taken a view

that delay should be condoned with a liberal attitude, while on

certain occasions the Courts have taken a stricter view and

wherever the explanation was not satisfactory, have dismissed the

application for condonation of delay. Thus, it is evident that it is

difficult to state any straight-jacket formula which can uniformly be

applied to all cases without reference to the peculiar facts and

circumstances of a given case.        It must be kept in mind that

whenever a law is enacted by the legislature, it is intended to be
23
enforced in its proper perspective. It is an equally settled principle

of law that the provisions of a statute, including every word, have

to be given full effect, keeping the legislative intent in mind, in

order to ensure that the projected object is achieved. In other

words, no provisions can be treated to have been enacted

purposelessly.   Furthermore, it is also a well settled canon of

interpretative jurisprudence that the Court should not give such an

interpretation to provisions which would render the provision

ineffective or odious.    Once the legislature has enacted the

provisions of Order 22, with particular reference to Rule 9, and the

provisions of the
Limitation Act
are applied to the entertainment of

such an application, all these provisions have to be given their

true and correct meaning and must be applied wherever called for.

If we accept the contention of the Learned Counsel appearing for

the applicant that the Court should take a very liberal approach

and interpret these provisions (
Order 22 Rule 9 of the CPC
and
Section 5
of the Limitation Act) in such a manner and so liberally,

irrespective of the period of delay, it would amount to practically

rendering all these provisions redundant and inoperative.       Such

approach or interpretation would hardly be permissible in law.
24
Liberal construction of the expression `sufficient cause' is intended

to advance substantial justice which itself presupposes no

negligence or inaction on the part of the applicant, to whom want

of bona fide is imputable.    There can be instances where the

Court should condone the delay; equally there would be cases

where the Court must exercise its discretion against the applicant

for want of any of these ingredients or where it does not reflect

`sufficient cause' as understood in law. [Advanced Law Lexicon, P.

Ramanatha Aiyar, 2nd Edition, 1997] The expression `sufficient

cause' implies the presence of legal and adequate reasons. The

word `sufficient' means adequate enough, as much as may be

necessary to answer the purpose intended. It embraces no more

than that which provides a plentitude which, when done, suffices

to accomplish the purpose intended in the light of existing

circumstances and when viewed from the reasonable standard of

practical and cautious men. The sufficient cause should be such

as it would persuade the Court, in exercise of its judicial

discretion, to treat the delay as an excusable one.           These

provisions give the Courts enough power and discretion to apply a

law in a meaningful manner, while assuring that the purpose of
25
enacting such a law does not stand frustrated.                 We find it

unnecessary to discuss the instances which would fall under

either of these classes of cases.        The party should show that

besides acting bona fide, it had taken all possible steps within its

power and control and had approached the Court without any

unnecessary delay.        The test is whether or not a cause is

sufficient to see whether it could have been avoided by the party

by the exercise of due care and attention. [Advanced Law Lexicon,

P. Ramanatha Aiyar, 3rd Edition, 2005]
15.    We feel that it would be useful to make a reference to the

judgment of this Court in
Perumon Bhagvathy Devaswom
(supra).

In this case, the Court, after discussing a number of judgments of

this Court as well as that of the High Courts, enunciated the

principles which need to be kept in mind while dealing with

applications filed under the provisions of
Order 22, CPC
along

with an application under
Section 5
, Limitation Act for condonation

of    delay in   filing   the   application   for   bringing   the   legal

representatives on record. In paragraph 13 of the judgment, the

Court held as under:-
26
"13 (i) The words "sufficient cause for
not making the application within the period of
limitation" should be understood and applied
in a reasonable, pragmatic, practical and
liberal manner, depending upon the facts and
circumstances of the case, and the type of
case. The words `sufficient cause' in
Section
5
of the Limitation Act should receive a liberal
construction so as to advance substantial
justice, when the delay is not on account of
any dilatory tactics, want of bona fides,
deliberate inaction or negligence on the part
of the appellant."
(ii) In considering the reasons for
condonation of delay, the courts are more
liberal with reference to applications for
setting aside abatement, than other cases.
While the court will have to keep in view that a
valuable right accrues to the legal
representatives of the deceased respondent
when the appeal abates, it will not punish an
appellant with foreclosure of the appeal, for
unintended lapses. The courts tend to set
aside abatement and decided the matter on
merits.      The courts tend to set aside
abatement and decide the matter on merits,
rather than terminate the appeal on the
ground of abatement.
(iii) The decisive factor in condonation of
delay, is not the length of delay, but
sufficiency of a satisfactory explanation.
(iv) The extent or degree of leniency to
be shown by a court depends on the nature of
application and facts and circumstances of
the case. For example, courts view delays in
making applications in a pending appeal more
leniently than delays in the institution of an
27
appeal. The courts view applications relating
           to lawyer's lapses more leniently than
           applications relating to litigant's lapses. The
           classic example is the difference in approach
           of courts to applications for condonation of
           delay in filing an appeal and applications for
           condonation of delay in re-filing the appeal
           after rectification of defects.
(v) Want of "diligence" or "inaction" can
           be attributed to an appellant only when
           something required to be done by him, is not
           done. When nothing is required to be done,
           courts do not expect the appellant to be
           diligent. Where an appeal is admitted by the
           High Court and is not expected to be listed for
           final hearing for a few years, an appellant is
           not expected to visit the court or his lawyer
           every few weeks to ascertain the position nor
           keep checking whether the contesting
           respondent is alive. He merely awaits the call
           or information from his counsel about the
           listing of the appeal.
We may also notice here that this judgment had been

followed with approval by an equi-bench of this Court in the case

of
Katari Suryanarayana
(supra)
16.   Above are the principles which should control the exercise of

judicial discretion vested in the Court under these provisions. The

explained delay should be clearly understood in contradistinction

to inordinate unexplained delay.       Delay is just one of the

ingredients which has to be considered by the Court. In addition to
28
this, the Court must also take into account the conduct of the

parties, bona fide reasons for condonation of delay and whether

such delay could easily be avoided by the applicant acting with

normal care and caution. The statutory provisions mandate that

applications for condonation of delay and applications belatedly

filed beyond the prescribed period of limitation for bringing the

legal representatives on record, should be rejected unless

sufficient cause is shown for condonation of delay. The larger

benches as well as equi-benches of this Court have consistently

followed these principles and have either allowed or declined to

condone the delay in filing such applications. Thus, it is the

requirement of law that these applications cannot be allowed as a

matter of right and even in a routine manner. An applicant must

essentially satisfy the above stated ingredients; then alone the

Court would be inclined to condone the delay in the filing of such

applications.
17.   On an analysis of the above principles, we now revert to the

merits of the application in hand. As already noticed, except for a

vague averment that the legal representatives were not aware of

the pendency of the appeal before this Court, there is no other
29
justifiable reason stated in the one page application. We have

already held that the application does not contain correct and true

facts.    Thus, want of bona fides is imputable to the applicant.

There is no reason or sufficient cause shown as to what steps

were taken during this period and why immediate steps were not

taken by the applicant, even after they admittedly came to know of

the pendency of the appeal before this Court. It is the abnormal

conduct on the part of the applicants, particularly Har-Inder Singh,

who had appeared as AW4 in the trial and was fully aware of the

proceedings, but still did not inform the counsel of the death of his

father. The cumulative effect of all these circumstances is that the

applicants have miserably failed in showing any `sufficient cause'

for condonation of delay of 778 days in filing the application in

question.
18.      Thus, we have no hesitation in dismissing I.A.No.2 of 2010

and consequently, I.A.No.1 of 2010 does not survive for

consideration and is also dismissed.       Resultantly, the appeal

having already abated also stands dismissed. However, in the

facts of the case, there shall be no orders as to costs.
30
........................................J.
                            [ DR. B.S. CHAUHAN ]


                       ........................................
J.
                       [ SWATANTER KUMAR ]

New Delhi
July 8, 2010.
31