[Cites
21
, Cited by
59
]
Supreme Court of India
Sagunthala(Dead) Thr. Lrs vs Special Tahsildar (L.A.) & Ors on 24 February, 2010
Equivalent citations: AIR 2010 SUPREME COURT 984, 2010 (3) SCC 661, 2010 AIR SCW 1457, 2010 (2) AIR KANT HCR 199, (2010) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 395, (2010) 1 CLR 729 (SC), (2010) 2 CIVLJ 748, (2010) 110 REVDEC 651, (2010) 4 MAH LJ 602, (2010) 1 CURCC 234, (2010) 3 MPLJ 313, 2010 (2) SCALE 620, (2010) 2 ALLMR 933 (SC), (2010) 1 LANDLR 1, (2010) 81 ALL LR 295, (2010) 6 MAD LJ 440, (2010) 91 ALLINDCAS 262 (SC), (2010) 2 RECCIVR 378, (2010) 2 SCALE 620, (2010) 3 ANDHLD 1
Bench:
Asok Kumar Ganguly
,
G.S. Singhvi
REPORTABLE

           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


      CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 6240-6243 OF 2001




Sagunthala (Dead) through Lrs.
                                     ..Appellant(s)

                        Versus


Special Tehsildar (L.A.) & Ors.      ..Respondent(s)


                         WITH
     Civil Appeal Nos. 6244-6248 of 2001 and
           Civil Appeal No. 495-504 of 2002



                   J U D G M E N T
GANGULY, J.
1.These appeals have been filed challenging the

  judgment and order dated 23.1.01 of Madras High

  Court.
2.Facts relevant to the present dispute are that

  an extent of 196 acres of lands were acquired
1
for   the      purpose   of   expansion         of     Tamil      Nadu

  Magnesite       Limited,      a    State        owned    company.

  Various notifications under
Section 4 (1)
of

  the   Land      Acquisition       Act,    1894       (hereinafter

  referred to as "the Act") were issued in the

  month of February, March and May 1984.
3.In connection with giving compensation for that

  acquisition, the Land Acquisition Officer had

  fixed     the     market      value       at     the     rate       of

  Rs.18,000/- per acre for irrigated dry land and

  Rs.15,000/- per acre for unirrigated dry land

  in Award Nos. 1 to 9 and 11 of 1986.
4.As    the      claimants      felt       aggrieved           by   and

  dissatisfied with the awards, they asked for

  reference       under
Section     18
of    the     Act.      The

  Reference Court, i.e. the Court of Subordinate

  Judge Salem, after considering the documentary

  and     oral     evidence,        treated       the     lands      as

  potential       house    sites     and    fixed        the    market

  value at Rs.1,75,000/- per acre.
2
5.The case as put forward by the claimants before

  the Reference Court and this Court was that the

  compensation was not fixed by the Collector on

  a   proper     basis    and        the   acquired       land     is

  potential house site and the valuation ought to

  have been done on that basis. It was also their

  submission      that    relevant          sale       deeds     were

  ignored while fixing up the value and the data

  sale    deed     selected          by    the     Officer        was

  absolutely     unreliable.         It    was   urged    that    in

  several      cases,    the        Officer      did    not    award

  compensation for well, cement channel and for

  the super structures and trees.                  While in some

  of the cases the Land Acquisition Officer had

  not awarded interest for the lands which are

  taken     possession    in        advance      from    the     land

  owners. Neither was the compensation paid for

  the change of residence and place of avocation.
6.Per contra, the respondents urged that the Land

  Acquisition Officer had fixed the value after

  verifying the records of nearby land owners on

  such transactions and after verifying all the
3
aspects.     It   was       further         submitted       that   the

  value fixed by the Land Acquisition Officer is

  correct and the value claimed by the claimants

  is very high and there was no objection by the

  owners     for    those          lands       at     the     time    of

  acquisition.      So        there      is     no    necessity      for

  enhancement of compensation. It was urged that

  the documents relied upon by the claimants are

  in    no   way    relevant           for     fixing       the   higher

  values.
7.The   Reference        Court     taking       into    account      the

  admission of R.W. 2 that there are number of

  buildings on the land acquired and the plots of

  land which are occupied by the building are to

  be    treated     as    house         sites,       held     that   the

  classification         of     lands         into    irrigated      and

  unirrigated lands made by the Land Acquisition

  Officer     was   unreasonable              and    erroneous.      The

  Reference Court held that the Officer should

  have taken into consideration the proximity of

  lands      acquired         to       the     other        residential
4
colonies,      the    factories       and   that     the    lands

  itself was used as housing plots.
8.The Reference Court fixed Rs. 1,75,000/- per

  acre as the amount taking note of the fact that

  although      the    lands    acquired      are    situated    in

  different survey numbers but they are adjacent

  to each other and are acquired as one block for

  the same purpose.
9.The    High     Court        vide    its    judgment        dated

  23.01.2001 passed in Appeal Suit Nos. 134 to

  143 of 1997 and C.M.P No. 16081 of 2000 in

  Cross Objection Sr. No. 14276 of 1997 while

  setting aside the order of Reference Court took

  into consideration the fact that plots of lands

  acquired were agricultural lands initially and

  continued to be so till they were acquired. The

  High    Court       relied     on     the   fact     that     the

  claimants in their representation before the

  Land Acquisition Officer have claimed different

  amounts       and      majority        of     them     claimed

  compensation only at the rate of Rs. One Lakh

  per    acre.    The     High        Court   held     that     the
5
Reference Court had given no reason at all for

  awarding compensation higher than what had been

  claimed. The High Court after taking into note

  the existence of 2 housing colonies held that

  it could not be concluded that the vast extent

  of land acquired in the case would also become

  a housing colony on its own and was of the view

  that     there    was     no       sufficient      material     to

  establish that the lands in dispute could be

  converted into a housing site in near future.
10.It    was     held   that     lands     in     question      were

  valuable agricultural lands where horticulture

  and    other     crops    were      raised    and    they     were

  garden       lands,      sufficiently         irrigated.       The

  market value was fixed at Rs.75,000/- per acre

  uniformly for all the lands involved in the

  above    acquisition.        The     award    of    interest    on

  solatium and on additional grounds was held to

  be contrary to the principles laid down by the

  Apex Court.
6
11.The        claimant(s)/appellant(s)                   being     aggrieved

      by     the     aforesaid       order        of     the     High     Court

      approached this Court.
12.The main bone of contention on behalf of the

      appellant is regarding the classification of

      lands and their value fixed by the High Court.

      It     was     argued      before        this      Court     that     the

      acquired lands are potential house sites and

      that     the     High      Court      was        not     justified     in

      ignoring        the     documentary          evidence        in      that

      regard.
13.   This Court finds that the Reference Court was

      right    in     holding      that      while       determining        the

      value of the property acquired one has to see

      whether        the      land       has      got        the    building

      potentiality          to    be       used    for       the    building

      purposes in the immediate or in near future.
In
P. Ram Reddy and others v. Land Acquisition

      Officer, Hyderabad Urban Development Authority,

      Hyderabad and others
(1995) 2 SCC 305, this

      Court held that:
7
"Market value of land acquired under the
LA Act
is the main component of the amount
    of compensation awardable for such land
    under
Section 23(1)
of the LA Act. The
    market value of such land must relate to
    the last of the dates of publication of
    notification or giving of public notice of
    substance of such notification according
    to
Section 4(1)
of the LA Act."
This Court went on to further hold that:-
"Such market value of the acquired land
    cannot only be its value with reference to
    the actual use to which it was put on the
    relevant date envisaged under
Section 4(1)
of the LA Act, but ought to be its value
    with reference to the better use to which
    it is reasonably capable of being put in
    the immediate or near future. Possibility
    of the acquired land put to certain use on
    the date envisaged under
Section 4(1)
of
    the LA Act, of becoming available for
    better use in the immediate or near
    future, is regarded as its potentiality.
    It is for this reason that the market
    value of the acquired land when has to be
    determined with reference to the date
    envisaged under
Section 4(1)
of the LA
    Act, the same has to be done not merely
    with reference to the use to which it was
    put on such date, but also on the
    possibility of it becoming available in
    the immediate or near future for better
    use, i.e., on its potentiality......"
(See para 8)
14.The High Court, however, has taken note of the

  deposition   of   C.W.   1   who   has   admitted   that

  excepting the plots of land under acquisition,
8
all    other    lands    are       agriculture   lands.     The

      aforesaid witness also admitted that his land

      under acquisition was agriculture land at the

      time of notification. C.W.6 has also admitted

      that    initially       all   the     acquired   lands     were

      agriculture lands. But High Court ignored other

      materials on record and fell into an error in

      concluding       that     the       acquired     lands     were

      agriculture lands and erroneously reversed the

      conclusions arrived by the Reference Court.
15.   The    High    Court    relied      on   the   case   of
Land

      Acquisition Officer, ELURU and others v. Jasti

      Rohini (Smt.) and another
[(
1995) 1 SCC 717],

      The Collector, Raigarh v. Dr. Harisingh Thakur

      and another
[
AIR 1979 SC 472] and Raghubans

      Narain Singh v. The Uttar Pradesh Government
,

      through Collector of Bijnor, [AIR 1967 SC 465],

      wherein this court has held that the market

      value, on the basis of which compensation is

      payable under
Section 23
of the Act, means the

      price that a willing purchaser would pay to a

      willing seller for a property having due regard
9
to its existing condition with all its existing

  advantages and its potential possibilities when

  laid   out    in   its   most      advantageous   manner,

  excluding any advantages due to the carrying

  out of the scheme for which the property is

  compulsorily acquired.
16.We, however, feel that the view taken by the

  learned High Court is not tenable. In our view

  the    learned     Reference       Court    has   rightly

  appreciated the evidence in this regard. While

  examining the evidence of C.W. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6,

  8 to 14, 17 to 19 and 21 it concluded that they

  have categorically stated that the lands were

  near   the    residential        housing    colonies   and

  abutting     the   Itteri   road    which   connects   the

  Tanmag road and are situated abutting the road

  from Thekkampatti village. According to C.W 4

  and 6 Gandhi Nagar Colony is at a distance of

  100 feet.
17.It will be worthwhile to refer to
Section 23
of the Act.
Section 23
reads as under:
10
"23.   Matters    to    be     considered    on
determining compensation:-
(1)   In    determining     the    amount    of
compensation   to   be    awarded    for   land
acquired under this Act, the Court shall
take into consideration-
First, the market- value of the land at
the date of the publication of the
[notification    under
section     4
,   sub-
section (1)];
Secondly, the damage sustained by the
person interested, by reason of the taking
of any standing crops trees which may be
on the land at the time of the Collector's
taking possession thereof;
thirdly, the damage (if any) sustained by
the person interested, at the time of the
Collector's taking possession of the land,
by reason of serving such land from his
other land;
fourthly, the damage (if any) sustained by
the person interested, at the time of the
Collector' s taking possession of the
land,   by   reason    of    the    acquisition
injuriously affecting his other property,
movable or immovable, in any other manner,
or his earnings;
fifthly, in consequence of the acquisition
of the land by the Collector, the person
interested is compelled to change his
residence   or   place    of    business,   the
reasonable expenses (if any) incidental to
such change, and sixthly, the damage (if
any) bona fide resulting from diminution
of the profits of the land between the
time of the publication of the declaration
under
section 6
and the time of the
Collector's taking possession of the land.
1A) In addition to the market value of the
land, as above provided, the Court shall
in every case award an amount calculated
at the rate of twelve per centum per annum
on such market value for the period
commencing on and from the date of the
11
publication of the notification under
section 4
, sub- section (1), in respect of
        such land to the date of the award of the
        Collector or the date of taking possession
        of the land, whichever is earlier.
Explanation: - In computing the period
        referred to in this sub- section, any
        period   or   periods   during  which  the
        proceedings for the acquisition of the
        land were held up on account of any stay
        or injunction by the order of any Court
        shall be excluded.]
        (2) In addition to the market value of the
        land as above provided, the Court shall in
        every case award a sum of [thirty per
        centum]   on    such   market   value,  in
        consideration of the compulsory nature of
        the acquisition."
18.   This Court in the case of State of Orissa v.
Brij Lal Misra and others, [(1995) 5 SCC 203],

      held that:
"
Section   23(1)
of   the   Act    charges
        determination    of     the     amount    of
        compensation for the acquired land taking
        into account firstly the market value of
        the land at the date of the publication of
        the notification under
Section 4(1)
of the
        Act. The question, therefore, would be
        that what would be the market value of the
        land. The market value prevailing on the
        date   of   the    notification    including
        potentiality the land possessed of or
        realisable potentiality existing as on the
        date of the notification would be the
        relevant   fact   for    consideration    to
        determine market value."
(See para 3)
12
19.   Further     in    the     case     of      Viluben         Jhalejar

      Contractor (Dead) by Lrs. v. State of Gujarat,

      (2005) 4 SCC 789, this Court illustrated some

      positive and negative factors that could have a

      bearing    on     the    market    value       of    land       under
Section    23
.     [See     para     20       pg.    797]       While

      upholding the aforesaid view it was held in the

      case of
Attar Singh and another v. Union of

      India    and     another
,    (2009)       9    SCC    289,       that

      determination of market value of the land may

      also depend upon the facts and circumstances of

      each case.
20.R.W.3 in his evidence stated that about 50

      company     quarters        were    constructed            on     the

      acquired land and 6 or 7 factory buildings were

      there. The construction made for factory was

      within     40    acres    and      about       30    acres       were

      constructed        for    residential           quarters.         He

      admitted         that      there        are         houses        of

      agriculturists in the acquired land. He also

      admitted    that    the     acquired       land      was    on    the

      northern side of the road from Thekkampatti and
13
Anna Nagar Colony was just interior to that

  being at a distance of 1 K.M. from interior to

  the   road.     He    also     said    that   there       may    be

  terraced buildings on the acquired land.
21.R.W. 2 in his evidence stated that there are

  about 50-60 houses at Anna Nagar. He also said

  that it was correct to                say that      there were

  lands on both sides of the acquired land which

  belong     to        the     agriculturists.         He        also

  categorically admitted that land was acquired

  to build quarters for the labourers.
22.R.W. 1 in his evidence admitted that the land

  adjacent      to      the    acquired      land     goes       from

  Thekkampatti         to    Sengaradu.      According      to    him

  Gandhi Nagar colony has 150 residential houses.
23.As   such      the       evidence    of    these    witnesses

  supports conclusion that even at the time of

  the notification under
Section 4 (1)
there were

  buildings including the terraced buildings on

  the land acquired and they are all abutting the
14
main road and are at a distance of 1 K.M. from

  residential colonies like Anna Nagar and Gandhi

  Nagar.
24.In the light of the above material facts this

  Court    feels      that     the    presence         of    number    of

  buildings on the lands acquired and the said

  lands being occupied by the buildings are to be

  treated as house sites. The basic purpose that

  has been traced out in                the evidence            and as

  admitted       by    the     RWs    that       the        lands    were

  acquired       for     the     purpose          of     putting       up

  residential quarters. As a portion of the land

  is   being       considered         as        house        site,    the

  adjoining lands have the potential of being put

  in   better      use   as     house      sites        in    the    near

  future.
25.The other important factor is the proximity of

  the plots to two residential colonies i.e. Anna

  Nagar    and    Gandhi       Nagar.      As    it     has    come   on

  record that the Anna Nagar colony has about 50-

  60 houses and Gandhi Nagar colony has about 150
15
houses, as such it is reasonable and proper to

  conclude that the present lands under dispute

  were near the residential colonies.
26.It    should   also    be   taken   into   consideration

  that the disputed lands were situated near the

  factory premises and further were adjoining the

  main road which connects the Tanmag road. As

  such the aforesaid lands are potential house

  sites.
27.In the judgment under appeal, the High Court

  took into consideration the fact that in the

  representation before the LAO, the claimants

  have    claimed    different      amounts   ranging   from

  Rs.80,000/- to Rs. Two Lakhs and the majority

  of the claimants have claimed compensation only

  at the rate of Rs. One Lakh per acre. The High

  Court opined that no reason was given by the

  Reference Court for not accepting the claims of

  the    claimants       excepting     stating   that    the

  claimants have claimed lesser amount.
16
28.   It      is        settled         that         the        burden       of

      establishing/proving the market value of the

      lands is always on the claimants.
In
Periyar

      and Pareekanni Rubbers Ltd. v. State of Kerala
[AIR 1990 SC 2192], this Court held that it is

      the duty of the Court to determine just and

      fair market value. It was further held that the

      claimants should produce necessary evidence on

      the value of land since the burden of proof is

      on them to establish the higher compensation

      claimed.
While agreeing with the judgment in
Periyar      and    Pareekanni          Rubbers          Ltd
(Supra),

      this     Court      in    the     case        of
Special      Deputy

      Collector & Another v. Kurra Sambasiva Rao &

      Others
, (1997) 6 SCC 41, held that in a claim

      for enhancement of compensation the burden of

      proof     was      on    the    claimants            that      land   was

      capable       of        fetching        higher           compensation.
Further      in     the     case        of
Kiran        Tandon     v.

      Allahabad         Development          Authority         and    another
,

      [(2004)      10    SCC    745],        it     was    held      that   the

      burden       of     proving            that        the      amount     of

      compensation            awarded        by     the        Collector     is
17
inadequate lies upon the claimant and he is in

      the position of a plaintiff.
29.   The   Court,     therefore,     has      to   treat     the

      reference as an original proceeding before it

      for determination of the market value afresh on

      the basis of the material produced before it.

      The claimant in the position of a plaintiff has

      to show that the price offered for his land in

      the award is inadequate on the basis of the

      materials   produced      in    Court.    The    material

      produced and proved by the other side will also

      be taken into account for this purpose. [See

      Para 10 page 754 of
Kiran Tandon
(supra)]
30.The      claimants    have   placed      reliance    on    sale

      deeds Ex. C 7, 8, 11 and 12 for the purpose of

      valuation   of    land.   The   Reference       Court    has

      considered that sale deeds as Ex. C 8 & 11 can

      be adopted as the basis for acquired lands. Ex.

      C8 is in respect of sale of house plots and is

      dated 11.03.83 which is nearly one year prior

      to the notification under
Section 4 (1)
and on
18
that basis the value of lands acquired under

 notification was fixed at Rs. 1,75,000/- per

 acre. It was held by the Reference Court that

 though   the    lands       were   acquired      in   different

 survey numbers but they were adjacent to each

 other and are acquired as one block for the

 same purpose.
31.The High Court, however, refused to rely on

 the   aforesaid        documents     as    the    High    Court

 opined that Ex. C8 was not admissible since the

 vendor or the vendee has not been examined. The

 High Court held that the sale of 1= cents of

 land on the condition that they should be used

 for house sites appears to be unusual. With

 respect to the other document i.e. Ex. C11 the

 High Court considered the admission of CW 15

 that the land was not sold as house sites. It

 was   also     held    by    the   High    Court      that   the

 Reference      Court    was    wrong      in   not    deducting

 developmental charges from the value arrived.

 Basing its conclusion on the facts that the
19
lands are agriculture lands the market value

      was fixed at Rs. 75,000/ per acre.
32.In view of the admitted case that the lands

      acquired were potential house sites we do not

      agree with the views taken by the High Court

      while calculating the compensation.                  R-13 and

      R-15     are     the    two     sale       deeds   containing

      particulars      of    the    sale    transactions        held   3

      years prior to the
Section 4 (1)
notification.

      The Reference Court after close perusal of the

      aforesaid       documents          held     that    the     same

      discloses      that    out    of    more    than   100    sales,

      number of sales in respect of the lands is sold

      as house sites in village Thathaiyangarpatti

      village    and    the    adjacent         survey   numbers       in

      Thekkampatty village were also sold as house

      sites.
33.   This Court in
Avinash Dhavaji Naik v. State of

      Maharashtra
, (2009) 11 SCC 171, has observed as

      following:
20
"14. The potentiality of a land for the
        purpose   of   development  as   also for
        building purposes would depend upon a
        large number of factors. For the said
        purpose, the court may not only have to
        bear in mind the purpose for which the
        lands were sought to be acquired but also
        the subsequent events to some extent.
15. In a case of this nature the court may
        proceed on the presumption that such a
        vast tract of land viz. 96 villages were
        sought to be acquired at the same time for
        construction of New Bombay. We are not
        unmindful of the fact that development in
        the entire area was not possible at one
        point of time. Development of the area
        must have taken place in phases. We are
        also not unmindful of the fact that the
        price of the land may skyrocket depending
        upon   the  development  as   also  future
        potentiality."
34.
In Atma Singh (Dead) through
Lrs., and others

      v. State of Haryana and another
, [(2008) 2 SCC

      568],   it    was     observed    that    the    expression

      "market value" has been the subject-matter of

      consideration by this Court in several cases.

      The market value is the price that a willing

      purchaser would pay to a willing seller for the

      property     having    due    regard     to   its     existing

      condition with all its existing advantages and

      its   potential     possibilities      when     let    out   in
21
most       advantageous            manner           excluding        any

      advantage due to carrying out of the scheme for

      which the property is compulsorily acquired. In

      considering market value disinclination of the

      vendor to part with his land and the urgent

      necessity of the purchaser to buy should be

      disregarded. The guiding principle would be the

      conduct     of    hypothetical               willing      vendor     who

      would offer the land and that of a purchaser

      who, in normal human conduct, would be willing

      to   buy    as    a     prudent        man     in     normal    market

      conditions       but     not      of    an     anxious      purchaser

      dealing at arm's length nor a fictitious sale

      brought about in quick succession or otherwise

      to inflate the market value. The determination

      of     market    value       is        the    prediction        of    an

      economic        event     viz.         a      price       outcome    of

      hypothetical          sale     expressed             in    terms     of

      probabilities. [See para 4]
35.   It has been further held in
Atma Singh
(Supra)

      that the market value of a property has to be

      determined having due regard to its existing
22
condition with all its existing advantages and

 its potential possibility when let out in its

 most advantageous manner. The question whether

 a land has potential value or not, is primarily

 one    of       facts   depending          upon    its    condition,

 situation, user to which it is put and whether

 it    is    reasonably         capable       of    being    put     and

 proximity          to     residential,             commercial        or

 industrial areas or institutions. The existing

 amenities like water, electricity, possibility

 of their further extension, whether near about

 town       is     developing          or     has        prospect     of

 development             have      to         be         taken      into

 consideration. [See para 5]
36.Following those principle
laid down by
this

 Court we hold that the High Court and the Land

 Acquisition         Officer           failed       to     take     into

 consideration the advantages and facilities, as

 discussed above, which were available in the

 acquired land. Moreover, the very purpose for

 which the land was being acquired is also a

 relevant factor.
23
37.   The purpose for which the acquisition is being

      made is an important factor. This Court in the

      case of
Nelson Fernandes and others v. Special

      Land Acquisition Officer, South Goa and others
(2007) 9 SCC 447, held that both the Special

      Land Acquisition Officer, the District Judge

      and the High Court have failed to notice that

      the purpose of acquisition is for Railways and

      that the purpose is a relevant factor to be

      taken   into    consideration   for     fixing      the

      compensation. [See para 29, page 459]
38.In the present case it has come on evidence

      from R.W. 2 that the lands were acquired to

      build quarters for the workers of the Company.
39.As such we observe that the Reference Court

      rightly fixed the amount of compensation to be

      Rs. 1,75,000/- and we are inclined to uphold

      the said finding. As far as the question of

      grant   of   higher   compensation    than   what    is

      claimed by the claimants goes, the Reference
24
Court has observed, and in our opinion rightly

      so, that even before the representation before

      the Land Acquisition Officer, the claimants had

      stated    that      in    event      of    their    being    not

      satisfied     with       the   award,      they    reserve   the

      right    to   go     before         the    Civil    Court    for

      determination            of     just        and     reasonable

      compensation.
40.   For the reasons above, the judgment of the High

      Court    is   set    aside      and       the   order   of   the

      Reference Court is upheld. So far as the claim

      of the appellant(s) for solatium, interest and

      other benefits under the statute is concerned,

      we direct that the same should be governed by

      the principles
laid down in
Sunder v. Union of

      India
, (2001) 7 SCC 211, and the principles
laid down in
para 26, page 231 of the judgment

      be followed.
Para 26 of the judgment in
Sunder
(supra) is set out below:
"Once it is held as it inevitably must be
        that the solatium provided for under
Section 23(2)
of the Act forms an integral
        and statutory part of the compensation
25
awarded to a landowner, then from the
       plain terms of
Section 28
of the Act, it
       would be evident that the interest is
       payable on the compensation awarded and
       not merely on the market value of the
       land. Indeed the language of
Section 28
does not even remotely refer to market
       value   alone  and   in   terms   talks  of
       compensation   or   the    sum   equivalent
       thereto. The interest awardable under
Section 28
therefore would include within
       its ambit both the market value and the
       statutory solatium. It would be thus
       evident that the provisions of
Section 28
in terms warrant and authorise the grant
       of interest on solatium as well."
41.In    so   far   as   the   enhanced      compensation      as

  determined by this Court is concerned, the same

  should be distributed to the appellant(s) and

  concerned     parties    by        the   District    Judge   of

  Salem by cheques drawn in their names as early

  as    possible,    preferably        within   three    months

  from the date of service of this order on the

  District     Judge.    The    respondents      are    to   take

  steps accordingly.
42.The appeals are thus allowed with no order as

  to costs.
.......................J.
                           (G.S. SINGHVI)
26
.......................J.
                    (ASOK KUMAR GANGULY)


New Delhi
February 24, 2010
27