[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Gali Janardhan Reddy vs The State Of Andhra Pradesh on 10 October, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
M. R. Shah
1

                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                            MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO. 528 OF 2020
                                                 IN
                         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 7053 OF 2013


                         Gali Janardhan Reddy                       ..Appellant (S)


                                                   Versus


                         The State of Andhra Pradesh                ..Respondent (S)

                                                   WITH

                                          DIARY NO. 11949 OF 2021


                         Gali Janardhan Reddy                       ..Appellant (S)


                                                   Versus


                         The State of Andhra Pradesh                ..Respondent (S)




                                                 ORDER
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SNEHA
M. R. Shah, J.
Date: 2022.10.10
17:05:16 IST
Reason:
1.   Present application has been preferred by the applicant
2
–     original   accused   for   an   appropriate   order    of
     modification of condition No.(c) of the order dated
     28.01.2015 passed by this Court in Special Leave
     Petition (Cri.) No.7053/2013 to the extent permitting the
     applicant to enter, stay and function in the Districts of
     Bellary in Karnataka and District of Ananthapuram and
     Cuddapah in Andhra Pradesh.
2.   The applicant herein is the accused in RC 17(A)/2009­
     CBI­HYD dated 07.12.2009 as amended on 05.09.2011,
     for the offences under
Sections 120(B)
,
420
,
379
,
409
,
468
,
411
,
427
and
447
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860,
section 2
of the Indian Forest Act, 1927, Rule 21 read
     with Rules 4(1), 4(1)(A) and 23 of the
Mines and
     Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957
. That,
     the applicant – accused was arrested by the CBI on
     05.09.2011. Prior to coming to this Court, the applicant
     – accused approached the learned trial Court as well as
     the High Court for the grant of regular bail on number
     of occasions. The said request of the applicant – accused
     was rejected inter alia on the ground that grant of bail to
     the     applicant   –   accused   may     impede    fair    and
     uninfluenced investigation. That, when the applicant –
     accused lastly approached the High Court in the year
     2013 by way of filing Criminal Petition No.3632/2013,
     vide judgment and order dated 20.06.2013 , considering
     the gravity of the allegations leveled against the
3
applicant – accused, his influential status and the CBI
indicated a reasonable apprehension that the accused is
likely to influence the investigation if enlarged on bail,
the High Court rejected the bail application. The
applicant approached this Court by way of Special Leave
Petition   (Cri.)    No.7053/2013.     By      an   order   dated
20.01.2015, the order which is sought to be now
modified, this Court had released the applicant on bail
subject to following conditions:
“a)      He shall surrender his passport, if not
           already surrendered, to the learned Principal
           Special Judge for CBI Cases, Hyderabad. If he
           has already surrendered his passport before
           the learned Principal Special Judge, that fact
           should also be supported by an affidavit;
b)       He shall not leave the country without
           the leave of the learned Principal Special
           Judge;
c)       He shall not visit the Districts of Bellary
           in Karnataka and District of Ananthapuram
           and Cuddapah in Andhra Pradesh;
d)       He shall cooperate with the Court in the
           smooth      process    of   trial    and   its   early
4
conclusion;


e)      He shall not directly or indirectly make
any inducement, threat or promise to any
person acquainted with the facts of the case so
as to dissuade such person from disclosing
such facts to the Court or to tamper with the
evidence;
f)      He shall remain present before the
learned Principal Special Judge on the dates
fixed for hearing of the case without fail. If he
requires to remain absent, he shall take prior
permission of the learned Principal Special
Judge       and    in     case       of     unavoidable
circumstances for remaining absent, he shall
immediately appropriately intimate the learned
Principal     Special    Judge    and      also   to    the
Superintendent, CBI and request that he may
be     permitted   to    be    present     through      the
counsel.
g)      Insofar    as    the     surety     amount       is
concerned, the petitioner shall execute a bond
with    two    solvent   sureties,    in    a     sum    of
Rs.10,00,000/­ (Rupees Ten lakhs only) each.
5
h)    If, for any reason the petitioner fails to
                comply with all the conditions as stipulated
                above,     the   respondents      are   at   liberty    to
                approach this Court for modification / recall of
                the order granting bail to the petitioner.
10. The grant of bail to the petitioner shall be
          subject to any other cases that are pending against
          the petitioner, wherein the petitioner is yet to be
          granted bail by the appropriate court(s).”
3.   Present application has been preferred by the applicant
     – accused to modify and/or delete condition No.(c)
     reproduced hereinabove and thereby permit him to
     enter, stay and function in the Districts of Ballery in
     Karnataka       and     District     of   Ananthapuram            and
     Cuddapah in Andhra Pradesh.
4.   At this stage it is required to be noted that in the year
     2016 a similar request was made to delete the
     conditions that were imposed while granting bail. By an
     order dated 01.07.2016, this Court dismissed the said
     application, however, directed the trial Court to make an
     endeavour to complete the trial expeditiously. That,
     thereafter, one another application was made being
     Criminal    Miscellaneous         Petition   No.6534/2017         for
     modification of the condition imposed while granting
6
bail which came to be rejected by this Court vide order
     dated      09.05.2017.     That,          thereafter,    the    present
     application has been preferred. By an order dated
     19.08.2021, this Court while adjourning the application
     to third week of November, 2021, has modified and
     substituted the condition No.(c) as under:
“(c)As and when the petitioner proposes to
              visit any of the following districts, being
              District      Ballery        in       Karnataka        and
              Ananthapuram and Cuddapah in Andhra
              Pradesh, he shall give prior intimation to the
              Superintendent of Police of the concerned
              district of the date when he proposes to go to
              the district and further he shall also give
              prior      intimation            to   the      concerned
              Superintendent of Police of the date of his
              departure from the said district.”
                  Condition No.(h) imposed in the order
             dated 20.01.2015 is reiterated.”


             This Court has also observed that the trial Court
     shall    make       endeavour        to    proceed   with      the    trial
     expeditiously.
5.   Thereafter, the present application is notified before the
     Bench for further hearing.
7
6.    Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned Senior Advocate has
      appeared on behalf of the applicant – accused and Ms.
      Madhavi Divan, learned ASG has appeared on behalf of
      the respondent – CBI.
7.    Ms.   Meenakshi     Arora,     learned   Senior   Advocate
      appearing for the applicant has vehemently submitted
      that after the initial order was passed by this Court in
      the year 2015 granting bail on the conditions mentioned
      in the said order, the applicant has visited Bellary on 8
      to 9 occasions pursuant to the permissions granted by
      this Court and during the said visits, the applicant has
      never violated any of the conditions imposed by this
      Court in the bail order. It is submitted that in past more
      than 6 to 7 years since the bail has been granted, the
      applicant has not violated any of the conditions as
      imposed. It is submitted that the trial has not proceeded
      further for which the applicant is not at all responsible.
It is submitted that the delay in the trial is not
      attributable to the applicant. It is, therefore, requested
      to modify the condition No.(c) as mentioned in the order
      dated 20.01.2015 and permit the applicant to enter,
      stay and function in the Districts of Bellary in
      Karnataka    and    District    of   Ananthapuram      and
      Cuddapah in Andhra Pradesh.
7.1   In the alternative it is prayed to continue modification of
      condition No.(c) as per the order passed by this Court
8
on 19.08.2021.
8.   Present application is vehemently opposed by Ms.
     Madhavi Divan, learned ASG. It is vehemently submitted
     that CBI has strong apprehension that if the condition
     No.(c) so imposed by this Court in the order dated
     20.01.2015    is   modified   and/or    substituted,   the
     applicant may influence the witnesses which may
     ultimately affect the trial and the judicial process. It is
     submitted that in past, attempts were made to influence
     even the Judicial Officers which is already on record. It
     is submitted that despite the orders passed by this
     Court, the trial is not proceeding because of the conduct
     on the part of the accused persons by filing one after
     another discharge applications.
9.   Ms. Madhavi Divan, learned ASG has submitted that
     therefore in case condition No.(c) of the order dated
     20.01.2015 is modified, there would be serious threat to
     the witnesses because of the power and influence that
     the applicant is having. It is submitted that still as and
     when there is any emergency the applicant may still
     move this Court for appropriate permission which may
     be considered on case to case basis and therefore, to
     that extent, the interest of the applicant can be taken
     care of.
9
10.   In response, Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned Senior
      Advocate in the alternative has submitted that as the
      daughter of the applicant has recently delivered a child
      at Bengaluru and now she is at Bellary, the applicant
      may be permitted to visit and stay at Bellary atleast for
      a period of four weeks to be with his daughter.
11.   On the aforesaid alternative prayer, Ms. Madhavi Divan,
      learned ASG has pointed out that in fact the daughter of
      the applicant had delivered the child at Bengaluru and
      she was never at Bellary. It is submitted that only after
      present application was heard by          this Court on
      29.09.2022, in the evening the daughter of the applicant
      is shifted to Bellary. Therefore, it is prayed to consider
      the aforesaid conduct on the part of the applicant.
12.   We have heard Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned Senior
      Advocate appearing for the applicant and Ms. Madhavi
      Divan, learned ASG appearing on behalf of the CBI at
      length. We have considered the submissions made on
      behalf of the respective parties. We have considered the
      material on record.
13.   The applicant is facing the trial for very serious offences
      punishable under
Sections 120(B)
,
420
,
379
,
409
,
468
,
411
,
427
and
447
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860,
section 2
of the Indian Forest Act, 1927, Rule 21 read
      with Rules 4(1), 4(1)(A) and 23 of the Mines and
10
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957
. The
investigation was carried out by the CBI. Most of the
witnesses are from Bellary in Karnataka and District of
Ananthapuram and Cuddapah in Andhra Pradesh.
Taking into consideration the apprehension on the part
of the CBI that if the applicant is allowed to enter, stay
and function in the Districts of Bellary in Karnataka and
District of Ananthapuram and Cuddapah in Andhra
Pradesh and that there are all possibilities of applicant
influencing and/or tampering with the witnesses, this
Court while granting bail imposed condition No.(c)
restraining the applicant from entering into the Districts
of Bellary in Karnataka and District of Ananthapuram
and Cuddapah in Andhra Pradesh. In past, the
apprehensions are proved to be true and even the
judicial officers were influenced / tried to be influenced.
There is a serious apprehension on the part of the CBI /
investigating agency that if condition No.(c) is relaxed
and/or modified and/or substituted, there would be
threat to the witnesses because of the power and
influence that the applicant is having. It is very
unfortunate that even after a period of 11 years of filing
the FIR and despite the observations made by this Court
directing the trial to be expedited, the trial has not
begun. From the material on record, it appears that the
trial has not begun on the ground that the accused / co­
accused are filing the applications for discharge one
11
after another, due to which the trial has not begun. In a
      case like this, it is always in the larger interest that the
      trial is concluded at the earliest. Early conclusion of the
      trial would enhance the faith of people in justice delivery
      system. The trial must come to its logical end at the
      earliest. Any attempt on the part of the accused to delay
      the trial of serious offences is to be dealt with iron
      hands. More the delay, more the possibilities of
      influencing the witnesses. Therefore, we are of the
      opinion that as despite the observations made by this
      Court directing to expedite the trial, as the trial has not
      begun, now, a direction is to be issued to the trial Court
      to begin the trial on day to day basis and once the trial
      begins the applicant – accused may be restrained from
      entering into the Districts of Bellary in Karnataka and
      District of Ananthapuram and Cuddapah in Andhra
      Pradesh looking to the strong apprehension on the part
      of the CBI recorded hereinabove.
14.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above,
      we dispose of / dismiss the present application for
      modification / substitution of condition No.(c) in the
      order dated 28.01.2015 passed by this Court in Special
      Leave Petition (Cri.) No. 7053/2013. However, we direct
      as under:
(1)   Learned trial Court / Special Court is hereby
            directed to conduct the trial on day to day basis
12
from 09.11.2022. We direct the learned Special
      Court to conclude the trial within a period of six
      months from 09.11.2022 without fail;
(2)   That the prosecution may examine first, the
      witnesses from Bellary in Karnataka and District of
      Ananthapuram and Cuddapah in Andhra Pradesh
      as far as possible. It will be the duty of the
      investigating agency to keep all the witnesses
      present for the purpose of their depositions /
      examination in chief;
(3)   All the accused are hereby directed to cooperate
      the learned Special Court in conclusion of the trial
      at the earliest and within the period stipulated
      hereinabove and any attempt on the part of the
      accused to delay the trial shall be viewed very
      seriously;
(4)   As it is reported that the daughter of the applicant
      has delivered a child recently and now she is at
      Bellary, the applicant is permitted to stay at
      Bellary upto 06.11.2022. It is specifically directed
      that the applicant shall move out of Bellary and
      remain out of Bellary in Karnataka and Districts of
      Ananthapuram and Cuddapah in Andhra Pradesh
      from 07.11.2022 till the trial is concluded.
13
15.   With the aforesaid directions, present application shall
      stand disposed of. Registry is directed to send the
      present order to the learned Special Court forthwith.
…………………………………J.
                                   (M. R. SHAH)


                                   …………………………………J.
                                   (KRISHNA MURARI)
NEW DELHI,
OCTOBER 10, 2022