[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Chander Prakash Wadhwa vs State (Nct Of Delhi) on 22 October, 2022
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) DIARY NO.33350 OF 2022

     CHANDER PRAKASH WADHWA                                                    Petitioner(s)

                                                         VERSUS

     STATE (NCT OF DELHI) & ANR.                                               Respondent(s)


                                                      O R D E R
The petitioner is arrested in two cases.                 The first was

     lodged by the Economic Offences Wing, Delhi and, the second

     has been lodged by the Directorate of Enforcement for the

     offences punishable under the provisions of the
Prevention of

     Money Laundering Act, 2002
.
In the first case, because of his medical condition, the

     petitioner was granted the facility of interim bail for a

     while.                 During the period of said interim bail, the petitioner

     was                 arrested    in     connection    with    the    second   case   by    the

     Directorate of Enforcement and has since then been in custody.
The application for bail was moved in connection with the

     second                 case    and    as   the   Order   dated     27.05.2022   annexed   as

     Annexure P-16 shows, the prayer for bail was rejected by the

     Trial Court.
Signature Not Verified   We have been apprised that no further challenge in that
Digitally signed by
BABITA PANDEY
Date: 2022.10.22
behalf has been raised by the petitioner.
17:50:52 IST
Reason:
2
At an earlier point in time, this Court had the occasion

to consider the prayer for relief of interim bail on medical

condition and the matter was dealt with by this Court vide

order dated 30.03.2022.          In that matter, the Report from the

Medical     Board     consisting       of     at     least     four       medical

professionals from King George’s Medical University, Lucknow,

was called for by this Court and after examining the Report,

it was found that the medical condition of the petitioner was

quite    stable.     In   light   of   said     Report,      the    request     for

interim bail was rejected by this Court.
Relying on certain certificates including one given by

the Senior Medical Officer, Central Jail No.11, Mandoli, New

Delhi,    prayer    for   bail   on   medical      condition       is   now   made.

Paragraphs 5 and 6 of said Report state as under:
“5. The medical records related to heart of the inmate
    reflected about 80 percent blockage in one left artery
    and 90 percentage blockage in another artery along with
    50 percent blockage in third artery. He has history of
    high BP and high Cholesterol for which he is taking
    medication since long time.    Cardiology department of
    King George Medical College advise for angiography
    (cardiac intervention) on 18.09.2021 but not be done.
He has problem of difficulty in breathing and chest
    pain while walking so he was sent to RML Hospital and
    examined by cardiologist and advised routine blood
    investigations, ECHO and angiography.        His blood
    investigations has been done but report is awaited.
    They also advised medication that provided to him from
    jail dispensary.   He has also family history of heart
    disease so proper treatment and investigation require
    in time to prevent any heart attack.     At present his
    problem is not improving.
3
6.   The medical report of inmate says that he is also
    suffering from trigeminal neuralgia.     Neurologist of
    Ganga Ram Hospital treated to him and later on King
    George Medical College and advised to avoid heat and
    directed air flow over face.    His MRI report showed a
    small vascular loop present in relation to cisterna
    segment of fifth cranial nerve. On dated 03.10.2022, he
    was sent to RML Hospital in neurology department.
    Neurologist examined to him and advised to medications
    (Carbarnazepine and Pregalin-NT) in increased dose as
    compared to previous dose.    But pain in over face is
    still persisted.    That also advised to cure dental
    issue, which are triggering it and take precautions
    from exposures of direct air/cold/heat.     He needs to
    walk   with   same   precautionary   due   to   frequent
    neurological pain attack.”

    Since the Report, as stated above, was given well after

the disposal of the bail application by the Trial Court in the

matter   concerning     offences      under     the      provisions   of    the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002
, we direct as under:
a.   The petitioner is entitled either to file fresh

         application     for   bail     on    the   projected     medical

         ground before the Trial Court or may raise the

         challenge to the Order dated 27.05.2022 on the

         grounds   of    merits    as        well   as    the   projected

         medical condition of the petitioner.
b.   The matter so filed shall be considered purely on

         its own merits and if necessary, the concerned

         Court may have the benefit of examination of the

         petitioner by a Medical Board consisting of four

         medical professionals as was done by this Court

         on the earlier occasion.
4
With   these   observations,   the   instant   writ   petition   is

disposed of.
..........................CJI.
                                   (Uday Umesh Lalit)




                                   .............................J.
                                   (Bela M. Trivedi)

New Delhi,
October 22, 2022