[Cites
44
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Himachal Pradesh vs Nirmal Kaur @ Nimmo on 20 October, 2022
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
B.R. Gavai
REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 956 OF 2012


                         STATE OF HIMACHAL PRADESH                    ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS
                         NIRMAL KAUR @ NIMMO AND OTHERS ...RESPONDENT(S)



                                                  JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.          A coordinate Bench of this Court, vide order dated

                         14th August 2018, has framed the following questions for

                         consideration:
(i)     Whether it is necessary to particularize

                                      the species of the contraband recovered –

                                      poppy husk, poppy straw etc.?
(ii)    So long as the prosecution proves that

                                      what was recovered was the sample of

                                      poppy straw and whether it is necessary
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SNEHA
Date: 2022.10.20
14:21:54 IST
for the prosecution to bring in materials
Reason:
1
to show as to what was the species of the

          contraband recovered?”
2.      Since the answer to the aforesaid questions have a

bearing on a number of cases under the
Narcotic Drugs and

Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
(hereinafter referred to as

the “1985 Act”), this Court, vide its order dated 14th August

2018, had requested Shri P.S. Narasimha, learned Senior

Counsel (as he then was) to assist the court as amicus curiae.

Shri K. Parameshwar, learned counsel was requested to

assist Shri P.S. Narasimha. On the elevation of Hon’ble Mr.

Justice P.S. Narasimha, Shri Parameshwar continued to

assist this Court as amicus curiae.
Factual Background:
3.      On 25th July 2003, when Sarbjeet Singh (PW-12)

along with some other police officials were on patrolling duty

at Haroli in Una District, he was informed by Constable

Upnesh Kumar (PW-1) that the respondent-accused was

indulging in the illicit trading of ‘poppy straw’ and that she

had kept huge quantity of ‘poppy straw’ in the room where

fodder for the cattle had been stacked.
2
4.      After complying with the formalities as prescribed

under the 1985 Act, a raiding party was formed and the

premises of the respondent was searched. During the search,

a bag containing 20 Kgs. of ‘poppy husk’ was found in the

room meant for stacking fodder. Two samples each weighing

250 grams were separated and sealed. The respondent was

arrested.   While in police custody, the respondent made a

disclosure statement that she had concealed nine more

gunny bags of ‘poppy husk’ on the side of khad near

Gurudwara Girgirga Sahib.      Accordingly, eight gunny bags

each containing 40 Kgs. of ‘poppy husk’ and one bag

containing 30 Kgs. of ‘poppy husk’ were recovered.        From

each of these nine bags, two samples, each weighing 250

grams, were separated and sealed in separate parcels.
5.      The samples were sent to the Chemical Examiner,

who opined that the samples contained contents of ‘poppy

husk’. After completion of the investigation, the respondent

was charged with the offence punishable under
Section 15(c)
of the 1985 Act for possessing commercial quantity of ‘poppy

straw’. The respondent pleaded not guilty and claimed to be

tried. At the conclusion of the trial, the trial court found the
3
respondent guilty and convicted and sentenced her to

undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten years and to pay a

fine of Rs.1,00,000/-, and, in default of payment of fine, to

undergo rigorous imprisonment for a further period of two

years.
6.       The respondent filed an appeal being Criminal

Appeal No. 525 of 2004 before the High Court. During the

course of hearing, the High Court was of the opinion that the

tests conducted by the Chemical Examiner to ascertain

whether ‘meconic acid’ and ‘morphine’ were present in the

sample stuff, were not enough to reach the conclusion that

the stuff was, in fact, ‘poppy straw’.   Therefore, the High

Court summoned the Chemical Examiner as a court witness.

The High Court came to a conclusion that the two tests

conducted by the Chemical Examiner to ascertain whether

the samples contained ‘meconic acid’ and ‘morphine’ did not

indicate that the stuff examined consisted of the parts of

either the plant of the species of the ‘papaver somniferum L’

or a plant of any other pieces of ‘papaver’ from which ‘opium’

or any other ‘phenanthrene alkaloid’ can be extracted and

which the Central Government had notified to be ‘opium
4
poppy’ for the purposes of the 1985 Act.      The High Court

therefore held that the two tests cannot be sufficient evidence

to hold that the stuff recovered from the respondent, the

sample of which was analysed by the Chemical Examiner,

was ‘poppy straw’.    The High Court further held that the

prosecution had failed to prove the sample to be of ‘poppy

straw’ within the meaning of the 1985 Act and therefore, the

respondent was not liable to conviction and punishment for

the offence described in and made punishable under
Section

15
of the 1985 Act.      Accordingly, the High Court, vide

impugned judgment dated 2nd November 2007, allowed the

appeal and set aside the judgment and order of conviction

and sentence dated 29th November 2004 passed by the trial

court. Being aggrieved thereby, the State preferred an appeal

before this Court.
7.      During the pendency of the appeal, this Court found

that important questions of law arose for consideration on

the aforesaid issue. Vide a subsequent order of this Court

dated 6th February 2019, the Union of India through its

Secretary, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, New
5
Delhi   was   directed   to   be       impleaded    as   the   second

respondent.
Submissions:
8.      We have accordingly heard Shri Abhinav Mukerji,

learned Additional Advocate General (for short, “AAG”) for the

State of Himachal Pradesh and Shri Neeraj Jain, learned

Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents.
9.      We have also heard Shri K. Parameshwar, learned

amicus curiae and Shri K.M. Nataraj, learned Additional

Solicitor General (for short, “ASG”) for the Union of India.
10.     Shri Mukerji submitted that the view taken by the

High Court is totally incorrect. The learned AAG submitted

that under
Article 47
of the Constitution of India, the State is

duty bound to bring about prohibition of the consumption

except for medicinal purposes of intoxicating drinks and of

drugs which are injurious to health. He submitted that the

1985 Act has been enacted not only to honour the

constitutional   commitments           but   also   to   honour   the

International Conventions.
6
11.      The learned AAG submitted that different definitions

have been given for ‘opium’, ‘opium derivative’, ‘opium poppy’

and ‘poppy straw’ under Clauses (xv), (xvi), (xvii) and (xviii) of
Section 2
of the 1985 Act. He submitted that, as per
Section

15
of the 1985 Act, when a person, in contravention of any

provisions of the said Act or any rule or order made or

condition   of   a   licence   granted   thereunder,   produces,

possesses, transports, imports inter-State, exports inter-

State, sells, purchases, uses or omits to warehouse poppy

straw, he shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a

term which may extend to one year or with fine which may

extend to ten thousand rupees or with both, or for a term up

to ten years and with fine which may extend to one lakh

rupees, or for a term which shall not be less than ten years

but may extend to twenty years and a fine which shall not be

less than one lakh rupees but may extend to two lakh

rupees, depending upon the quantity of ‘poppy straw’.          He

submitted that, similarly,
Sections 17
and
18
of the 1985 Act

deal with punishment for contravention in relation to

‘prepared opium’, ‘opium poppy’ and ‘opium’ respectively.

The learned AAG submitted that the High Court has wrongly
7
relied on the judgment of this Court in the case of
Amarsingh Ramjibhai Barot v. State of Gujarat1
.                  He

submitted that the issue involved in the said case was totally

different.
12.          Shri Mukerji submitted that the National Institute of

Science and Communication, CSIR, New Delhi, in its first re-

print of the Book titled “Wealth of India”, which is a

dictionary of Indian Raw Materials and Industrial Products,

1966 (hereinafter referred to as “the 1966 Dictionary”),

mentions six species of ‘papaver’.          He submitted that a

perusal of the said authority would reveal that ‘papaver

somniferum L’ is cultivated as the chief source of ‘opium’. He

submitted that it is only ‘papaver somniferum L’ which

contains the alkaloids ‘morphine’ and ‘codeine’. Shri Mukerji

submitted that the United Nations International Drug

Control Programme has recommended methods for testing

‘opium’, ‘morphine’ and ‘heroin’ in its Manual for use by the

National       Drug    Testing   Laboratories,   1998   (hereinafter

referred to as the “1998 Manual”). He submitted that the two

tests which are conducted by the appellant are the only tests
1
(2005) 7 SCC 550
8
which are recommended by the United Nations. The learned

AAG further submitted that the Directorate of Forensic

Science Services, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of

India, New Delhi has issued “Working Procedure Manual :
Narcotics” in the year 2021 (hereinafter referred to as the

“2021 Manual”).           He submitted that the said Manual

contains the tests which are required to be conducted for

finding out the presence of ‘opium/crude morphine’ and

‘meconic acid’.        The learned AAG submitted that ‘papaver

somniferum L’ is the only species which contains ‘morphine’

and ‘meconic acid’. It is therefore submitted that the finding

of the High Court that these two tests are not sufficient to

reach to a conclusion that the species belong to ‘papaver

somniferum L’ and as such, is not punishable under
Section

15
of the 1985 Act, does not lay down a correct proposition of

law.
13.          Shri Mukerji relies on the judgments of this Court in

the cases of
State of M.P. and Others v. Ram Singh2
,

Swantraj and Others v. State of Maharashtra3 and NEPC
2
(
2000) 5 SCC 88
3
(1975) 3 SCC 322
9
Micon Limited and Others v. Magma Leasing Limited4
in

support of the proposition that the interpretation which

advances the purpose of the Act has to be preferred as

against the one which defeats the purpose of the Act.
14.          Shri Jain submitted that since the provisions of the

1985 Act are very stringent in nature, the Court will have to

prefer an approach of strict interpretation of the statute. He

submitted that the High Court has rightly held that the

definition of ‘opium poppy’ as given under Clause (xvii) of
Section 2
of the 1985 Act is in two parts. He submitted that,

as per sub-clause (a) of Clause (xvii) of
Section 2
of the 1985

Act, ‘opium poppy’ means “the plant of the species ‘papaver

somniferum L”, whereas sub-clause (b) thereof empowers the

Central Government to notify any other species of ‘papaver’

from which ‘opium’ or any ‘phenanthrene alkaloid’ can be

extracted.       It is therefore submitted that, unless any other

species of ‘papaver’ from which ‘opium’ or any ‘phenanthrene

alkaloid’ can be extracted is notified by the Central

Government, the same cannot be considered to be ‘opium’ for

the purpose of the 1985 Act. It is submitted that, as such,
4
(1999) 4 SCC 253
10
unless the prosecution proves that the genus of the material

seized was a species of ‘papaver somniferum L’, the

conviction could not be sustained. He, therefore, submitted

that no interference would be warranted with the judgment of

the High Court. The other counsel have adopted the

submissions advanced by Shri Jain.
15.         Shri Nataraj, learned ASG also submitted that since

the 1985 Act is both penal and beneficial, the interpretation

which advances the purpose of the Act will have to be

preferred. The learned ASG relies on the judgment of this

Court in the case of
NEPC Micon Limited
(supra).
16.         Shri Parameshwar, learned amicus curiae submitted

that the following three issues arise for consideration in the

present matter:
(i)     When the statute identifies only one species as

              contraband material and when the legislature

              leaves it open to the Central Government to

              notify   any   other    species,   it   will   not   be

              permissible for the State to argue that a test

              which will prove that the contraband material
11
belongs to the species of ‘papaver somniferum

               L’ is not necessary;
(ii)     What is the appropriate test to identify that the

               contraband belongs to the species of ‘papaver

               somniferum L’; and
(iii)    Whether the first question is relevant only for

               ‘poppy husk’ or ‘poppy straw’ or for all other

               forms of ‘poppies’?
17.           Shri Parameshwar submitted that there are three

families of narcotic drugs which are dealt with by the statute,

namely, ‘opium’, ‘cannabis (hemp)’ and ‘coca leaf’.                He

submitted that it is only the plant of ‘papaver somniferum L’

which contains ‘opium’. He fairly submitted that the earlier

enactments only recognized ‘papaver somniferum L’ as a

source for ‘opium’. It is only the 1985 Act which has also

included sub-clause (b) in Clause (xvii) of
Section 2
which

provides for any other species of ‘papaver’ from which ‘opium’

or any ‘phenanthrene alkaloid’ can be extracted. However,

such a species, to come under the provisions of the 1985 Act,

is required to be notified by the Central Government.              He

fairly submitted that no such notification recognizing any
12
other species of ‘papaver’ has been notified by the Central

Government.
18.          Shri Parameshwar also agrees with the submissions

made by Shri Mukerji that India is also obligated to honour

its obligations as per the decisions taken in various

International Conventions. Shri Parameshwar has also taken

us through different statutes, enacted by different countries

to highlight the relevant provisions with regard to ‘opium’.

Shri Parameshwar has also taken us to the judgment

rendered by Justice Hidayatullah in the case of
Baidyanath

Mishra and Another v. The State of Orissa5
, wherein this

Court held that when evidence shows that it could be

‘opium’, it will not be necessary to conduct any further

analysis.
However, he submitted that the said position

would no longer be valid in view of the subsequent judgment

of this Court in the case of
Harjit Singh v. State of

Punjab6
, wherein this Court considered the provisions of the

1985 Act and held that chemical analysis of the contraband

material is essential to prove a case against the accused

under the 1985 Act.
Shri Parameshwar submitted that the
5
1968 (XXXIV) Cuttack Law Times-I
6
(2011) 4 SCC 441
13
Gujarat High Court in the case of
Hathi @ Mangalsinh

Ramdayalji v. State of Gujarat7
as well as the Himachal

Pradesh High Court in the cases of Rajiv Kumar alias
Guglu v. State of H.P.8
and
State of H.P. v. Des Raj9
have

taken a similar view.       Shri Parameshwar fairly submitted

that, as amicus curiae, he has placed both the sides before

this Court and it is for this Court to take a view in the

interest of justice.
Legislative History:
19.      For appreciating the controversy, it will be relevant

to refer to the legislative history prior to the present

enactment, i.e., the 1985 Act coming into force.
20.      The first of such enactments was the Opium Act,

1857 (for short, “1857 Act”), which was enacted for

preventing illicit cultivation of ‘poppy’ and for regulating the

cultivation of ‘poppy’ and the manufacture of ‘opium’ on

account of Government.        However, the 1857 Act does not

define ‘opium’. Thereafter in the year 1878, the Opium Act,
7
1992 SCC OnLine Guj 311
8
2007 SCC OnLinee HP 120
9
2013 SCC OnLine HP 371
14
1878 (for short, “1878 Act”) was enacted to amend the laws

relating to ‘opium’, wherein ‘opium’ was defined as under:
“3. Interpretation clause. - ………….
      ‘Opium’ means-
(i) the capsules of the poppy (papaver
      somniferum, L), whether in their original form
      or cut, rushed or powdered, and whether or
      not juice has been extracted therefrom;
(ii) the spontaneously coagulated juice of such
      capsules which has not been submitted to any
      manipulations other than those necessary for
      packing and transport; and
(iii) any mixture with or without natural
      materials, of any of the above forms of opium;
but does not include any preparation
      containing not more than 0.2 per cent of
      morphine, or a manufactured drug as defined
      in Section 2 of the Dangerous Drugs Act,
      1930;”
21.      Thereafter, the Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 (for

short, “1930 Act”) came to be enacted. The 1930 Act came to

be enacted in pursuance to the Second International Opium

Conference (Geneva Convention). The preamble of the 1930

Act would reveal that the Contracting Parties to the said

Geneva Convention resolved to take further measures to

suppress the contraband trafficking and abuse of dangerous

drugs, especially those derived from ‘opium’, ‘Indian hemp’
15
and ‘coca leaf’. It defined ‘opium’ in Clause (e) of
Section 2
as

under:
“2. Definitions. ………….
(e) “opium” means
(i)    the capsules of      the   poppy   (Papaver
             somniferum L.);
(ii) the spontaneously coagulated juice of
           such capsules which has not been
           submitted to any manipulations other
           than those necessary for packing and
           transport; and
(iii) any mixture, with or without neutral
            materials, of any of the above forms of
            opium; but does not include any
            preparation containing not more than 0.2
            per cent of morphine;”
22.         It would also be relevant to refer to the definition of

‘opium’ as found in the
Maharashtra Prohibition Act, 1949
(for short, “1949 Act”), which reads thus:
“(30) “opium” means –
(a) The capsules of the poppy (Papaver
      Somaniforum L), [whether in their original
      form or cut, or crushed or powdered and
      whether or not the juice has been extracted
      therefrom;
(b) The spontaneously coagulated juice of such
      capsules which has not been submitted to any
      manipulation other than those necessary for
      packing and transport; and
(c) Any mixture with or without neutral
      materials of any of the above forms of opium;
16
but does not include any preparations
      containing not more than 0.2 percent of
      morphine, or a manufactured drug as defined
      in section 2 of the Dangerous Drugs of Act,
      1930.”
23.      Thereafter, the present Act, i.e., the 1985 Act came

to be enacted in the year 1985. It will be relevant to refer to

the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the 1985 Act, which

reads thus:
“STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
           The statutory control over narcotic drugs
      is exercised in India through a number of
      Central and State enactments. The principal
      Central Acts, namely, the Opium Act, 1857,
      the
Opium Act, 1878
and the Dangerous
      Drugs Act, 1930 were enacted a long time ago.
      With the passage of time and the developments
      in the field of illicit drug traffic and drug abuse
      at national and international level, many
      deficiencies in the existing laws have come to
      notice, some of which are indicated below:
(i) The scheme of penalties under the present
      Acts is not sufficiently deterrent to meet the
      challenge of well organized gangs of smugglers.
The Dangerous Drugs Act, 1930 provides for a
      maximum term of imprisonment of 3 years
      with or without fine and 4 years imprisonment
      with or without fine for repeat offences.
Further,     no   minimum     punishment     is
      prescribed in the present laws, as a result of
      which drug traffickers have been some times
      let off by the courts with nominal punishment.
      The country has for the last few years been
      increasingly facing the problem of transit
      traffic of drugs coming mainly from some of
17
our neighboring countries and destined mainly
      to Western countries.
(ii) The existing Central laws do not provide for
      investing the officers of a number of important
      Central enforcement agencies like Narcotics,
      Customs, Central Excise, etc., with the power
      of investigation of offences under the said
      laws.
(iii) Since the enactment of the aforesaid three
      Central Acts a vast body of international law in
      the field of narcotics control has evolved
      through various international treaties and
      protocols. The Government of India has been a
      party to these treaties and conventions which
      entails several obligations which are not
      covered or are only partly covered by the
      present Acts.
(iv) During recent years new drugs of addiction
      which have come to be known as psychotropic
      substances have appeared on the scene and
      posed     serious    problems     to   national
      governments. There is no comprehensive law
      to enable exercise of control over psychotropic
      substances in India in the manner as
      envisaged in the Convention on Psychotropic
      Substances, 1971 to which India has also
      acceded.”
24.      It could thus be seen that the 1985 Act came to be

enacted since the three earlier enactments, i.e., the 1857 Act,

the 1878 Act and the 1930 Act were enacted a long time ago.

It was also noticed that there were developments in the field

of illicit drug trafficking and drug abuse at the national and

international level. Many deficiencies had come to notice in
18
the three earlier enactments including the inadequacy of

penalties. It was also noticed that the existing central laws

did not provide for vesting a number of important Central

enforcement agencies with the power of investigation of

offences under the said laws. It was also noticed that, since

the earlier three enactments came into existence, various

international treaties and protocols were evolved.            The

Government of India was a party to these treaties and

conventions which entail several obligations which are not

covered under the earlier three enactments. Thus, it was felt

that there was an urgent need for the enactment of a

comprehensive legislation of narcotic drugs and psychotropic

substances.
25.      The 1985 Act defined ‘opium’, ‘opium derivative’,

‘opium poppy’, ‘poppy straw’ and ‘poppy straw concentrate’

under Clauses (xv), (xvi), (xvii), (xviii) and (xix) of
Section 2
,

which read thus:
“2. Definitions . –
(xv) "opium" means-
(a)  the coagulated juice of the
           opium poppv; and
19
(b) any mixture, with or without any
     neutral material, of the coagulated
     juice of the opium poppy,
but does not include any preparation
containing not more than 0.2 per cent. of
morphine:
(xvi) "opium derivative" means-
(a) medicinal opium, that is, opium
       which has undergone the processes
       necessary to adapt it for medicinal
       use    in  accordance    with    the
       requirements     of   the     Indian
       Pharmacopoeia      or  any     other
       pharmacopeia notified in this behalf
       by the Central Government, whether
       in powder form or granulated or
       otherwise or mixed with neutral
       materials;
(b) prepared opium, that is, any
     product of opium by any series of
     operations designed to transform
     opium into an extract suitable for
     smoking and the dross or other
     residue remaining after opium is
     smoked;
(c) phenanthrene alkaloids, namely,
     morphine, codeine, thebaine and
     their salts:
(d) diacetylmorphine, that is, the
     alkaloid also known as diamorphine
     or heroin and its salts; and
(e) all preparations containing more
     than 0.2 per cent. of morphine or
     containing any diacetylmorphine;
(xvii) “opium poppy” means-
(a) the plant of the species Papaver
       somriferum L.; and
20
(b) the plant of any other species of
           Papaver from which opium or any
           phenanthrene alkaloid can be
           extracted and which the Central
           Government may, by notification in
           the Official Gazette, declare to be
           opium poppy-for the purposes of
           this Act;
(xviii) "poppy straw" means all parts (except
      the seeds) of the opium poppy after harvesting
      whether in their original form or cut, crushed
      or powdered and whether or not juice has been
      extracted therefrom;
(xix)    "poppy straw concentrate" means the
      material arising when poppy straw" has
      entered into a process for the concentration of
      its alkaloids;”
26.      In the present case, we are concerned with the

conviction in relation to ‘poppy straw’.   ‘Poppy straw’ has

been defined to mean all parts of ‘opium poppy’ after

harvesting, whether in their original form or cut, crushed or

powdered and whether or not juice has been extracted

therefrom. However, the said definition excludes the seeds.

As such, ‘poppy straw’ would mean all parts of ‘opium poppy’

except the seeds. Therefore, for bringing home the guilt of

the accused for contravention in relation to ‘poppy straw’, it

will be relevant to refer to the definition of ‘opium poppy’.

‘Opium poppy’ has been defined under Clause (xvii) of
21
Section 2
of the 1985 Act which has been reproduced

hereinabove. As per sub-clause (a) of Clause (xvii) of
Section

2
of the 1985 Act, ‘opium poppy’ means the plant of the

species ‘papaver somniferum L’.       As per sub-clause (b)

thereof, ‘opium poppy’ would also mean the plant of any

other species of ‘papaver’ from which ‘opium’ or any

‘phenanthrene alkaloid’ can be extracted and which the

Central Government, by notification in the official gazette,

has declared to be ‘opium poppy’ for the purposes of the

1985 Act.
27.
Section 15
of the 1985 Act which provides for

punishment for contravention in relation to ‘poppy straw’

reads thus:
“15.    Punishment for contravention in
      relation to poppy straw.-         Whoever, in
      contravention of any provisions of this Act or
      any rule or order made or condition of a
      licence   granted     thereunder,    produces,
      possesses, transports, imports inter-State,
      exports inter-State, sells, purchases, uses or
      omits to warehouse poppy straw or removes or
      does any act in respect of warehoused poppy
      straw shall be punishable,-
(a)    where the contravention involves small
             quantity, with rigorous imprisonment for
             a term which may extend to one year, or
             with fine which may extend to then
             thousand rupees or with both; or
22
(b)     where the contravention involves quantity
              lesser than commercial quantity but
              greater than small quantity, with rigorous
              imprisonment for a term which may
              extend to ten years and with fine which
              may extend to one lakh rupees; or
(c)     where      the    contravention     involves
              commercial quantity, with rigorous
              imprisonment for a term which shall not
              be less than ten years but which may
              extend to twenty years and shall also be
              liable to fine which shall not be less than
              one lakh rupees but which may extend to
              two lakh rupees:
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be
      recorded in the judgment, impose a fine
      exceeding two lakh rupees.
28.         A perusal of
Section 15
of the 1985 Act would reveal

that, whoever, in contravention of any provisions of this Act

or any rule or order made or condition of a licence granted

thereunder, produces, possesses, transports, imports inter-

State, exports inter-State, sells, purchases, uses or omits to

warehouse poppy straw or removes or does any act in respect

of warehoused poppy straw shall be punishable with rigorous

imprisonment of minimum one year up to twenty years

depending on the quantity and also a fine which may extend

to minimum ten thousand rupees up to two lakh rupees.
23
29.     It could thus be seen that, for bringing home the

guilt of the accused within the ambit of
Section 15
of the

1985 Act, it is necessary to establish that the contravention

is in relation to ‘poppy straw’. A combined reading of the

definition given under Clauses (xvii) and (xviii) of
Section 2
,

and
Section 15
of the 1985 Act would reveal that, for

bringing home the guilt of the accused, it will be necessary to

establish that the seized material collected is any part of

‘opium poppy’ except the seeds.     As such, what would be

required to establish is that the genus of the seized material

is ‘opium poppy’ as defined under Clause (xvii) of
Section 2
of

the 1985 Act.
30.     The question that requires to be considered is as to

whether it is sufficient for the prosecution to establish that

the raw material contains ‘morphine’ and ‘meconic acid’ to

bring it under sub-clause (a) of Clause (xvii) of
Section 2
of

the 1985 Act or is it necessary for the prosecution to further

establish   that,   though   the   seized   material   contains

‘morphine’ and ‘meconic acid’, the genus of the seized

material is ‘papaver somniferum L’ or any other species of

‘papaver’ from which ‘opium’ or any ‘phenanthrene alkaloid’
24
can be extracted and which is notified in the Official Gazette

by the Central Government to be ‘opium poppy’ for the

purposes of the 1985 Act.
31.        It will be relevant to note that, though the 1857 Act

and the 1930 Act only defined ‘opium’, for the first time in

the 1985 Act, separate definitions have been provided for

‘opium’, ‘opium poppy’, ‘poppy straw’ and ‘poppy straw

concentrate’.
32.        We have already referred to the legislative history.

The first of the enactments to deal with is the 1878 Act and

the second one is the 1930 Act.        Both these enactments

defined ‘opium’ to mean the capsules of the ‘poppy’ (papaver

somniferum L), and the spontaneously coagulated juice of

such capsules which has not been submitted to any

manipulation other than those necessary for packing and

transport.     The said definitions also included any mixture

with or without neutral materials of any of the above forms of

‘opium’.     However, if any such preparations contained less

than 0.2% of ‘morphine’, it was excluded from the definition

of ‘opium’. The 1949 Act also provided a similar definition.
25
International Developments:
33.      While we notice the developments on the legislative

side in India in enacting various legislations till the 1985 Act

came into existence, it will also be pertinent to note that

there was a development in the last century at the

international level so as to make a combined effort in

controlling and prohibiting the menace of drugs and

psychotropic substances.
34.      The International Opium Convention was signed at

The Hague on 23rd January 1912 (hereinafter referred to as

“the 1912 Convention”). As per the agreement, in the 1912

Convention, ‘raw opium’ was defined as under:
“Definition. – By “raw opium” is understood :
The spontaneously coagulated juice obtained
      from the capsules of the papaver somniferum
      which has only been submitted to the
      necessary manipulations for packing and
      transport.”
35.      In order to further the determination to continue the

efforts to combat drug addiction and illicit trafficking in

narcotic substances and being aware about the fact that the

desired results could be achieved only by close collaboration

between the contracting parties, at the United Nations
26
Opium Conference of 1953, the “Protocol for Limiting and

Regulating   the    Cultivation        of   the   ‘poppy    plant’,    the

Production of, International and Wholesale Trade in, and use

of Opium” (hereinafter referred to as “the 1953 Protocol)

came to be resolved. It will be relevant to refer to the

definitions of ‘poppy’, ‘poppy straw’ and ‘opium’ provided in

the said Protocol, which read thus:
“Poppy” means the plant Papaver somniferum
      L., and any other species of Papaver which
      may be used for the production of opium;
      “Poppy straw” means all parts of the poppy
      after mowing (except the seeds) from which
      narcotics can be extracted;
“Opium” means the coagulated juice of the
      poppy in whatever form including raw opium,
      medicinal opium, and prepared opium, but
      excluding galenical preparations;”
36.      The efforts to combat the menace of drugs at the

international level continued. Recognizing that addiction to

narcotic drugs constitutes a serious evil for the individual

and is fraught with social and economic danger to mankind,

and conscious of the duty to prevent and combat this evil

and understanding that such a universal action calls for an

international co-operation, the Single Convention on Narcotic

Drugs,   1961      (hereinafter   referred        to   as   “the      1961
27
Convention”) was resolved. It was further amended by the

1972 Protocol. It will be relevant to refer to the definitions of

‘medicinal opium’, ‘opium’, ‘opium poppy’ and ‘poppy straw’,

as found in the 1961 Convention:
“o) “Medicinal opium” means opium which has
      undergone the processes necessary to adapt it
      for medicinal use.
p) “Opium” means the coagulated juice of the
      opium poppy.
q) “Opium poppy” means the plant of the
      species Papaver somniferum L.
r) “Poppy straw” means all parts (except the
      seeds) of the opium poppy, after mowing.”
37.      It could thus be seen that the 1912 Convention as

well as the 1961 Convention, as amended by the 1972

Protocol, recognized even at the international level that it was

the plant ‘papaver somniferum L’ which was used for

manufacture of ‘opium’. In the 1953 Protocol, it was for the

first time noticed that there could be other species of

‘papaver’ which may be used for the production of ‘opium’.

As such, though the definition in the 1953 Protocol included

the plant of ‘papaver somniferum L’, it also included any

other species of ‘papaver’ which may be used for the

production of ‘opium’.
28
38.      It will also be relevant to refer to the following

extracts from the “Commentary on the Single Convention on

Narcotic Drugs, 1961” (for short, “the said Commentary”),

which reads thus:
“1. It is sometimes difficult to decide, and
      therefore a difference of opinion exists whether
      different forms of a plant constitute different
      varieties of the same species or different
      species of the same genus, e.g. “Papaver
      setigerum” is by some considered to be a
      variety of the species Papaver somniferum L.
      and by others a separate species. It appears
      that some, albeit insignificant, quantities of
      morphine can be obtained from Papaver
      setigerum.
2. The authors of the Single Convention
      appear to have assumed that all plants from
      which opium can be obtained in significant
      quantities are only varieties of a single species,
      Papaver somniferum L. They therefore defined
      “opium poppy” as the plant of the species
      Papaver somniferum L. The 1953 Protocol, on
      the other hand, defines “Poppy” to mean “the
      plant Papaver somniferum L., and any other
      species of Papaver which may be used for the
      production of opium”.
3. Should any plant which is considered not
      to be a variety of the species Papaver
      somniferum L., but another species of the
      genus Papaver, be found to yield opium, the
      plant itself and its product would not be
      covered by the control provisions of the Single
      Convention, but only by those of the Protocol.
The coagulated juice of the plant would for the
      purposes of the Single Convention not be
      “opium” but could by the operation of
article 3
of the Single Convention be listed in Schedule I
29
and become a “drug” of Schedule I – like the
      “opium” obtained from the species “Papaver
      somniferum L.” – and thus be placed under
      the regime provided by the Single Convention
      for drugs in this Schedule. Its separation from
      the plant, not being “opium poppy” within the
      meaning of the Single Convention, would also
      not be “production”, but “manufacture”.
      Another way of handling such a situation
      would be an amendment of the definition of
      opium poppy so as to cover the additional
      species found to yield opium. It might in such
      a case be possible to obtain for such a revision
      the consensus of the Parties to the Single
      Convention required for the application of the
      simplified procedure foreseen in article 47.”
39.      The said Commentary would show that, it was at

times difficult to consider as to whether different varieties of

the same species or different species of the same genus, i.e.,

‘papaver setigerum’ could be considered to be a variety of the

species ‘papaver somniferum L’ or a separate species.          It

noted that the authors of the Single Convention appeared to

have assumed that all plants from which opium can be

obtained in significant quantities are only varieties of a single

species, i.e., Papaver somniferum L. As such, ‘opium poppy’

was defined as the plant of the species ‘papaver somniferum

L’. It also noted that though the 1953 Protocol included the

plant ‘papaver somniferum L’ within the definition of ‘poppy’,
30
it also included any other species of ‘papaver’ which may be

used for the production of ‘opium’. The authors of the said

Commentary therefore opined that, if a plant which is

considered not to be a variety of the species ‘papaver

somniferum L’ but of another species of the genus ‘papaver’,

be found to yield opium, the plant itself and its product

would not be covered by the controlling provisions of the

Single Convention, but only by those of the Protocol.       The

coagulated juice of the plant would, for the purpose of the

Single Convention, not be ‘opium’ but could, by the operation

of
Article 3
of the Single Convention be listed in Schedule I

and become a ‘drug’ of Schedule I like the ‘opium’ obtained

from the species ‘papaver somniferum L’. The authors of the

said Commentary, therefore, recommended that, for handling

such a situation, the definition of ‘opium poppy’ be amended

so as to cover the additional species found to yield ‘opium’.
40.     We find that all these international developments

need to be taken into consideration while interpreting the

1985 Act inasmuch as the Statement of Objects and Reasons

itself mentioned that there had been developments at the

international level with regard to control of any drugs and
31
psychotropic substances and the 1985 Act is enacted to give

effect to the commitments in the international conventions.

Scientific Studies:
41.         A lot of research has undertaken with regard to the

exact definition of ‘opium poppy’. In the 1966 Dictionary,

‘papaver somniferum L' is defined as ‘opium poppy’. The said

dictionary would reveal that ‘opium poppy’ was cultivated for

the production of ‘opium’ and for ‘poppy seeds’.            In India,

cultivation of ‘poppy’ for ‘opium’ was established by the early

sixteenth century and was a considerable source of revenue

for successive governments. It also noted that ‘opium’ was

freely sold as an intoxicant within the country and exported

for   the     same   purpose    to    the   far-eastern    countries,

particularly China. This resulted in the high acreage under

‘opium poppy’ cultivation in the early part of the present

century. The flagrant misuse of ‘opium’ and its deleterious

effects     physically,   mentally    and    morally      became   so

widespread that it became a serious social problem in many

countries.      As a result of an agreement with China to

progressively reduce the export of ‘opium’ to that country,

the total area under ‘poppy’ cultivation substantially declined
32
in 1960-1961. Further, the Government of India decided in

the year 1949 to stop ‘opium’ consumption for non-medical

and quasi-medical uses in the country completely by 1958-

1959.
42.      It will be apposite to reproduce the relevant extracts

from the 1966 Dictionary as under:
“CHEMICAL COMPOSITION
      Fresh opium is a brownish, somewhat plastic
      solid, becoming tough and occasionally brittle
      on keeping and has a characteristic fruity
      odour. Opium is valued for the alkaloids it
      contains, the total alkaloid content varying
      from 5 to 25% (generally 20%). A large number
      of alkaloids have been isolated from opium, of
      which at present 25 are known (Table 3).
      Morphine,     codeine   thebaine,     narcotine,
      narceine and papaverine are the chief opium
      alkaloids, and of these morphine is the most
      abundant and by far the most important.
      Morphine exists in combination with meconic
      and sulphuric acids in the form of salts readily
      soluble in water. Other alkaloids occur in
      opium partly in the free state and partly as
      salts (Thrope, IX, 99; Annett et al., Mem Dep.
      Agric India, Chem, 1921-23, 6-1; Merck Index,
      756, Chopra et al., 169; Henry, 178; U.S.D.,
      1955, 927)
      The valuation of opium depends upon its
      morphine-content which varies markedly in
      commercial samples.”
43.      A perusal of the aforesaid would reveal that ‘papaver

somniferum L’ contains five major alkaloids, viz., ‘Morphine’,
33
‘Narcotine’, ‘Papaverine’, ‘Thebaine’ and ‘Codeine’. It would

also reveal that ‘morphine’ exists in combination with

‘meconic’ and ‘sulphuric’ acids.       The valuation of ‘opium’

depends upon its ‘morphine-content’ which varies markedly

in commercial samples.
44.     It will also be relevant to refer to the 1998 Manual,

which recommended methods for the testing of ‘opium’,

‘morphine’ and ‘heroin’.        The 1998 Manual deals with

production of illicit ‘opium’. The relevant extracts from the

1998 Manual reads thus:
“The immediate precursor of heroin is
      morphine, and morphine is obtained from
      opium. Opium is the dried milky juice (latex)
      obtained from the unripe seed pods of Papaver
      somniferum L., more commonly referred to as
      the opium or oil poppy. Morphine has also
      been reported to be present in Papaver
      setigerum, and as a minor alkaloid in Papaver
      decaisnei and Papaver rhoeas. However, there
      is no known instance of these poppies being
      used for opium production, and more recent
      work has cast considerable doubt as to the
      presence of morphine in Papaver rhoeas. A
      major review by Kapoor on the botany and
      chemistry of the opium poppy is recommended
      additional reading.”
45.     It   is   thus   seen   that   the   1998   Manual   also

emphasizes that the immediate precursor of ‘heroin’ is
34
‘morphine’, and ‘morphine’ is obtained from ‘opium’.        It

further states that ‘opium’ is the dried milky juice obtained

from the unripe seed pods of ‘papaver somniferum L’. It also

notices that ‘morphine’ has also been reported to be present

in ‘papaver setigerum’, and as a minor alkaloid in ‘papaver

decaisnei’ and ‘papaver rhoeas’. It further notices that there

is no known instance of these poppies being used for ‘opium’

production.   It also notices that a recent work has cast

considerable doubt as to the presence of ‘morphine’ in

‘papaver rhoeas’.     The 1998 Manual also shows that the

following major alkaloids are found in ‘raw opium’:
MAJOR ALKALOIDS FOUND IN RAW OPIUM
      alkaloids       min%        avg%     max%
      MORPHINE        3.1         11.4     19.2
      CODEINE         0.7         3.5      6.6
      THEBAINE        0.2         3.1      10.6
      PAPAVERINE      <0.1        3.2      9.0
      NOSCAPINE       1.4         8.1      15.8
46.     The 1998 Manual, on research, shows six major

constituents in ‘opium’ and ‘crude morphine’ samples, viz.,

‘morphine’, ‘codeine’, ‘thebaine’, ‘papaverine’, ‘noscapine’,

and ‘meconic acid’.
35
47.      Another publication titled as “Analysis of Plant

Poisons” authored by Dr. M.P. Goutam and Smt. Shubhra

Goutam establishes that, apart from the six major alkaloids

found in ‘opium’, ‘meconic acid’ is easily detectible in

‘papaver somniferum L’.      The study states that ‘meconic

acid’ is invariably found in ‘opium’ and its presence has long

been used to indicate ‘opium’. The study shows that some

species of ‘papaver’ which produces no morphine but other

morphinanes may also contain this acid.           However, the

study shows that, insofar as ‘papaver somniferum L’ is

concerned, ‘morphine’ and ‘meconic acid’ are found in it.
48.      A   publication   published   by   the   International

Narcotics Control Board namely “Narcotic Drugs Stupefiants

Estupefacientes – Estimated World Requirements for 2022”,

also states thus:
“3. Opium and poppy straw are the raw
      materials obtained from the opium poppy plant
      (Papaver somniferum), from which alkaloids
      such as morphine, thebaine, codeine and
      oripavine are extracted. Concentrate of poppy
      straw is a product obtained in the process of
      extracting alkaloids from poppy straw. It is
      controlled under the 1961 Convention.
      Detailed information on the supply of opiate
      raw material and demand for opiates for
      medical and scientific purposes is provided in
      part three of the present publication.”
36
49.      It will further be relevant to note that
Section 3
of

the 2021 Manual deals with ‘opium’, ‘opium alkaloids’ and

‘poppy straw’. It will be relevant to refer to
Section 3
.7 of the

2021 Manual, which reads thus:
“3.7   Methods:
3.7.1 Colour Tests:
Positive results of these tests are only
      presumptive indication for the presence of
      opium alkaloids. It is mandatory for analyst to
      confirm such results by use of any alternate
      technique.
a) Marquis test [1]: Take a small amount of
      suspected sample in a test tube and add about
      10 drops of water, crush the sample with a
      glass rod. Place a few drops of water solution
      through filter paper/supernatant liquid on a
      spotting plate and add few drops of Marquis
      reagent. The development of purple violet color
      indicates the presence of opium/crude
      morphine.
Preparation of Marquis Reagent: 8-10 drops
      of 40% formaldehyde solution is added to 10
      ml of Con. Sulphuric acid.
b) Ferric Salt Test [1]: Take small aount of
      suspected material on a spot plate and add
      about 2 drops of water, triturate the sample
      until the water becomes brown colour. Take a
      drop of brown liquid to another part of the spot
      plate, add one drop of reagent. Appearance of
      brown purple colour indicates the positive test
      for the presence of meconic acid. This meconic
      acid is present in raw and prepared opium, but
      it will not be detected in crude morphine.
37
Preparation of Ferric Salt Reagent: Dissolve
      1 g of ferric sulphate in 20 ml of water.
Alternate Test of Meconic Acid [2] :
c) Ferric Chloride Test: Dissolve appropriate
      sample of opium in water and add a drop of
      dilute hydrochloric acid by few drops of 10%
      solution of ferric chloride. A red colour is
      appeared. Divide this solution into two parts.
Take first part and add dilute hydrochloric
      acid to it in excess and warm. The red colour
      of the solution remains there. Take the second
      part and add a solution of mercuric chloride.
      The colour of the solution does not affect.
      Preparation of Mercuric Chloride Reagent:
Dissolve 5 gms. mercuric chloride in 100 ml of
      water.
Dilute Hydrochloric Acid [3]: About 10%
      W/W of HC1 in water

      Porphyroxine Test [1]: Take a small amount
      of suspected material on a spot plate and add
      two drops of water. Triturate it with glass rod.
      Take one drop of brown liquid from this
      mixture to another part of the plate, add one
      drop of 2 N hydrochloric acid and heat gently.
      Appearance of red colour indicates the
      presence of porphyroxine.”
50.      It could thus be seen that, though the positive

results in the colour tests are only an indication for the

presence of ‘opium alkaloids’, it is mandatory to confirm

such results by the use of an alternate technique. It would

further reveal that the Marquis Test indicates the presence of
38
‘opium/crude morphine’. The Ferric Salt Test would reveal

the presence of ‘meconic acid’. It could thus be seen that,

though colour test is positive, the same is required to be

confirmed         to    establish   the    presence   of   ‘opium/crude

morphine’ and ‘meconic acid’.
51.          In this background, we will have to consider the

present issue.
52.          We find that two principles of interpretation of

statutes would govern the present case. The first one being

the Mischief Rule of interpretation.
Heydon’s/Mischief Rule:
53.          As early as in the year 1955, the Constitution Bench

of this Court in the case of
The Bengal Immunity Company

Limited v. The State of Bihar and Others10
, has observed

thus:
“23. It is a sound rule of construction of a
         statute firmly established in England as far
         back as 1584 when Heydon's case [3 Co. Rep
         7a : 76 ER 637] was decided that—
                “…     for  the   sure   and    true
                interpretation of all statutes in
                general (be they penal or beneficial,
                restrictive or enlarging of the
10
[1955] 2 SCR 603
39
common law) four things are to be
     discerned and considered:
1st. What was the common law
       before the making of the Act.
       2nd. What was the mischief
       and defect for which the
       common law did not provide.
3rd.    What   remedy     the
       Parliament hath resolved and
       appointed to cure the disease
       of the Commonwealth., and
       4th. The true reason of the
       remedy; and then the office of
       all the Judges is always to
       make such construction as
       shall suppress the mischief,
       and advance the remedy, and
       to suppress subtle inventions
       and evasions for continuance
       of the mischief, and pro privato
       commodo, and to add force and
       life to the cure and remedy,
       according to the true intent of
       the makers of the Act, pro bona
       publico.”
In In re Mayfair Property Company [LR (1898) 2
Ch 28 at p. 35] Lindley, M.R. in 1898 found
the rule “as necessary now as it was when
Lord Coke reported Heydon case”. In Eastman
Photographic Material Company v. Comptroller
General of Patents, Designs and Trade
Marks [LR (1898) AC 571 at 576] Earl of
Halsbury reaffirmed the Rule as follows:
“My Lords, it appears to me that to
     construe the Statute in question, it
     is not only legitimate but highly
     convenient to refer both to the
     former Act and to the ascertained
     evils to which the former Act had
     given rise, and to the later Act which
40
provided the remedy. These three
                being compared I cannot doubt the
                conclusion.”
      It appears to us that this rule is equally
      applicable to the construction of
Article 286
of
      our Constitution. In order to properly interpret
      the provisions of that article it is, therefore,
      necessary to consider how the matter stood
      immediately before the Constitution came into
      force, what the mischief was for which the old
      law did not provide and the remedy which has
      been provided by the Constitution to cure that
      mischief.”
54.           The law laid down in the case of
The Bengal

Immunity Company Limited
(supra) has been consistently

followed by this Court. We will therefore have to examine the

following four factors:
(i)       What was the position before the enactment of

                the 1985 Act?
(ii)      What was the mischief and defect for which

                the earlier enactments did not provide?
(iii)     What remedy had the Parliament resolved to

                cure the mischief and defect?
(iv)      The true reason for the remedy.
55.           As already discussed hereinabove, the International

Conventions         consistently   recognized   that   the   ‘papaver
41
somniferum L’ was used for the production of ‘opium’. The

1878 Act as well as the 1930 Act also clearly recognized that

‘opium’ was derived from ‘papaver somniferum L’.          The

voluminous scientific study has also recognized that the

‘papaver somniferum L’ contains ‘morphine’ and ‘meconic

acid’.
56.      The 1953 Protocol first noticed that there are other

species of ‘papaver’ which may be used for the production of

‘opium’. The said Commentary again noticed this position.
It also noticed the difficulty in deciding whether different

forms of a plant constitute different varieties of the same

species or different species of the same genus, for example,

‘papaver setigerum’. It noticed that some considered it to be

a variety of the species ‘papaver somniferum L’ and others

considered it a separate species.      It also noticed that

insignificant quantities of ‘morphine’ can be obtained from

‘papaver setigerum’. The said Commentary noticed that the

authors of the Single Convention appeared to have assumed

that all plants from which ‘opium’ can be obtained in

significant quantities are only varieties of a single species

‘papaver somniferum L’. It noted that they, therefore, defined
42
‘opium   poppy’   as   the   plant   of   the   species   ‘papaver

somniferum L’. It also noted that the 1953 Protocol, on the

other hand, defined ‘poppy’ to mean the plant ‘papaver

somniferum L’ and any other species of ‘papaver’ which may

be used for the production of ‘opium’.          To overcome this

difficulty, the said Commentary recommended amendment in

the definition of ‘opium poppy’ so as to cover the additional

species found to yield ‘opium’.
57.      It is to be noted that, the Statement of Objects and

Reasons of the 1985 Act would reveal that the 1985 Act was

enacted since it was found that the earlier three enactments

were not found sufficient to meet the challenges thereunder.

It is also noticed that, after the enactment of the earlier three

Acts, a vast body of international law in the field of narcotics

control has evolved through various international treaties

and protocols and as such, it was found necessary to bring

out a consolidated enactment.
58.      Viewed from this angle, it is clear that the legislature

was aware that the plant of species ‘papaver somniferum L’

which contained ‘morphine’ and ‘meconic acid’ was used for

the production of ‘opium’. However, it was also noticed that
43
there could be some other species of ‘papaver’ from which

‘opium’ or any other ‘phenanthrene alkaloid’ could be

extracted. In this background, Clause (xvii) of
Section 2
of

the 1985 Act was divided into two parts.        In view of sub-

clause (a) of Clause (xvii) thereof, the plant of the species

‘papaver somniferum L’, which was already known to be used

for production of ‘opium’ was meant to be ‘opium poppy’ for

the purpose of the 1985 Act. However, in view of sub-clause
(b) of Clause (xvii) thereof, the legislature provided discretion

with the Central Government to declare the plant of any

other species of ‘papaver’ from which ‘opium’ or any

‘phenanthrene alkaloid’ could be extracted to be ‘opium

poppy’ for the purpose of the 1985 Act.
59.     The legislature, being aware that scientific studies

undisputedly establish that ‘papaver somniferum L’ contains

‘morphine’ and ‘meconic acid’ and as such, it may be used

for the production of ‘opium’, by virtue of sub-clause (a) of

Clause (xvii) of
Section 2
of the 1985 Act, defined it to mean

‘opium’ for the purpose of the 1985 Act. Whereas, since it

was noticed that some other species of ‘papaver somniferum

L’ could also be used for the production of ‘opium’ which
44
contains ‘opium’ or any ‘phenanthrene alkaloid’, it vested a

discretion   with   the   Central   Government     to     issue   a

notification in the Official Gazette to declare such a plant to

be ‘opium poppy’ for the purpose of the 1985 Act.
60.     Since it is recognized by the earlier three enactments

as well as the International Conventions and scientific

studies that ‘papaver somniferum L’ contains ‘morphine’ and

‘meconic acid’, in our view, after the two tests positively

indicate the sample of ‘poppy straw’ to contain ‘morphine’

and ‘meconic acid’, a further requirement to establish that

the contraband species belong to the species of only ‘papaver

somniferum L’ would be contrary to the legislative intent.
61.     It is further to be noted that the United Nations

Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and

Psychotropic    Substances,     1988    (for     short,     “1988

Convention”), has again defined ‘opium’, which reads thus:
“Opium poppy” means the plant of the species
      “papaver sominferum L”;
62.     It is to be noticed that, though the 1953 Protocol for

the first time included any other species of ‘papaver’, which

was being used for the production of ‘opium’, the subsequent
45
Conventions of 1961 and 1988 restricted the definition of

‘opium poppy’ to be a plant of the species of ‘papaver

somniferum L’.     It is thus clear that, the legislature by

incorporating sub-clause (a) in Clause (xvii) of
Section 2
of

the 1985 Act, intended to continue ‘papaver somniferum L’ in

the definition of ‘opium poppy’. However, by taking abundant

precautions and to take care of a situation where any other

species of ‘papaver’ was found to be used for the production

of ‘opium’, the legislature vested the Central Government

with a power to include such a variety to mean ‘opium poppy’

for the purpose of the 1985 Act.
63.     In our view, the defect that was noticed by the

legislature was that, though ‘papaver somniferum L’, which

contained ‘morphine’ and ‘meconic acid’ and was used for the

production of ‘opium’, was already included in the definition

of ‘opium’ in the earlier enactments, there was also a

possibility of other variety of ‘papaver’ being used for ‘opium’

production, but could not be brought under the prohibitory

and regulatory measures.       This position would also be

clarified by the observations made in the said Commentary

referred to hereinabove.
46
64.      The remedy, in our view, which the Parliament has

provided is by way of incorporating sub-clause (b) in Clause

(xvii) of
Section 2
of the 1985 Act thereby empowering the

Central Government to notify any other species of ‘papaver’

from which ‘opium’ or any other ‘phenanthrene alkaloid’

could be extracted, to be declared as ‘opium poppy’ for the

purpose of the 1985 Act.
65.      The true reason for the remedy, in our view, is to

empower the Central Government to include any other

species of ‘papaver’ which may be used for the production of

‘opium’ and bring the same under the purview of the 1985

Act.   The reason is that, if it is found that any species of

‘papaver’ is being used for the production of ‘opium’, the

production of such a variety should not be permitted and the

same be brought under the prohibitory and regulatory

measures as provided under the 1985 Act.
Purposive Interpretation:
66.      That leaves us to deal with the next principle of

interpretation which would govern the case. By now, it is a

settled principle of law that an enactment has to be

incorporated in such a manner which advances the purpose
47
of the Act rather than interpretating in such a manner which

defeats the purpose of the Act.
67.
In the case of
State of Kerala v. Mathai Verghese

and Others11
, the High Court of Kerala has held that, for

appreciating the provisions of
Section 489-A
of the Indian

Penal Code, 1860 for possession of contraband notes, it was

necessary to establish that the said currency notes would

mean only Indian currency notes. This Court, reversing the

judgment of the Kerala High Court, held thus:
“6. …….It is not for the court to reframe the
         legislation for the very good reason that the
         powers to “legislate” have not been conferred
         on the court. When the expression “currency
         note” is interpreted to mean “Indian currency
         note”, the width of the expression is being
         narrowed down or cut down. Apart from the
         fact that the court does not possess any such
         power, what is the purpose to be achieved by
         doing so? A court can make a purposeful
         interpretation so as to ‘effectuate’ the
         intention of the legislature and not a
         purposeless one in order to “defeat” the
         intention of the legislators wholly or in
         part. When the court (apparently in the course
         of an exercise in interpretation) shrinks the
         content of the expression “currency note”, to
         make it referable to only “Indian currency
         note”, it is defeating the intention of the
         legislature partly inasmuch as the court makes
         it lawful to counterfeit notes other than Indian
         currency notes. The manifest purpose of the
11
(1986) 4 SCC 746
48
provision is that the citizens should be
      protected from being deceived or cheated.
The citizens deal with and transact business
      with each other through the medium of
      currency [ Currency n. 1 a metal or paper
      medium of exchange that is in current use.
      (Collins English Dictionary)] (which expression
      includes coins as also paper currency that is
      to say currency notes). It is inconceivable
      why the legislature should be anxious to
      protect citizens from being deceived or
      cheated only in respect of Indian currency
      notes and not in respect of currency notes
      issued by other sovereign powers. The
      purpose of the legislation appears to be to
      ensure that a person accepting a currency
      note is given a genuine currency which can
      be exchanged for goods or services and not
      a worthless piece of paper which will bring
      him nothing in return, it being a
      counterfeit or a forged currency note.
Would the legislature in its wisdom and
      anxiety to protect the unwary citizens
      extend immunity from being cheated in
      relation to Indian currency notes but show
      total unconcern in regard to their being
      cheated in respect of currency notes issued
      by any foreign State or sovereign power?
…….”
                                 [emphasis supplied]
68.      This Court holds that the manifest purpose of the

provision was that the citizens should be protected from

being deceived or cheated. It was also held that the court

can make a purposive interpretation so as to effectuate the

intention of the legislature and not a purposeless one in
49
order to defeat the intention of the legislators wholly or in

part.       It held that, if the court restricts the expression

‘currency note’ only to ‘Indian currency note’, it would defeat

the intention of the legislature inasmuch as the court makes

it lawful to possess counterfeit notes other than Indian

currency notes.
69.
In the case of
Baldev Krishna Sahi v. Shipping

Corporation             of   India   Limited   and   Another12
,    the

provisions of
Section 630
of the Companies Act, 1956 fell for

consideration before this Court.            It was argued before the

court that, the term “officer” or “employee” used in the said

Section would apply to the existing officers or employees and

not       past    officers    and    employees.   Negating   the   said

contention, this Court observed thus:
“7. The beneficent provision contained in
         Section 630 no doubt penal, has been
         purposely enacted by the legislature with the
         object of providing a summary procedure for
         retrieving the property of the company (a)
         where an officer or employee of a company
         wrongfully obtains possession of property of
         the company, or (b) where having been placed
         in possession of any such property during the
         course    of  his   employment,       wrongfully
         withholds possession of it after the termination
         of his employment. It is the duty of the court
12
(1987) 4 SCC 361
50
to place a broad and liberal construction
on the provision in furtherance of the
object and purpose of the legislation which
would suppress the mischief and advance
the remedy.
8.
Section 630
of the Act which makes the
wrongful withholding of any property of a
company by an officer or employee of the
company a penal offence, is typical of the
economy of language which is characteristic of
the draughtsman of the Act. The section is in
two parts. Sub-section (1) by clauses (a) and
(b) creates two distinct and separate offences.
First at these is the one contemplated by
clause (a), namely, where an officer or
employee of a company wrongfully obtains
possession of any property of the company
during the course of his employment, to which
he is not entitled. Normally, it is only the
present officers and employees who can secure
possession of any property of a company. It is
also possible for such an officer or employee
after termination of his employment to
wrongfully take away possession of any such
property. This is the function of clause (a) and
although it primarily refers to the existing
officers and employees, it may also take in past
officers and employees. In contrast, clause (b)
contemplates a case where an officer or
employee of a company having any property of
a company in his possession wrongfully
withholds it or knowingly applies it to
purposes other than those expressed or
directed in the articles and authorised by the
Act. It may well be that an officer or employee
may have lawfully obtained possession of any
such property during the course of his
employment but wrongfully withholds it after
the termination of his employment. That
appears to be one of the functions of clause (b).
It would be noticed that clause (b) also makes
51
it an offence if any officer or employee of a
      company having any property of the company
      in his possession knowingly applies it to
      purposes other than those expressed or
      directed in the articles and authorised by the
      Act. That would primarily apply to the present
      officers and employees and may also include
      past officers and employees. There is therefore
      no warrant to give a restrictive meaning to the
      term “officer or employee” appearing in sub-
      section (1) of
Section 630
of the Act. It is quite
      evident that clauses (a) and (b) are separated
      by the word “or” and therefore are clearly
      disjunctive.”
                                  [emphasis supplied]
70.      It is thus clear that this Court held that there was no

reason to restrict the meaning of the term “officer or

employee” to the existing officers or employees. It held that a

situation where an officer or employee, though having

lawfully obtained the possession of such property during the

course of his employment, wrongfully withholds possession

of it after the termination of the employment, would squarely

be covered by the said Section. The Court also held that it is

the duty of the court to place a broad and liberal

construction on the provision in furtherance of the object

and purpose of the legislation. The interpretation which

suppresses the mischief and advances the remedy has to be

preferred.
52
71.          Though this Court in the case of
Sanjay Dutt v.

State
through C.B.I., Bombay (II)13, has held that in case of

a      penal    statute,   when   two   reasonable   and      possible

constructions are possible, one which leans in favour of the

accused could be preferred, it will still be relevant to refer to

the following observations of the Constitution Bench in the

said case:
“13.
The TADA Act
was enacted to make
         special provisions for the prevention of, and for
         coping with, terrorist and disruptive activities
         and for matters connected therewith or
         incidental thereto in the background of
         escalation of the terrorist and disruptive
         activities in the country. There is also material
         available for a reasonable belief that such
         activities are encouraged even by hostile
         foreign agencies which are assisting influx of
         lethal and hazardous weapons and substances
         into the country to promote escalation of these
         activities. The felt need of the times is,
         therefore, proper balancing of the interest of
         the nation vis-a-vis the rights of a person
         accused of an offence under this Act. The
         rights of a person found in unauthorised
         possession of such a weapon or substance in
         this context, to prove his innocence of
         involvement in a terrorist or disruptive activity,
         is to be determined.
14. The construction made of any provision
         of this Act must, therefore, be to promote
         the object of its enactment to enable the
         machinery to deal effectively with persons
         involved in, and associated with, terrorist
13
(1994) 5 SCC 410
53
and disruptive activities while ensuring
that any person not in that category
should not be subjected to the rigours of
the stringent provisions of the
TADA Act
. It
must, therefore, be borne in mind that any
person who is being dealt with and prosecuted
in accordance with the provisions of the
TADA
Act
must ordinarily have the opportunity to
show that he does not belong to the category of
persons governed by the
TADA Act
. Such a
course would permit exclusion from its ambit
of the persons not intended to be covered by it
while ensuring that any person meant to be
governed by its provisions, will not escape the
provisions of the
TADA Act
, which is the true
object of the enactment. Such a course while
promoting the object of the enactment would
also prevent its misuse or abuse. Such a
danger is not hypothetical but real in view of
serious allegations supported by statistics of
the misuse of provisions of the
TADA Act
and
the concern to this effect voiced even by the
National Human Rights Commission.
15. It is the duty of courts to accept a
construction which promotes the object of
the legislation and also prevents its
possible abuse even though the mere
possibility of abuse of a provision does not
affect its constitutionality or construction.
Abuse has to be checked by constant vigilance
and monitoring of individual cases and this
can be done by screening of the cases by a
suitable machinery at a high level. It is
reported that in some States, after the decision
of this Court in Kartar Singh [(1994) 3 SCC
569 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 899] , high-powered
committees     have   been     constituted    for
screening all such cases. It is hoped that this
action will be taken in all the States
throughout the country. Persons aware of
instances of abuse, including the National
Human Rights Commission, can assist by
54
reporting such instances with particulars to
      that machinery for prompt and effective cure.
      However, that is no reason, in law, to doubt its
      constitutionality or to alter the proper
      construction when there is a felt need by
      Parliament for enacting such a law to cope
      with, and prevent terrorist and disruptive
      activities threatening the unity and integrity of
      the country.”
                                    [emphasis supplied]
72.      It could thus be seen that the Constitution Bench

held that it is the duty of the courts to accept a construction

which promotes the object of the legislation. It was held that

the construction made of any provision of the Act must be to

promote the object of the enactment to enable the machinery

to deal effectively with the persons involved in the crime.
73.
In the case of
State of M.P. and Others v. Ram

Singh
(supra), this Court held thus:
“10.
The Act
was intended to make effective
      provisions for the prevention of bribery and
      corruption rampant amongst the public
      servants. It is a social legislation intended to
      curb illegal activities of the public servants
      and is designed to be liberally construed so as
      to advance its object. Dealing with the object
      underlying the Act this Court in
R.S.
      Nayak v. A.R. Antulay
[(1984) 2 SCC 183 :
1984 SCC (Cri) 172] held: (SCC p. 200, para
18)
55
“18. The 1947 Act was enacted, as
its long title shows, to make more
effective provision for the prevention
of     bribery     and     corruption.
Indisputably,       therefore,      the
provisions of the Act must receive
such construction at the hands of
the court as would advance the
object and purpose underlying the
Act and at any rate not defeat it. If
the words of the statute are clear
and unambiguous, it is the plainest
duty of the court to give effect to the
natural meaning of the words used
in the provision. The question of
construction arises only in the event
of an ambiguity or the plain
meaning of the words used in the
statute would be self-defeating. The
court is entitled to ascertain the
intention of the legislature to remove
the ambiguity by construing the
provision of the statute as a whole
keeping in view what was the
mischief when the statute was
enacted and to remove which the
legislature enacted the statute. This
rule of construction is so universally
accepted that it need not be
supported by precedents. Adopting
this rule of construction, whenever a
question of construction arises upon
ambiguity or where two views are
possible of a provision, it would be
the duty of the court to adopt that
construction which would advance
the object underlying the Act,
namely, to make effective provision
for the prevention of bribery and
corruption and at any rate not
defeat it.”
56
11. Procedural delays and technicalities of law
         should not be permitted to defeat the object
         sought to be achieved by the Act. The overall
         public interest and the social object is required
         to be kept in mind while interpreting various
         provisions of the Act and deciding cases under
         it.”
74.          It could be seen that this Court held that a social

legislation like the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
,

intended to curb the illegal activities of the public servants,

should be liberally construed so as to advance its object. It

was held that the overall public interest and the social object

is required to be kept in mind while interpreting various

provisions of the Act and deciding cases under it.
75.
In the case of
Balram Kumawat v. Union of India

and Others14
, this Court had an occasion to consider the

meaning of the word ‘ivory’ used in the
Wild Life (Protection)

Act, 1972
. The court observed thus:
“23. Furthermore, even in relation to a penal
         statute any narrow and pedantic, literal and
         lexical construction may not always be given
         effect to. The law would have to be interpreted
         having regard to the subject-matter of the
         offence and the object of the law it seeks to
         achieve. The purpose of the law is not to allow
14
(2003) 7 SCC 628
57
the offender to sneak out of the meshes of law.
Criminal jurisprudence does not say so.
24. ……..
25. A statute must be construed as a workable
instrument. Ut res magis valeat quam pereat is
a well-known principle of law.
In
Tinsukhia
Electric   Supply     Co.    Ltd. v. State  of
Assam
[(1989) 3 SCC 709 : AIR 1990 SC 123]
this Court stated the law thus : (SCC p. 754,
paras 118-120)
     “118. The courts strongly lean
     against any construction which
     tends to reduce a statute to futility.
The provision of a statute must be
     so construed as to make it effective
     and operative, on the principle ‘ut
     res magis valeat quam pereat’. It is,
     no doubt, true that if a statute is
     absolutely vague and its language
     wholly intractable and absolutely
     meaningless, the statute could be
     declared void for vagueness. This is
     not in judicial review by testing the
     law      for     arbitrariness      or
     unreasonableness under
Article 14;
but what a court of construction,
     dealing with the language of a
     statute, does in order to ascertain
     from, and accord to, the statute the
     meaning and purpose which the
     legislature    intended      for    it.
In Manchester        Ship        Canal
     Co. v. Manchester          Racecourse
     Co. [(1900) 2 Ch 352 : 69 LJCh 850
     : 83 LT 274 (CA)] Farwell, J. said :
(pp. 360-61)
       ‘Unless the words were so
       absolutely senseless that I
       could do nothing at all with
       them, I should be bound to
58
find some meaning and not to
        declare    them   void   for
        uncertainty.’
119.        In Fawcett     Properties
     Ltd. v. Buckingham            County
     Council [(1960) 3 All ER 503 : (1960)
     3 WLR 831 (HL)] Lord Denning
     approving the dictum of Farwell, J.
said : (All ER p. 516)
        ‘But when a statute has some
        meaning, even though it is
        obscure, or several meanings,
        even though there is little to
        choose between them, the
        courts have to say what
        meaning the statute is to bear,
        rather than reject it as a
        nullity.’
120. It is, therefore, the court's duty
     to make what it can of the statute,
     knowing that the statutes are meant
     to be operative and not inept and
     that nothing short of impossibility
     should allow a court to declare a
     statute unworkable.
In Whitney v. IRC [1926 AC 37 : 95
     LJKB 165 : 134 LT 98 (HL)] Lord
     Dunedin said : (AC p. 52)
‘A statute is designed to be workable, and the
interpretation thereof by a court should be to
secure that object, unless crucial omission or
clear direction makes that end unattainable.’ ”
26. The courts will therefore reject that
construction which will defeat the plain
intention of the legislature even though there
may be some inexactitude in the language
used. [See Salmon v. Duncombe [(1886) 11 AC
627 : 55 LJPC 69 : 55 LT 446 (PC)] (AC at p.
634).] Reducing the legislation futility shall be
avoided and in a case where the intention of
59
the legislature cannot be given effect to, the
         courts would accept the bolder construction
         for the purpose of bringing about an effective
         result. ……”
76.          A perusal of the aforesaid observations would reveal

that this Court held that, even in relation to a penal statute,

any narrow and pedantic, literal and lexical construction

may not always be given direct effect and the interpretation

has to be preferred with regard to the subject matter of the

offence and the object of law it seeks to achieve.                       The

interpretation          that   defeats    the   plain   intention   of   the

legislature, even though there may be some inexactitude in

the language used, will have to be rejected. It has been held

that the golden construction for the purpose of bringing out

an effective result will have to be accepted.
77.
In the case of
Standard Chartered Bank and

Others v. Directorate of Enforcement and Others15
, it was

contended before the Constitution Bench of this Court that

no      criminal        proceedings can be        initiated   against the

Company under
Section 56(1)
of the Foreign Exchange

Regulation Act (FERA), 1973 since under the
FERA Act
, the
15
(2005) 4 SCC 530
60
minimum punishment prescribed is imprisonment for a term

which shall not be less than six months with fine. The

argument on behalf of the appellant therein that the penal

provision of the statute is required to be construed strictly,

was considered in the majority view as under:
“23. The counsel for the appellant contended
     that the penal provision in the statute is to be
     strictly construed. Reference was made
     to
Tolaram Relumal v. State of Bombay
[(1955)
     1 SCR 158 : 1954 Cri LJ 1333] , SCR at p. 164
     and
Girdhari Lal Gupta v. D.H. Mehta
[(1971) 3
     SCC 189 : 1971 SCC (Cri) 279] . It is true that
     all penal statutes are to be strictly construed
     in the sense that the court must see that the
     thing charged as an offence is within the plain
     meaning of the words used and must not
     strain the words on any notion that there has
     been a slip that the thing is so clearly within
     the mischief that it must have been intended
     to be included and would have been included if
     thought of. All penal provisions like all
     other statutes are to be fairly construed
     according to the legislative intent as
     expressed in the enactment. Here, the
     legislative intent to prosecute corporate bodies
     for the offence committed by them is clear and
     explicit and the statute never intended to
     exonerate them from being prosecuted. It is
     sheer violence to common sense that the
     legislature intended to punish the corporate
     bodies for minor and silly offences and
     extended immunity of prosecution to major
     and grave economic crimes.
24. The    distinction  between    a    strict
     construction and a more free one has
     disappeared in modern times and now mostly
     the question is “what is true construction of
61
the statute?” A passage in Craies on Statute
Law, 7th Edn. reads to the following effect:
“The distinction between a strict and
     a liberal construction has almost
     disappeared with regard to all
     classes of statutes, so that all
     statutes, whether penal or not, are
     now construed by substantially the
     same rules. ‘All modern Acts are
     framed with regard to equitable as
     well as legal principles.’ ‘A hundred
     years ago,’ said the court in Lyons'
     case [Lyons v. Lyons, 1858 Bell CC
     38 : 169 ER 1158] , ‘statutes were
     required to be perfectly precise and
     resort was not had to a reasonable
     construction of the Act, and thereby
     criminals were often allowed to
     escape. This is not the present mode
     of construing Acts of Parliament.
They are construed now with
     reference to the true meaning and
     real intention of the legislature.”
At p. 532 of the same book, observations of
Sedgwick are quoted as under:
“The more correct version of the
     doctrine appears to be that statutes
     of this class are to be fairly
     construed and faithfully applied
     according to the intent of the
     legislature, without unwarrantable
     severity on the one hand or
     unjustifiable lenity on the other, in
     cases of doubt the courts inclining
     to mercy.”
25. The question, therefore, is what is the
intention of the legislature. It is an undisputed
fact that for all the statutory offences,
company also could be prosecuted as the
“person” defined in these Acts includes
62
“company, or corporation or other incorporated
         body”.”
                                        [emphasis supplied]
78.          It is thus clear that the Constitution Bench has

reiterated that penal provisions like all other provisions of

other statutes are to be construed according to the legislative

intent as expressed in the enactment.
79.         Recently, a three-Judges Bench of this Court in the

 case of
Hira Singh and Another v. Union of India and

 Another16
, while answering a reference with regard to the

 correctness of the view taken by this Court in the case of
E.

 Micheal Raj v. Narcotics Control Bureau17
, to the effect

 that, when any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance is

 found mixed with one or more neutral substance for the

 purpose of imposition of punishment, it is the content of

 narcotic drug or psychotropic substance which would be

 taken into consideration, the Court held thus:
“10.1.
In
Directorate of Enforcement v. Deepak
         Mahajan [Directorate of Enforcement
v. Deepak
         Mahajan, (1994) 3 SCC 440 : 1994 SCC (Cri)
         785] , it is observed by this Court that every
         law is designed to further ends of justice but
         not to frustrate on the mere technicalities. It is
16
(2020) 20 SCC 272
17
(2008) 5 SCC 161
63
further observed that though the intention of
the Court is only to expound the law and not
to legislate, nonetheless the legislature cannot
be asked to sit to resolve the difficulties in the
implementation of its intention and the spirit
of the law. It is the duty of the Court to mould
or creatively interpret the legislation by
liberally interpreting the statute. In
the said
decision
this Court has also quoted (at SCC
pp. 453-54, para 25) the following passage
in Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes, 10th
Edn. p. 229:
“25. … ‘Where the language of a
     statute, in its ordinary meaning and
     grammatical construction, leads to a
     manifest     contradiction     of  the
     apparent purpose of the enactment,
     or to some inconvenience or
     absurdity, hardship or injustice,
     presumably       not     intended,   a
     construction may be put upon it
     which modifies the meaning of the
     words, and even the structure of the
     sentence. … Where the main object
     and intention of a statute are clear,
     it must not be reduced to a nullity
     by the draftsman's unskilfulness or
     ignorance of the law, except in a
     case of necessity, or the absolute
     intractability of the language used.’ ”
Thereafter, it is further observed that to
winch up the legislative intent, it is
permissible for courts to take into account
the ostensible purpose and object and the
real legislative intent. Otherwise, a bare
mechanical interpretation of the words
and application of the legislative intent
devoid of concept of purpose and object
will render the legislature inane. It is
further    observed     that     in   given
circumstances, it is permissible for courts
64
to have functional approaches and look
      into    the  legislative    intention   and
      sometimes it may be even necessary to go
      behind the words and enactment and take
      other factors into consideration to give
      effect to the legislative intention and to
      the purpose and spirit of the enactment so
      that     no   absurdity      or    practical
      inconvenience    may     result   and    the
      legislative exercise and its scope and
      object may not become futile.”
                                   [emphasis supplied]
80.     It could thus be seen that it is more than a settled

principle of law that, while interpreting the provisions of the

statute, the court has to prefer an interpretation which

advances the purpose of the statute.
Conclusion:
81.     As already discussed hereinabove,         since many

deficiencies were found in the earlier enactments and the

provisions therein were not found sufficient to deal with the

problems of drug trafficking, it was found necessary to enact

a new law since after passing of the earlier three Acts, there

were tremendous developments on an international platform

and a vast body of international law in the field of narcotics

control had evolved through various international treaties

and protocols. The Government of India had been a party to
65
these   treaties and   conventions which entailed      several

obligations which were not covered or were only partly

covered under the old Acts. It was further noticed that the

scheme of the earlier Acts was not a sufficient deterrent to

meet the challenge of well-organized gangs of smugglers. It

was further noticed that the penalty provided under the old

Acts was inadequate.        Taking into consideration that the

country had, for the last many years, been increasingly faced

with the problem of trafficking of drugs, which had posed

serious problems to governments at the State and Centre, it

was found necessary to enact a comprehensive law. It is thus

clear that the dominant purpose of the new enactment was to

curb the menace of trafficking of drugs and psychotropic

substances.    Therefore, the interpretation which advances

the purpose of the Act has to be preferred rather than

adopting a pedantic and a mechanical approach.
82.     As already discussed hereinabove, it was well

recognized    under   the   earlier enactments, International

Conventions and scientific studies that ‘papaver somniferum

L’ plant was the main source for the production of ‘opium’.

The 1878 Act so also the 1930 Act had recognized this
66
position.   In the International Conventions also, this was

recognized. Though for the first time in the 1953 Protocol, in

addition to “papaver somniferum L’, any other species of

‘papaver’, which may be used for the production of ‘opium’

was included in the definition of ‘opium’, the subsequent

conventions of 1961 and 1988 again defined ‘opium poppy’

as a plant of ‘papaver somniferum L’.    The scientific study

conducted at the national as well as the global level

establishes   that   ‘papaver   somniferum   L’   consists   of

‘morphine’ and ‘meconic acid’. If the construction as adopted

in the impugned judgment is to be accepted, then, even if it

is found that the Chemical Examiner’s report establishes

that the contraband article contains ‘morphine’ and ‘meconic

acid’, a person cannot be convicted unless it is further

established that the contraband material has a genesis in

‘papaver somniferum L’.
83.     Shri Kapil Sharma, Chemical Examiner was present

in the Court. He reiterated that the ‘morphine test’ and the

‘meconic test’ are the only two tests available worldwide to

establish that the contraband material is derived from

‘papaver somniferum L’. As already discussed hereinabove,
67
prior to enactment of the 1985 Act, it was only the plant

‘papaver somniferum L’ which was included in the definition

of 1878 and 1930 enactments. By virtue of sub-clause (a) of

Clause (xvii) of
Section 2
of the 1985 Act, the same has been

retained. However, noticing that there was some material to

show that some other species of ‘papaver’ may also be used

for the production of ‘opium’, the legislature, by an abundant

precaution, also added sub-clause (b) in Clause (xvii) of
Section 2
of the 1985 Act so as to enable the Central

Government to notify such a species from which ‘opium’ or

any ‘phenanthrene alkaloid’ can be extracted. The legislative

intent is clear that the 1985 Act, in addition to retaining the

species of ‘papaver somniferum L’ in the definition of ‘opium

poppy’, enabled the Central Government to include any other

species of ‘papaver’ from which ‘opium’ or any ‘phenanthrene

alkaloid’ could be extracted. This declaration has to be done

by a notification published in the official gazette. The

legislative intent is to bring any other species of ‘papaver’

which can be used for manufacture of ‘opium’ within the

prohibitory and regulatory provisions of the 1985 Act.
68
84.     If the view as taken by the High Court is to be

accepted, a person who has been found contravening the

provisions of the 1985 Act and dealing with a contraband

material which has been found in the Chemical Examiner’s

report to contain ‘morphine’ and ‘meconic acid’, would escape

the stringent provisions of the 1985 Act.     The said could

never have been the intention of the legislature. In our view,

if the view as taken by the High Court is to be accepted, the

same would frustrate the object of the Act and defeat its very

purpose.
85.     In light of the view that we have taken, we do not

find it necessary to refer to other judgments of the Gujarat

High Court as well as the Himachal Pradesh High Court.
86.
Insofar as the reliance placed by the High Court of

Himachal Pradesh on the judgment of this Court in the case

of
Amarsingh Ramjibhai Barot
(supra) is concerned, the

only question for consideration before this Court was, as to

whether the High Court was justified in taking the total

quantity of the offending substances recovered from the two

accused jointly and holding that the said quantity was more
69
than the commercial quantity, warranting punishment under
Section 21(c)
of the 1985 Act. In the said case, the opinion

given by the FSL was that it was ‘opium’ as described in the

1985 Act.      The court from the evidence found that the

substance recovered from the appellant therein had 2.8%

anhydride morphine. The court therefore held that it would

amount to ‘opium derivative’ within the meaning of
Section

2(xvi)(e)
of the 1985 Act. It was therefore held that, what was

recovered from the appellant therein was ‘manufactured

drug’ within the meaning of
Section 2(xi)
of the 1985 Act.

The Court therefore held that the offence proved against the

appellant therein clearly fell within
Section 21
of the 1985

Act for illicit possession of a ‘manufactured drug’. We fail to

understand as to how
the said judgment
could be said to be

a   proposition    for   holding    that,   unless   the   Chemical

Examiner’s report establishes that the contraband material

was derived from the species of ‘papaver somniferum L’,

conviction under
Section 15
of the 1985 Act would not be

tenable.
87.
Insofar as the judgment of this Court in the case of
Baidyanath Mishra
(supra), to which a reference has been
70
made by Shri Parameshwar, is concerned, this Court, in the

case of
Harjit Singh
(supra), has itself held that the said

case was decided under the
Opium Act
and not under the

1985 Act. It has been held that the chemical analysis of the

contraband material is essential to prove a case against the

accused under the 1985 Act.
88.     We are therefore of the considered view that the High

Court was not justified in holding that, even after the

Chemical Examiner’s report establishes that the contraband

contains ‘meconic acid’ and ‘morphine’, unless it was

established that the same was derived from the species of

‘papaver somniferum L’, conviction under
Section 15
of the

1985 Act could not be sustained.
89.     As   already   discussed    hereinabove,   once    it   is

established that the seized material contains ‘meconic acid’

and ‘morphine’, it will be sufficient to establish that it is

derived from the plant ‘papaver somniferum L’ as defined in

sub-clause (a) of Clause (xvii) of
Section 2
of the 1985 Act.
90.     We further find that the High Court was also not

justified in observing that the Chemical Examiner’s report, in
71
the alternative, should establish that the seized material is a

part of any other species of ‘papaver’ from which ‘opium’ or

any ‘phenanthrene alkaloid’ could be extracted and which

has been notified by the Central Government as ‘opium’ for

the purpose of the 1985 Act. We fail to understand as to how

a Chemical Examiner could be asked whether the seized

material was a part of any other species of ‘papaver’ from

which ‘opium’ or any other ‘phenanthrene alkaloid’ could be

extracted when there is no such species of ‘papaver’ which

has been notified by the Central Government to be ‘opium

poppy’ for the purpose of the 1985 Act.
91.     In the result, we hold that, once a Chemical

Examiner establishes that the seized ‘poppy straw’ indicates

a positive test for the contents of ‘morphine’ and ‘meconic

acid’, it is sufficient to establish that it is covered by sub-

clause (a) of Clause (xvii) of
Section 2
of the 1985 Act and no

further test would be necessary for establishing that the

seized material is a part of ‘papaver somniferum L’. In other

words, once it is established that the seized ‘poppy straw’

tests positive for the contents of ‘morphine’ and ‘meconic

acid’, no other test would be necessary for bringing home the
72
guilt of the accused under the provisions of
Section 15
of the

1985 Act.
92.     Before we part with the judgment, we must place on

record that Shri Parameshwar, learned amicus curiae and

Shri Mukerji, learned AAG have taken great pains in

researching various scientific study as well as the relevant

material at the national and international level. We place on

record our deep appreciation for the valuable assistance

rendered by both Shri Parameshwar and Shri Mukerji. We

must also place on record that Shri Parameshwar has ably

placed before us both the sides of the present issue, one from

the perspective of the accused and the other from the

perspective of the prosecution.
93.     Insofar as the present appeal is concerned, since the

appeal is allowed by the High Court only on the aforesaid

ground without considering any other material, we remand

the matter to the High Court for consideration afresh in

accordance with what has been held by us hereinabove.
73
94.     Mr. Neeraj Jain, learned senior counsel appearing for

the respondent(s) submits that since the judgment and order

of the High Court has been set aside, the respondent(s)-

accused would be required to surrender.
95.     We suspend the sentence till the matter is decided

on merits by the High Court.
96.     The appeal is allowed in the above terms.
97.     Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of

in the above terms. No order as to costs.
…..….......................J.
                                                 [B.R. GAVAI]




                                        …….......................J.
                                         [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]

NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 20, 2022.
74