[Cites
15
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs M/S Commercial Engineers And Body ... on 14 October, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7170 OF 2022


The State of Madhya Pradesh and Another            …Appellants


                      Versus


M/s Commercial Engineers and Body Building
Company Limited                                    …Respondent




                            JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and order dated 05.08.2015 passed by the High Court of Madhya

Pradesh, Principal Seat at Jabalpur in Writ Petition No. 7628/2015, by

which the Division Bench of the High Court has entertained the writ

petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India and has quashed

and set aside the Assessment Order passed by the Divisional Deputy

Commissioner, Commercial Tax, Jabalpur, the State of Madhya Pradesh

has preferred the present appeal.
1
2.    By an Assessment Order dated 28.02.2015, the Assessing Officer

denied the Input rebate under
Section 14
of the Madhya Pradesh Value

Added Tax Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘MP VAT Act, 2002’)

to the respondent. Without preferring an appeal against the Assessment

Order denying the Input rebate under Section 46(1) of the MP VAT Act,

2002, the respondent preferred the writ petition before the High Court.

Despite the specific objection raised on behalf of the State not to

entertain the writ petition against the Assessment Order denying the

Input rebate in view of the availability of the statutory remedy of appeal

under Section 46(1) of the MP VAT Act, 2002, the High Court entertained

the writ petition by observing that there are no disputed questions of

facts involved in the matter and it is a question to be decided on

admitted facts for which no dispute or enquiry into factual aspects of the

matter is called for.   That thereafter by the impugned judgment and

order, the High Court has set aside the Assessment Order denying the

Input rebate and consequently has allowed the Input rebate in favour of

the respondent – assessee – original writ petitioner.       The impugned

judgment and order passed by the High Court is the subject matter of

present appeal.
3.    Number of submissions have been made by the learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the respective parties on merits including the

entertainability of the writ petition by the High Court under
Article 226
of
2
the Constitution of India challenging the Assessment Order denying the

Input rebate. However, for the reasons stated hereinbelow, we propose

to dismiss the writ petition preferred before the High Court and relegate

the respondent – assessee – original writ petition to prefer a statutory

appeal against the Assessment Order, we are not considering any other

submission on merits on whether the High Court is justified in allowing

the Input rebate or not.
4.    Having heard learned counsel for the respective parties at length

on the entertainability of the writ petition under
Article 226
of the

Constitution of India by the High Court against the Assessment Order

and the reasoning given by the High Court while entertaining the writ

petition against the Assessment Order despite the statutory remedy by

way of an appeal available, we are of the opinion that the High Court

ought not to have entertained the writ petition under
Article 226
of the

Constitution of India challenging the Assessment Order denying the

Input rebate against which a statutory appeal would be available under

Section 46(1) of the MP VAT Act, 2002.
5.    While entertaining the writ petition under
Article 226
of the

Constitution of India challenging the Assessment Order denying the

Input rebate, the High Court has observed that there are no disputed

question of facts arise and it is a question to be decided on admitted

facts for which no dispute or enquiry into factual aspects of the matter is
3
called for. The aforesaid can hardly be a good/valid ground to entertain

the writ petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India challenging

the Assessment Order denying the Input rebate against which a statutory

remedy of appeal was available.
6.    At this stage, a recent decision of this Court in the case of The

State of Maharashtra and Others v. Greatship (India) Limited (Civil

Appeal No. 4956 of 2022, decided on 20.09.2022) is required to be

referred to. After taking into consideration the earlier decision of this

Court in the case of
United Bank of India v. Satyawati Tondon and

others
, reported in (2010) 8 SCC 110, it is observed and held that in a

tax matter when a statutory remedy of appeal is available, the High

Court ought not to have entertained the writ petition under
Article 226
of

the Constitution of India against the Assessment Order by-passing the

statutory remedy of appeal.
While holding so, this Court considered the

observations made by this Court in paragraphs 49 to 53 in
Satyawati

Tondon
(supra), which read as under:
“49. The views expressed in
Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. vs. State of Orissa
(1983) 2 SCC 433 were echoed in
CCE v. Dunlop India Ltd.
(1985) 1 SCC
     260 in the following words: (SCC p. 264, para 3)
        “3. …
Article 226
is not meant to short-circuit or circumvent statutory
        procedures. It is only where statutory remedies are entirely ill-suited to
        meet the demands of extraordinary situations, as for instance where the
        very vires of the statute is in question or where private or public wrongs
        are so inextricably mixed up and the prevention of public injury and the
        vindication of public justice require it that recourse may be had to
Article
        226
of the Constitution. But then the Court must have good and
        sufficient reason to bypass the alternative remedy provided by statute.
Surely matters involving the revenue where statutory remedies are
4
available are not such matters. We can also take judicial notice of the
  fact that the vast majority of the petitions under
Article 226
of the
  Constitution are filed solely for the purpose of obtaining interim orders
  and thereafter prolong the proceedings by one device or the other. The
  practice certainly needs to be strongly discouraged.”
50.
In
Punjab National Bank v. O.C. Krishnan
(2001) 6 SCC 569 this Court
considered the question whether a petition under
Article 227
of the
Constitution was maintainable against an order passed by the Tribunal
under
Section 19
of the DRT Act and observed: (SCC p. 570, paras 5-6)

  “5. In our opinion, the order which was passed by the Tribunal directing
  sale of mortgaged property was appealable under
Section 20
of the
  Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993
  (for short ‘the Act’). The High Court ought not to have exercised its
  jurisdiction under
Article 227
in view of the provision for alternative
  remedy contained in the Act. We do not propose to go into the
  correctness of the decision of the High Court and whether the order
  passed by the Tribunal was correct or not has to be decided before an
  appropriate forum.
6.
The Act
has been enacted with a view to provide a special procedure
  for recovery of debts due to the banks and the financial institutions.
  There is a hierarchy of appeal provided in the Act, namely, filing of an
  appeal under
Section 20
and this fast-track procedure cannot be
  allowed to be derailed either by taking recourse to proceedings under
Articles 226
and
227
of the Constitution or by filing a civil suit, which is
  expressly barred. Even though a provision under an Act cannot
  expressly oust the jurisdiction of the Court under
Articles 226
and
227
of
  the Constitution, nevertheless, when there is an alternative remedy
  available, judicial prudence demands that the Court refrains from
  exercising its jurisdiction under the said constitutional provisions. This
  was a case where the High Court should not have entertained the
  petition under
Article 227
of the Constitution and should have directed
  the respondent to take recourse to the appeal mechanism provided by
  the Act.”
51. In CCT v. Indian Explosives Ltd. [(2008) 3 SCC 688] the Court
reversed an order passed by the Division Bench of the Orissa High Court
quashing the show-cause notice issued to the respondent under the
Orissa Sales Tax Act
by observing that the High Court had completely
ignored the parameters laid down by this Court in a large number of cases
relating to exhaustion of alternative remedy.
52.
In
City and Industrial Development Corpn. v. Dosu Aardeshir
Bhiwandiwala
[(2009) 1 SCC 168] the Court highlighted the parameters
which are required to be kept in view by the High Court while exercising
jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution. Paras 29 and 30 of that
5
judgment which contain the views of this Court read as under: (SCC pp.
175-76)
   “29. In our opinion, the High Court while exercising its extraordinary
   jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution is duty-bound to take all
   the relevant facts and circumstances into consideration and decide for
   itself even in the absence of proper affidavits from the State and its
   instrumentalities as to whether any case at all is made out requiring its
   interference on the basis of the material made available on record.
   There is nothing like issuing an ex parte writ of mandamus, order or
   direction in a public law remedy. Further, while considering the validity
   of impugned action or inaction the Court will not consider itself restricted
   to the pleadings of the State but would be free to satisfy itself whether
   any case as such is made out by a person invoking its extraordinary
   jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution.
30. The Court while exercising its jurisdiction under
Article 226
is duty-
   bound to consider whether:
(a) adjudication of writ petition involves any complex and disputed
   questions of facts and whether they can be satisfactorily resolved;
(b) the petition reveals all material facts;
(c) the petitioner has any alternative or effective remedy for the
   resolution of the dispute;
(d) person invoking the jurisdiction is guilty of unexplained delay and
   laches;
(e) ex facie barred by any laws of limitation;
(f) grant of relief is against public policy or barred by any valid law; and
   host of other factors.
The Court in appropriate cases in its discretion may direct the State or its
instrumentalities as the case may be to file proper affidavits placing all the
relevant facts truly and accurately for the consideration of the Court and
particularly in cases where public revenue and public interest are involved.
Such directions are always required to be complied with by the State. No
relief could be granted in a public law remedy as a matter of course only
on the ground that the State did not file its counter-affidavit opposing the
writ petition. Further, empty and self-defeating affidavits or statements of
Government spokesmen by themselves do not form basis to grant any
relief to a person in a public law remedy to which he is not otherwise
entitled to in law.”
53.
In
Raj Kumar Shivhare v. Directorate of Enforcement
[(2010) 4 SCC
772] the Court was dealing with the issue whether the alternative statutory
remedy available under the
Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999
can
be bypassed and jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the Constitution could be
invoked. After examining the scheme of the Act, the Court observed: (SCC
p. 781, paras 31-32)
   “31. When a statutory forum is created by law for redressal of grievance
   and that too in a fiscal statute, a writ petition should not be entertained
   ignoring the statutory dispensation. In this case the High Court is a
   statutory forum of appeal on a question of law. That should not be
6
abdicated and given a go-by by a litigant for invoking the forum of
       judicial review of the High Court under writ jurisdiction. The High Court,
       with great respect, fell into a manifest error by not appreciating this
       aspect of the matter. It has however dismissed the writ petition on the
       ground of lack of territorial jurisdiction.
32. No reason could be assigned by the appellant's counsel to
       demonstrate why the appellate jurisdiction of the High Court under
Section 35
of FEMA does not provide an efficacious remedy. In fact
       there could hardly be any reason since the High Court itself is the
       appellate forum.”
7.   In view of the above, the impugned judgment and order passed by

the High Court entertaining the writ petition under
Article 226
of the

Constitution of India against the Assessment Order denying the benefit

of Input rebate is unsustainable and the same deserves to be quashed

and set aside and the original writ petitioner is to be relegated to prefer

an appeal against the Assessment Order dated 28.02.2015 passed by

the Divisional Deputy Commissioner, Commercial Tax, Jabalpur, which

may be available under Section 46(1) of the MP VAT Act, 2002.
8.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above and without

expressing anything on merits in favour of either of the parties on the

Input rebate claimed by the respondent – original writ petitioner, the

impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is hereby

quashed and set aside. The writ petition preferred by the respondent

herein – original writ petitioner – assessee is hereby dismissed on the

ground of alternative efficacious statutory remedy of appeal available to

the respondent. The respondent is relegated to prefer an appeal before
7
the appellate authority under Section 46(1) of the MP VAT Act, 2002. If

such an appeal is preferred within a period of four weeks from today, the

same be entertained and decided and disposed of on merits without

raising an issue with respect to limitation, however, subject to

compliance of the statutory requirements, if any, for preferring an appeal

under Section 46(1) of the MP VAT Act, 2002. The appellate authority to

decide and dispose of the appeal and the issue without in any way being

influenced by any of the observations made by the High Court which as

such is hereby quashed and set aside by the present judgment and

order.
9.       The present appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent. However,

there shall be no order as to costs.
………………………………..J.
                                         [M.R. SHAH]


NEW DELHI;                               ………………………………..J.
OCTOBER 14, 2022.                        [KRISHNA MURARI]
8