[Cites
17
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Securities And Exchange Board Of India vs National Stock Exchange Members ... on 13 October, 2022
Author:
Ajay Rastogi
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
Ajay Rastogi
REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 435 OF 2007

                         SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE
                         BOARD OF INDIA                             ….APPELLANT(S)

                                              VERSUS

                         NATIONAL STOCK EXCHANGE
                         MEMBERS ASSOCIATION AND ANR.               ….RESPONDENT(S)

                                                      WITH

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.5076 OF 2007

                                                      WITH

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.3003 OF 2011



                                                    JUDGMENT
Rastogi, J.
Civil Appeal No. 435 of 2007
1.   The instant appeal is directed against the judgment and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
order dated 7th November, 2005 passed by the Division Bench
Date: 2022.10.13
14:04:23 IST
Reason:
of the High Court of Delhi, setting aside the finding returned by
1
the learned Single Judge of the High Court under judgment

dated 26th October, 2004. The Division Bench has arrived at a

conclusion that in terms of
Section 12(1)
of the Securities and

Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (hereinafter referred to as

“the Act 1992”), a single registration with Securities and

Exchange Board of India (hereinafter referred to as “SEBI”) is

sufficient even if the stock broker has various memberships and

functions from several stock exchanges and, therefore, will have

to pay the fee for the initial registration with SEBI and,

accordingly, set aside paragraph (vi) of Part A of the Circular

dated 28th March, 2002 issued by SEBI.
Factual backdrop
2.   SEBI has been established under provisions of the Act,

1992 with an object to protect the interest of investors in the

securities market and to promote the development of, and to

regulate the securities market. SEBI was created as a regulator

to regulate the securities’ market which includes dealing in

shares,   debentures,   derivates,   etc.   in   recognised   stock

exchanges. It may be relevant to note that before SEBI was
2
formed, each stock exchange admitted members and the

brokers/sub-brokers could deal in securities in accordance

with bye-laws of each of such stock exchanges. The law that

governed prior to the Act, 1992 was the
Securities Contracts

(Regulation)   Act,   1956
read   with   Securities   Contracts

(Regulation) Rules, 1957.
The Act
and the Rules provide for

recognition of the stock exchange and qualifications of members

of the stock exchange.
3.   After the formation of SEBI, the Central Government in

exercise of power under
Section 29
of Act, 1992 framed

Securities and Exchange Board of India(Stock Brokers and Sub-

Brokers) Rules, 1992 and in exercise of powers conferred under
Section 30
, the Board framed Securities and Exchange Board of

India(Stock Brokers and Sub-Brokers) Regulations, 1992

(hereinafter referred to as “Regulations 1992”).
4.   When SEBI levied the fees on the stock brokers in terms

of
Regulation 10
read with Schedule III, it was challenged before

this Court in
BSE Brokers’ Forum, Bombay and Others v.
3
Securities and Exchange Board of India and Others1
. This

Court upheld the validity of
Regulation 10
read with Schedule

III to the Regulations, 1992 and further held that the fees

charged by SEBI is not a tax but is a fee and that is regulatory

in nature and the element of quid pro quo is not strictly

necessary. This Court passed further directions requiring SEBI

to amend Regulations to incorporate the recommendations of

the R.S. Bhatt Committee.
5.         That keeping in view the directions of this Court in the

afore-stated judgment, SEBI issued a Circular dated 28th

March, 2002 clarifying that every stock broker who has a

certificate of registration has to pay the fees prescribed in

Schedule III for each and every certificate of registration that he

holds.          The relevant extract of the Circular dated 28th March,

2002 is reproduced hereunder:
“SMD/POLICY/Cir-07/2002

           March 28, 2002

           The Executive Directors/Managing Directors
           All Stock Exchanges

           Dear Sir / Madam,
1
(2001) 3 SCC 482
4
SUB : FEES PAYABLE BY STOCK BROKERS

SEBI has notified the SEBI (Stock Brokers and Sub-brokers)
Regulations in 1992. Schedule III of the SEBI (Stock Brokers
and Sub-brokers) Regulations 1992 which deals in detail with
the payment of the fees was challenged by the brokers of the
stock exchanges in their individual and representative
capacity. The Hon’ble Supreme Court was pleased to deliver
a judgment on February 01, 2001 on this issue inter alia
directing SEBI to amend the Regulations incorporating the
recommendations of the R. S. Bhatt Committee Report.
SEBI has amended the regulations on February 20, 2002 as
per the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court incorporating
the recommendations of R. S. Bhatt Committee.

It may be mentioned that the incidence of fees payable to SEBI
by brokers has been reduced by the R. S. Bhatt Committee.
R. S. Bhatt Committee has suggested different rates of
payment of fees depending on nature of the transactions
entered into. SEBI has accepted the recommendations of the
R. S. Bhatt Committee and many brokers have paid fees in the
past as per schedule III read down with the recommendations
of the R. S. Bhatt Committee and such fees have been
accepted by SEBI.
Following the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, SEBI
has received representations from the brokers in their
individual capacities as well as their representative capacity.
The issues have been examined by SEBI. Part A of this
circular contains clarifications on the issues sought by the
brokers.
xxx   xxx   xxx

                     PART A
CLARIFICATIONS ON THE ISSUES ARISING OUT OF THE
VARIOUS REPRESENTATIONS ON FEES TO BE PAID BY
BROKERS TO SEBI.
xxx   xxx   xxx

vi.   Fees payable by composite corporate members :
5
It is clarified that Regulations require every broker
          who wants to receive a Certificate of registration
          from SEBI to make payment of fees to SEBI. This is
          irrespective of the number of cards which are held
          by the broker on the stock exchange. In case the
          broker has more than one registration certificate
          from SEBI on any stock exchange then he will be
          required to pay fees as per the Regulations for each
          and every certificate that he holds. In case the
          broker holds only one registration certificate and
          more than one card on any exchange it is clarified
          that registration fees are payable on the registration
          certificate and not on the number of cards held by
          the broker.      The brokers’ turnover will be the
          aggregate turnover of all cards.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)
6.   Respondent no.1 is an association of the trading members

of the National Stock Exchange and as alleged, its members deal

in sale and purchase of shares and securities in India and each

stock broker has been registered under the Act, 1992 and pay

fee for registration in accordance with the Regulations, 1992.
7.    The association of trading members challenged the

Circular dated 28th March, 2002 to the extent that paragraph
(vi) of Part A provides the fees payable by a composite corporate

member and requires that the stock broker who held more than

one registration with SEBI, structured fee would be required to

be paid for each registration.        It was contended by the

association that even if a stock broker has more than one
6
registration from SEBI, he was required to pay fees only with

respect to the initial registration with SEBI irrespective of the

number of cards held by the broker from the stock exchange

and accordingly it was prayed that the clarification made by

SEBI under its Circular dated 28th March, 2002 of which a

reference has been made, is in contravention to the scheme of

the Act, 1992 and deserves to be set aside.
8.   Learned Single Judge of the High Court, after examining

the scheme of Regulations and the Circular dated 28th March,

2002 and Reg. 6 read with Reg. 9 in particular along with Form

‘A’, arrived at the conclusion that multiple registrations are

envisaged under the scheme of Regulations, and upheld the

impugned Circular dated 28th March, 2002 holding that it only

determines the mode and manner of the calculation and

dismissed the petition by judgment dated 26th October, 2004.
9.   On a Letters Patent Appeal being preferred by respondent

no.1, the Division Bench of the High Court was of the view that

the scheme only manifests one certificate of registration from

SEBI even if a stock broker operates from several stock
7
exchanges in the country and was primarily influenced by the

expression ‘a certificate’ as referred to in
Section 12(1)
of the

Act, 1992 and while setting aside the finding returned by the

learned Single Judge, allowed the appeal by a judgment dated

7th November, 2005 and held that single registration of SEBI is

required even if a stock broker has a membership and functions

from several stock exchanges and will have to pay registration

fee for the first initial registration with SEBI even if he operates

in several other stock exchanges with a further direction that if

any of the stock broker has paid fees to SEBI for any subsequent

registration after his first initial registration, the said fee has to

be refunded by SEBI forthwith and declared paragraph (vi) of

Part A of the Circular dated 28th March, 2002 to be inconsistent

with
Section 12(1)
of the Act 1992. That became the subject

matter of challenge in appeal before us.
10. It may be noticed that the procedure of requiring

registration with SEBI for each stock exchange separately

continued till the year 2014 and by amending the Regulations,

SEBI now requires a single registration for a stock broker with

one registration number. The broker has to apply to individual
8
stock exchanges for approval to trade in their exchange.

Therefore, from 2014 onwards, the scheme requires one

registration for multiple approvals from individual stock

exchanges.
11. Learned counsel for the appellant submits that this is the

second round of litigation initiated by the respondents having

failed in their challenge to the validity of
Regulation 10
read with

Schedule III of the Regulations providing for imposition of fee,

which was upheld in
BSE Brokers’ Forum, Bombay and

Others
(supra) and the Circular dated 28th March, 2002 is

nothing but a clarification and in terms thereof, the fee is to be

paid by the stock broker which is in conformity with the scheme

of Regulations 1992.
12. Learned counsel for the appellant further submits that the

imposition is held to be a fee and not a tax and being a levy

which is also regulatory in nature, in view of various activities

of SEBI to regulate the business of the securities market

mentioned in
Section 11
of the Act, quid pro quo was not held to

be a condition precedent for levy to constitute fee.
9
13. Learned counsel further submits that the scheme of the

securities contracts clearly postulates that the application is to

be made through a stock exchange for registration with SEBI

and each stock exchange is separately registered under the Act

and it was further emphasised that the scheme demonstrates

that SEBI endorses different stock exchanges and so the fee has

to be separate as its part of the regulatory mechanism.
14. Learned counsel further submits that the multiple

registrations are envisaged and a bare reading of the scheme of

Regulations   indicates   that   wherever      there   is   singular

phraseology, the same is in reference to the registration in

respect of a particular stock exchange and it is not disputed

that stock brokers are enrolling themselves in different

categories of memberships in stock exchanges, for example, like

an equity segment, debt, derivative commodity segment etc.,

and thus brokers are conscious of the different nature of

activities required and the expertise which may entitle them for

registration to trade in one nature of securities but may not be

so in respect of another nature of security.
10
15. In that background, learned counsel for the appellant

further submits that the emphasis that has been laid by the

Division Bench of the High Court on the expression “a

certificate” as referred to under
Section 12(1)
of the Act appears

to be a misnomer for the reason that the same term can be used

for singular or plural expression and the High Court has

completely overlooked the scheme of Regulations, 1992 and

Form ‘A’ annexed to Reg.3 thereto and if the scheme of the Act,

Rules and Regulations framed thereunder are examined in a

holistic manner, it clearly manifests that the stock broker has

to get the certificate of registration from SEBI for each of the

stock exchange where he operates and accordingly the fee is to

be paid pursuant to the Circular dated 28th March, 2002 which

was only a clarification made, according to which the fee was

payable by the composite corporate broker.
16. Learned counsel for the appellant further submits that the

complaint of the association was only with respect to the fee

payable under Schedule III and the computation of five years’

period from the date of initial registration but the scheme of

Regulations, 1992 makes it explicit that an application has to
11
be made by the stock broker through each of the stock

exchanges where he wishes to be a member and the respective

stock     exchange    forwards    the    application    with    its

recommendations to SEBI, who will consider the application

under Reg. 5 and grant registration under Reg. 6 after the

necessary requirements are satisfied and an intimation of

registration is to be sent to the individual stock exchanges, that

enabled broker/sub-broker to apply to SEBI for reconsideration

of his case of registration for a particular exchange, if refused.
17.     Learned counsel further submits that a stock broker who

had been a member of the Madras, Calcutta and Bombay Stock

Exchanges, has to get himself separately registered with SEBI

in respect of each of such stock exchanges and a certificate of

registration may be applicable to each of such stock exchanges

and it has been wrongly claimed by the respondents that one

certificate of registration is required which is applicable to

multiple stock exchanges.
18. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents, on the

other hand, while supporting the finding recorded by the

Division Bench of the High Court under the judgment impugned
12
submits that the scheme of the Act and the Regulations framed

thereunder nowhere suggest that separate registration is

required with respect to each of the stock exchanges and has

referred to certain provisions of the scheme of Regulations and

Rules, 1992 and submits that only a semblance of a suggestion

of multiple registrations can be found in Schedule III, wherein

paragraph 1(1)(c), the word “initial registration” has been

employed to indicate the starting point for the reckoning of five

years for which ad valorem fees has to be paid.
19. Learned counsel further submits that the schedule

annexed to the Regulations cannot override the scheme of the

Regulations and further submits that the then prevailing

practice of multiple registrations was sought by the stock

brokers only out of abundant caution, after their initial

registration, since the certificate issued in Form ‘D’ reflected the

names of such stock exchanges of which they are members on

the date of such initial registration. That apart, there is no

provision to amend and insert the name of more stock

exchanges in the certificate and this being a settled principle of

law, this practice cannot be used in aid of interpretation if it is
13
contrary to the plain language of the statute and took assistance

of the judgment of this Court in
K.P. Varghese v. Income Tax

Officer, Ernakulam and Another2
.
20. Learned counsel for the respondents further submits that

irrespective of whether a stock broker is required to hold a

single registration or multiple registrations with each stock

exchange, the payment of ad valorem fee will nonetheless

happen only once, i.e., for five years from the first of such

multiple registrations and further submits that there is no

indication in the scheme i.e., the Act, Rules and Regulations,

that a stock broker ought to register separately with respect to

each stock exchange of which he is a member and even if

multiple registrations are contemplated, still the ad valorem fee

payable for five years can only be reckoned from the initial

registration, i.e. the first of said multiple registrations with SEBI

and on this premise at least the Circular dated 28th March, 2002

is ultra vires to the Act, 1992 insofar as it compels the stock

brokers to pay ad valorem fee for multiple blocks of five years
2
(1981) 4 SCC 173
14
from the dates of their multiple registrations which is otherwise

not legally permissible and this what the Division Bench has

examined in light of expression ‘a certificate’ in
Section 12(1)
of

the Act, 1992 which does not call for further interference.
21. We have heard the submissions of the learned counsel for

the parties and with their assistance perused the material on

record.
22. From the arguments advanced before us, the following two

questions arise for our consideration:-
(i)     Whether under the Act 1992, a stock broker has to

          obtain a certificate of registration from SEBI for each of

          the stock exchanges where he operates or whether a

          single certificate of registration from SEBI is sufficient

          and the same would enable him to trade in all other

          stock exchanges?
(1) Whether the ad valorem fee to be paid for an initial

          period of five years will recur with every such

          registration?
15
23. Before we proceed to examine the questions that emerge

for our consideration, it will be apposite to first have a bird’s eye

view of the scheme of the Act and the rules/regulations framed

thereunder that will facilitate this Court to appreciate the

submissions made by the parties.
24. The Board has been established under
Section 3
of the Act,

1992 and it has various functions to discharge. The primary

duty of the Board is to protect the interests of the investors in

securities and to promote the development of, and to regulate

the securities market, by such measures as it thinks fit.
Section

11
provides various functions of the Board, including to register

and regulate the working of stock brokers, sub-brokers and

such other intermediaries who intend to associate with the

securities market.
Section 12
of Chapter V reinforces that every

stock broker who fulfils the conditions of eligibility has to obtain

a certificate of registration from the Board in accordance with

the regulations made thereunder.
Section 12
reads as under:-
“Registration of stock brokers, sub-brokers, share
     transfer agents, etc.
12. (1)    No stock broker, sub-broker, share transfer
     agent, banker to an issue, trustee of trust deed, registrar to
16
an issue, merchant banker, underwriter, portfolio manager,
     investment adviser and such other intermediary who may be
     associated with securities market shall buy, sell or deal in
     securities except under, and in accordance with the
     conditions of a certificate of registration obtained from the
     Board in accordance with the (regulations) made under the
     Act :”…………

                                           [Emphasis Supplied]
25. Every stock exchange has to obtain recognition by the

Central Government under
Section 4
of the Securities Contracts

(Regulation)   Act,   1956    and    the     scheme    contemplates/

recognises such of the stock brokers who are members of the

stock exchange. No stock broker or sub-broker shall abide by

and deal in securities unless he holds a certificate of registration

granted by the Board. The Central Government has laid down

the conditions of eligibility which the stock broker has to fulfil

for the purpose of obtaining certificate of registration under the

guiding principles prescribed under Rule 4 of Rules 1992.
26. That in exercise of power under
Section 29
of the Act 1992,

the Central Government framed the Rules for carrying out the

purpose of this Act called the Securities and Exchange Board of

India (Stock Brokers and Sub-Brokers) Rules, 1992.
17
27. It will be apposite to take note of Rules 2(d), 2(e), 3 and 4

of the Rules, 1992 which have been extracted as under:-
“2. In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires :
(a) ……..……….
(b) ..…………….
(c) ………………
(d) “stock exchange” means a stock exchange which is for the
      time being recognised by the Central Government under
section 4
of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956
      (42 of 1956);
(e) “stock broker” means a member of a stock exchange;
(f) …………
(g) …………

  Not to act as stock broker or sub-broker without registration.
3. No stock broker or sub-broker shall buy, sell, deal in
  securities, unless he holds a certificate granted by the Board
  under the Regulations :
Provided that such person may continue to buy sell or deal in
  securities if he has made an application for such registration till
  the disposal of such application.
Conditions for grant of certificate to stock broker.
4. The Board may grant a certificate to a stock-broker subject to
  the following conditions namely :-
(a) he holds the membership of any stock exchange;
(b) he shall abide by the rules, regulations and bye-laws of the
      stock exchange or stock exchanges of which he is a member;
(c) In case of any change in the status and constitution, the
      stock broker shall obtain prior permission of the Board to
      continue to buy, sell or deal in securities in any stock
      exchange;
(d) He shall pay the amount of fees for registration in the manner
      provided in the regulations; and
(e) He shall take adequate steps for redressal of grievances of the
      investors within one month of the date of the receipt of the
      complaint and keep the Board informed about the number,
      nature and other particulars of the complaints received from
      such investors.”
18
28. The scheme of rules clearly postulates that a stock broker

who is a member of any stock exchange, has to abide by the

rules, regulations and bye-laws of the stock exchange or the

stock exchanges of which he is a member apart from other

conditions, for the grant of certificate of registration.
29. The Board, in exercise of its power under
Section 30
of the

Act has framed its Regulations 1992, which are duly notified in

the Gazette. It provides a procedure/mechanism according to

which the stock broker (in terms of Rule 2(e) a member of stock

exchange), has to apply for grant of a certificate in Form ‘A’

which is to be routed through the stock exchange or stock

exchanges of which he is a member and after the fee being

deposited in terms of Reg. 10 as specified in Schedule III, such

applications are considered by the Board in terms of the

conditions of eligibility prescribed under Reg. 5 and after

following the procedure for registration, as referred to under

Reg. 6, the stock broker becomes eligible for grant of certificate

of registration with the Board. The relevant extract of the

provision of Regulations, 1992 is reproduced hereunder:-
19
“CHAPTER II
             REGISTRATION OF STOCK BROKERS
 Application for registration of stock broker.
3. (1) An application by a stock broker for grant of a certificate
shall be made in ‘Form A’ through the stock exchange or stock
exchanges, as the case may be, of which he is admitted as a
member.
(2) The stock exchange shall forward the application form to
the Board as early as possible but not later than thirty days
from the date of its receipt.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-regulation (1),
any application made by a stock broker prior to coming into
force of these regulations containing such particulars or as
near thereto as mentioned in the ‘Form A’ shall be treated as
an application made in pursuance of sub-regulation (1) and
dealt with accordingly :
Provided that the requirement of the payment of fees shall be
the same as is referred to in sub-regulation (1) of regulation
10.

Furnishing of information, clarification, etc.
4. …………….
Consideration of application.
5. The Board shall take into account for considering the grant
of a certificate all matters relating to buying, selling, or dealing
in securities and in particular the following, namely, whether
the stock broker—
(a) is eligible to be admitted as a member of a stock exchange;
(b) has the necessary infrastructure like adequate office space,
equipments and man power to effectively discharge his
activities;
(c) has any past experience in the business of buying, selling
or dealing in securities;
(d) is subjected to disciplinary proceedings under the rules,
regulations and byelaws of a stock exchange with respect to
his business as a stock-broker involving either himself or any
of his partners, directors or employees;
(e) is a fit and proper person.]


Procedure for registration.
6. The Board on being satisfied that the stock-broker is
eligible, shall grant a certificate in ‘Form D’ to the stock-broker
20
and send an intimation to that effect to the stock exchange or
     stock exchanges as the case may be.
Effect of refusal of certificate of registration.
9. A stock-broker, whose application for grant of a certificate
     has been refused by the Board, shall not, on and from the date
     of the receipt of the communication under sub-regulation (2)
     of regulation 8 buy, sell, or deal in securities as a stock-
     broker.
Payment of fees and the consequences of failure to pay
     fees.
10. (1) Every applicant eligible for grant of a certificate shall
     pay such fees and in such manner as specified in Schedule III

     Provided that the Board may on sufficient cause being shown
     permit the stockbroker to pay such fees at any time before the
     expiry of six months from the date on which such fees become
     due.
(2) Where a stock-broker fails to pay the fees as provided in
     regulation 10, the Board may suspend the registration
     certificate, whereupon the stock-broker shall cease to buy, sell
     or deal in securities as a stock-broker.”
30. It may be relevant to note that the application for

registration prescribed in Form ‘A’ annexed to Reg. 3 has to be

filled up by the stock broker for seeking registration with the

Board. Apart from the details which the stock broker has to

indicate, recommendation has to be made by the stock

exchange of which he is a member and through whom the

application is processed/forwarded to the Board for the purpose

of registration. After the compliance is made, the certificate of
21
registration is issued to the stock broker in Form ‘D’ annexed to

Reg. 6.
“SCHEDULE I
                                            FORMS

                                             FORM A

      Securities and Exchange Board of India (Stock Brokers and
                    Sub-brokers) Regulations, 1992
                            [
Regulation 3
]

            Application Form for Registration as Stock Brokers
              with Securities and Exchange Board of India

      Name of the Stock Exchange :
1. Name of Member with Code No.
2. Address of Member
3. Trade name of Member
4. Form of Organisation—Sole proprietorship, partnership,
     corporate body, financial institution. Please give names of
      proprietor/partners/directors.
5. Educational Qualifications.
6. Date of admission to membership.
7. Whether member of more than one Stock Exchange? If so,
      please give name(s) of the Stock Exchange(s) with Code
     Number(s).
8. Indicate Fax, Telex and Phone Number(s) of office and
     residence.
9. In the case of members admitted on any Stock Exchange
      after February 21, 1992, the copy of the information given
      to the Stock Exchange at the time of admission.
I declare that the information given in this form is true to the
     best of my knowledge and belief.
...........................................................
     Dated.....................
Signature

     Recommendation of the Stock Exchange
22
This is to certify that..................is a member of this Exchange
     and is recommended for registration with the Securities and
     Exchange Board of India.
Signature

     Name

     Designation”


                                             “FORM D
      Securities and Exchange Board of India (Stock Brokers and
                                          Sub-brokers)
                                      Regulations, 1992
                                         [
Regulation 6
]
                                Certificate of Registration
     In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of
section 12
of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,
     1992, read with the rules and regulations made thereunder,
     the Board hereby grants a certificate of registration
     to....................a member of the................Stock Exchange(s)
     as a Stock Broker for carrying on the activities of buying,
     selling or dealing in securities and carrying on such other
     activities as are permitted by such Stock Exchange(s) subject
     to conditions prescribed in the rules and in accordance with
     the regulations.
Registration number allotted is as under :
.............................................................................................
     ............... This certificate shall be valid till it is suspended or
     cancelled in accordance with the regulations.
Date.............
By Order

     For and on behalf of

     Securities and Exchange Board of India”
31. At the given time, Schedule III annexed to
Regulation 10
prescribes the fee to be paid by the stock broker for the purpose

of seeking registration which is reproduced hereunder:-
23
“SCHEDULE III
  Securities and Exchange Board of India (Stock Brokers and
                            Sub-brokers)
                          Regulations, 1992
                           [
Regulation 10
]
I. Fees to be paid by the Stock Broker.
1. Every stock broker shall subject to paragraphs 2 and 3 of
this Schedule pay registration fees in the manner set out
below :
(a) where the annual turnover does not exceed rupees one
crore during any financial year, a sum of rupees five thousand
for each financial year;
(b) where the annual turnover of the stock-broker exceeds
rupees one crore during any financial year, a sum of rupees
five thousand plus one hundredth of one per cent of the
turnover in excess of rupees one crore for each financial year;
[(bb) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) it is
clarified that the fee shall be recoverable as computed as
under :
(i) in respect of jobbing transactions that is to say all
transactions which are squared off during the same day which
have not been undertaken by the broker on behalf of clients,
the fees shall be computed at the rate of one two hundredth
of one per cent in respect of the sale side of such transactions;
(ii) in respect of transactions in Government securities, the
bonds issued by any Public Sector Undertaking and the units
traded in a similar manner, the fee payable shall be computed
at the rate of one thousandth of one per cent of the turnover;
(iii) in case of carry forward, renewal or badla transactions the
fees shall be computed at the rate of one hundredth of one per
cent of the turnover and the reverse off setting transactions
shall not be counted as part of the turnover;
(iv) if brokers are carrying out transactions in securities
without reporting them to the stock exchange, those
transactions shall be taken into account for the purpose of
turnover and the fees shall be computed at the rate of one
hundredth of one per cent of the turnover;
(v) the trade put through on other stock exchanges shall be
included in the turnover of that exchange if market for that
security does not exist on the exchange of which he is a
member and the fees shall be computed at the rate of one
hundredth of one per cent of the turnover;
(vi) activity such as underwriting and collection of deposits
shall not be taken into account for the purpose of calculating
the turnover;]
24
(c) after the expiry of five financial years from the date of initial
     registration as a stock-broker, he shall pay a sum of rupees
     five thousand for [every] block of five financial years
     commencing from the sixth financial year after the date of
     grant of initial registration to keep his registration in force.”
                                               [Emphasis supplied]
32. It is not disputed that the rules and the regulations have

been notified with the previous approval of the Competent

Authority in the Official Gazette, of which a reference has been

made above. Before a certificate of registration is issued as

referred to under
Section 12
of the Act 1992, the procedure has

been prescribed for a stock broker who indeed to be a member

of the stock exchange as defined/codified under Rule 2(e) of

Rules 1992. The stock broker not only has to comply with the

conditions for grant of certificate under Rule 4, but at the same

time, has to disclose all the relevant information as required in

the application form for registration in Form ‘A’, which has to

be filled by him as referred to under Reg. 3.
33. The Board, after recording satisfaction that the stock

broker is eligible, on fulfilment of the conditions as being

disclosed by him in Form ‘A’, may issue a certificate of

registration as prescribed in Form ‘D’ annexed to Reg. 6 of
25
Regulations 1992.     For     obtaining     the    certificate    of

registration, the stock broker has to pay such registration fees

as prescribed in Schedule III annexed to Reg. 10 of Regulations

1992.   If we look into Schedule III, it has been completely

structured prescribing the fee to be deposited by the stock

broker; not only the initial registration fee but also the fee which

has to be paid by the stock broker for renewal of his registration.
34. Clause 1(1)(c) of Schedule III to
Regulation 10
postulates

that after expiry of five financial years from the ‘date of initial

registration’, a stock broker, for the sixth financial year, after

the grant of initial registration, has to pay the prescribed fee to

retain registration in force. In reference to the expression ‘date

of initial registration’ to which emphasis been made, it leaves

no ambiguity that if more than one registration is permissible

in terms of the scheme of rules/regulations framed by the

Central Government/Board, as the case may be, the stock

broker has to comply with the conditions prescribed in Form ‘A’

annexed to
Regulation 3
and if he holds multiple registrations

with the Board in his basket, after expiry of five years of the
26
certificate of registration from the initial registration in

reference to the stock exchange of which he is a member, a fee

has to be paid/deposited by him to keep his registration in

force. In other words, each certificate of registration with SEBI

remains co-terminus with the stock exchange(s) to which the

stock broker is a member.
35. In the earlier round of litigation, the stock brokers through

their brokers’ forum challenged the validity of
Regulation 10
read with Schedule III of the said regulations prescribing the fee

to be charged for the purpose of obtaining certificate of

registration with the Board. The objection was that the same is

in the nature of a turnover tax but not a fee being charged by

the Board for the purpose of obtaining certificate of registration.
36. This Court in
B.S.E. Brokers’ Forum, Bombay and

Others
(supra) held in paras 45 and 47 as under:-
“45. It cannot be disputed that the annual turnover of a
     broker is not the subject matter of the levy but is only a
     measure of the levy. In other words, the fee is not being levied
     on the turnover as such but the fee is being levied on the
     brokers making their annual turnover as a measure of the levy
     which is a fee for regulating the activities of the securities
     market and for registration of the brokers and other
     intermediaries in the said market. Therefore, it is futile to
     contend that such levy would be either a tax or a fee on
27
turnover. It is a settled principle in law that if the State has
the authority to impose a levy then it has a wide discretion in
choosing the measure of levy provided, of course, it
withstands the test of reasonableness. Many levies may have
a similar measure but by such similarity in the measure, the
levies do not become the same. Therefore, if the impugned levy
adopts a measure which is either similar to the one adopted
while levying turnover tax or income-tax, the impugned levy
ipso facto by adoption of such measure, would not become
either an income-tax or a turnover tax or even a fee on income
or a fee on turnover.
47. Therefore, it would be futile to contend that the
impugned fee merely because it is levied on the basis of the
turnover of the brokers would either amount to a turnover tax
or a tax on income. While we accept the levy based on annual
turnover of the brokers as valid, we have to notice that the
Expert Committee appointed by the Board has in its report
held that there should be certain changes brought about in
the definition of annual turnover as also in the quantum of
the levy pertaining to certain specific transactions which are
treated as part of the turnover. It has recommended that for
jobbing transactions the scale of fees may be reduced to One
Two hundredth of 1 per cent, and in regard to carry forward,
renewal or badla transactions, the off-setting entries made by
the Exchange, may not be counted as part of the turnover,
and further on Government securities, PSU Bonds and Units,
the turnover will have to be calculated separately and a fee of
one thousandth of one per cent may be charged on such
turnover than the present scale of one hundredth of one per
cent. It has also recommended that the activities such as
underwriting and collection of deposits should not be taken
into account for the purpose of calculating the turnover of the
brokers. These recommendations of the Committee were, as a
matter of fact, accepted by the Government of India also but
as on date, the necessary changes have not been brought
about by the Board in its Regulations. Consequently, to the
extent of the recommendations made by the Expert
Committee, we are of the opinion that the Board is bound to
bring about corresponding changes so as to remove the
anomalies pointed out by the Committee. This was pointed out
to learned counsel for the respondents when it was submitted
that the Board has accepted these recommendations and the
proposed changes were not brought about because of the
pendency of this petition and the necessary changes to
incorporate the recommendations of the Bhatt Committee
28
would be done after disposal of these petitions. We record this
     submission on behalf of the Board and direct that the said
     changes recommended by the Bhatt Committee will be
     incorporated in the Regulations. Subject to the above, we are
     of the view that the challenge made to the levy based on the
     measure of turnover has to be rejected.”
37. This Court, in the earlier round of litigation, has approved

the mechanism which was being followed by the Board in

charging fees in terms of the procedure prescribed under

Schedule III based on “annual turnover”.
38. While accepting the anomalies pointed out by the R.S.

Bhatt committee, this Court was of the view that the Board may

make certain corresponding changes so as to remove those

anomalies pointed out by the Committee and directed to

incorporate the conditions/recommendations with regard to the

levy based on the turnover.
39.
In furtherance of the judgment of this Court in
B.S.E.

Brokers’ Forum, Bombay and Others
(supra), the appellant

came out with a circular dated 28th March, 2002 providing the

procedure according to which the structure for obtaining the

certificate of registration has been laid down providing the fees
29
to be deposited by the stock broker based on the ‘annual

turnover’.
40. The grievance of the respondents was in reference to

paragraph (vi) of Part A to the Circular dated 28th March, 2002

which prescribed the fees payable by composite corporate

members. It only clarifies that every stock broker who wants to

obtain certificate of registration from SEBI irrespective of the

number of registration cards which are held by the stock broker

under stock exchange or stock exchanges, will be required to

pay the fees, for each and every certificate of registration which

he holds. That appears to be the primary cause of grievance

which was assailed by the respondents through the association

by filing of a writ petition before the High Court of Delhi and

after examining the scheme of regulations and the circular of

which reference has been made dated 28th March, 2002, and

taking note of the judgment of this Court, while repelling the

contentions advanced by the respondents, the learned Single

Judge of the High Court upheld the Circular dated 28th March,

2002.
30
41. The Division Bench of the High Court was primarily

persuaded with the expression ‘a certificate’ as referred to under
Section 12(1)
of the Act, 1992 and arrived at a conclusion that

the expression ‘a certificate’ signifies a single certificate of

registration irrespective of the fact that a stock broker is a

member of various stock exchanges and the rules/regulations

which are being framed either by the Central Government or the

Board in exercise of power under
Sections 29
and
30
of the Act,

1992 have to be in conformity with the mandate of the Act, 1992

and   that    will   prevail   over   the    subordinate    legislation.

Proceeding on the said premise, the Division Bench of the High

Court arrived at the conclusion that only initial registration with

SEBI is required for a stock broker even if he is a member of

multiple     stock   exchanges    and       accordingly   directed   the

appellant to refund the fee which had been deposited by each of

the stock broker for multiple registrations.
42. The High Court, in our view, appears to be influenced by

the expression ‘a certificate of registration’ referred to under
Section 12(1)
of the Act, 1992 but has failed to notice that the
31
expression ‘a certificate’ is not in reference to any number and

it can be considered that the words in the singular shall include

plural as well, and has failed to notice that certificate of

registration has to be obtained from the Board in accordance

with the regulations framed in exercise of power under
Section

30
of the Act 1992. In this context, the very scheme of rules

framed by the Central Government in exercise of power under
Section 29
and regulations framed by the Board under
Section

30
of the Act, 1992 has been completely misplaced which indeed

has a statutory force.   Although the scheme may be in the

nature of subordinate legislation, the same has superior force

and supplements a mechanism/ procedure according to which

the member (stock broker) of the stock exchange has to obtain

certificate of registration from the Board and issuance of

certificate of registration from SEBI remain co-terminus with

the stock exchange to which the stock broker is a member and

that being the reason, Reg. 10 read with Schedule III lays down

the procedure according to which the fees has to be

paid/deposited by the stock broker in obtaining certificate of

registration from SEBI in reference to the stock exchange and
32
for its renewal at a later stage for keeping its registration in

force.
43. When the law has to be applied in a given case, it is for the

Court to ascertain the facts and then interpret the law to apply

on such facts.   Interpretation, indeed, cannot be in a vacuum

or in relation to hypothetical facts. It is always the function of

the legislature to say what shall be the law and it is only the

Court to say what the law is and this Court applied the principle

of purposive construction while interpreting the law to apply to

such facts.   A statute has to be construed according to the

intent that makes it and it is always the duty of the Court to act

upon the true intention of the legislature.       If a statutory

provision is open to more than one interpretation, it is always

desirable of the Court to choose the interpretation which

represents the true intention of the legislature. It is also well-

settled that to arrive at the intention of the legislation, it is

always depending on the objects for which the enactment is

made, the Court can resort to historical, contextual and

purposive interpretation leaving textual interpretation aside.
33
Thus, while interpreting the statutory provisions, the Court is

always supposed to keep in mind the object or purpose for

which the statute has been enacted.
44. Barak in his exhaustive work on “Purposive Construction”

explains various meanings attributed to the term “purpose”. It

would be in the fitness of discussion to refer to “Purposive

Construction” in Barak's words:
“Hart and Sachs also appear to treat ‘purpose’ as a subjective
      concept. I say ‘appear’ because, although Hart and Sachs
      claim that the interpreter should imagine himself or herself in
      the legislator's shoes, they introduce two elements of
      objectivity : First, the interpreter should assume that the
      legislature is composed of reasonable people seeking to
      achieve reasonable goals in a reasonable manner; and second,
      the interpreter should accept the non-rebuttable presumption
      that members of the legislative body sought to fulfil their
      constitutional duties in good faith. This formulation allows the
      interpreter to inquire not into the subjective intent of the
      author, but rather the intent the author would have had, had
      he or she acted reasonably.”
      (Aharon Barak, Purposive Interpretation in Law, (2007) at p.
87.)
45.      Francis        Bennion          in      his      book Statutory

Interpretation described “purposive interpretation” as under:
“A purposive construction of an enactment is one which gives
      effect to the legislative purpose by—
(a) following the literal meaning of the enactment where that
      meaning is in accordance with the legislative purpose, or
(b) applying a strained meaning where the literal meaning is
      not in accordance with the legislative purpose.”
34
46.
In
Chief Justice of Andhra Pradesh and Others v. L.V.A.

Dixitulu and Others3
,               a Constitution Bench of this Court

observed as under:
“66. The primary principle of interpretation is that a
           constitutional or statutory provision should be construed
           ‘according to the intent of they that made it’ (Coke). Normally,
           such intent is gathered from the language of the provision. If
           the language or the phraseology employed by the legislation is
           precise and plain and thus by itself proclaims the legislative
           intent in unequivocal terms, the same must be given effect to,
           regardless of the consequences that may follow. But if the
           words used in the provision are imprecise, protean or
           evocative or can reasonably bear meanings more than one, the
           rule of strict grammatical construction ceases to be a sure
           guide to reach at the real legislative intent. In such a case, in
           order to ascertain the true meaning of the terms and phrases
           employed, it is legitimate for the court to go beyond the arid
           literal confines of the provision and to call in aid other well-
           recognised rules of construction, such as its legislative
           history, the basic scheme and framework of the statute as a
           whole, each portion throwing light on the rest, the purpose of
           the legislation, the object sought to be achieved, and the
           consequences that may flow from the adoption of one in
           preference to the other possible interpretation.”
47. Thus, in our considered view, the conjoint reading of the

expression “a certificate” as referred to in
Section 12(1)
of the

Act read with the scheme of Rules, 1992 and Regulations 1992,

leads to an inevitable conclusion that the stock broker not only

has to obtain a certificate of registration from SEBI for each of
3
(1979) 2 SCC 34
35
the stock exchange where he operates, at the same time, has to

pay ad valorem fee prescribed in terms of Part III annexed to
Regulation 10
of the Regulations, 1992 in reference to each

certificate of registration from SEBI in terms of the computation

prescribed under Circular dated 28th March, 2002 and fee is to

be paid as a guiding principle by the stock broker which is in

conformity with the scheme of Regulations 1992.
48. So far as the emphasis which was made to the expression

‘date of initial registration’ as referred to in Schedule III(I)(1)(c)

is concerned, it is in relation to a certificate of registration which

has been obtained by the stock broker from SEBI, which in turn

is in relation to the stock exchange of which he is a member.

After the expiry of five financial years from the date of initial

registration, in reference to the stock exchange, the fee has to

be deposited for the purpose of sixth financial year to keep his

registration in force.
49.
Insofar as the procedure of charging fees as prescribed

under Schedule III annexed to
Regulation 10
of the Regulations,

1992 is concerned, it has already been examined by this Court,
36
in
B.S.E. Brokers’ Forum, Bombay and Others
(supra) and

needs no further deliberation of this Court.
50. During the course of arguments, and for our own

clarification, we put a query to the learned counsel for the

appellant that in consequence of refusal to grant certificate of

registration to a stock broker in relation to one stock exchange,

whether this disqualification will give adverse impact on

registrations granted to the stock broker in other stock

exchanges for the reason that the certificate of registration was

granted based on membership of different stock exchanges, it

has been contended by the appellant that certificate of

registration was granted based on membership of different

stock exchanges, and the applicant was to be admitted as

member of different stock exchanges as per their own bye-laws,

rules and regulations. However, in the case where stock broker

is declared defaulter or disqualified to continue as a stock

broker in reference to one of the stock exchanges, in terms of

SEBI Circular SEBI/MIRSD/Master Cir-04/2010 dated 17th

March, 2010, it has been notified that such stock exchange

shall immediately inform all other stock exchange(s) the details
37
of the defaulter member such as name of the member, the

names   of   the   proprietors/partners/   promoters/dominant

shareholders, as applicable.     This may be a mechanism

according to which if the stock broker who is a member of the

stock exchange commits default, or on being disqualified to

continue as a member, consequential actions could be taken

against him pursuant to the circular to which a reference has

been made. However, this is not a question to be examined by

this Court in the instant proceedings.
51. Consequently, the appeal deserves to succeed and is

accordingly allowed and the judgment and order passed by the

Division Bench of the High Court is hereby quashed and set

aside. No costs.
52. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.


CIVIL APPEAL NO.5076 OF 2007
CIVIL APPEAL NO.3003 OF 2011
53. In view of the judgment passed by this Court in Civil

Appeal No.435 of 2007, the appeals are allowed and the
38
judgment and order passed by the Division Bench of the High

Court impugned is hereby set aside. No costs.
54. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
….…………………………J.
                                     (AJAY RASTOGI)




                                     …………………………….J.
                                     (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER 13, 2022.
39