[Cites
6
, Cited by
14
]
Supreme Court of India
Kapil Kumar vs Raj Kumar on 14 October, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5854 OF 2022


KAPIL KUMAR                                      ...APPELLANT(S)

                            VERSUS


RAJ KUMAR                                     …RESPONDENT(S)



                       JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

     judgment and order dated 05.08.2019 passed by the High

     Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh in Regular

     Second Appeal No. 1727 of 2016, by which, the High Court

     has allowed the said appeal preferred by the original

     defendant and has set aside the judgment and order

     passed by the First Appellate Court as well as the Trial

     Court decreeing the suit for recovery of Rs. 1,36,550/­ the

     original plaintiff has preferred the present appeal.
1
2.    The appellant herein – original plaintiff instituted the suit

      against the respondent – original defendant for recovery of

      Rs. 1 lakh. It was the case on behalf of the plaintiff that

      the defendant has borrowed a sum of Rs. 1 lakh from him

      on 29.06.2007 and has also executed a pro­note (exhibit

      P1) and receipt (exhibit P2) in favour of the plaintiff. The

      defendant denied the execution of pro­note and took the

      stand that no loan was taken by the defendant and in fact

      the transaction was in between the father of the plaintiff

      and the defendant had paid the whole amount borrowed

      by him from the father of the plaintiff. The learned Trial

      Court framed the relevant issues.
2.1   The plaintiff examined four witnesses, namely, PW1 – Kapil

      Kumar (plaintiff), PW2 – Yashpal Chand (handwriting and

      finger print expert), PW3 – Satish Kumar (deed writer) and

      PW4 – Sat Narian (clerk to prove legal notice).

2.2   The defendant examined three witnesses, namely, DW1 –

      Dinesh Kumar (clerk cum cashier, SBI to prove the deposit

      of amount in bank account), DW2 – Raj Kumar (defendant)

      and DW3 – Phool Singh s/o Puran Singh (father of

      plaintiff).
2
2.3   On appreciation of evidence, the learned Trial Court

      believed the execution of pro­note executed by the

      defendant in favour of the plaintiff and consequently

      decreed the suit. The appeal filed by the defendant before

      the learned First Appellate Court came to be dismissed. In

      the second appeal under
Section 100
of Code of Civil

      Procedure, the High Court has interfered with the

      concurrent findings recorded by both the courts below on

      execution of the pro­note by the defendant in favour of the

      plaintiff, solely on the ground that attesting witness to the

      pro­note has not been examined therefore, the content of

      the pro­note has not been proved and consequently has

      allowed the second appeal.
2.4   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court the original

      plaintiff has preferred the present appeal.
3.    Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant –

      original plaintiff has vehemently submitted that in the

      facts and circumstances of the case the High Court has

      erred in   upsetting   and/or   quashing      the concurrent

      findings recorded by both the courts below on execution of
3
the pro­note by the defendant in favour of the plaintiff, in

      exercise of powers under
Section 100
of CPC.

3.1   It is submitted that when the findings on facts were

      recorded by both the courts below on execution of pro­note

      by the defendant in favour of the plaintiff which as such

      were   on    appreciation    of     evidence   on   record,   more

      particularly, the testimony of PW3, the same was not

      required to be interfered with by the High Court in exercise

      of powers under
Section 100
of CPC.
3.2   It is submitted that if the deposition of PW3 is considered

      as a whole, it is apparent that PW3 – deed writer has

      specifically stated that when he asked the defendant as to

      whether he had received the money then the defendant

      admitted the receipt of money. It is submitted in that view

      of the matter and the deposition of PW1 – plaintiff and the

      deposition of deed writer – PW3 the execution of pro­note

      and even the content of payment of the consideration

      mentioned in the pro­note has been established and

      proved. Therefore the High Court has committed a very

      serious     error   in   allowing    the   second    appeal   and

      consequently quashing and setting aside the judgment and
4
decree passed by the learned Trial Court confirmed by the

      learned First Appellate Court.
3.3   It is further submitted that even the signature on the pro­

      note of the defendant has been established and proved by

      the plaintiff by examining handwriting expert – PW2.

3.4   Making the above submissions and relying upon
Section 4
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
(NI Act
) and the

      findings recorded by the learned Trial Court as well as the

      learned First Appellate Court, it is prayed to allow the

      present appeal and restore the judgment and order passed

      by the learned Trial Court confirmed by the learned First

      Appellate Court.
4.    While opposing the present appeal the learned counsel

      appearing   on     behalf   of   the   original   defendant   has

      vehemently submitted that as the plaintiff has failed to

      prove the execution of pro­note by examining the witness

      to the pro­note the High Court has rightly quashed and set

      aside the decree passed by the learned Trial Court

      confirmed by the learned First Appellate Court.

4.1   It is vehemently submitted by the learned counsel

      appearing on behalf of the defendant that as held in the
5
case of Mirza Gorgani Vs. (Firm) Bhola Mal Nihal Chand;
AIR 1934 Lahore 293 (2) burden to prove the execution of

      promissory note is on the plaintiff, even if signatures are

      admitted and execution of document is denied.

4.2   It is further submitted that even the plaintiff has to prove

      the consideration which in the present case plaintiff has

      failed to prove. It is submitted that in the facts and

      circumstances of the case presumption under
Section 118
of the NI Act shall not be attracted as the execution of pro­

      note has not been proved.
4.3   It is submitted that as rightly observed by the High Court

      non­examination of witness to the pro­note is fatal to the

      case of the plaintiff. It is submitted that as observed and

      held by this Court in the case of M.S. Narayana Menon

      alias
Mani Vs. State of Kerala and Anr.
; (2006) 6 SCC

      39 in the case of negotiable instrument in case of

      withholding of relevant evidence adverse inference can be

      drawn against the person and presumption can be

      rebutted on the bases of preponderance of probabilities.
6
4.4   Making the above submissions it is prayed to dismiss the

      present appeal.
5.    We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respective parties at length and have gone through the

      judgment and findings recorded by the learned Trial Court

      while decreeing the suit confirmed by the learned First

      Appellate Court. We have also gone through the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court. We have

      also re­appreciated the entire evidence on record including

      the deposition of relevant witnesses examined by both the

      sides.
5.1   At the outset it is required to be noted that as such there

      were concurrent findings of facts recorded by the learned

      Trial Court as well as the learned First Appellate Court on

      execution of pro­note by the defendant in favour of the

      plaintiff. The said findings were on appreciation of entire

      evidence on record. Therefore, unless the concurrent

      findings recorded by the courts below were found to be

      perverse, the same were not required to be interfered with

      by the High Court in exercise of powers under
Section 100
of CPC. Even the substantial question of law framed by the
7
High Court cannot be said to be as such a question of law

     much less substantial question of law. From the impugned

     judgment and order passed by the High Court it appears

     that as such no specific substantial question of law seems

     to have been framed by the High Court. However, it

     appears that what was considered by the High Court was

     whether the plaintiff has proved the execution of pro­note

     and the receipt by leading cogent evidence. The aforesaid

     can be said to be a question of facts and cannot be said to

     be a question of law much less substantial question of law.

     Therefore, as such the High Court has committed a very

     serious error in upsetting the findings of facts recorded by

     the learned Trial Court confirmed by the learned First

     Appellate Court on execution of pro­note by the defendant

     in favour of the plaintiff.
6.   Even otherwise on merits also the impugned judgment and

     order passed by the High Court is unsustainable. The

     signature of the defendant on the pro­note has been

     established and proved by the plaintiff by examining the

     handwriting expert – PW2. No contrary evidence has been

     led by the defendant to disprove his signature on the pro­
8
note. Even the execution of pro­note has been established

      by the plaintiff by examining the deed writer ­ PW3. Now

      so far as the consideration mentioned in the pro­note is

      concerned there may be some minor contradictions in the

      depositions of PW1 and PW3. However, at the same time if

      the deposition of PW3 as a whole is considered, in the

      cross­examination it has come out that when the deed

      writer asked the defendant that he has received the

      consideration, he has admitted the same.
6.1   In view of the above facts and circumstances of the case

      emerging from the evidence on record, non­examination of

      the witness to the pro­note cannot be held against the

      plaintiff. At this stage it is required to be noted that as per

      the provision of
Section 118
of the NI Act there is a

      presumption of consideration in the negotiable instrument

      [
Section 118(a)
]. It is true that such presumption may be

      rebutted. However, no rebuttal evidence is led by the

      defendant. Under the circumstances also the High Court

      has erred in allowing the second appeal and quashing and

      setting aside the decree passed by the learned Trial Court

      confirmed by the learned First Appellate Court.
9
7.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the

     impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is

     unsustainable both, on law as well as on facts and the

     same deserves to be quashed and set aside and the same

     is accordingly quashed and set aside. The judgment and

     decree passed by the learned Trial Court decreeing the suit

     confirmed by the learned First Appellate Court is hereby

     restored. The present appeal is accordingly allowed. No

     costs.
………………………………….J.
                                   [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                         ………………………………….J.
OCTOBER 14, 2022                   [KRISHNA MURARI]
10