[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Deputy Commissioner Of Gift Tax vs M/S Bpl Limited on 13 October, 2022
Author:
J.K. Maheshwari
Bench:
J.K. Maheshwari
REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3265 OF 2016

                          DEPUTY COMMISSIONER OF GIFT TAX,
                          CENTRAL CIRCLE-II                                 .....     APPELLANT

                                                        VERSUS

                          M/S BPL LIMITED                                   .....   RESPONDENT

                                                                WITH

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3272 OF 2016



                                                         JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
The issue raised in these appeals relates to the valuation of

                                29,46,500 shares of M/s. BPL Sanyo Technologies Limited and

                                69,49,900 shares of M/s. BPL Sanyo Utilities and Appliances

                                Limited, which were gifted by the respondent-assessee, M/s. BPL

                                Limited, to M/s. Celestial Finance Limited on 2nd March 1993. The

                                shares of M/s. BPL Sanyo Technologies Limited and M/s. BPL

                                Sanyo Utilities and Appliances Limited, both public limited
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2022.10.14
companies, were listed and quoted on the stock exchanges.
11:07:47 IST
Reason:
However, these gifted shares, being promoter quota shares,
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                              Page 1 of 18
allotted to the assessee on 17th November 1990 and 10th July 1991,

        were under a lock-in period up to 16th November 1993 and 25th May

        19941, respectively.
2.      As per the provisions of the Gift Tax Act, 19582, as it was applicable

        on the date on which the gift was made, gift tax at the applicable

        rate is chargeable on the value of the taxable gift. Sub-section (1)(a)

        to
Section 43
of the G.T. Act states that where a property is

        transferred otherwise than for adequate consideration, the amount

        by which the market value of the property, at the date of the transfer,

        exceeds the value of the consideration, shall be deemed to be a gift

        made by the transferor. Sub-section (1) to
Section 64
of the G.T. Act

        states that the value of any property, other than cash, which is

        transferred by way of gift, shall be its value on the date on which


1 There appears to be some discrepancy in the date, which need not be authoritatively commented as
it is not material for adjudication of the present appeals.
2 For short, “
G.T. Act
”.
3 4. Gifts to include certain transfers. – (1) For the purpose of this Act, –
(a) where property is transferred otherwise than for adequate consideration, the amount by which the
market value of the property at the date of the transfer exceeds the value of the consideration shall be
deemed to be a gift made by the transferor:
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply in any case where the property is
transferred to the Government or where the value of the consideration for the transfer id determined or
approved by the Central Government or the Reserve Bank of India;
xx                       xx                       xx

4 6. Value of gifts, how determined.– (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the value of any
property, other than cash, transferred by way of gift shall for the purpose of this Act, be its value as on
the date on which the gift was made and shall be determined in the manner laid down in Schedule II.
(2) Where a person makes a gift which is not revocable for a specific period, the value of the property
gifted shall be the capitalised value of the income from such property during the period for which the
gift is not revocable.
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                                                         Page 2 of 18
the gift was made and shall be determined in the manner as laid

        down in
Schedule II of the G.T. Act
. Sub-section (1) to
Section 6
is

        subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) to
Section 6
of the G.T.

        Act, which sub-section need not be elucidated as it is not applicable

        in the context of the present case. It is an accepted position that the

        machinery provision relating to the method of valuation in
Schedule

        II of the G.T. Act
is mandatory and cannot be deviated.5
3.
Schedule II to the G.T. Act
, which incorporates the rules for

        determining the value of a gifted property, states that the value of

        any property, other than cash, transferred by way of gift, subject to

        the modifications as stated, shall be determined in accordance with

        the provisions of Schedule III of the Wealth Tax Act, 19576.

        Therefore, we are required to refer to and apply the provisions of

        Part C of Schedule III of the W.T. Act, which lays down the method

        of valuation of shares and debentures of a company. For the

        purpose of the present decision, we are required to interpret Rules

        9 and 11 of Part C of Schedule III of the W.T. Act, which relate to

        the valuation of quoted shares and debentures of companies and




5 See decisions of this Court in relation to the method of valuation when stipulated under the rules or
the Schedule in S.N. Wadiyar (Dead) through Legal Representative v. Commissioner of Wealth Tax,
Karnataka, (2015) 15 SCC 38; and
Commissioner of Wealth Tax, Meerut v. Sharvan Kumar Swarup &
Sons
, (1994) 6 SCC 623.
6 For short, “W.T. Act”.
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                                                     Page 3 of 18
valuation of unquoted equity shares in companies other than

       investment companies respectively and read thus:
“9. Quoted shares and debentures of companies. – The
              value of an equity share or a preference share in any
              company or a debenture of any company which is a quoted
              share or a quoted debenture shall be taken as the value
              quoted in respect of such share or debenture on the
              valuation date or where there is no such quotation on the
              valuation date, the quotation on the date closest to the
              valuation date and immediately preceding such date.
xx                 xx                Xx
11. Unquoted equity shares in companies other than
              investment companies. – (1) The value of an unquoted
              equity share in any company, other than an investment
              company, shall be determined in the manner set out in sub-
rule (2).
(2) The value of all the liabilities as shown in the balance-
              sheet of such company shall be deducted from the value of
              all its assets shown in that balance-sheet; the net amount
              so arrived at shall be divided by the total amount of its paid-
              up equity share capital as shown in the balance sheet; the
              result multiplied by the paid-up value of each equity share
              shall be the break-up value of each unquoted equity share,
              and an amount equal to eighty per cent of the break-up
              value so determined shall be the value of the unquoted
              equity share for the purposes of this Act.
(3) For the purposes of sub-rule (2),–
(a) the following amounts shown as assets in the
                    balance-sheet shall not be treated as assets,
                    namely:–
(i)     any amount paid as advance-tax under the
Income-tax Act
;
(ii)    any amount shown in the balance-sheet
                            including the debit balance of the profit and
                            loss account or the profit and loss
                            appropriation account which does not
                            represent the value of any asset;
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                                        Page 4 of 18
(b) the following amounts shown as liabilities in
                        the balance-sheet shall not be treated as
                        liabilities, namely:–
(i)       the paid-up capital in respect of equity shares;
(ii)      the amount set apart for payment of dividends
                           on preference shares and equity shares
                           where such dividends have not been declared
                           before the valuation date at a general body
                           meeting of the company;
(iii)     reserves, by whatever name called, other than
                           those set apart towards depreciation;
(iv)      credit balance of the profit and loss account;
(v)       any amount representing provision for
                           taxation, other than the amount referred to in
                           sub-clause (i) of clause (a), to the extent of the
                           excess over the tax payable with reference to
                           the book profits in accordance with the law
                           applicable thereto;
(vi)      any amount representing contingent liabilities
                           other than arrears of dividends payable in
                           respect of cumulative preference shares.
Explanation.– For the purposes of this rule, “balance-sheet”,
              in relation to any company, means the balance-sheet of
              such company (including the Notes annexed thereto and
              forming part of the accounts) as drawn up on the valuation
              date and, where there is no such balance-sheet, the
              balance-sheet drawn up on a date immediately preceding
              the valuation date, and, in the absence of both, the balance-
              sheet drawn up on a date immediately after the valuation
              date.
4.     The expressions “quoted share” and “quoted debentures”, and

       “unquoted shares” and “unquoted debentures” have been defined

       vide sub-rules (9) and (11), respectively, to Rule 2 of Part A of

       Schedule III of the W.T. Act, which read:
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                                            Page 5 of 18
“2. Definitions.-… (9) “quoted share” or “quoted
              debenture”, in relation to an equity share or a preference
              share or, as the case may be, a debenture, means a share
              or debenture quoted on any recognised stock exchange
              with regularity from time to time, where the quotations of
              such shares or debentures are based on current
              transactions made in the ordinary course of business.
Explanation. – Where any question arises whether a share
              or debenture is a “quoted share” or a “quoted debenture”
              within the meaning of this clause, a certificate to that effect
              furnished by the concerned stock exchange in the
              prescribed form shall be accepted as conclusive;
xx               xx                 xx

              (11) “unquoted share” or “unquoted debenture”, in relation
              to an equity share or a preference share or, as the case may
              be, a debenture, means a share or debenture which is not a
              quoted share or a quoted debenture.”

               As per the definitions, the expression “quoted share” in case

       of an equity share means a share which is quoted on any

       recognised stock exchange with regularity from time to time and

       where the quotation of such shares is based on current transactions

       made in the ordinary course of business. Explanation to sub-rule

       (9) of Rule 2 of Part A of Schedule III of the W.T. Act states that

       when a question arises on whether a share is a quoted share within

       the meaning of the rule, a certificate to that effect furnished by the

       concerned stock exchange in the prescribed form shall be accepted

       as conclusive. The expression “unquoted share”, in relation to an

       equity share, means a share which is not a quoted share.
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                                     Page 6 of 18
5.     We are in agreement with the view expressed in the impugned

       judgment, which observes that the equity shares under the lock-in

       period were not “quoted shares”, for the simple reason that the

       shares in the lock-in period were not quoted in any recognised stock

       exchange with regularity from time to time. There are no current

       transactions relating to these shares made in the ordinary course

       of business. These equity shares being under the lock-in period

       could not be traded and, therefore, remained unquoted in any

       recognised stock exchange. There, therefore, would be no current

       transactions in respect of these shares made in the ordinary course

       of business.
6.     When the equity shares are in a lock-in period, then as per the

       guidelines issued by the Securities and Exchange Board of India

       (SEBI), there is a complete bar on transfer, which is enforced by

       inscribing the words “not transferable” in the relevant share

       certificates. This position is accepted by the Revenue, which,

       however, has relied upon a general circular issued by SEBI,

       wherein it is stated that the shares under the lock-in period can be

       transferred inter se the promoters. This restricted transfer, in our

       opinion, would not make the equity shares in the lock-in period into

       “quoted shares” as defined vide sub-rule (9) to Rule 2 of Part A of

       Schedule III of the W.T. Act, as the lock-in shares are not quoted in
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                              Page 7 of 18
any recognised stock exchange with regularity from time to time,

       and it is not possible to have quotations based upon current

       transactions made in the ordinary course of business. Possibility of

       transfer to promoters by private transfer/sale does not satisfy the

       conditions to be satisfied to regard the shares as quoted shares.
7.     Rule 11 of Part C of Schedule III of the W.T. Act applies to

       “unquoted shares” which, as per the definition vide sub-rule (11) to

       Rule 2 of Part A of Schedule III of the W.T. Act, means a share

       which is not a “quoted share”. Sub-rule (1) to Rule 11 of Part C of

       Schedule III of the W.T. Act, states that other than investment

       companies, the value of unquoted equity shares is to be determined

       in the manner specified in sub-rule (2) to Rule 11 of Part C of

       Schedule III of the W.T. Act. Sub-rule (2) to Rule 11 of Part C of

       Schedule III of the W.T. Act states the method of valuation in the

       case of “unquoted equity shares in any company, other than

       investment companies”, which, in the context of the limited

       controversy raised before us, need not be elaborated. Suffice it is

       to observe that Rule 11 of Part C of Schedule III of the W.T. Act is

       a statutory rule which prescribes the method of valuation of

       “unquoted equity shares” in companies, other than investment

       companies, which prescription and method of valuation is

       mandatory in nature. The effect of Rule 11 of Part C of Schedule III
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                             Page 8 of 18
of the W.T. Act is that unquoted shares must be valued as per the

       formula prescribed. No other method of valuation is permitted and

       allowed.
8.     Equity shares which are quoted and transferable in the stock

       exchange are to be valued on the basis of the current transactions

       and quotations in the open market. The market quotations would

       reflect the market value of the equity shares that are transferable in

       a stock exchange, but this market price would not reflect the true

       and correct market price of shares suffering restrictions and bar on

       their transferability. The shares in question would become

       transferable post the lock-in period. It is a fact that the market price

       fluctuates, and the share prices can move up and down. Share

       prices do not remain static. Equally, the restriction or bar on

       transferability has an effect on the value/price of the shares. Easy

       and unrestricted marketability are important considerations that

       would normally impact valuation/price of a share. Therefore, one

       may have to depreciate the value of the lock-in equity shares, viz.

       shares that are free from such restriction.
9.     In terms of the Rules, we cannot apply a hybrid method of valuation

       while applying Rule 9 of Part C of Schedule III of the W.T. Act, which

       prescribes the method of valuation for quoted shares. Ad hoc
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                                Page 9 of 18
depreciation/reduction from the quoted price of equity shares

       transferable in the open market is not permitted and allowed vide

       Rule 9 of Part C of Schedule III of the W.T. Act. The shares in

       question being “unquoted shares”, therefore, have to be valued in

       terms of Rule 11 as a standalone valuation method. This would be

       in accord with sub-section (1) to
Section 6
of the G.T. Act, which

       states that the value of a property, other than cash, transferred by

       way of gift, shall be valued on the date on which the gift was made

       and shall be determined in the manner as
laid down in
Schedule II

       of the G.T. Act
, which, as noticed above, makes the provisions of

       Schedule III of the W.T. Act applicable.
10.    Faced with the aforesaid position, the Revenue has relied upon

       Rule 21 of Part H of Schedule III of the W.T. Act, which reads thus:
“21. Restrictive covenants to be ignored in determining
              market value.–For, the removal of doubts, it is hereby
              declared that the price or other consideration for which any
              property may be acquired by or transferred to any person
              under the terms of a deed of trust or through or under any
              restrictive covenant in any instrument of transfer shall be
              ignored for the purposes of determining under any provision
              of this Schedule, the price such property would fetch if sold
              in the open market on the valuation date.”

               In order to understand the import of Rule 21 of Part H of

       Schedule III of the W.T. Act, it is necessary to refer to earlier

       judgments of this Court on the valuation of equity shares or property

       not freely transferrable or where transfer is restricted. Reference to
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                                  Page 10 of 18
these decisions is also relevant as it supports our interpretation in

          highlighting the difference between “quoted” and “unquoted”

          shares.
11.
In
Ahmed G.H. Ariff and Others v. Commissioner of Wealth Tax,

          Calcutta7
, a three Judge Bench of this Court, in a matter relating to

          the W.T. Act for a period when Schedule III of the W.T. Act was not

          applicable, had observed that the expression ‘property’ is a term of

          the widest import as it signifies every possible interest which a

          person can clearly hold or enjoy. ‘Property’, as a term, should be

          given a liberal and wide connotation, and extends to those well-

          recognised types of          interests that   have the insignia or

          characteristics of a proprietary right. Having held so, this Court

          rejected the argument of the assessee therein that his right to

          receive a specified share of the net income from an estate in

          respect of a Wakf-Alal-Aulad was not an asset assessable to wealth

          tax, on the ground that this asset had ‘nil’ or no value as it was of a

          non-transferable nature. It was held that wealth tax under Section

          3 of the W.T. Act is imposed on the charge of net wealth, which

          necessarily includes in it every description of property of the

          assessee, movable or immovable, barring the exceptions as stated



7   (1969) 2 SCC 471.
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                                 Page 11 of 18
in the provisions of the W.T. Act. More significant for our purposes

          are the observations that the words “if sold in the open market” does

          not contemplate actual sale or the actual state in the market, but

          only enjoins that it should be assumed that there is an open market

          and the property, even with the restrictions, can be sold in such a

          market, and on that basis the value has to be found out. Therefore,

          the expression “if sold in the open market” refers to a hypothetical

          case, where, for the purpose of valuation, one must assume that

          there is an open market in which an asset with restrictions or bar on

          transfer can be sold. This decision was followed in
Purshottam N.

          Amarsay and Another v. Commissioner of Wealth Tax,

          Bombay8
, which was a case relating to the valuation of the right to

          property of the assessee in a trust. The argument of the assessee

          that the right to property in a trust, being a personal estate, is

          incapable of being sold in the open market and, therefore, it would

          have ‘nil’ or no value was rejected.
This decision in this context

          quotes
Ahmed G.H. Ariff
(supra).
At this stage, it would be

          relevant to refer to the decision of the House of Lords in

          Commissioners of Inland Revenue v. Crossman9, which

          decision was referred to with approval in both Ahmed G.H. Ariff



8   (1972) 4 SCC 376.
9   (1937) A.C. 26.
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                                Page
12 of 18
(supra) and
Purshottam N. Amarsay
(supra). The majority

       decision of the House of Lords in Crossman’s case (supra), a case

       relating to estate duty, holds that where the right to transfer shares

       of a limited company is restricted and while its value is not ‘nil’ or

       ‘0’, it should be valued on the basis and accounting for the

       restriction. The contention that in view of the bar on transfer no

       property was actually passed on death, and a fresh set of rights in

       favour of the legatees came into existence was disapproved. At the

       same time, it was held that the shares cannot be valued ignoring

       the restrictions on transfer, as contained in the Articles of

       Association
in that case
, as that would be to value the property

       which the deceased as an owner did not own. Even if the shares

       were not transferable in the open market in terms of the Articles of

       Association, the shares had certain privileges and rights, which

       form the ingredients in its value. The expression “if sold in the open

       market” does not alter the nature of the property. What the

       expression postulates is to permit the assessee or the authorities

       to assume a sale in the open market, which is to limit the property

       to be valued at the price that a person would be prepared to pay in

       the open market with all rights and obligations. The value would not

       exceed the sum, which a willing purchaser would pay, given the fact

       that the right to purchase is restricted or barred. This does not imply
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                              Page 13 of 18
that the valuation of the shares can be made artificially and by

        ignoring the restrictions on the property. Valuation cannot ignore

        the limitations attached to the shares. This judgment in

        Crossman’s case (supra) has been subsequently reiterated by the

        House of Lords in
Lynall and Another v. Inland Revenue

        Commissioners10
. Referring to the decision in Crossman’s case

        (supra) and a decision of the High Court of Australia in
Abrahams

        v. The Federal Commissioner of Taxation11
, a Division Bench of

        the Madras High Court in
R. Rathinasabapathy Chettiar v.

        Commissioner of Wealth-Tax, Madras12
, in our opinion, has

        rightly observed:
“13. In
Abraham v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation
at
               the time of his death a deceased owned shares in five
               companies, four of which carried on investment business,
               and the fifth a pastoral business. The brother of the
               deceased who held equal interest in the whole of the issued
               capital of the companies was appointed the sole executor.
               The memorandum and articles of association of the four
               companies contained a restriction on transfer of shares
               whereby the board of directors may refuse to register any
               transfer of shares to a transferee who was in their opinion
               an undesirable person to be admitted as a member of the
               company. In the fifth company the articles of association
               provided that the governing directors should have a right at
               any time of purchasing the shares of all the-members of the
               company, the purchase price to be the amount paid up
               thereon or, at the option of the governing directors, the
               amount which bore the same proportion to the excess value
               of the assets over the liabilities of the company as the total
               amount paid up on the shares bore to the total paid up
               capital of the company. The question arose as to how the
10 (1972) A.C. 680.
11 (1944) HCA 32.
12 (1974) 93 ITR 555.
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                                    Page 14 of 18
shares left by the deceased are to be valued for the purpose
                of estate duty. The court held that the assessment of value
                of the shares held by the deceased in the five companies
                must normally be made principally on the basis of the
                income yield including the strong probability of distribution
                of accumulated profits and that the effect of the restrictions
                on transfer of shares and the right of pre-emption given to
                the governing directors to purchase the shares must all be
                taken note of and depreciation on that account had to be
                allowed for in the primary valuation. The above case laid
                down the principle that the restrictions contained in the
                articles of association on the transfer and also on the price
                for which the shares could be transferred has to be ignored
                and the transferability in the open market must be assumed,
                for the purpose of valuation, but that the market value of the
                shares has to be depreciated to a certain extent having
                regard to the said restrictions contained in the articles of
                association, and that if the market value of such shares
                could not be ascertained otherwise, it is possible to value
                the shares on a break-up basis with reference to the
                balance-sheet of the company for the relevant year.”
12.       The aforesaid decision was subsequently followed by the Madras

          High Court in two other decisions,
Commissioner of Wealth Tax,

          Chennai v. Shri Thirupathy Kumar Khemka13
, and the decision

          dated 12th April 2019 in
Commissioner of Income Tax, Chennai

          v. Sadhana Devi14
, which relates to the valuation of shares in lock-

          in period as per the provisions of Schedule III of the W.T. Act.
13.       Read in this manner, Rule 21 of Part H of Schedule III of the W.T.

          Act is a rule which has been enacted to clarify and remove doubts.

          It has reiterated and affirmed the dictum in
Ahmed G.H. Ariff
(supra) and
Purshottam N. Amarsay
(supra) that notwithstanding


13   (2012) SCC OnLine Mad 2562.
14   Tax Case No. 788 of 2008.
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                                     Page 15 of 18
the negative covenants prohibiting or restricting transfer, the

       property should be valued for the purpose of the W.T. Act and the

       G.T. Act, but the valuation is not by overlooking or ignoring the

       restrictive conditions. The shares in the lock-in period have market

       value, which would be the value that they would fetch if sold in the

       open market. Rule 21 of Part H of Schedule III of the W.T. Act

       permits valuation of the property even when the right to transfer the

       property is forbidden, restricted or contingent. Rights and limitations

       attached to the property form the ingredients in its value. The

       purpose is to assume that the property which is being valued is

       being sold, and not to ignore the limitations for the purpose of

       valuation. This is clear from the wording of Rule 21 of Part H of

       Schedule III of the W.T. Act, which when read carefully expresses

       the legislative intent by using the words “hereby declared”. The

       Rule declares that the price or other consideration for which any

       property may be acquired by, or transferred, to any person under

       the terms of a deed of trust or through any other restrictive

       covenant, in any instrument of transfer, is to be ignored as per the

       provisions of the Schedule III of the W.T. Act. However, the price of

       such property is the price of the property with the restrictions if sold

       in the open market on the valuation date. In other words,

       notwithstanding the restrictions, hypothetically the property would
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                               Page 16 of 18
be assumed to be saleable, but the valuation as per the Schedule

       III of the W.T. Act would be made accounting and taking the

       limitation and restrictions, and such valuation would be treated as

       the market value. The rules do not postulate a charge in the nature

       and character of the property. Therefore, the property has to be

       valued as per the restrictions and not by ignoring them.
14.    Thus, Rule 21 of Part H of Schedule III of the W.T. Act permits

       valuation and ascertainment of the market value as per the

       provisions of Schedule III of the W.T. Act, but does not state that

       the valuation will be done by disregarding the restrictions, or by

       enhancing the rights which have been transferred, or by revaluation

       of the asset when provisions of Schedule III are invoked for the

       purpose of valuation of an asset under the W.T. Act.
15.    However, one aspect is required to be clarified, viz. explanation to

       Rule 2(9) of Part A, Schedule III of the W.T. Act. The certificate from

       the concerned stock exchange is only to state whether an equity

       share, preference share or debenture, as the case may be, was

       quoted with the regularity from time to time and whether the

       quotations of such shares or debentures are based on current

       transactions made in the ordinary course of business. The

       explanation does not prohibit the authority, tribunal or the court from
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                              Page 17 of 18
examining whether a particular share, be it equity or preference

       share, is a “quoted share” or an “unquoted share” in terms of sub-

       rules (9) and (11) of Rule 2 of Part A of Schedule III of the W.T. Act.

       This right which is conferred on the authorities under the W.T. Act

       or the
G.T. Act
is not delegated to the stock exchange. A decision

       of the authority is amenable and can be examined when challenged

       in an appeal.
16.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, and for the reasons stated

       above, the present appeal by the Revenue is to be dismissed. We

       must record that the assessee has not pressed the ground raised

       in its appeal challenging the impugned order, which is to be

       dismissed as not pressed. We order accordingly. There shall be no

       order as to costs.
......................................J.
                                                           (SANJIV KHANNA)



                                                  ......................................J.
                                                        (J.K. MAHESHWARI)
NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 13, 2022.
Civil Appeal No. 3265 of 2016 & Anr.                                     Page 18 of 18