[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
South Delhi Municipal Corporation vs Federation Of Residents Welfare ... on 21 October, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7614 OF 2022


          South Delhi Municipal Corporation                         …Appellant(s)

                                               Versus

          Federation of Residents Welfare Association,            …Respondent(s)
          Vasant Kunj (Regd.) and Ors.


                                          JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 06.12.2016 passed by the High

                         Court of Delhi at New Delhi in C.M. No. 34439/2016 in

                         Writ Petition No. 3687/1995, by which, the Division Bench

                         of the High Court has dismissed the said application

                         preferred by the South Delhi Municipal Corporation

                         (hereinafter referred to as the Municipal Corporation) and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
has refused to modify the earlier order dated 03.12.2003
Date: 2022.10.21
16:55:29 IST
Reason:
passed by the High Court in Writ Petition No. 3687/1995,
1
the Municipal Corporation has preferred the present

     appeal.
2.   That the dispute is with respect to the cremation ground at

     Masoodpur, New Delhi which as such is in existence since

     last more than 100 years and the same is for the benefit of

     village people of village Masoodpur, New Delhi. That the

     original writ petitioner – Residents Welfare Association,

     Vasant Kunj approached the High Court by way of Writ

     Petition No. 3687/1995 for appropriate orders inter­alia

     not to permit the use of land in question as cremation

     ground. It was the case on behalf of the original writ

     petitioner that Delhi Development Authority (DDA) has

     already provided cremation ground at other place in the

     same area. Taking into consideration communication dated

     27.12.1990 by DDA calling upon the Municipal Authorities

     to issue notification for closure of cremation ground at

     Masoodpur Village and for shifting it to enlarge cremation

     ground at Kishangarh Village and taking note of the

     provisions of the
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957
(hereinafter referred to as the Act, 1957), more particularly,
Sections 390
and
391
of the Act, 1957, and observing that
2
it was for the Standing Committee of the Municipal

Corporation to take an appropriate decision, the High

Court while disposing of the aforesaid writ petition directed

the Municipal Corporation to take an appropriate decision

under
Section 391
of the Act, 1957. The Division Bench of

the   High   Court   also   directed   that   the   Municipal

Corporation shall take possession of the land offered at

Kishangarh and shall make all necessary arrangements to

use the same as a crematorium. That thereafter, pursuant

to the directions issued by the High Court in order dated

03.12.2003 in Writ Petition No. 3687/1995, the Standing

Committee in exercise of powers under
Section 391
of the

Act, 1957 had taken a conscious decision not to close the

crematorium at Masoodpur Village, by observing that it is

not in the public interest to close the crematorium at

Masoodpur Village and that the crematorium at Masoodpur

Village is being used for the village since long. That

thereafter, the Municipal Corporation filed the present

application before the High Court for modification of order

dated 03.12.2003 passed in Writ Petition No. 3687/1995.

By the impugned order the High Court dismissed the said
3
application hence, the present appeal at the instance of the

      Municipal Corporation.
3.    Ms. Vandana Sehgal, learned counsel appearing on behalf

      of the Municipal Corporation has vehemently submitted

      that pursuant to earlier order dated 03.12.2003 passed by

      the Division Bench of the High Court in Writ Petition No.

      3687/1995, the Standing Committee of the Municipal

      Corporation has taken a conscious decision not to close the

      crematorium at Village Masoodpur. It is submitted that the

      decision of the Standing Committee not to close the

      crematorium is in exercise of powers under
Section 391
of

      the Act, 1957. It is submitted that having considered the

      fact that the crematorium at Village Masoodpur is in use

      since long, much prior the society at Vasant Kunj came

      into existence and having considered that it is not in the

      public interest and/or in the interest of the village people

      to close the crematorium at Village Masoodpur, the High

      Court ought to have modified its earlier decision dated

      03.12.2003 in Writ Petition No. 3687/1995.

3.1   It is submitted that under
Section 42
of the Act, 1957 it is

      the duty cast upon the Corporation to make provision for
4
regulation of places for disposal of dead. It is submitted

      that therefore, the provision of maintenance of places for

      disposal of dead is an obligatory function of Municipal

      Corporation.     It   is   submitted   that   merely   because

      subsequently the society/residential colonies might have

      come into existence it cannot be a ground to close the

      crematorium which is in use since long.
3.2   It is submitted that when a conscious decision has been

      taken by the Standing Committee of the Municipal

      Corporation not to close the crematorium at Village

      Masoodpur the High Court ought to have modified its

      earlier order.
4.    While opposing the present appeal Shri Karan Singh Bhati,

      learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1 –

      Federation of Residents Welfare Association, Vasant Kunj

      has vehemently submitted that the crematorium is nearer

      to the residential complexes of Vasant Kunj and therefore,

      it is not in the interest of residents of Vasant Kunj to

      continue the crematorium at Village Masoodpur.

4.1   It is vehemently submitted that as such the DDA has

      already   allotted    and/or    allowed   a   crematorium   at
5
Kishangarh    to   use   the    same    as   crematorium,    the

      crematorium at Village Masoodpur ought to have shifted to

      Kishangarh which is just seven k.m. away.
4.2   It is submitted that therefore when earlier the High Court

      directed    the    Municipal    Corporation     to   shift   the

      crematorium at Village Masoodpur to Kishangarh, the

      same is not rightly modified by the High Court by

      impugned order.
5.    We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      Municipal    Corporation   as    well   as    learned   counsel

      appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1 – Residents

      Welfare Association, Vasant Kunj.
5.1   At the outset it is required to be noted that the dispute is

      with respect to the crematorium at Village Masoodpur. The

      crematorium at Village Masoodpur is being used for the

      village people since long and it appears that the same is

      being used much prior the Act, 1957 came into force. The

      residential colonies in Vasant Kunj have come into

      existence in 1990. So, at the relevant time when the

      residential colonies at Vasant Kunj came into existence

      there was already a crematorium at Village Masoodpur.
6
The residential colonies came into existence subsequent to

      the crematorium at Village Masoodpur. Therefore, when

      the residents of Vasant Kunj started residing on and after

      1990,   there   was   already   a    crematorium   at   Village

      Masoodpur. Merely because subsequently the residents of

      Vasant Kunj/locality have started residing, it cannot be a

      ground to shift the crematorium and/or not to use the

      crematorium at Village Masoodpur.
5.2   In the earlier round of litigation the Division Bench of the

      High Court directed the Municipal Corporation/Standing

      Committee of the Municipal Corporation to take an

      appropriate decision under
Section 391
of the Act, 1957.

      That thereafter the Standing Committee of the Municipal

      Corporation has taken a conscious decision not to close

      the   crematorium     at   Village   Masoodpur.    From    the

      resolution of the Standing Committee, it appears that the

      Standing Committee has taken a conscious decision not to

      close the crematorium on the grounds that (i) Masoodpur

      cremation ground has not become offensive to the health

      of persons residing in the neighbourhood; (ii) is running

      since long and (iii) its continuation is in the larger public
7
interest. Therefore, when a conscious decision has been

      taken by the Standing Committee of the Municipal

      Corporation under
Section 391
of the Act, 1957 not to

      close the crematorium at Village Masoodpur, the High

      Court ought to have modified its earlier order dated

      03.12.2003 in Writ Petition No. 3687/1995 by which the

      Municipal   Corporation    was   directed   to   shift   the

      crematorium to Kishangarh.
5.3   At this stage it is required to be noted that as such under
Section 42(f)
of the Act, 1957 it is the duty cast upon the

      Municipal Corporation to make provision for regulation of

      places for the disposal of dead and the provision of

      maintenance of said places is an obligatory function of

      Municipal Corporation. Therefore, until and unless the

      conditions as mentioned in
Section 391
of the Act, 1957

      are satisfied and it is specifically found that any burning

      or burial ground has become offensive, or dangerous to the

      health of the persons residing at neighbourhood, the

      burning and burial ground can be ordered to be closed

      with the previous sanction of the Standing Committee. A

      conscious decision has been taken by the Standing
8
Committee not to close the crematorium at Village

     Masoodpur looking to the public interest and in the

     interest of village people of Village Masoodpur. If the

     request made on behalf of respondent No. 1 is accepted in

     that case on the settlement of the residents subsequently

     every crematorium in the city/town will have to be shifted

     outside the town/city, which shall not be in the interest of

     the residents of the village/city/town. Therefore, the High

     Court ought to have modified its earlier order dated

     03.12.2003, by which it was directed to shift the

     crematorium     at    Village    Masoodpur         to   Kishangarh.

     However, at the same time taking into consideration need

     of the day the Municipal Corporation has to modernise the

     crematorium     and    to    shift   it   to   a   modern   electric

     crematorium which shall be in the larger public interest of

     the   village   people      as   well     as   residents    of   the

     neighbourhood area.
6.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the

     present appeal succeeds. The impugned order passed by

     the High Court refusing to modify its earlier order dated

     03.12.2003 in Writ Petition No. 3687/1995 directing to
9
shift the crematorium at Village Masoodpur to Kishangarh

    is hereby quashed and set aside. Consequently, order

    dated 03.12.2003 passed in Writ Petition No. 3687/1995

    directing to shift the crematorium at Village Masoodpur to

    Kishangarh is hereby modified/quashed and set aside in

    view of subsequent decision dated 31.03.2016 of Standing

    Committee of the Municipal Corporation. However, at the

    same time we direct the Municipal Corporation to take

    steps to modernise the crematorium by shifting it to a

    modern electric crematorium which shall be in the larger

    public interest of the village people as well as the residents

    of the neighbourhood area. The said exercise be completed

    within a period of twelve months from today. The present

    appeal is accordingly allowed. No costs.
………………………………….J.
                                   [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                         ………………………………….J.
OCTOBER 21, 2022                   [M.M. SUNDRESH]
10