[Cites
53
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. M.S.P.L. Limited Rep. By Executive ... vs The State Of Karnataka And Ors. ... on 11 October, 2022
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
Hemant Gupta
REPORTABLE


                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   Civil Appeal No(s). 4678 OF 2021
                            (arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 23353 of 2012)

          M/S. M.S.P.L. LIMITED                                    …Appellant(s)

                                               VERSUS

          THE STATE OF KARNATAKA AND ORS.                         …Respondent(s)
                                 WITH

                                 CIVIL APPEAL No(s).          OF 2022
                            (arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 23351 of 2012)



          SRI SYED AHMED                                           …Appellant(s)

                                               VERSUS

          THE STATE OF KARNATAKA AND ORS.                        …Respondent(s)



                              CIVIL APPEAL No(s). 4699­4719 OF 2021
                         (arising out of SLP (Civil) Nos. 20866­20886 of 2012

          THE KARNATAKA INDUSTRIAL AREA
          DEVELOPMENT BOARD AND ANOTHER                           …Appellant(s)

                                               VERSUS

          SRI KAKARAL RAVIKUMAR AND OTHERS                       …Respondent(s)
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
BABITA PANDEY
Date: 2022.10.11
18:13:43 IST
Reason:




                                                  1
          CIVIL APPEAL No(s). 4679­4698 OF 2021
     (arising out of SLP (Civil) Nos. 21310­21329 of 2012

M/S. AARESS IRON & STEEL LTD.                   …Appellant(s)

                           VERSUS

THE STATE OF KARNATAKA AND ORS.
ETC.                                           …Respondent(s)

                           AND WITH
           CIVIL APPEAL No(s). 4745­4747 OF 2021
     (arising out of SLP (Civil) Nos. 21915­21917 of 2013

THE STATE OF KARNATAKA AND ANOTHER              …Appellant(s)

                           VERSUS

SRI KAKARAL RAVIKUMAR AND OTHERS               …Respondent(s)


                       JUDGMENT
Vikram Nath, J.
1.   Leave granted in SLP(C) No. 23351/2012.
2.   The State of Karnataka (Civil Appeal No. 4745­4747 of

2021), the Karnataka Industrial Area Development Board (Civil

Appeal No. 4699­4719 of 2021), M/S MSPL Limited (Civil Appeal

No. 4678 of 2021) and AARESS Iron & Steel Limited (Civil Appeal

No. 4679­4698 of 2021) have jointly assailed the correctness of

the judgement and order dated 22.03.2012 passed by the
2
Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court, Circuit Bench at

Dharwad in a group of writ appeals filed by the land owners. By

the said judgment, the Division Bench allowed the writ appeals,

set aside the order of the learned Single Judge dated 17.03.2009

and the writ petitions were allowed. The notifications under

Sections 3(1), 1(3) and 28(1) of the Karnataka Industrial Areas

Development Act, 19661 were quashed.
3.     Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No. 23351 of 2012 is filed by a land

owner Syed Ahmed challenging the judgment dated 14.12.2011

passed by the Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court,

Circuit Bench at Dharwad in Writ Appeal No. 6098 of 2009

whereby the writ appeal was dismissed and the judgement of the

learned Single Judge dated 23.06.2008 dismissing the writ

petition {bearing number W.P.No. 18617 of 2007 (LA­KIDAB)} was

affirmed.      As the argument of the appellant is based upon the

Division Bench Judgement of the Karnataka High Court dated

22.03.2012 which is impugned in the group of Civil Appeals

referred to above, this matter has been taken up analogous with

the above said appeals.
Background

1 In short “the 1966 Act”
3
4.          Two State Acts legislated in the State of Karnataka are

relevant for determination of issues in the present case.
Karnataka Industrial Areas Development Act, 1966
and the

Karnataka Industries (Facilitation) Act, 20022.
(i)      The      1966   Act    came       up    with   the    following

     preamble/object:
“
An Act
to make special provisions for securing the
            establishment of industrial areas in the 1 [State of
            Karnataka]1 and generally to promote the establishment
            and orderly development of industries therein, and for that
            purpose to establish an Industrial Areas Development
            Board and for purposes connected with the matters
            aforesaid. WHEREAS it is expedient to make special
            provisions for securing the establishment of industrial areas
            in the 1 [State of Karnataka]1 and generally to promote the
            establishment and the orderly development of industries in
            such industrial areas, and for that purpose to establish an
            Industrial Areas Development Board and for purposes
            connected with the matters aforesaid;”
(ii)   The     2002    Act   was       enacted   with   the    following

     preamble/object:
“
An Act
to provide for the promotion of industrial
            development and facilitation of new investments to simplify
            the regulatory frame work by reducing procedural
            requirements and rationalising documents and to provide for
            an investor friendly environment in the State of Karnataka.
            Whereas, it is expedient to provide for speedy
            implementation of industrial and other projects in the State
            by providing single point guidance and assistance to
            promoters, reducing the procedural requirements,
            rationalising documents and to ensure smooth
            operation;”

2 In short “the 2002 Act”
4
5.       The acquisition is for two companies viz. M/s MSPL

Ltd.3 and M/s AARESS Iron and Steel Ltd. 4, for setting up an

iron ore palletisation plant and an integrated steel plant

respectively.
6.       Before setting out the facts it is relevant to note that

challenge to the notifications under
Section 1(3)
and
3(1)
of

1966 Act is made only in W.P. No.6304 of 2008. This

petition relates to the land acquired for MSPL. The land

owner in this petition S. Narayana Reddy owned only 4.35

acres whereas the total land acquired for MSPL was approx:
110 acres. Thus, S.Narayana Reddy owned a fraction of land

being less than 4% of the total acquisition for MSPL. Rest of

the 10 petitions challenged the notification under
Section 28
of 1966 Act. The writ petitioners therein in all the 10

petitions held less than 10% of the total land acquired for

AISL. For sake of convenience facts from the appeal of MSPL

have been recorded. It covers the relevant facts of the AISL

appeal also.
________________
3
In short “MSPL”
4
In short “AISL”
5
Chronology of events:
i.    MSPL moved an application on 23.03.2005 before the

                State High Level Clearance Committee5 under the 2002

                Act for approval of project to set up palletisation plant

                and an integrated steel plant in Koppal Taluk of

                Koppal District in the State of Karnataka.
ii.   The SHLCC in its meeting dated 06.06.2005 approved

                the proposal of the project of MSPL to establish 1.20

                million TPA iron ore pellet plant and 1 million TPA

                speciality steel plant (an integrated steel plant with an

                initial capacity of 1 million TPA) with a total cost of Rs.
2296.26 Crores for both the plants.
iii.     The SHLCC also approved infrastructural facilities for

                the aforesaid project which included acquisition of

                1034 acres of land by Karnataka Industrial Area

                Development Board63 setup under the 1966 Act.
iv.      Government of Karnataka on the aforementioned

                recommendations issued a Government Order dated

35 In short “SHLCC”
6
In short “KIADB”
6
22.12.2005 permitting MSPL to setup the project

        and also approved the infrastructural facilities,

        including 1034 acres of land to be acquired by the

        KIADB.
v.    MSPL on 04.01.2006 transferred all applications

        made to the Government of Karnataka for setting up

        of palletisation and iron and steel plant to AISL.


 vi.    Consequent to the above, AISL on 09.01.2006

        applied for all applications submitted by MSPL to be

        transferred in its name.
vii.    On 16.01.2006, a further restructuring was made

        by    MSPL   and    it    was    communicated      to    the
Department of Industries that the palletisation

        project was to be done by MSPL whereas the iron

        and steel project was to be done by AISL.
viii.   On 28.01.2006, the Land Audit Committee granted
        approval of 1034 acres of land for acquisition.

 ix.    On 15.02.2006, Karnataka Udyog Mitra conveyed

        the
        decision dated 28.01.2006 to KIADB to give 1034

        acres of land for the project.
x.     The    Government        of   Karnataka   issued        another
7
Government     Order       dated   22.03.2006    modifying

              already approved project for pellet plant in favour of

              the MSPL and integrated steel plant in the name of

              AISL.
xi.    The State Government issued notifications under
Section 1(3)
,
3(1)
and
28(1)
of the 1966 Act somewhere

              between 09.11.2006 till 07.05.2007.
xii. The Karnataka State Pollution Control Board 7           on
4
19.10.2006 forwarded its inspection report for the

              palletisation plant of MSPL.
xiii.The Special Land Acquisition Officer, KIADB on

              20.11.2006 issued notice to the land owners under
Section 28(2)
of 1966 Act inviting their objections.


        xiv. On 12.04.2007, the Special Land Acquisition Office,

              KIADB issued an order under
Section 28 (3)
of 1966

              Act after dealing with each of the objections.


        xv.   Thereafter, notifications under
Section 28(4)
of 1966

              Act was issued on 17.05.2007, 13.03.2008 and

              17.04.2007 for a total area of 110 acres 24 guntas

47 In short KSPCB
8
required by MSPL. (Similar notifications were issued

    for the land required for AISL)


xvi. The compensation under
Section 29 (2)
of 1966 Act

    was   determined at a sum of Rs. 3,64,98,000/­ for

    MSPL.
xvii. The Special Land Acquisition Officer, KIADB issued its

    orders determining compensation of land in two

    categories: Rs. 3 lac per acre for dry land and Rs. 3.50

    lacs per acre for irrigated lands. The land owners were

    requested to collect their compensation.


 xviii. Writ Petition No. 10501 of 2007 and 10 other

    petitions were filed praying for quashing of the

    notifications issued under
Section 28(4)
of the 1966

    Act for MSPL and AISL.        It would be relevant to

    mention that more than 90 per cent of the land owners

    covering 90 per cent of the area acquired accepted the

    compensation. It was only 10 per cent or less of the

    land owners who had filed the above 11 petitions. In

    Writ Petition No. 6304 of 2008 challenge was also

    made to the grant under
Sections 1(3)
and
3(1)
of the
9
1966 Act. The area of petitioners therein sought to be

         acquired is only 4 acres and 34 guntas. Further the

         Writ Petition No. 6304 of 2008 was with respect to the

         land for the pelletisation plant being set up by MSPL

         The other 10 petitions were for the land acquired for

         AISL.
xix. On 31.01.2008, the Government of Karnataka issued

         an order for transfer of land with respect to 110 acres

         and 24 guntas.
xx.       The transfer of possession took place on 10.03.2008

         and both the companies MSPL and AISL were handed

         over possession.
xxi.      MSPL entered into an agreement with KIADB on

         11.03.2008.
xxii.     KSPCB gave its consent to MSPL to establish pellet

         plant on 02.08.2008 and 01.12.2008.
xxiii.    Further the Ecology and Environment Department of

         Government       of   Karnataka   gave   environmental

         clearance on 01.10.2010.
10
xxiv.      On 17.03.2009, the learned Single Judge dismissed

          all the 11 petitions.
xxv.      Judgment of the Single Judge was challenged by way

          writ appeals before the Division Bench.
xxvi.      The Division Bench vide judgment dated 22.03.2012

          allowed the appeals and quashed the acquisition

          proceedings for the entire areas which was not even

          challenged.
xxvii.       Special Leave Petitions filed in this Court with a

          request for interim order in favour of MSPL.    This

          Court granted interim protection on 27.07.2012 by

          staying operation of the impugned judgment of the

          Division Bench.
xxviii.     The Ministry of Environment and Forest issued an

          order dated 08.09.2014 providing that the plant may

          be continued to operate.
xxix.      The KSPCB issued an order dated 16.10.2014 asking

          MSPL to apply for Terms of Reference (TOR) by

          07.12.2014 and also to obtain environment clearance
11
within one year.
xxx.      The Ministry of Environment and Forest vide letter

             dated     23.09.2016       communicated         environmental

             clearance to MSPL.
7.    The above chronology of events is part of the written note of

the appellant MSPL. No objection has been taken by the

respondents to the said chronology.
Proceedings before the High Court:
8.    Before the learned Single Judge, the learned counsels for

land owners had raised two points as recorded in paragraph 3

thereof; the same is reproduced below:
“Sri Mahabaleshwar Goud, learned counsel appearing on
            behalf of some of the petitioners canvassed mainly two
            points: (a) The State Government has not issued Notification
            under
Section 1(3)
of the KIADB Act and consequently,
            Chapter 7 of the
KIADB Act
has not come into force in so far
            as it relates to the present acquisition is concerned and
            therefore, the acquisition notifications issued under
Section
            28(1)
and
28(4)
of the KIADB Act are bad in the eye of law,
            and (b) the acquisition is in respect of only one company and
            therefore, the same is not for public purpose. According to
            him, it is the case of colourable exercise of power and the
            action of the respondents is fraudulent and therefore, the
            acquisition proceedings vitiate.”
9.    Insofar as the first point was concerned regarding the
12
absence of notification under
Section 1(3)
of the 1966 Act, the

learned counsel appearing for KIADB produced the notification of

the Government dated 09.01.2006 notifying that chapter VII of

the 1966 Act would come into force in the relevant area. Insofar

as the second point is concerned that the acquisition was only for

one company and as such it could not be for public purpose, the

exercise being colourable exercise of power and the action of

respondents is fraudulent was dealt with by the learned Single

Judge in detail and relying upon the judgments of the Karnataka

High Court under the 1966 Act held that the second argument

would also fail. The learned Single Judge has also recorded in

the last paragraph that only 1/10 i.e. 10% of the land owners

submitted their grievances by filing the writ petitions. It further

gave reasons for not accepting their challenge in larger public

interest relying upon a judgment of this Court.                    The last

paragraph of the judgment of learned Single Judge is reproduced

hereinbelow:
“As aforementioned, the owners of only 1/10 th of the lands
         which are sought to be acquired are agitating their
         grievances by filing these writ petitions. If the Notifications
         under
Section 28(1)
and
Section 28(4)
of the KIADB Act are
         set aside, qua these pockets of lands, then the entire
         development activity in the industrial area will come to a
         grinding halt and that would not be in the interest of anyone.
         It is not advisable nor feasible to interfere with the
13
acquisition of such a large tract of lands when the occupants
         of 9/10th of the acquired lands have not thought it fit to
         challenge the acquisition proceedings. The aforesaid view of
         mine is supported by the judgement of the Apex Court in the
         case of OM PRAKASH AND ANOTHER ­vs­ STATE OF U.P.
         AND OTEHRS ((1998) 6 SCC PAGE­1). The individual’s right
         of the land owner must yield place to the larger public
         purposes. In view of the same, this Court declines to
         interfere I the acquisition proceedings.”
10.   The Division Bench allowed the appeals, and after setting

aside the judgement of the learned Single Judge proceeded to

quash the acquisition proceedings.             In paragraph 127, the

Division Bench recorded its conclusions which are reproduced

hereunder:
“127. In the result, we sum up our conclusions as under:
i) In the Indian context, Judicial review of administrative
         action is much more precise, pervasive and accurate than as
         contemplated either under the English legal system or as
         developed in the American legal system. In the wake of our
         country having a written Constitution and laws made by
         competent legislatures, judicial review of administrative
         action is not merely confined to the question of decision
         making process on the parameters of the same being
         affected or vitiated due to unreasonableness, arbitrariness or
         irrationality, which concepts are not capable of a precise
         definition though many erudite authors have made good
         contributions and administrative law is very much part of
         jurisprudence but is on more substantial and precise
         parameters such as on the touchstone of the statutory
         provisions and the constitutional provisions and therefore
         any decision and the process of making such a decision, if is
         not in conformity with the relevant statutory provisions and
         the constitutional provisions, the decision is affected and
         cannot be sustained.
ii) Acquisition of private lands even for a public purpose,
         while should always be in conformity with the laws
14
governing acquisition proceedings and existence of public
purpose which subserve a public interest is a sine quo none
of such acquisition proceedings, in a situation where
acquisition is of private agricultural lands belonging to
agriculturists and has the effect of affecting their very
livelihood and depriving them of their avocation, then the
acquisition proceedings will have to be tested even on the
touchstone of the constitutional provisions such as
Articles
14
, 21
and
300A
of the Constitution of India and though
there is no corresponding safeguard as is provided under
Article 22
of the Constitution of India visa­vis violations of
Article 21
, nevertheless, Courts will have to apply the test of
strict compliance with procedural requirements and any
deviation even from procedural requirement will vitiate
acquisition proceedings.
iii) Acquisition of lands under the provisions of the
Karnataka
Industrial Areas Development Act, 1966
can only be for the
purpose of developing the subject lands as an industrial area
and by the Board and cannot be for the benefit of a private
industry or company or companies, particularly as the
notifications issued under the provisions of 1, 3 and 28 of the
Act, proclaiming that the subject lands are notified for
acquisition for the purpose of the board and when once it is
so, handing over of such lands to a private industrialist
amounts to an instance of improper exercise of power and for
a purpose other than the published and stated purpose, but
more importantly, distribution of such acquired land, whether
after development or before development, being in the nature
of distribution of largesse of the State, amounts to depriving
equal opportunity to all aspirants, who propose to set up
industries in industrial areas and when the State hands over
acquired lands to a private individual, it is therefore violative
of the equality clause in the Constitution of India. In this
regard, statement of law as enunciated in the single bench
decision of this Court in the case of Heggappanavara [supra],
later followed by another learned Single Judge in the case of
N. Somashekar [supra], on the basis of the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of RAMTANU [supra], does not
state the correct legal position as indicated in para 21 of the
judgment of the constitutional bench of the Supreme Court,
reading as under:
21. Counsel on behalf of the petitioners contended that
   there was procedural discrimination between the
Land
   Acquisition Act and the Act
in the present case. It was
   said that there was a special procedure designed by
15
the
Land Acquisition Act
for acquisition of land for the
companies whereas in the present case the State was
acquiring land for companies without adopting the
procedure of the
Land Acquisition Act
. It is to be
remembered that the Act in the present case is a
special one having the specific and special purpose of
growth, development and organisation of industries in
the State of Maharashtra.
The Act
has its own
procedure and there is no provision in the Act for
acquisition of land for a company as in the case of
Land Acquisition Act
. In the present case, acquisition
under the Act is for the purpose of development of
industrial estates or industrial areas by the
Corporation or any other purpose in furtherance of the
objects of the Act. The policy underlying the Act is not
acquisition of land for any company but for the one
and only purpose of development, organisation and
growth of industrial estates and industrial areas.
The
Act
is designed to have a planned industrial city as
opposed to haphazard growth of industrial areas in all
parts of the State.
The Act
is intended to prevent,
growth of industries in the developed parts of the
State. Industries are therefore to be set up in the
developing or new parts of the State where new
industrial towns will be brought into existence. The
object of the Act is to carve out planned areas for
industries. On one side there will be engineering
industries and on the other there will be chemical
industries. There will be localisation of industries with
the result that the residents and dwellers of towns and
cities will not suffer either from the polluted air or
obnoxious chemicals of industries or the dense growth
of industries and industrial population, within and
near about the residential areas.
The Land Acquisition
Act
is a general Act and that is why there is specific
provision for acquisition of land by the State for public
purpose and acquisition of land by the State For
companies. The present Act on the other hand is
designed the sole purpose of development of industrial
areas and industrial estates and growth and
development of industries within the State. Industrial
undertakings or persons who are engaged in
industries all become entitled to the facilities on such
industrial growth.
Under the Land Acquisition Act
acquisition is at the instance of and for the benefit of a
company whereas under the present Act acquisition is
solely by the State for public purposes. The two Acts
16
are dissimilar in situations and circumstances.
though the examination by the Supreme Court of the
Maharashtra Act was in the context of the Constitutional
validity of the
Maharashtra Act
as being repugnant to the
Central Enactment ­
Land Acquisition Act
­ as we find the
purpose of acquisition of lands under the
Maharashtra Act
as
well as the
Karnataka Act
is both for the purpose of
developing industrial areas in the State, and therefore cannot
be held to be laying down the correct law and ratio as
indicated in the two single bench decisions of this Court to
this effect is hereby overruled.
iv) An approval of the project proposed by an entrepreneur
and cleared by the State high level clearance committee
under Section 5 of the Felicitation Act by itself cannot act as
an insurance against any possible violations, infractions,
illegalities or irregularities in the matter of acquisition of
private lands by the State Government in exercise of its
power under any enabling acquisition Acts including the
present act
(KIAD Act, 1966
). Such clearance cannot and
does not absolve the State Government from adhering to the
procedural requirements envisaged tinder the Acquisition Act
and in the instant case, under the provisions of the
KIAD Act
and the legality or otherwise of the proceedings for
acquisition of lands has to bear scrutiny independently and
the mere approval of the project by the State high level
clearance committee cannot and will not validate the
illegalities or irregularities in the matter of acquisit ion of
land. On such an independent examination in the instant
case, we find from the records that the State Government as
an acquiring authority and the board as a statutory
development board, have not, only committed infractions of
statutory provisions of
Sections 3(1)
and
28
of the Act but
having also merely surrendered to the decision of the State
high level committee and have thereby abdicated their duties
and responsibilities under the acquiring Act.
v) Simultaneous issue of notifications by the State
Government for declaring an area as industrial area under
Section 3(1)
of the Act for notifying the applicability of
Chapter­VII of the Act in respect of an industrial area under
Section 1(3)
of the Act and the State Government issuing the
notification of its intention to acquire any extent of land in an
industrial area for the purpose of development by the board,
particularly when different extent of lands are mentioned in
these notifications, betrays a clear lack of understanding of
17
the statutory provisions as well as lack of awareness to the
legislative scheme in making provisions in the Act for issuing
of not only notifications but also to gazette the same under
these three different statutory provisions and unless it is
factually and on record that the State Government is able to
establish a commensurate application of mind to the three
different enabling sections of the Act, a presumption that
either the notifications are validly issued or that the
notifications are fully in conformity with the procedural
requirement does not arise. For a valid acquisition of lands
by the State Government in exercise of its powers under
Section 28
of the Act, unless the State Government has
adhered to the procedural requirement under sub­sections (2)
to (8) of
Section 28
of the Act, the acquisition proceedings get
vitiated, as the acquisition results in deprivation of not
merely land of agriculturists but also their livelihood and
denial of their avocation, and therefore the present
acquisition of land becomes unsustainable as procedural
requirements under these statutory provisions are not
adhered to in the present cases.
vi) Proceedings for acquisition of lands notified under
Section
28
of the Act are also vitiated for the reason that the State
Government has not shown its awareness to the mandate of
sub­rule (3) of Rule 5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules,
1986, imposing restrictions and prohibitions on new projects
or activities based on their potential environmental impacts
in respect of the industries and the nature of industries
proposed to be set up by the fourth respondent in the subject
lands before embarking on acquisition proceedings. The
amended Rule has come into force as per notification dated
14­9­2006 and in clear and emphatic terms envisages the
procedure for either granting or rejecting of prior
environmental clearance. In terms of the notification, even
before construction of new projects, it has to be
approved/permitted or cleared by the central government or
by the State level environment impact assessment authority,
constituted by the Central Government under sub­section (3)
of
Section 3
of the Environment (Protection) Act. The
industries proposed to be set up by respondents 4 and 5
having an annual production capacity far exceeding 20000
tonnes are a class of industries/activities within the meaning
of column 3(a) of the schedule to the notification and
therefore prior clearance by the Central Government was
essential. The State Government having embarked on the
acquisition proceedings by issue of preliminary notification
dated 9­11­2006 i.e., subsequent to the publication of the
18
notification dated 14­9­2006 under the provisions of the
Environment (Protection) Act
, indicates that the State
           Government had embarked on acquisition proceedings for the
           benefit of a private company to set, up industries covered by
           the notification even before it was known as to whether a
           project of this nature can be cleared by the Central
           Government and therefore the acquisition proceedings get
           vitiated. Acquisition of private agricultural lands by the State
           Government and in the name of a public purpose cannot be
           either casual or without being aware of the suitability and
           possibility of the acquired lands being available or otherwise
           for the proposal. In this view of the matter the State action
           affecting rights of citizens under
Articles 21
and
300A
of the
           Constitution of India and in turn violating
Article 14
also,
           cannot pass muster before a constitutional Court.”
11.   Based on the above conclusion, the Division Bench allowed

the bunch of appeals and quashed the notifications issued under
Sections 1(3)
,
3(1)
and
28(1)
of the 1966 Act. Aggrieved by the

same, the appeals have been preferred by not only the companies

for whose benefits the land was acquired but also by the KIADB

and the State of Karnataka. At the cost of repetition, it is pointed

out that Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No. 23351 of 2012 has been

preferred by a land owner aggrieved by judgment dated

14.12.2011, whereby the writ appeal of the said petitioner was

dismissed, confirming the dismissal of the writ petition by the

learned Single Judge with respect to a challenge relating to

similar acquisition for a company BMM Ispat Ltd. on similar

grounds.
19
12.    We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and

perused the material on record.       Shri Krishnan Venugopal,

learned Senior counsel appearing for the MSPL, after taking us

through the chronology of events, summarised the findings and

reasonings given in the impugned judgment as follows:
a. The appellant being a ‘private’ company, its interests are not

      public.
b. The appellant MSPL multiplied into two or three entities

      even during the process of acquisition proceedings.
c. The 2002 Act cannot lead to a situation that ‘at the same

      time it can never be by giving a go by to other statutory

      requirements and procedural compliances.
d. The process followed in terms of
Section 28
of the 1996 Act

      was not proper and many land owners were complaining

      about being dispossessed or thrown out of their land as

      procedural requirements were not complied.
e.
Section 28(7)
of the 1996 Act is ‘draconian’.
f. There is no ‘public purpose’ when land is acquired for one

      entity.
20
g. The KIADB has not examined the issue of Environmental

         Clearance.
h. Acquisition proceedings, in the background of the 2002 Act,

         are not in accordance with law and not for public purpose.
13.      Mr. Venugopal also briefly summarised the conclusions

given in paragraph 127 of the impugned judgment, which have

already been reproduced above as follows:
i.      KIADB cannot acquire lands for a single company/private

         industrialist and the same is improper exercise of power. It

         is also not in public interest.
ii.      Approval of project by SHLCC under the 2002 Act is not

         immunity       against   illegalities/irregularities   in   land

         acquisition.
iii.     Simultaneous issuance of Notifications under
Sections 1(3)
,
3(1)
and
28(1)
of the 1966 Act for declaration of the land as

         ‘industrial area’ and its acquisition, ‘betrays a clear lack of

         understanding of the statutory provisions as well as lack of

         awareness to the legislative scheme’ and further, ‘unless it

         is factually and on record that the State Government is able
21
to establish a commensurate application of mind to the

        three different enabling sections of the 1966 Act, a

        presumption that either the notifications are validly issued

        or that the notifications are fully in conformity with the

        procedural requirement does not arise’.
iv.     State    Government      has    not    complied    with   the   EIA

        Notification for Environmental Clearance.
14.     Shri Krishnan Venugopal, learned Senior Counsel then

advanced        his    submissions     which   are   briefly   summarised

hereunder:
a.      Failure to appreciate following facts and material on

record


      Approval of Project was after due consideration of material


 i.     The initiation of the entire process is based on an

        application filed by Appellant and its consideration under

        the     2002    Act.   The   Application     was   considered   on

        06.06.2005.
ii.     The Government Order approving the Project was on

        22.12.2005.      The approval was not hastily done and the
22
Government Order in fact notes key features of the project.


iii.   The approval for modification of the Government Order by

       inclusion of AISL was based on an application filed by

       MSPL. The details and relation between AISL and MSPL are

       set out in additional documents, which discloses that MSPL

       and AISL had common shareholders and were under same

       management and ultimately, AISL was a wholly owned

       subsidiary of MSPL.
iv.    Full and complete disclosure was made by Applicant and

       the same was duly considered and not mechanically

       approved by Government of Karnataka. The High Court has

       observed:
“106…..There is absolutely no application of mind at the
          subsequent levels. A notification issued under
Section 3
of the
          Act in the name of the Act and for declaring an area mentions
          names of respondent Nos. 4 and 5. Respondent No. 5 was
          never an applicant before the State High Level Clearance
          Committee, but, nevertheless, figures in the notification under
Section 3
of the Act. Even mentioning of the names do not
          reveal or spell out as to how they figure there. No preamble or
          legend is given to it. Then follows the application of chapter­VII
          in respect of the land notified.”

 v.    The above observations have not taken into consideration

       the   Government Order dated 22.03.2006.                 The grant of

       land is also approved by the Land Audit Committee in its
23
meeting on 28.01.2006.
Objections of land owners duly considered


 vi.    Upon approval to the Project under the 2002 Act, the

        notifications for land acquisition are issued under the 1966

        Act. The Notifications for acquisition of land were issued on

        09.11.2006:­ (A) declaration under
Section 1(3)
that Chapter

        VII would apply (B) declaration under
Section 3(1)
that an

        area is ‘industrial area’ for the 1966 Act and (C) acquisition

        of land.
vii.    Notice is only thereafter issued under
Section 28(1)
of the

        1966 Act to the individual landowners to show cause as to

        why land should not be acquired. In the present case, notice

        under
Section 28(2)
was issued on 20.11.2006 and the

        objections   were   duly   considered.   The   Special   Land

        Acquisition Officer passed an order under
Section 28(3)
of

        the KIAD Act after considering these objections.


viii.   Sample Panchnama has also been placed before this

        Hon’ble Court. Without any basis and despite material on

        record, the High court has concluded that procedure in

        terms of
Section 28(3)
was violated.
24
b. Failure to appreciate law


         Scope of Facilitation Act


 i.      The High Court has erroneously concluded that the 2002

         Act ‘virtually leaves no option to all other agencies of the

         State whether statutory or otherwise and has produced in

         them a state of submissiveness and they have mechanically

         like robots acted in a compliant manner.’ It is submitted

         that the very purpose of a SHLCC and Single Window

         Clearance Committee would be defeated if the approval

         granted by such committee is reviewed again and again by

         other departments. The approach of the High Court will not

         only render the text of the 2002 Act otiose and unworkable,

         but will defeat the very purpose of the 2002 Act as set out in

         the Statement of Object and Reasons.
ii.      Further, the Hon’ble High Court has completly exceeded its

         jurisdiction to review the very approval of the Project when

         the only issue to have examined was – whether the mandate

         of
Section 28
of the 1966 Act was complied.
iii.     The High Court’s conclusion that the 2002 Act leads to a

         complete ‘go by’ to ‘statutory requirements and procedural
25
compliances’ is manifestly contrary to the record. The

      approval of the project by the SHLCC, the State Government

      Order along with the compliances in terms of site inspection

      by    KPSCB      and      even       obtaining     Environmental

      Clearance, the approval in terms of the 2002 Act has not

      given a ‘go by’ to statutory requirements and procedural

      compliances.
iv.   It   is   submitted    that   the   High   Court   has   erred   in

      appreciating the scope of the Facilitation Act.              It is

      submitted that the same is only for approval of proposal of a

      project and not for construction and operation itself, which

      are only subject to various other approvals.


      Process under
section 28
of 1966
Act


v.    The High
Court has concluded that the power of State

      Government to take possession of land under
Section 28(7)
of the 1966 Act is draconian. However, this power is

      conferred only in the scenario that orders are passed after

      considering objections and further notice to the landowners

      in terms of
Section 28(6)
of the 1966 Act.
vi.   It is only on the refusal in such an event that the power to
26
forcibly acquire land is conferred on the State Government.
Single entity being eligible Applicant


vii.    It is submitted that the High Court has committed a grave

        error of jurisdiction in reconsidering the approval granted to

        the Project­ which was cleared by the SHLCC and also by

        the Land Audit Committee. It is submitted that the High

        Court could not have second­guessed the policy decision to

        approve a palletisation and integrated steel plant.


viii.   Without prejudice to the above contention, in any event, it is

        submitted that a single applicant can be an eligible

        applicant and there is no bar for the same.
ix.    The conclusions fail to appreciate the socio­economic

        benefit to the State of Karnataka and the scope of what

        constitutes ‘public purpose’.
15.    Learned counsels appearing for AISL, State of Karnataka

 and KIADB have majorly adopted the arguments advanced by Mr.

 Krishnan Venugopal and have submitted that the impugned

 judgment of the Division Bench be set aside. It is their

 submission that the procedure as prescribed under the law has
27
been strictly adhered to.
16.    On behalf of the respondent no.8 in the Appeal of MSPL,

Shri    Shekhar    S.   Naphade,    learned   Senior      counsel    made

submissions. Other counsels appearing for other land owners in

the appeal of AISL have adopted the same. Briefly the arguments

advanced on behalf of the private respondents are reproduced

below:
a. MSPL and AISL did not have any Environmental Clearance,

       in the absence of which the land could not have been

       acquired for setting up the plant.
b. The    land   owner–respondents        have   not    accepted    any

       compensation.
c. Just     because     90%      of   acquirees        have   accepted

       compensation, that does not validate an illegal acquisition.
d. This is a colourable exercise of power since the 1996 Act

       does not contemplate acquisition for a private party directly.
An area has to be set up as an industrial area in which

       private industry can be set up later. In the present case, the

       procedure has been shortened at the behest of private
28
parties.
e. AISL was not even before the SHLCC and the only applicant

      was MSPL. Hence, the acquisition for AISL is bad in law.
f. Division Bench considered the issues in detail and has

      rightly quashed the notifications under 1966 Act. It does not

      call for any interference. The appeal deserves to be

      dismissed.
17.   In so far as Civil Appeal @ SLP (C) No. 23351 of 2012 is

concerned, Shri Ankur S. Kulkarni, learned counsel, supported

the arguments of Mr. Shekhar S. Naphade. He has further

submitted that judgment of the Division Bench dated 22.03.2012

is correct on law and facts as such the Division Bench dismissing

the writ appeal by the impugned judgement dated 14.12.2011

committed an error and, therefore, needs to be set aside.
18.   It may be noted here that depending upon the outcome of

the decision in the appeals filed by MSPL, AISL, KIADB and State

of Karnataka in which the judgment of the Division Bench dated

22.03.2012 is under challenge, the fate of the aforesaid Civil

Appeal of Syed Ahmad would rest.
29
19.   Before proceeding to deal with the respective submissions, a

brief outline of the two state enactments i.e. 1966 Act and the

2002 Act, is spelled out.
1966 Act.
20.     The object of the 1966 Act is already reproduced in the

earlier part of this order. It is for securing the establishment of

industrial areas and generally to promote the establishment and

orderly development of industries therein within the state of

Karnataka.
(i) Under
section 1(3)
, it is provided that the Act would come

  into force at once except Chapter VII which shall come into

  force in such area and from such date as the State Government

  may from time to time by notification specify on this behalf.
(ii)
Section 2
deals with the definitions of the various words and

  phrases used in the Act.
(iii) Under
section 3(1)
, the State Government by Notification

  may declare any area in the State to be an industrial area for

  purposes of the Act.
(iv) Under
section 6
, a Board is to be established chaired by the

  Secretary,   Commerce      and      Industries   Department.    Its
30
constitution is provided therein and comprises of the following

as members:
●   The Secretary, Finance Department;
●   The Secretary, Housing and Urban Development;
●   The Commissioner, Industrial Development;
●   Director, Industries and Commerce;
●   The Chairman and Managing Director, Karnataka State

    Industrial     Investment   and     Development       Corporation

    Limited;
●   The Chairman, Karnataka State Pollution Control Board;
●   The Director, Town Planning;
●   The Managing Director, Karnataka State Small Industries

    Development Corporation Limited;
●   The   Managing      Director,     Karnataka   State     Financial

    Corporation;
●   The Executive Member of the Board; and

●   Two nominees of the Industrial Development Bank of India;
(v) The functions of the Board are enumerated in
section 13
and further general powers of the Board are spelled out in
section 14
of the 1966 Act. The same are reproduced

hereunder:
31
“13. Functions.­ The functions of the Board shall
be,­
(i) generally to promote and assist in
      the rapid and orderly establishment,
      growth and development of industries
      [and to provide industrial infrastructural
      facilities and amenity] in industrial
      areas, and
(ii) in particular, and without prejudice
      to the generality of clause (i), to,­
(a) develop industrial areas
            declared by the State Government and
            make them available for undertakings to
            establish themselves;
(b) establish, maintain, develop,
            and manage industrial estates within
            industrial areas;
(c) undertake such schemes or
            programmes of works, either jointly with
            other corporate bodies or institutions, or
            with the Government or local or
            statutory authorities, or on an agency
            basis, as it considers necessary or
            desirable, for the furtherance of the
            purposes for which the Board is
            established and for all purposes
            connected therewith.
14. General powers of the Board.­ Subject to the
provisions of the Act, the Board shall have power,­
(a) to acquire and hold such property, both movable
and immovable as the Board may deem necessary
for the performance of any of its activities and to
lease, sell, exchange or otherwise transfer any
property held by it on such conditions as may be
deemed proper by the Board;
(b) to purchase by agreement or take on lease or
under any form of tenancy any land, to erect such
buildings and to execute such other works as may
be necessary for the purpose of carrying out its
duties and functions;
32
(c) to provide or cause to be provided amenities
         [industrial infrastructural facilities] and common
         facilities in industrial areas and construct and
         maintain or cause to be maintained works and
         buildings therefor;
(d) to make available buildings on lease or sale or
         lease­cum­sale to industrialists or persons intending
         to start industrial undertakings;
(e) to construct buildings for the housing of the
         employees of industries;
(f)   (i) to allot to suitable persons [premises or parts
         thereof] including residential tenements in the
         industrial areas established or developed by the
         Board;
(ii) to modify or rescind such allotments,
               including the right and power to evict the
               allottees concerned on breach of any of the
               terms or conditions of their allotment;
(iii) to resume possession of premises or part
               thereof including residential tenements in the
               industrial area, or industrial estate in the
               manner provided in section 34B.
(g) to delegate any of its powers generally or
         specially to the Executive Member;
(h) to enter into and perform all such contracts as it
         may consider necessary or expedient for carrying out
         any of its functions; and
(i) to do such other things and perform such acts as it
         may think necessary or expedient for the proper
         conduct of its functions, and the carrying into effect
         the purposes of this Act.
(vi) Chapter VII deals with the acquisition and disposal of the

land.
Section 27
provides that the areas notified by the State
33
Government under
section 1(3)
would be applicable to this

 Chapter with effect from the date specified in the notification.
Section 28
and its sub­sections (i) to (viii) provide the

 procedure for acquisition of land.
Section 29
provides for

 determination of compensation of the land acquired.
Section 30
provides that
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
would mutatis

 mutandis apply with respect to the provisions therein for

 inquiry and award by the Deputy Commissioner, reference to

 Court, apportionment and payment of compensation.
Section

 40
confers powers on the State Government to make rules and
section 41
confers power on the Board to frame regulations

 with the previous approval of the State Government.




2002 Act:
21.
This Act
was promulgated for promotion of industrial

development and facilitation of new investments to simplify the

regulatory framework. Statement of objects and reasons is

reproduced below:­

            “STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.­ It is
            considered necessary to provide for the promotion of
            industrial development and facilitation of new
34
investments, to simplify the regulatory frame work,
       by reducing the procedural requirements and
       rationalising documents and to provide for an
       investor friendly environment in the State of
       Karnataka. The Bill among other things provides for
       the following, namely:­
1. Constitution of State High Level Clearance
       Committee, State Level Single Window Clearance
       Committee and District Level Single Window
       Clearance Committee for consideration of application
       from entrepreneurs intending to establish industries
       in the State.
2. Appointment of Karnataka Udyoga Mitra as a
       Nodal Agency at State Level and the District
       Industries Centre at Nodal Agency at the District
       level to undertake investment promotional activities
       and to render necessary guidance and assistance to
       entrepreneurs to setup industrial undertaking in the
       State.
3. Providing Combined Application Form in lieu of
       existing forms prescribed under various laws.
4. Facilitating entrepreneurs by furnishing a self
       certification at the time of submitting the combined
       application form to the Nodal Agency.
5. Rationalising inspections by various authorities.
6. Providing for deemed approval by the departments
       or authorities in case of delay.
7. Penalty for entrepreneurs who fail to comply with
       the conditions of undertaking in the self certification.
”
(i)
Section 3(1)
provided for establishment of a SHLCC

consisting of such members as may be notified by the State

Government to work as a single point clearance committee.

Under sub­section (2), the SHLCC was to examine and consider
35
such proposals received from any entrepreneur relating to

setting up of any industrial or any other project in the State

with the minimum investment of Rs.100 Crores or above. The

functions of the SHLCC are provided in
section 4
and its

powers are provided in
section 5
.
(ii) Under
section 6
, a State Level Single Window Clearance

Committee (SLSWCC) is to be notified by the State Government

which has the power to deal with the proposals with the

investment of more than Rs.15 Crores but less than Rs.100

Crores.
The powers of SLSWCC are provided in
section 7
and
section 8
.
(iii)Similarly, there would be a District Level Single Window

Clearance Committee (DLSWCC) dealing with investments up

to Rs.15 Crores and its functions and powers spelled out in

paragraphs 10 and 11.
(iv) Under
section 11(A)
, the Government could constitute a

State Level Empowered Committee which was to be chaired by

the Chief Secretary of the State, with Principal Secretaries of 10

different departments, Chairman of KSPCB, Director­General

and Inspector­General of Police & State Fire Extinguishing and

Emergency Services, Chief Executive Officer & Executive
36
Member of KIADB and the Commissioner for Industrial

 Development & the Director for Industries and Commerce as its

 members.
(v) There    was   also   provision    made   for   Nodal   Agencies,

 Karnataka Udyog Mitra at the State Level under
section 12
and

 its functions enumerated under
section 13
.
(vi)
Section 14
provides for a Combined Application Form for

 use of entrepreneurs for obtaining clearance to be prescribed

 by the State Government to all the Clearance Committees.
(vii)
Section 17
provides for deemed approval in case

 clearance is not issued within stipulated time.
(viii)
Section 18
provided for an appeal by any person

 aggrieved by the decision of the above­mentioned committees.
22.   In the present case as stated in the chronology of events,

the MSPL had initially moved an application under the 2002 Act.

During the consideration of the said application by the State

Government, MSPL shared its projects of the two industries by

inducting    AISL   a   fully   owned   subsidiary   of   MSPL.   The

introduction of AISL was accepted by the State Government and

necessary applications were given by AISL also. The SHLCC had
37
earlier   approved    both   the        projects   and   one   of   the

recommendations was for acquisition of land under the 1966 Act.

The KIADB considered the recommendations of the SHLCC,

Karnataka Udyog Mitra & the State Government and accordingly

acquired the land as per the procedure prescribed under
section

28
of the 1966 Act.
23.   It is this acquisition of land for MSPL and AISL which is

under challenge in these proceedings. The Division bench having

quashed the acquisition as also the notifications under
section

1(3)
and
section 3(1)
along with
section 28
of 1966 Act is now for

consideration in the present group of appeals.
24.   Based upon the arguments advanced by the learned

counsels, the following issues arise in these appeals for our

consideration:
(I) Whether in the absence of environmental clearance, the

acquisition in question could have taken place?
(II) Whether the acquisition was vitiated in view of the

undue haste and non­application of mind by the competent

authorities?
38
(III) Whether the procedure prescribed under the 1966 Act

was duly followed?
(IV) Whether the acquisition for a single company could be

said to be for public purpose and could be made under the 1966

Act?
(V) Whether acquisition could be made for a non­applicant

AISL under the 1966 Act without its application being routed

through SHLCC.
(VI)   Whether   the   comparison with   the
Maharashtra

Industrial Development Act, 1962
, placing reliance on the

judgment of this Court in the case of Shri Ramtanu Co­

op.Housing
Society Ltd. Vs. State of Maharashtra
, reported in

(197) 3 SCC 323 in the impugned judgment is correct?
(VII) Whether the conclusions arrived at in the impugned

judgment are vitiated on account of inclusion of value judgments

of policy views by the High Court?
(VIII) Whether the entire acquisition could be quashed upon

a petition by a fraction of landowners holding a fraction of

acquired land which is only 10 % or less of the total acquired

land?
A. Environmental Clearance.
39
25.   On record environmental clearance has been given on

23.09.2016 by the Ministry of Environment and Forests,

Government of India, copy of which has been filed along with I.A.

No.118035 of 2017 in the appeal of MSPL. Prior to it, the Ministry

itself vide paragraph­2 of the Notification dated 14.09.2006

provided that no Environment Clearance from MOEF was

required for securing land. It may also be relevant to note here

that KSPCB had given its clearance and no objection much

earlier for setting up the plant vide communication dated

02.08.2008. Further, the Ecology and Environmental Department

of Government of Karnataka had given clearance on 01.10.2010.

Further, the Ministry of MOEF had issued an order dated

08.09.2014 providing that the plant may be continued to operate.

Thereafter, the KSPCB issued an order dated 16.10.2014

requiring MSPL to apply for Terms of Reference by 07.12.2014

and to obtain environment clearance from MOEF within one year.

The MSPL accordingly applied as per the Terms of Reference and

was   granted   the   environment    clearance   by   MOEF    vide

communication dated 23.09.2016. In view of the above facts, as

of date, no objection can be raised that there is no environmental
40
clearance certificate from the Ministry of Environment and Forest

as the same has already been issued on 23.09.2016.

B. Non­application of mind and undue haste.
26.    From the chronology of events what is to be noted is that

the SHLCC after considering all aspects of the matter had

resolved to approve the project and had made recommendations

accordingly.    Thereafter,   the     KIADB      accepted    the

recommendations of the SHLCC and the same also had due

approval of the Government at the highest level. The division

made by MSPL (the initial applicant) for setting up the two

industries by two different entities also had due approval of the

KIADB and the Government.
27.   The original writ petitioners (land owners) had challenged

the notifications under
Section 1(3)
,
3(1)
and
28(1)
of the 1966

Act on the ground of non­application of mind and undue haste.

No grounds were raised nor any foundation laid in the petitions

alleging mala fide. The object of the 2002 Act was primarily to

provide a Single Window Clearance by the High Level Committees

constituted under the 2002 Act. We have gone through the

reports and recommendations of the different Committees as also
41
the State Government and we find that all aspects of the matter

have been considered and a conscious decision has been taken

on the overall conspectus of the project and the proposals

submitted.
28.   The meeting of the SHLCC dated 06.06.2005 was chaired by

the Chief Minister, State of Karnataka, the concerned Ministers

and Secretaries were also present in the meeting. The complete

project was discussed under different heads including the

background of the promoters, background of the company,

means of finance, infrastructure facilities, environment and

pollution    control   clearances,        local   employment,     water

consumption,     electricity     consumption       and   incentives   &

concessions.
29.   The    Government        Order,    thereafter,   was   issued   on

22.12.2005 detailing the different facets of the proposal and

granting due approval for establishment of the palletization plant

as also the integrated steel plant with a total investment of

2292.26 crores and generating employment to one thousand

persons.
42
30.   Thereafter, under the provisions of 1966 Act, the Land Audit

Committee in its meeting of 28th January, 2006, which was

chaired by the Principal Secretary, Department of Commerce &

Industries and Secretaries of other relevant Departments with

special invitees also took a conscious decision with respect to the

project submitted by MSPL for both the plants at subject Item

No.2.5 and recommended for acquisition of 1034 acres of land

and to intimate the same to the KIADB. It was thereafter that the

Nodal Agency of the State level i.e. Karnataka Udyog Mitra in its

meeting dated 15.02.2006 after considering the proceedings of

the SHLCC dated 6th June, 2005 and that of the Land Audit

Committee dated 28.01.2006 accepted the recommendation for

acquisition of 1034 acres of land.
31.   These aspects were examined by this Court in Chairman &

MD, BPL Ltd. Vs. S.P. Gururaja, reported in (2003) 8 SCC 567.

This Hon’ble Court was dealing with a similar situation where a

State High Level Committee was constituted to grant approvals

and acquire land to the appellant therein. This process was

challenged in a public interest litigation. This Court was pleased

to dismiss the writ petition finding that:
43
17. The Company intended to set up more than one unit.
For the purpose of achieving the objective of economic
development of the State, the State is entitled to deal with
the applications of the entrepreneurs in an appropriate
manner. For the said purpose a High Level Committee was
constituted. The said Committee held its meeting on
10.10.1994 wherein not only the members referred to
hereinbefore but also various other officers were present.
Presumably, prior thereto the applications filed by the
Company were scrutinized by the competent authorities.
After detailed discussions, the High Level Committee
resolved: (a) to permit the unit to change the location from
Malur Indl. Area. to Dobespet Industrial Area; (b) to allot a
total of 500 acres of land for the three projects viz., Colour
Picture Tube, Colour Televisions and Battery, in Dobespet
Industrial Area, Nelamangala to, in lieu of the earlier
allotment of 100 acres of land at Malur Indl Area for the
Colour TV sets project, subject to the promoters indicating
the individual land requirement for Colour Picture Tube
project, Colour TV project and the battery project duly
justifying the requirement with necessary plans, block
diagrams, etc.
18. Similar considerations were made in respect of Colour
Television Picture Tube Project of the Company and
Manufacture of Batteries. The matter relating to allotment
of land is a statutory function on the part of the Board. In
terms of the provisions of the Act, consultations with the
State Government is required if
Regulation 13
of the
Regulations in place of
Regulation 7
is to be taken
recourse to. Does it mean that consultations must be held
in a particular manner, i.e. by exchange of
correspondences and in no other? Answer to the said
questions must be rendered in negative. The High Level
Committee was chaired by the Minister who in terms of
the Rules of Executive Business framed under
Article 166
of the Constitution of India was entitled to represent the
State. Once a consultation takes place by mutual
discussion and a consensus is arrived at between
different authorities performing different functions under
the statutes, the purpose for which consultation was to be
made would stand satisfied.
Under the Act
or the
Regulations framed thereunder, no procedure for holding
such consultations had been laid down. In that situation it
was open to the competent authorities to evolve their own
procedure. Such a procedure of taking a decision upon
44
deliberations does not fall foul of
Article 14
of the
      Constitution of India. No malice of fact has been alleged in
      the instant case.”
32.   In view of the above, the finding in the impugned judgment

regarding non­application of mind and the submission of Mr.

Naphade to the aforesaid effect cannot be sustained.
33.    Insofar as the notifications under
Section 1(3)
,
3(1)
and
28(1)
of 1966 Act being issued on the same date, it may be noted

that there is no embargo on the same. The statutes do not

prohibit the same. Moreover, this issue has also been dealt with

by this Court in the case of Deputy General Manager (HRM) and

another Vs. Mudappa and others reported in 2007 (9) SCC
768. Para 30 of the said judgment is reproduced hereunder:
“In our judgment, the learned Single Judge was
           wholly in error in taking such view and quashing the
           notification. Upholding of such view would make
           statutory provisions under the Act or similar
           provisions in other laws, (for example, the
Land
           Acquisition Act, 1894
) nugatory and otiose. We are
           also of the view that the learned Single Judge
           was not right in finding fault with the State
           Authorities in issuing notifications under
Section 1(3)
,
Section 3(1)
and
Section 28(1)
simultaneously. There is no bar in issuing such
           notifications as has been done and no provision has
           been shown to us by the learned counsel for the
           contesting respondents which prevented the State
           from doing so. Even that ground, therefore, cannot
           help the land­owners”.
45
34.    The above view has the approval of this Court in its recent

order dated 28.01.2020 passed in      Special Leave Petition (c)

No(s).9662 of 2013 (
C. Jayaram and others Vs. The State of

Karnataka and others
).
C. Procedure Prescribed under the 1966 Act duly followed:
35.   As already noted above from the chronology of events given

in the earlier part of the judgment, the due procedure had been

followed. It is also to be noticed that the objections were invited

under the procedure prescribed in
Section 28
of the 1966 Act and

the same were duly considered and disposed of, as such, it

cannot be alleged that the objections have not been considered

vitiating the acquisitions. In this respect it would be relevant to

mention that the Land Audit Committee approved the grant of

1034 acres of land in its meeting dated 28.01.2006, which was

duly accepted and approved by the State Nodal Agency,

Karnataka Udyog Mitra in its meeting dated 15.02.2006 and duly

communicated vide letter of even date to the KIADB to start the

process for acquisition. It was thereafter that the notifications

were issued under
Section 3(1)
,
1(3)
and
28(1)
of the 1966 Act, on

09.11.2006. Simultaneous publication of the said notifications
46
has already been upheld to be not suffering from any illegality or

irregularity.
36.   Pursuant to the notification under
Section 28(1)
of the 1966

Act, further steps were taken and after inviting objections and

disposing of the same, final declaration was made, compensation

was determined and thereafter possession taken. It would be also

relevant to state here that from the material on record, it is

apparent that the land was acquired in the name of the State,

thereafter transferred to the KIADB, which proceeded to allot the

same to MSPL and AISL respectively and, accordingly, lease

deeds were executed. The entire process as provided under the

Act has been strictly followed. The Division Bench in the

impugned judgment apparently was swayed by its own personal

views based on assumptions and having no material backing

which led to the quashing of the notifications.
D. Acquisition for a Single Company.
37.
Section 28(1)
of the KIAD Act is reproduced below:
“28. Acquisition of land.­ (1) if at any time, in the
           opinion of the State Government, any land is required
           for the purpose of development by the Board, or for
           any other purpose in furtherance of the objects
47
of this Act, the State Government may by
          notification, given notice of its intention to acquire
          such land.” [Emphasis Provided]


      The words for the purpose of development by the Board, and

or for any other purpose in furtherance of the objects of this Act

make it amply clear that the intention to acquire land in the

opinion of the State Government could be not only for the

purpose of development by the Board but for any other purpose

in furtherance of the objects of this Act. This gives power to

acquire land beyond development by KIADB. Further, the

regulations framed by the Board under
Section 41
particularly

deal with this aspect in
Regulation 13
which reads as under;
“Allotment of Plots in Special Cases: Notwithstanding
          anything contained in these regulations, the Board
          in consultation with the State Government may allot
          any plot or area other than those in respect of
          which applications are called for under
Regulation 7
to any individual or company for the
          establishment of an industry or for the provision of
          any amenity required in the Industrial area.”
          [Emphasis Provided]
38.    Under the above regulations, the Board is empowered to

allot any plot or area to any individual or company for

establishment of an industry in consultation with the State

Government. This provision also contemplates acquiring land for

the purpose of allotment to a single company to set up an
48
industry. In the present case, the allotment by the Board is duly

approved by the State Government.
39.
In the same context, it would be relevant to refer to a

judgment of this Court in the case of
P. Narayanappa Vs. State

of Karnataka
reported in (2006) 7 SCC 578, where it upheld the

acquisition of land in favour of a private company under the 1966

Act. Paragraphs 6, 13 and 14 of
the said judgment
are

reproduced below:
“6. Shri Shanti Bhushan, learned senior counsel for
          the appellants, has challenged the impugned
          notifications on several grounds and the principal
          ground is that the land has been acquired in order to
          benefit a company, namely, Vikas Telecom (P) Ltd.
          (respondent no.9) who had submitted a project report
          for setting up a software technology park which
          included an I.T. Training Institute/Engineering
          College,    Research   and     Development    Centre,
          Educational Centre, Commercial and Residential
          Buildings and Service Apartments, Convention
          Centre, Hotel, Shopping Mall, etc……
          …………
13. The provision for acquisition of land under the Act
          is contained in
Section 28
which is somewhat
          different from the provisions contained in
Sections 4
,
5A
and
6
of the Land Acquisition Act. The legislature
          in its wisdom thought it proper to make a specific
          provision for acquisition of the land in the Act itself
          rather than to take recourse to
Sections 4
and
6
of the
          Land Acquisition Act. A plain reading of sub­
          section (1) of
Section 28
would show that land
          can be acquired for the purpose of (i)
          development by the Board, or (ii) for any other
          purpose in furtherance of the objects of the Act.
Sub­section (3) of
Section 28
is similar to
Section 5A
of the Land Acquisition Act and the final notification
49
is issued under sub­section (4) of
Section 28
. The
necessary precondition for a valid notification
under sub­section (4) of
Section 28
is that the
State Government should be satisfied that the
land is required for the purpose specified in the
notification issued under sub­section (1), viz., for
the purpose of (i) development by the Board, or (ii) for
any other purpose in furtherance of the objects
of the Act. Therefore, in order to judge the validity of
the notification what is to be seen is whether the
acquisition of land is being made for securing the
establishment of industrial areas or to promote the
establishment or orderly development of industries in
such areas. In view of wide definition of the
words "industrial infrastructural facilities" as
contained in
Section 2 (7a)
of the Act, making of
a technology park, research and development
centre, townships, trade and tourism centres or
making provisions for marketing and banking
which would contribute to the development of
industries will meet the objectives of the Act
and acquisition of land for such a purpose
would be perfectly valid.
14……….Sub­section (1) of
Section 28
clearly
shows that the land can be acquired for (i)
development by the Board; or (ii) for any other
purpose in furtherance of the objects of the Act.
Under sub­section (8) of
Section 28
, the State
Government is empowered, after it has taken
possession of land, to transfer the same to the Board
for the purpose for which the land has been acquired.
Section 32
empowers the State Government to place
at the disposal of the Board any land vested in it and
the Board is enjoined to deal with the land in
accordance with the regulations made and directions
given by the State Government in this behalf. This
stage when the Board gets the authority to deal with
the land comes at a later stage which is after the
land has been developed by it. An entrepreneur or
a company may give a proposal to the State
Government for setting up an industry or
infrastructural facility and the Government may
thereafter acquire the land and give it to the
Board. It is also possible that after the land has
50
already been acquired and developed by the
         Board, it may be allotted to an entrepreneur or
         a company for setting up an industry or
         infrastructural facility. Therefore, the scheme of
         the Act does not show that at the time of acquisition
         of the land and issuing a preliminary notification
         under
Section 28(1)
of the Act, the complete details of
         the nature of the industry or infrastructural facility
         proposed to be set up should also be mentioned. At
         that stage what is to be seen is whether the land is
         acquired for development by the Board or for any
         other purpose in furtherance of the objects of the Act,
         as mentioned in sub­section (1) of
Section 28
of the
         Act. In fact, if the contention raised by the learned
         senior counsel for the appellants is accepted, it would
         mean that even at the stage of preliminary
         notification under
Section 28(1)
of the Act, the nature
         of the activity which may be done by some
         entrepreneur or a company which may give a
         proposal for setting up an industry or infrastructural
         facility much after land has been acquired should
         also be taken note of and specifically mentioned in
         the notification, which is well nigh impossible. While
         interpreting the provisions of the Act, the Court should
         not only take into consideration the facts of the
         present case but should also have in mind all
         possible contingencies. Therefore, on a plain
         reading of the language used in the Act, it is not
         possible to accept the contention of the learned
         senior counsel for the appellants that the
         impugned notification is vague or cryptic as the
         complete details of the project which was
         proposed to be established by Vikas Telecom (P)
         Ltd. (respondent no.9) were not mentioned and
         on account of the aforesaid lacuna, the landowners
         were deprived of their right to make a proper
         representation or to show cause against the proposed
         acquisition.” [Emphasis Provided]
40.   Therefore, the view expressed by the Division Bench that

no acquisition could be made for a single company cannot be

sustained.
51
E­ Acquisition for a non­applicant (AISL).
41.   It is not disputed that AISL (non­applicant) is fully owned

subsidiary of MSPL (applicant). In effect, AISL is a new Company

promoted by the same promoters. The State Government

examined the request of MSPL and also AISL for modification of

its Government Order dated 22.12.2005. It examined the

bifurcation under various heads. State Government issued

Government Order dated 22.03.2006 splitting the infrastructures

required with further stipulation that all other terms and

conditions mentioned in the Government Order dated 22.12.2005

would apply as it is to both the Companies. The only change

sought by MSPL was the integrated steel plant be set up by AISL

which was its own subsidiary. These are commercial matters and

the State after examining the proposal for change in its wisdom

accepted the same. There was no change in the project, as such,

regarding the finance, employment and other infrastructures. The

objection raised by Mr. Naphade to the aforesaid effect does not

merit consideration.
F. Relevance of Shri Ramtanu judgment:
52
42.   The impugned judgment has
placed reliance upon
the

judgment in the case of Shri Ramtanu (supra) for the proposition

that the acquisition under the 1966 Act was in pari materia to the
Maharashtra Industrial Development Act, 1962
and, therefore,

the acquisition has to be for public purpose only and not for a

private company. At the outset, it may be recorded that validity of

the 1962 Act was being considered in the case of Shri Ramtanu

(supra). In the present litigation, there is no challenge to the

validity of the 1966 Act or the 2002 Act. Further, the object and

purpose   of   the   1962    Act    was    for   securing     the   orderly

establishment in industrial areas and industrial State of

industries in the State of Maharashtra whereas the 1966 Act, the

object and preamble was to promote the establishment and

orderly development of industries (in industrial areas). This Court

while dealing with the 1962 Act discussed this aspect in para 21

of Shri Ramtanu (supra), which is reproduced hereunder:
Counsel on behalf of the petitioners contended that
          there was procedural discrimination between
          the
Land Acquisition Act and the Act
in the present
          case. It was said that there was a special procedure
          designed by the
Land Acquisition Act
for acquisition
          of land for the companies whereas in the' present
          case the State was acquiring land for companies
          without adopting the procedure of, the
Land
          Acquisition Act
. It is to be remembered that the Act in
          the present case is a special one having the specific
53
and special pur­ pose of growth, development and
Organisation of industries in the State of
Maharashtra.
The Act
has its own procedure and
there is no provision in the Act for acquisition of land
for a company as in the case of
Land Acquisition Act
.
In the present case, acquisition under the Act is
for      the    purpose      of     development       of
industrial estates or industrial areas by the
Corporation or any other purpose in furtherance
of the objects of the Act. The policy underlying,
the Act is not acquisition of land for any
company but for the one. and only purpose of
development, Organisation and growth of
industrial estates and industrial areas.
The
Act
is designed to have a planned industrial
city as opposed to haphazard growth of
industrial areas in all parts of the State.
The
Act
is intended to prevent ,.growth of industries
in the developed parts of the State. Industries are
therefore to be set up in the developing or, new parts
of the State where new industrial towns will be
brought into existence. The object of, the Act is to
carve out planned areas for industries. On one
side there Will be engineering industries and on the
other there will be chemical industries. There will be
localisation of industries with the result that the
residents and dwellers of towns and cities will not
suffer either from the polluted air or obnoxious.
chemicals of industries or the dense growth of
industries and industrial population, within and near
about the residential areas.
The Land Acquisition
Act
is a general Act and that is why there is specific
provision for acquisition of land by the, State for
public purpose and acquisition of land by the State
for companies. The present Act on the other hand
is designed the sole purpose of development of
industrial areas and industrial estates and
growth and development of industries within
the State. Industrial undertakings or persons who
are engaged in industries all become entitled to the'
facilities on such industrial growth.
Under the Land
Acquisition Act
acquisition is at the instance of and
for the benefit of a company whereas under the
present Act acquisition is solely by the State for public
54
purposes. The two acts are dissimilar in situations
              and circumstances." [Emphasis Provided]
43.     Thus, it is to be noticed that the purpose in 1962 Act was

for establishment of industrial areas whereas in the other statute

i.e 1966 Act, it was for promotion of the establishment and

orderly development of industries. Thus, the reliance by the

Division Bench in the impugned judgment on the case of Shri

Ramtanu (supra) is misplaced.
G. Value judgments of policy views.
44.   The Division Bench in the impugned judgment seems to

have been swayed by its own philosophy in due deference to the

principles of statutory interpretation. The statute is to be read in

its   plain    language.    Setting    up   of   industries    is   part   of

development. There has to be a sustainable growth and existence

of all facets and, that is why, laws have been framed, cheques

and balance have been imposed so that development takes place

side by side with the protection and preservation of nature and

environment. Certain extracts from the impugned judgment

wherein the Division Bench had expressed its personal policy

views and value judgments are reproduced hereunder:
55
“Though the word ‘development’ is used, when this word
      is examined in an objective manner, in an impassionate
      manner, it is nothing but interference with the existing
      state of nature and destroying naute !” (P.90­91)

      “Any industry inevitably creates and causes pollution of
      the land, air and water….” (P.91)

      “Unfortunately, by and large,….courts have been pro
      acquisition and have generally approved or upheld
      acquisition proceedings in the name of public interest.”
      (P.96)

      “When examined on such a touchstone and such tests are
      applied, we find that the present acquisition proceedings
      cannot stand. The affectation is very adverse and the
      benefit if at all is a return because of future development
      of any industry with some potential for employment and
      may be a little revenue to the State. The affectation to the
      livelihood and dignified life of thousands of people which
      is not examined even it is not the focal point, it should be
      at least be given due attention which it deserved” (P.105)

      “…..[A]nd with the history of limited companies being too
      well­known, though the British claim the invention of joint
      stock company is the genius of English legal mind when
      the concept is examined from the perception as it prevails
      in this country and in the society and examine from the
      ethos of our society, it is nothing short of deception or
      playing fraud.” (P.106)

      “A joint stock company is invented only to defraud
      creditors.” (P.106­107)

      “Let us not lose our souls in the name of development by
      depriving land holders of their land holdings.” (P.108)
45.   A perusal of the above makes it amply clear that the

Division Bench introduced several value judgments and policy

views in order to interpret the provisions of the 1966 Act and the

2002 Act. It is only as a measure of caution that the said aspect

is being taken note of. Such value judgments and policy views are
56
beyond the domain of the Courts. The Courts should refrain itself

from expressing value judgments and policy views in order to

interpret statutes. Statutes are to be read in their plain language

and not otherwise. Reference may be had to the following

decisions:
(i) Regina Vs. Barnet London Borough Council;
             (1983) 1 AII ER 226;
(
ii) Union of India Vs. Elphinstone Spinning and
             Weaving Company Ltd.
; (2001) 4 SCC 139 (Para
17)
(
iii)         D.R.   Venkatachalam    Vs.    Transport
             Commissioner
; (1977) 2 SCC 273 (Para 29)
(iv) Padma Sundara Rao Vs. State of Tamil Nadu;
             (2002) 3 SCC 533 (Para 13);
(v) Harbhajan Singh Vs. Press Council of India;
             (2002) 3 SCC 722 (Para 11) and
(
vi) Unique     Butyle   Tube   Industries   Vs.   U.P.
             Financial Corporation
; (2003) 2 SCC 455 (Para
12).
H. Challenge to acquisition by a minority (10%) of land
owners.
46.   It is admitted position that the challenge to the acquisition

of more than a thousand acres was made by a small fraction of

land owners having land less than 10% of the total acquisition.

Compensation for rest of the 90% land acquired had been
57
accepted by their respective land owners. The Division Bench has

quashed the entire acquisition of more than a thousand acres at

the instance of such a small fraction. This aspect has been dealt

with by this Court in the case of
Amarjit Singh Vs. State of

Punjab
reported in (2010) 10 SCC 43 and Om Prakash Vs.

State of U.P. reported in (1998) 6 SCC 1.
The learned Single

Judge had placed reliance on the judgment of Om Prakash

(supra). It is also worthwhile to mention that out of approx 110

acres of land acquires for MSPL, only one land owner possessing

only 4.34 acres of land, had filed the writ appeal before the

Division Bench. Quashing the entire acquisition at the instance

of one land owner having 4.34 acres of land out of total

acquisition for MSPL of 110 acres, would be against the public

policy and public interest. The MSPL alone provides employment

to 292 persons with a substantial investment of Rs.200 crores.

The employment to approximately 300 persons by MSPL is also

alleged to be double of the number of employees as projected in

the proposal. Further, in the case of AISL acquisition of 914 acres

is challenged by a fraction of less than 10% land owners. The

estimated project of AISL is approx Rs.2092 crores and would

employment to at least one thousand persons.
58
47.   In view of the above analysis, we are of the view that the

Division Bench committed an error in quashing the acquisition

proceedings. Accordingly, the appeals filed by MSPL, AISL, KIADB

and State of Karnataka are allowed.
48.   The judgment of the Division Bench dated 22.03.2012 is

set aside and the writ petitions stand dismissed as ordered by the

learned Single Judge vide judgment dated 17.03.2009.
49.   Insofar as the claim of Syed Ahmed is concerned, which is

in respect of similar acquisition for M/S BMM Ispat Ltd. on

similar grounds based upon the judgment of the Division Bench

dated 22.03.2012 impugned in the other appeals, deserves to be

dismissed as we have already set aside the said judgment.

Relevant to state here that Syed Ahmed was owner of 14.35 acres

out of total land measuring 705.99 acres acquired for M/S BMM

Ispat Ltd., which is less than 2%. The appeal of Syed Ahmed is

accordingly dismissed.
50.   There shall be no order as to costs.
59
51.   Pending application(s), if any, is/are disposed of.
…..……..........................J.
                                                 [HEMANT GUPTA]


                                       ………….........................J.
                                                   [VIKRAM NATH]
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER 11, 2022.
60