[Cites
16
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. ... vs Nisar Ahmed Ganai on 12 October, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
M.R. Shah
1

                                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6778 ­ 6780 OF 2022


                         Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL) & Ors.            ...Appellant(s)

                                                          Versus

                         Nisar Ahmed Ganai & Ors.                                 …Respondent(s)

                                                          With

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6781 ­ 6783 OF 2022

                                                  JUDGMENT
M.R. Shah, J.
1.   Feeling aggrieved     and    dissatisfied    with    the    impugned

                              common judgment and order dated 06.10.2021 passed by

                              the High Court of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh, at

                              Jammu in respective writ petitions preferred by the private

                              respondents herein – original petitioners whereby the

                              appellants herein – original respondents have been directed

                              to determine the compensation of the acquired lands in

                              accordance with the provisions of the Right to Fair

                              Compensation    and    Transparency         in   Land      Acquisition,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SNEHA
Date: 2022.10.12
16:29:26 IST
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (hereinafter
Reason:
referred to as “the Act, 2013”), the appellants herein –
2
original respondents have preferred present appeals.
2.    The facts leading to the present appeals in a nut­shell are as

      under:
2.1   That, the lands in question were sought to be acquired

      under the provisions of the State Land Acquisition Act, 1990

      (hereinafter referred to as “State Act of 1990”). The

      notification under Section 4 of the State Act of 1990 was

      issued on 15.11.2016. The lands in question were sought to

      be acquired for the appellants – beneficiary. That thereafter

      declaration under Section 6 of the State Act of 1990 was

      issued on 12.11.2018. The land owners – original petitioners

      filed   the   respective   petitions   before   the   High   Court

      challenging the proceedings initiated under the J&K Land

      Acquisition Act SVT 1990 with the following prayers: ­


      A.      CERTIORARI; so as to quash the proceedings initiated

              by respondents u/s 4,6,9 & 9­A and Section 17 of J &

              K Land Acquisition Act, SVT 1990 for the acquisition of

              land for relocation of petroleum Depots from Channi

              Himmat near Railway Station to Villages Pargalta and

              Khana Chargal, Tehsil and District Jammu.
B.      MANDAMUS; so as to command and direct the
3
respondents to de­notify the land sought to be

           acquired in villages Pargalta and Kanna Chargal,

           Tehsil and District Jammu for re­location of Petroleum

           Depots.
C.   PROHIBITION; so as to restrain the respondents from

           taking the possession of land falling under various

           Khasra numbers of aforesaid villages u/s 17 of J&K

           Land Acquisition Act.
2.2   That, during the pendency of the writ petitions before the

      High Court, the State Act of 1990 came to be repealed. When

      the aforesaid writ petitions came up for hearing before the

      High Court, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the

      original writ petitioners submitted that the petitioners would

      be satisfied, if instead of quashing the land acquisition

      proceeding, determination of compensation is made in

      accordance with the provisions of
Section 24
of the Act,

      2013.
2.3   It was the case on behalf of the original writ petitioners

      before the High Court that as neither the possession of the

      lands in question have been taken over nor the award has

      been declared even under the State Act of 1990, the original
4
writ petitioners shall be entitled to compensation of acquired

      land in accordance with the provisions of
Section 24(1)
of the

      Act, 2013.
2.4   The aforesaid prayer was opposed by the appellants on the

      ground that as the acquisition proceedings have been

      initiated under the State Act of 1990,
Section 24(1)
of the

      Act, 2013 shall not be applicable at all. It was submitted on

      behalf of the appellants that in view of
Section 6
of the

      General Clauses Act, 1897 read with sub­clause (13) of

      Clause 2 of the Jammu & Kashmir Reorganization (Removal

      of Difficulties) Order, 2019 issued vide S.O. No.3912(E) of

      2019 dated 30.10.2019 of the Ministry of Home Affairs

      (Department of J & K Affairs) the repeal of the Act shall not

      affect the rights, privileges, obligations or liabilities acquired,

      accrued or incurred under any law so repealed and that any

      investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted,

      continued    and    enforced     as   if
Jammu     &   Kashmir

      Reorganization Act, 2019
has not been passed. Therefore, it

      was submitted on behalf of the appellants that award in

      respect of the acquisition in question has to be made in

      accordance with the provisions of the State Act of 1990 and
Section 24
of the Act, 2013 would not be applicable.
5
2.5   By the impugned judgment and order the Division Bench of

      the High Court has allowed the said writ petitions and has

      directed the appellants – original respondents to determine

      the compensation of the acquired lands in accordance with

      the provisions of the Act, 2013.
2.6   Feeling   aggrieved    and   dissatisfied   with   the   common

      judgment and order passed by the High Court directing the

      appellants to determine and pay the compensation of the

      acquired lands in accordance with the provisions of the Act,

      2013, the original respondents – appellants herein, for

      whose benefit the lands have been acquired, have preferred

      the present appeals.
3.    Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General appearing on

      behalf of the appellants has vehemently submitted that in

      the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has

      erred in directing the appellants to determine and pay the

      compensation under the provisions of
Section 24
of the Act,

      2013.
3.1   It is further submitted that in view of Clause 2(13) of the

      Order, 2019 read with Section 6 of the General Clauses Act,
6
the rights, liabilities, and obligations acquired, accrued or

      incurred under the Repeal Law vis. State Act of 1990 stands

      saved and would continue under the said Act.


3.2   It is further submitted by Shri Mehta, learned Solicitor

      General appearing on behalf of the appellants that even

      otherwise considering
Section 24(1)
of the Act, 2013, with

      respect to the acquisition under the State Act of 1990, Act,

      2013 shall not be applicable at all. It is submitted that
Section 24
of the Act, 2013 shall be applicable only in a case

      where   the   acquisition   under    the   provisions   of
Land

      Acquisition Act, 1894
have been initiated. Heavy reliance is

      placed on the decision of this Court in the case of
Bangalore

      Development     Authority       &   Anr.   vs.   The    State   of

      Karnataka & Ors.
rendered in M.A. No.1614­1616 of 2019

      in M.A. No.1346­1348 of 2019 in Civil Appeal Nos.7661­

      7663 of 2018.
3.3   It is further submitted by Shri Mehta, learned Solicitor

      General appearing on behalf of the appellants that even

      otherwise the High Court has erred in holding that as the

      award was not declared and the possession was not taken

      over,
Section 24
of the Act, 2013 shall be applicable.
7
3.4   It is further submitted that the High Court has failed to

      appreciate that the award could not be passed on account of

      stay order granted by the High Court. It is submitted that

      therefore non­passing of the award which was due to the

      stay granted by the High Court cannot be a ground to apply
Section 24
of the Act, 2013.
Making the above submissions it is prayed to allow the

      present appeals.
4.    Present appeals are vehemently opposed by learned Counsel

      Sunil Fernandes appearing on behalf of the respondents

      herein – original writ petitioners.
4.1   It is submitted that in the present case, as neither the

      possession of the lands in question have been taken over nor

      the compensation has been paid as the award was not

      declared, no error has been committed by the High Court in

      directing to pay the compensation under the Act, 2013.


4.2   It is further submitted by the learned Counsel appearing on

      behalf of the original writ petitioners that in the present case

      neither   Clause    2(13)    of   the   Jammu     &    Kashmir
8
Reorganization (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 2019 nor
section 6
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall be

      applicable.
4.3   It is submitted that reliance placed by the appellants on the

      decision of this Court in the case of
Bangalore Development

      Authority & Anr.
(Supra) is wholly misconceived, as the

      same shall not apply to the facts of the instant case. It is

      submitted that in
the said judgment
it was held that the

      repeal of the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
would not affect /

      lapse the land acquisition proceedings initiated under the
Bangalore     Development   Act,   1976
,   inasmuch   as   the

      provisions of the former Act had been ‘incorporated’ into the

      latter Act and therefore, had independent existence. It is

      submitted that in
the said decision
the view taken by this

      Court was on the premise that since the governing statute,

      i.e., the
Bangalore Development Act, 1976
had not been

      repealed, there was no occasion of applicability of the Act,

      2013. It is submitted that in the present case, J & K Act

      which was pari materia to the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
stands repealed and Act, 2013 has come into force with

      respect to the J & K with effect from 31.10.2019 on

      enactment of the Jammu & Kashmir Reorganization Act,
9
2019.
4.4   It is further submitted that in view of the plain language

      implied in
Section 24
of the Act, 2013 i.e., if at the time of

      commencement of the Act, 2013, no award has been made

      under the old Act, then all provisions under the new Act

      (Act, 2013) relating to determination of compensation shall

      apply. It is submitted that therefore the intention of the

      legislature to ensure that the proceedings under the old Act

      did not lapse merely due to the coming into force of the new

      Act. However, at the same time, the intention is to give

      benefit of the liberal provisions of the Act, 2013 to the land

      owners as well. It is submitted that therefore the High Court

      has rightly held that in case an award has been made under

      the J&K Act before its repeal, then the right of compensation

      of the land owners would certainly have been determined in

      accordance with the J & K Act only. However, where no

      award has been passed under the J & K Act before its repeal

      and consequently no right to compensation had been

      matured, neither clause 2(13) of the Jammu and Kashmir

      Reorganization (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 2019 nor
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act shall be employed to

      nullify the express provision contained in
Section 24(1)
of
10
the Act, 2013 insofar as it provides that where no award is

      passed under the old / repealed Act, the provisions of

      enhanced compensation under the Act, 2013 would apply

      while not affecting the land acquisition proceedings under

      the old / repealed law as such.
4.5   Now, so far as non­passing of the award on account of the

      stay order dated 14.12.2018 is concerned, it is submitted

      that as such the order dated 14.12.2018 was only directing

      the parties to maintain status quo with regard to the

      possession and the High Court did not pass any interim

      order restraining the authorities from declaring the award. It

      is submitted that even the order of status quo was in some

      of the writ petitions and did not extend to other lands. It is

      submitted that despite the same, no award was passed.


4.6   In the alternative it is submitted by the learned Counsel

      appearing on behalf of the original writ petitioners that

      before the High Court the land acquisition proceedings were

      challenged on number of grounds and to pay the enhanced

      amount of compensation under
Section 24(1)(a)
of the Act,

      2013 was an alternative prayer due to non­declaration of the

      award under Section 11 of the State Act of 1990. It is
11
submitted that in view of the alternative relief prayed for by

      the original writ petitioners, the High Court did not go into

      the merits of the submissions of the original writ petitioners

      with respect to quashing of the land acquisition proceedings

      and therefore, to that extent the issue is yet to be

      considered. It is submitted that in case this Court takes the

      view that the provisions of the Act, 2013 shall not be

      applicable and that the original land owners are not entitled

      to enhanced compensation under
Section 24(1)(a)
of the Act,

      2013
,
in that case
, the matters may be remanded to the

      High Court to decide the writ petitions on other grounds.
5.    We have heard Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General

      appearing on behalf of the appellants and Shri Sunil

      Fernandes, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respondents herein – original writ petitioners.


5.1   Having gone through the impugned common judgment and

      order passed by the High Court, the High Court has directed

      the appellants herein to determine and pay to the original

      owners the compensation under the Act, 2013 on the ground

      that no award under the State Act of 1990 has been

      published and/or declared. While passing the impugned
12
common judgment and order, the High Court has relied

upon
Section 24(1)(a)
of the Act, 2013.
Section 24(1)(a)
of the

Act, 2013 reads as under:
“24. Land acquisition process under Act No.1 of
     1894 shall be deemed to have lapsed in certain
     cases.­ (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
     this    Act,   in   any   case    of   land   acquisition
     proceedings initiated under the
Land Acquisition
     Act, 1894
,­
(a)    where no award under section 11 of the
     said Land Acquisition Act has been made, then,
     all    provisions    of   this   Act   relating   to   the
     determination of compensation shall apply; or
(b)    where an award under said
section 11
has
     been made, then such proceedings shall continue
     under the provisions of the said
Land Acquisition
     Act
, as if the said Act has not been repealed.”


     On fair reading of
Section 24(1)(a)
of the Act, 2013, it

provides that notwithstanding anything contained in Act,

2013, in any case of land acquisition proceedings initiated

under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
, where no award

under
Section 11
of the said
Land Acquisition Act
has been

made, then, all provisions of Act, 2013 relating to the

determination of the compensation shall apply.
Section 24(1)
13
of the Act, 2013 speaks about the land acquisition

proceedings initiated under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
.
In the present case, the lands in question have been

acquired under the provisions of the State Land Acquisition

Act, 1990. Therefore, the acquisition of the lands in question

is not under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
. It cannot be

disputed that prior to the enactment of the
Jammu &

Kashmir Reorganization Act, 2019
and promulgation of the

Jammu & Kashmir (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 2019, the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
was not applicable at all so as far

as the State of Jammu & Kashmir is concerned. It is only on

the enactment of the
Jammu & Kashmir Reorganization Act,

2019
, Act, 2013 shall be made applicable. It is the case on

behalf of the original writ petitioners that as the provisions of

the State Act of 1990 are pari materia to the
Land

Acquisition Act, 1894
and therefore,
Section 24(1)(a)
of the

Act, 2013 shall be applicable. The aforesaid cannot be

accepted. The language of
Section 24(1)(a)
of the Act, 2013 is

very clear and unambiguous. It talks about the land

acquisition under the provisions of the
Land Acquisition Act,

1894
only and it does not speak about any other pari

materia provision of different statutes.
14
5.2   At this stage the decision of this Court in the case of
Bangalore Development Authority & Anr.
(Supra) is required

      to be referred to. In
the said decision
it is specifically

      observed and held that the Act, 2013 repeals only the
Land

      Acquisition Act, 1894
and not any other Central or State

      enactment dealing with the acquisition and therefore, what

      is sought to be saved under the Act, 2013 is only

      acquisitions which have been initiated under the
Land

      Acquisition Act, 1894
and not those acquisitions which have

      been initiated under any other Central or State enactment.

      In paragraphs 19 and 23, this Court had observed and held

      as under:
“19. The 2013 Act repeals only the
LA Act
and
           not any other Central or State enactment dealing
           with acquisition. Therefore, what is sought to be
           saved under
Section 24
of the 2013 Act is only
           acquisitions which had been initiated under the
LA
           Act
and 13 not those acquisitions which had been
           initiated    under      any   other    Central   or   State
           enactment. The expression contained in
Section 24
of     the   LA   Act    cannot   be     given   extensive
           interpretation by adding words into the provision,
           in the absence of the provision itself giving rise to
           any such implication. We are of the view that 2013
15
Act would not regulate the acquisition proceedings
     made under the
BDA Act
.
23. In view of the above, the Learned Judge of
     the High Court in Sri Sudhakar Hegde (supra) was
     not justified in holding that the provisions of
LA Act
that are made applicable to the
BDA Act
are in the
     nature of legislation by reference. The learned
     Judge has also erred in holding that in view of the
     repeal of
LA Act
by coming into force of 2013 Act,
     the corresponding provisions of 2013 Act would
     regulate acquisition proceedings under the
BDA Act
and that this would include determination of
     compensation in accordance with 2013 Act. It is
     hereby clarified that since
LA Act
has been
     incorporated into the
BDA Act
so far as they are
     applicable, the provisions of 15 2013 Act are not
     applicable for the acquisitions made under the
BDA
     Act
. Therefore, the judgment of the learned Single
     Judge of the High Court in Sri Sudhakar Hegde
     (supra) and other connected matters is hereby
     overruled.”


     In view of the above binding decision of this Court, we

are of the firm view that the provisions of the Act, 2013 shall

not be applicable with respect to the acquisition under the J

& K Act, 1990.
16
5.3   Even otherwise considering clause 2(13) of the Order, 2019

      read with
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act under which

      the   rights,   liabilities,   privileges,   obligations   acquired,

      accrued, or incurred under the repealed laws stands saved

      and would be continued under those Acts (in the present

      case the Act, 1990), it is to be noted that Order, 2019 is

      subsequent to the Act, 2013. Therefore, it is to be presumed

      that while enacting the Order, 2019 and providing Clause

      2(13) of the Order, 2019, the legislature was conscious of the

      provisions of the earlier Act (Act, 2013). Under the

      circumstances also, with respect to the lands acquired under

      the State Act of 1990,
Section 24(1)(a)
of the Act, 2013 shall

      not be applicable at all.
5.4   Even otherwise, it is required to be noted that in some of the

      writ petitions there was an order of status quo may be with

      respect to the possession. It is to be noted that the

      notification under
Section 4
and declaration under Section 6

      of the State Act of 1990 was a common notification /

      declaration. Therefore, there was impediment on the part of

      the authority in declaring the award. The original writ

      petitioners cannot be permitted to take benefit of the order of

      status quo obtained by some of the original writ petitioners
17
and thereafter to contend that as the award has not been

declared they shall be entitled to the enhanced amount of

compensation under the provisions of the Act, 2013.
In the

case of
Indore Development Authority Vs. Manoharlal

and Ors.
; (2020) 8 SCC 129, it is observed and held by this

Court that: ­
(i)     Lapse of acquisition takes place only in case of default by
        the authorities acquiring the land, not caused by any other
        reason or order of the court;
(ii)    If it was not possible for the acquiring authorities, for any
        reason not attributable to them or the Government, to take
        requisite steps, the period has to be excluded;
(iii)   In case the authorities are prevented by the court's order,
        obviously, as per the interpretation of the provisions such
        period has to be excluded;
(iv)    The intent of the Act, 2013 is not to benefit landowners
        only. The provisions of
Section 24
by itself do not intend to
        confer benefits on litigating parties as such, while as per
Section 114
of the Act, 2013 and
Section 6
of the General
        Clauses Act the case has to be litigated as per the
        provisions of the Act, 1894;
(v)     It is not the intendment of the Act, 2013 that those who
        have assailed the acquisition process should get benefits of
        higher compensation as contemplated under
Section 24
;
(vi)    It is not intended by the provisions that in case, the
        persons, who have litigated and have obtained interim
        orders from the Civil Courts by filing suits or from the High
        Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution should have the
        benefits of the provisions of the Act, 2013 except to the
        extent specifically provided under the Act, 2013;
(vii)   In cases where some landowners have chosen to take
        recourse to litigation and have obtained interim orders
        restraining taking of possession or orders of status quo, as
        a matter of practical reality it is not possible for the
18
authorities or the Government to take possession or to
        make payment of compensation to the landowners. In
        several instances, such interim orders also have impeded
        the making of an award;
(viii) The litigation initiated by the landowners has to be decided
       on its own merits and the benefits of
Section 24(2)
should
       not be available to the litigants in a straightjacket manner.
       In case there is no interim order, they can get the benefits
       they are entitled to, not otherwise. Delays and dilatory
       tactics and sometimes wholly frivolous pleas cannot result
       in benefitting the landowners under sub­section (1) of
Section 24
of the Act, 2013;
(ix)    Any type of order passed by this Court would inhibit action
        on the part of the authorities to proceed further, when a
        challenge to acquisition is pending;
(x)     Interim order of stay granted in one of the matters of the
        landowners would cause a complete restraint on the
        authorities to proceed further to issue declaration;
(xi)    When the authorities are disabled from performing duties
        due to impossibility, it would be a sufficient excuse for
        them to save them from rigour of provisions of
Section 24
. A
        litigant may have a good or a bad cause, be right or wrong.
        But he cannot be permitted to take advantage of a situation
        created by him by way of an interim order passed in his
        favour by the Court at his instance. Although provision of
Section 24
does not discriminate between landowners, who
        are litigants or non­litigants and treat them differently with
        respect to the same acquisition, it is necessary to view all of
        them from the stand point of the intention of the
        Parliament. Otherwise, anomalous results may occur and
        provisions may become discriminatory in itself;
(xii)   The law does not expect the performance of the impossible;
(xiii) An act of the court shall prejudice no man;
(xiv)   When there is a disability to perform a part of the law, such
        a charge has to be excused. When performance of the
        formalities prescribed by a statute is rendered impossible
        by circumstances over which the persons concerned have
        no control, it has to be taken as a valid excuse;
(xv)    The Court can under its inherent jurisdiction ex debito
        justitiae has a duty to mitigate the damage suffered by the
19
defendants by the act of the Court;
(xvi)   No person can suffer from the act of Court and an unfair
             advantage of the interim order must be neutralised;

     (xvii) No party can be permitted to take shelter under the cover of
            Court’s order to put the other party in a disadvantageous
            position;
(xviii) If one has enjoyed under the Court's cover, that period
             cannot be included towards inaction of the authorities to
             take requisite steps under
Section 24
as the State
             authorities would have acted and passed an award
             determining compensation but for the Court's order.


             Therefore also, the original writ petitioners – land

     owners shall not be entitled to enhanced amount of

     compensation under
Section 24(1)(a)
of the Act, 2013 on the

     ground that as the award has not been declared they shall

     be entitled to compensation under the Act, 2013.
6.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above and

     our specific finding that with respect to the lands acquired

     under the provisions of the J & K Act, 1990
Section 24(1)(a)
of the Act, 2013 shall not be applicable and even otherwise

     as observed hereinabove on merits also as the award could

     not be declared due to the pendency of the writ petitions

     before the High Court and the order of status quo, the High

     Court has committed a serious error in directing the

     appellants to pay the amount of compensation under the
20
Act, 2013. To that extent the impugned common judgment

      and order passed by the High Court is unsustainable, both

      on facts as well as on law.
6.1   However, at the same time, as it is reported that the

      acquisition proceedings were challenged on other grounds

      also and the prayer to pay the compensation under the Act,

      2013 was an alternative prayer, which has been granted by

      the High Court and therefore, the High Court did not go into

      the merits of the submissions made on behalf of the original

      land owners with respect to the quashing of the land

      acquisition proceedings on other grounds, the matters are to

      be remanded to the High Court to decide the writ petitions

      afresh in accordance with law and on its own merits on the

      other grounds if any, challenging the land acquisition

      proceedings under the State Act of 1990.
7.    In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, all

      these appeals succeed. The impugned common judgment

      and order dated 06.10.2021 passed by the High Court

      allowing the writ petitions and directing the appellants to

      pay to the original writ petitioners / original land owners the

      compensation as per the Act, 2013 is hereby quashed and
21
set aside. As the High Court has not decided the writ

    petitions on merits on other grounds with respect to

    quashing of the land acquisition proceedings, all the writ

    petitions are remitted back to the High Court to decide and

    dispose of the said writ petitions afresh in accordance with

    law and on its own merits so far as other grounds with

    respect to the quashing of the land acquisition proceedings,

    which shall be dealt with by the High Court in accordance

    with law and on its own merits. However, the issue with

    respect to the applicability of the Act, 2013 is concluded and

    shall not be reopened by the High Court and it is observed

    and clarified that the High Court shall consider on merits

    other submissions, if any raised in the writ petitions, with

    respect to quashing of the land acquisition proceedings only.
Present   appeals    are   allowed   accordingly   to   the

    aforesaid extent. In the facts and circumstances of the case,

    there shall be no order as to costs.
………………………………….J.
                                     [M.R. SHAH]

                                     ………………………………….J.
                                     [KRISHNA MURARI]
NEW DELHI;
OCTOBER 12, 2022