[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Bhupatbhai Bachubhai Chavda vs The State Of Gujarat on 10 April, 2024
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
2024 INSC 295


                                                                     REPORTABLE

                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 334 OF 2019


                            Bhupatbhai Bachubhai Chavda & Anr.        … Appellants



                                                    versus



                            State of Gujarat                        … Respondent


                                                  JUDGMENT
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.   The appellants, who are father and son, were
                            prosecuted for the offence punishable under Section 302,
                            read with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code (
IPC
). The
                            incident occurred on 17th September 1996. The allegation
                            is that the appellants assaulted one Punjabhai (the
                            deceased) with pipes and sticks. The deceased suffered a
                            large number of injuries and ultimately succumbed to the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2024.04.10
17:05:07 IST
Reason:                  injuries. By judgment dated 5th July 1997, the Sessions
Criminal Appeal no.334 of 2019 etc.                              Page 1 of 9
Court acquitted the appellants.            Being aggrieved by the
          judgment of the Sessions Court, the respondent - State of
          Gujarat preferred an appeal against acquittal before the
          High Court.                 By the impugned judgment dated 14th
          December 2018, the High Court interfered and converted
          the acquittal of the appellants into a conviction for the
          offence punishable under
Section 302
, read with
Section
          34
and
Section 323
of the IPC. By order dated 6th January
          2020, this Court directed that the present appeal be listed
          for hearing. By order dated 18th May 2021, the application
          for suspension of sentence and grant of bail by the first
          appellant was rejected by this Court. However, this Court
          continued the order dated 21st January 2019 by which
          exemption was granted to the second appellant from
          surrendering.
2.       The prosecution case in brief is that PW-1 Danabhai
          is the brother of the deceased. He had two brothers. The
          deceased was engaged in the business of diamond
          polishing.            At about 9.45 pm on 17th September 1996,
          when PW-1 was sitting in his pan-bidi shop, one
          Vajsurbhai came to him by motorcycle and told him that
          the appellants had assaulted the deceased. On hearing
          this news, PW-1 went towards village Jhanjhmer. He met
          his uncle Ramabhai on the outskirts of the village, who
          was taking the deceased to the hospital by a tempo.
Criminal Appeal no.334 of 2019 etc.                                  Page 2 of 9
According to the prosecution case, Karshanbhai (PW-4),
          Dayabhai, Jivabhai and other villagers were sitting in the
          tempo. The deceased was taken to the clinic of Dr. Goti at
          Dhola village.              As per his advice, the deceased was
          immediately shifted to Bhavnagar in a private hospital.
          The deceased succumbed to the injuries in the early
          morning of 18th September 1996.
3.       The Trial Court disbelieved the testimony of PW-4
          Karshanbhai for various reasons. In the impugned
          judgment, the High Court noted that though, according to
          the case of PW-4, he received injuries on 17th September
          1996 at the hands of the accused, Dr Jagdishbhai (PW-5)
          deposed that PW-4 informed him that he suffered injuries
          on 18th September 1996. The High Court, in the impugned
          judgment, held that in his police statement, PW-4, had
          correctly stated that he was injured on 18th September
          1996. Therefore, the statement he gave before the Court
          and the statement given by the doctor were meaningless.
          The High Court held that although the number of persons
          who witnessed the incident have not been examined, the
          appellants failed to adduce any evidence to falsify the
          prosecution's version. By the impugned judgment, after
          overturning the acquittal of the appellants, the High Court
          sentenced them to undergo life imprisonment.
Criminal Appeal no.334 of 2019 etc.                                Page 3 of 9
SUBMISSIONS
4.       The learned senior counsel appearing for the
          appellants pointed out that the High Court, while
          overturning the order of acquittal, had relied upon the
          police statement of PW-4 and had erroneously put the
          burden on the appellants to adduce evidence to show their
          innocence. He submitted that the entire approach of the
          High Court while dealing with an appeal against acquittal,
          is completely erroneous. He submitted that there is no
          finding recorded by the High Court that the only possible
          view which could be taken based on the evidence was that
          the guilt of the appellants had been proved. The learned
          senior counsel submitted that the High Court had erred in
          overturning the order of acquittal.
5.       The       learned   counsel   appearing   for   the    State
          vehemently submitted that in an appeal against acquittal,
          the High Court was duty-bound to reappreciate the
          evidence, and after finding that evidence of PW-4, an eye-
          witness, completely inspires confidence, the High Court
          rightly interfered with the order of acquittal.
OUR VIEW
6.       It is true that while deciding an appeal against
          acquittal, the Appellate Court has to reappreciate the
          evidence. After re-appreciating the evidence, the first
          question that needs to be answered by the Appellate Court
Criminal Appeal no.334 of 2019 etc.                                      Page 4 of 9
is whether the view taken by the Trial Court was a
          plausible view that could have been taken based on
          evidence on record. Perusal of the impugned judgment of
          the High Court shows that this question has not been
          adverted to. Appellate Court can interfere with the order
          of acquittal only if it is satisfied after reappreciating the
          evidence that the only possible conclusion was that the
          guilt of the accused had been established beyond a
          reasonable doubt. The Appellate Court cannot overturn
          order of acquittal only on the ground that another view is
          possible. In other words, the judgment of acquittal must
          be found to be perverse.       Unless the Appellate Court
          records such a finding, no interference can be made with
          the order of acquittal. The High Court has ignored the
          well-settled principle that an order of acquittal further
          strengthens the presumption of innocence of the accused.
          After having perused the judgment, we find that the High
          Court has not addressed itself on the main question.
7.       The second error the High Court committed is found
          in paragraph 23 of the impugned judgment.          The High
          Court has gone to the extent of recording a finding that the
          appellants have failed to adduce evidence in their support,
          failed to examine the defence witness and failed to
          establish falsity of the prosecution's version. This concept
          of the burden of proof is entirely wrong. Unless, under the
Criminal Appeal no.334 of 2019 etc.                             Page 5 of 9
relevant penal statute, there is a negative burden put on
          the accused or there is a reverse onus clause, the accused
          is not required to discharge any burden. In a case where
          there is a statutory presumption, after the prosecution
          discharges initial burden, the burden of rebuttal may shift
          on the accused. In the absence of the statutory provisions
          as above, in this case, the burden was on the prosecution
          to prove the guilt of the accused beyond a reasonable
          doubt. Therefore, the High Court's finding on the burden
          of proof is completely erroneous. It is contrary to the law
          of the land.
8.       We have carefully examined the evidence of the
          material prosecution witnesses.    PW-1 Danabhai stated
          that after he was informed in the night around 9 O’clock
          about the assault on the deceased by one Vajsurbhai, he
          proceeded by his bicycle. He stated that when he reached
          Jhanjhmer, he found that his deceased brother was laid in
          a tempo of Ramabhai. He stated about the presence of
          Arjanbhai and Jivabhai. He stated that no one informed
          him about the incident at that time.        He thereafter
          described how the deceased was taken to the hospital of
          Dr Goti and thereafter to a private hospital in Bhavnagar.
          PW-1 deposed that PW-4 Karshanbhai went with him to
          Bhavnagar, and in the hospital of Dr Rana, PW-4 informed
          PW-1 that the appellants had assaulted the deceased by
Criminal Appeal no.334 of 2019 etc.                           Page 6 of 9
using a stick.              He stated that though PW-4 informed him
          that he was present at the time of the incident, he did not
          tell him about the assault on him by the accused. Thus,
          PW-1 did not state that PW-4 was present when he reached
          the place where he found that the deceased was laid in a
          tempo, and according to his version, PW-4 came to
          Bhavnagar. Though PW-4 stated that PW-1 came on a
          bicycle and came to Dhola with them, the version of PW-1
          is that PW-4 joined him at Bhavnagar.                This creates a
          doubt about the presence of PW-4 at the time of the
          incident. Importantly, one Vajsurbhai, who informed PW-
          1 about the assault on the deceased, has not been
          examined as a witness.
9.       PW-4 admitted that there is an ongoing litigation
          about his family's land between the appellants and his
          family. PW-4 claimed that just before the fatal blow was
          inflicted on the deceased, a blow was given to the witness
          by pipe around 8 pm on the date of the incident. However,
          PW-5 Dr Jagadishbhai stated that when he examined PW-
          4 on 19th September 1996, the history given by PW-4 was
          to the effect that he was assaulted by a pipe on 18 th
          September 1996 at 8.00 pm.                  The incident is of 17th
          September 1996. The High Court has completely brushed
          aside this statement of PW-5 by observing that once the
          police recorded statements of the Doctor and PW-4, the
Criminal Appeal no.334 of 2019 etc.                                    Page 7 of 9
statements of PW-4 and the Doctor before the Court
          became meaningless. As is apparent from
Section 162
of
          the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (
CrPC
), statements
          recorded by police under
Section 161
of the CrPC cannot
          be used for any purpose except to contradict the witness.
          The Trial Court gives several reasons for discarding the
          testimony of PW-4. His prior enmity with the appellants
          and his failure to report the incident to the police,
          notwithstanding available opportunities, are also the
          factors considered by the Trial Court.
10. Therefore, after having perused the evidence of the
          material prosecution witnesses, in our view, the finding of
          the Trial Court that the evidence of PW-4 did not inspire
          confidence is a possible finding which could have been
          recorded on the basis of the evidence on record. There was
          no reason for the High Court to overturn the order of
          acquittal when the findings of the Trial Court were possible
          findings that could be arrived at after reappreciating
          evidence.
11. Therefore, the appeal must succeed. We set aside the
          judgment and order dated 14th December 2018 of the High
          Court and set aside the conviction of the appellants. The
          judgment and order dated 5th July 1997 of the Trial Court
          is restored. The appeal is, accordingly, allowed. The bail
          bonds of the appellant no.2 are cancelled. The appellant
Criminal Appeal no.334 of 2019 etc.                            Page 8 of 9
no.1 shall be forthwith set at liberty unless he is required
          to be detained in connection with any other case.
….…………………….J.
                                               (Abhay S. Oka)



                                               …..…………………...J.
                                               (Ujjal Bhuyan)

          New Delhi;
April 10, 2024.
Criminal Appeal no.334 of 2019 etc.                            Page 9 of 9