[Cites
11
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Securities And Exchange Board Of India vs Udayant Malhoutra on 18 November, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 932
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Indira Banerjee
,
Indu Malhotra
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable


                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       Civil Appeal Nos 2981-2982 of 2020


          Securities and Exchange Board of India                                 .... Appellant(s)



                                                      Versus


          Udayant Malhoutra                                                    ....Respondent(s)



                                                JUDGMENT
1              These statutory appeals have been instituted by the Securities and

                         Exchange Board of India1 under
Section 15Z
of the Securities and

                         Exchange Board of India Act 1992 2. The appeals arise out of the orders

                         passed by the Securities Appellate Tribunal 3 on 27 June 2020 and 23 July

                         2020. The Tribunal set aside an interim order dated 15 June 2020 passed

                         by the Whole Time Member of SEBI under
Section 19
read with
Sections

                         11(1)
,
11(4)(d)
,
11(4A)
,
11(5)
and
11B
of the SEBI Act read with
Regulation 10
of the SEBI (Prohibition of Insider Trading) Regulations

                         2015.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2020.11.25
16:57:57 IST
Reason:
1              “SEBI”
          2              “
SEBI Act
”
          3              “Tribunal”
1
2   By the interim order, the Whole Time Member quantified an amount of

    Rs 3,83,16,230.73, being the notional loss sought to be avoided on

    account of trades carried out by the respondent in the scrips of Dynamatic

    Technologies Ltd over unpublished price sensitive information.           The

    respondent was directed by the Whole Time Member to credit the amount

    into an Escrow Account.
3   For the purpose of the present appeals, the facts lie in a narrow compass.

    The respondent is the Chief Executive Officer and Managing Director of

    the Company in question. It was alleged that he had sold 51,000 shares of

    the Company on 24 October 2016 having inside knowledge of price

    sensitive information, namely, the unaudited financial results of the quarter

    ending on 30 September 2016. It was alleged that the financial results

    were approved by the Board of Directors on 11 November 2016, upon

    which the price of the scrips of the Company sustained a drastic reduction.

    The allegation against the respondent was that being in possession of

    price sensitive information and being a connected person, he had sold the

    shares and had, thus, made a notional gain or averted a notional loss.

    The sales made by the respondent were the subject matter of an

    investigation in 2017. It appears from the record that the investigating team

    called for information from the respondent on 28 November 2019. The

    Whole Time Member passed an ex parte order on 15 June 2020.


4   Before the Tribunal, it was urged by the respondent that there was no

    urgency in passing an ex-parte order against the respondent, regarding a
2
trade done about three years ago and that the ex-parte action of the

    appellant in requiring a deposit during the pandemic is arbitrary. Opposing

    this, the appellant alleged that the reason for passing an ex-parte order

    was that there was a possibility of a diversion of the notional gain made by

    the respondent.
In arriving at its conclusion in the impugned order, the

    Tribunal placed reliance on             its earlier decision in
North End Foods

    Marketing Pvt Ltd v Securities and Exchange Board of India
4.                     In

    paragraph 11 of the decision, the Tribunal held as follows:
“11.    As held in
North End Foods Marketing Pvt. Ltd.
(supra) there is
                    no real urgency in the matter to pass an ex-parte interim order
                    especially during the pandemic period. There is no doubt that
                    SEBI has the power to pass an interim order and that in
                    extreme urgent cases SEBI can pass an ex-parte interim order
                    but such powers can only be exercised sparingly and only in
                    extreme urgent matters. In the instant case, we do not find any
                    case of extreme urgency which warranted the respondent to
                    pass an ex-parte interim order only on arriving at the prima-
                    facie case that the appellant was an insider as defined in the
                    SEBI (Prohibition of Insider Trading) Regulations, 2015 ('PIT
                    Regulations' for short) without considering the balance of
                    convenience or irreparable injury.”
5   On the facts before it, the Tribunal, in our view, was correct in coming to

    the conclusion that since the investigation was pending since 2017 and

    information had been supplied on 28 November 2019, there was no

    urgency for passing an ex-parte interim order of the nature that was issued

    by the Whole Time Member. It was, in this background, that the Tribunal,

    while affirming the power of SEBI to pass an ex parte interim order in

    appropriate cases, observed that this should be exercised “only in extreme

    urgent matters”.
4   Appeal 80 of 2019 decided on 12 March 2019
3
6   On the facts, as they have emerged before this Court, we do not find any

    reason to take a view at variance with the conclusion of the Tribunal on the

    facts of the case. By way of abundant caution, we clarify that we are

    affirming the view on the facts which have emerged from the record before

    the Tribunal.
7   Mr Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General, however, submitted that the

    reason why SEBI has been constrained to file the appeals is because of

    certain observations contained in the impugned order, on question of law

    bearing on the statutory powers of SEBI. In particular, the attention of the

    Court was drawn to the following paragraph:
“9.       ...We are of the opinion that no amount towards disgorgement
                    can be directed to be deposited in advance unless it is
                    adjudicated and quantified unless there is some evidence to
                    show and justify the action taken. An order of the like nature
                    can only be passed during the pendency of the proceedings
                    and such orders cannot be passed at the time of initiation of
                    the proceedings.”
8
Section 11(4)
of the SEBI Act confers power on SEBI in the following

    terms:
“11.      Functions of Board:
***                    ***                    ***

          (4)       Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-sections
(1), (2), (2A) and (3) and
section 11B
, the Board may, by an
                    order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, in the interests of
                    investors or securities market, take any of the following
                    measures, either pending investigation or inquiry or on
                    completion of such investigation or inquiry, namely:—
(a)       ***
(b)       ***
4
(c)    ***
(d)    impound and retain the proceeds or securities in respect of any
                  transaction which is under investigation;”
9    Since we have come to the conclusion that the Tribunal was on the facts of

     the case correct in setting aside the ex-parte order of the Whole Time

     Member on the ground that no urgency has been made out to sustain such

     an order, it is necessary for this Court to clarify that the interpretation which

     has been placed by the Tribunal on the powers of SEBI, particularly in

     paragraph 9 of the impugned order, which has been extracted above, shall

     not be cited as a precedent in any other case. The order passed by the

     SEBI must necessarily be in accord with
Section 11(4)
of the SEBI Act.


10   With the above clarification, we affirm the view of the Tribunal on the facts

     as they have emerged. The appeals are accordingly disposed of.
…………...…...….......………………........J.
                                         [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]



                                         …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                         [Indu Malhotra]



                                        …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                        [Indira Banerjee]

New Delhi;
November 18, 2020
-S-
5