[Cites
18
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Gursimran Singh Narula vs Union Of India Ministry Of Science And ... on 5 November, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 817
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
R.Subhash Reddy
,
Ashok Bhushan
1




                                                                               REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                WRIT PETITION (C) NO.560 OF 2020

  GURUSIMRAN SINGH NARULA                                          ... PETITIONERS

                                                    VERSUS

  UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                            ... RESPONDENTS




                                             J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN,J.
1.                    This    Writ    petition      filed    in   the   public   interest

         under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India seeks

         direction to forthwith ban on spraying of all kinds of

         disinfectants                 on   human    beings   which     is   being    done

         supposedly              for protecting the human beings from the

         Novel Coronavirus disease 2019(Covid­19).
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2020.11.05
15:19:08 IST
2.
Reason:
The    World    Health   Organisation(WHO)         declared    novel

         coronavirus disease, 2019 (hereinafter referred to as
2
Covid­19) as a Pandemic on 11.03.2020. All countries

     including India after spread of the pandemic had taken

     and are still taking different measures to contain the

     disease   and   protect    its   citizens    from   Covid­19.   On

     29.03.2020,     Ministry   of    Health   and   Family   Welfare,

     Government      of    India,      released      guidelines      on

     disinfection of common Public places including Offices.
The scope as contained in the guidelines is to the

     following effect: ­

           "Scope: This document aims to provide
           interim guidance about the environmental
           cleaning/decontamination of common public
           places   including    offices  in   areas
           reporting COVID­19.
Coronavirus Disease 2019(COVID­19) is an
           acute respiratory disease caused by a
           novel Cornavirus (SARS­CoV­2), transmitted
           in most instances through respiratory
           droplets, direct contact with cases and
           also          through          contaminated
           surfaces/objects.     Though   the    virus
           survives on environmental surfaces for
           varied period of time, it gets easily
           inactivated by chemical disinfectants...”
3.     On 18.04.2020, Director General of Health Services

     (EMR Division), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,

     issued an advisory against spraying of disinfectants on
3
people for Covid­19 arrangements. Even though in the

     above advisory, spraying of individuals or groups was

     not recommended, several bodies, organizations started

     using spraying tunnels to disinfect the human body. The

     press release dated 23.4.2020 was issued by National

     Capital      Laboratory(Council        for         Scientific      and

     Industrial Research) which was joint press release by

     CSIR­NCL Pune­ICT Mumbai, stating that the use of mist

     based sanitization is expected to provide safeguard to

     front­line        health    care     professionals        including

     paramedical       staff,   police    and     employees    providing

     essential    services.     Other    public    organizations       also

     started using the walk way spray tunnels, and other

     measures    for    disinfecting     humans    at    various     public

     places.
4.     This writ petition under
Article 32
has been filed

     on 05.06.2020 praying for following reliefs: ­

           "i. Issue a writ in the nature of Mandamus
           or any other appropriate writ, direction
           or order a forthwith ban on the usage,
           installation, production, advertisement of
           disinfection tunnels involving spraying or
           fumigation of chemical disinfectants for
4
the purposes      disinfecting     human     being
              and/or

              ii. Issue a writ in the nature of Mandamus
              or any other appropriate writ, direction
              or order a forthwith ban on usage,
              installation, production, advertisement of
              disinfection tunnels involving spraying or
              fumigation of organic disinfectants for
              the purposes disinfecting human beings
              and/or

              iii. Issue a writ in the nature of
              Mandamus or any other appropriate writ,
              direction or order a forthwith ban on the
              usage,      installation,       production,
              advertisement   of   disinfection   tunnels
              exposing human beings to ultraviolet rays
              for the purposes disinfecting them and/or

              iv. To pass such other orders and further
              orders as may be deemed necessary on the
              facts and in the circumstances of the
              case”
5.      The petitioner in the writ petition referred to and

     relied    the   advisory   dated   18.04.2020      and    has    also

     referred to press release dated 23.04.2020 issued by

     CSIR­NCL,Pune­ICT,Mumbai,      where     tunnels    for    external

     body     surface   sanitization     of    personal        walk   was

     recommended.
6.     The petitioner's case in the writ petition is that
5
although the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,

     Government of India, has not approved the use of any

     self   claimed     organic      or    ayurvedic       disinfectant        for

     spraying    or     fumigation        purposes     nor       approved      any

     chemical    disinfectants        on    human      body      but    lot    of

     organizations/public         authorities        are     using      chemical

     disinfectants      for    spraying      and     fumigation.         Several

     instances in the writ petition of public authorities

     installing disinfecting tunnel has been given in the

     writ petition.
7.     Publication from World Health Organization has also

     been relied where it is clearly stated that spraying

     and introducing bleach or other disinfectant into body

     will not protect against Covid­19 and can be dangerous.

     Quoting World Health Organization, it is pleaded that

     the    Ultraviolet     (UV   Lamps)      should       not     be   used    to

     disinfect    the    hands    and      other    areas     of     the    skin.

     Reference has also been made of advanced disinfectant

     tunnel     developed      jointly      by     Indian        Institute      of

     Technology,      Kanpur   and    Artificial       Limb      Manufacturing
6
Corporation of India.
8.        Articles questioning against the use of disinfectant

     tunnels have also been referred to and relied by the

     petitioner. Certain materials where different experts

     have    recommended     use    of     UV     light      and   disinfectant

     tunnel has also been referred to. sIn view of several

     discordant    note     expressed           by    certain      experts       and

     organizations, the writ petition prayed for directions

     as quoted above.
9.        This Court issue notice to respondent Nos. 1­3 on

     10.08.2020.    No     notice        having       been     issued     to     the

     respondent Nos.4 to 6, they be deleted from the array

     of the parties. The respondent No.1 has filed a counter

     affidavit     dated     01.09.2020              where     advisory        dated

     18.04.2020    as      well     as    minutes         of    meeting        dated

     09.06.2020    held     under    the     chairmanship          of   Director

     General Health Services, with regard to review on use

     of    disinfection     tunnel       using       various    chemicals        and

     spraying disinfectants have been brought on the record.

     Taking note of the meeting proceeding dated 09.06.200
7
where spraying disinfectant was not recommended by the

  minutes,       This     Court    passed       following      order    on

  07.09.2020: ­

                              " ORDER
                  A counter affidavit has been filed on
             behalf of Union of India. In the counter
             affidavit at page 40 copy of meeting ­
             Annexure 'G' dated 09.06.2020 has been
             brought on the record, where it has been
             decided that spraying disinfectants is not
             recommended. Shri Tushar Mehta, learned
             Solicitor General submits that relevant
             directions and circulars shall be issued
             to all concerned.
As prayed by Shri Tushar Mehta,
             learned Solicitor General, list after two
             weeks.”
10.    After the aforesaid order, another affidavit titled

  as        'Compliance     affidavit       dated      28.09.2020'       by

  respondent No.1 where O.M. dated 23.09.2020 has been

  brought      on   the   record   reiterating      that    spraying     of

  individuals       or    groups   with     disinfectant       using    any

  modality is not recommended and hence, all States/Union

  Territories are directed to ensure that such practices

  are not implemented in the States/UTs.
11.    An    additional    affidavit      has   also    been    filed   by
8
respondent No.1 with regard to use of Ultraviolet (UV)

  rays to disinfect/sterilize edible items like fruits

  and vegetables. Petitioner has also filed consolidated

  rejoinder        affidavit.     An    intervention          application       has

  also      been    filed    by   one    Ideal    Flow    Pvt.      Ltd.    which

  claims to be a company which has developed and designed

  pressurized steam disinfectant chamber. The applicant

  submits that in designed pressurized steam disinfectant

  chamber,         natural    oils      are   mixed      in    an    emulsifier

  solution. Applicant claims that the product has various

  health benefits. Applicant further submitted that there

  is    a    major       difference     between    disinfectant         tunnels

  spraying          chemical      disinfectant           and        pressurized

  disinfection chamber, any blanket ban as sought in the

  writ petition may seriously impact the business of the

  applicant,        in    light   of    the   major   difference           of   the

  applicant's product from that of disinfection tunnel

  mentioned in the writ petition.
12.    We have heard the petitioner appearing in person,

  Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General for the
9
respondents and Smt. Anita Shenoy, Senior Advocate for

  the intervenor.
13.   The petitioner submits that although the Ministry of

  Health & Family Welfare, the respondents No.1 through

  its advisory dated 18.04.2020 had stated that spraying

  of disinfectant on human being is not recommended but

  Union of India has not taken any step to stop use,

  advertisement and sale of chemical based disinfection

  tunnels. The petitioner submits that there is no study

  anywhere in the world by any credible health agency

  which     states    that     human    disinfection      tunnels    are

  effective       against    Covid­19    virus.     On   the   contrary,

  there     are   sufficient    health    advisories      by   the   WHO,

  respondent      No.1   and   other    international      agency    that

  tunnels are counter productive and harmful for human

  health. There has been no advisory issued by respondent

  No.1      which recommends usage of any organic solution

  for spraying on human body against Covid­19 pandemic.
14.   The   petitioner       submits    that   in    absence    of   any

  recommendation of health authorities, there is a trend
10
across the Country where people are producing self­

  certified      so     called        safe   disinfection     tunnels        with

  variety of organic solutions. The petitioner submits

  that the concept of “human disinfection” through walk

  in    tunnel     is        flawed    and   misconceived      and     be     not

  permitted at any cost in light of Right to Health under
Article 21
of the Constitution.
15.    Shri   Tushar          Mehta,     learned     Solicitor       General,

  submits that answering respondent No.1 had not issued

  any    advisory        for     usage,      installation,      production,

  advertisement of disinfection tunnel involving spraying

  or    fumigation       of    chemicals/organic          disinfectants      for

  the    purpose        of     disinfecting       human    beings.     Learned

  Solicitor      General         has    referred     to     advisory        dated

  18.04.2020 issued by respondent No.1. It is further

  submitted that in the meeting held on 09.06.2020 under

  the Chairmanship of Director General Health Services,

  review on use of disinfection tunnel was made and it

  was    reiterated           that     spraying    disinfectant      is       not

  recommended in both health care and non­health care
11
settings. Shri Mehta submits that the States/UTs have

  to implement the guidelines dated 18.04.2020 and the

  role of the Government of India is limited to providing

  necessary guidelines and financial support.
16.    Learned    counsel    for       the       intervenor     has   submitted

  that    the     product    which          is    being   designed         by    the

  applicant       does      not    use           any   chemical       as        human

  disinfectant rather it uses natural oil which promotes

  health. The applicant opposes any blanket ban on the

  use of such products for human disinfection.
17.    We have considered the submission of learned counsel

  for the parties and perused the record.
18.    The writ petition raises following three questions:­

  I)    Whether       spraying    or    fumigation        of    any    kind        of

  chemical       disinfectants         on    human     beings     without         the

  approval       of   the   relevant         ministry     is    violative          of
Article 21?
12
II) Whether spraying or fumigation of any kind of self­

  claimed organic disinfectant on human beings without

  the approval of the relevant Ministry is violative of
Article 21?
III) Whether exposure of human beings to artificial

  ultraviolet rays is violative of
Article 21?
All the above questions being inter­connected are

  being taken together.
19.
Article     21
of     the     Constitution      provides      for

  protection of life and personal liberty. The expression

  'life'    used       in
Article    21
has    wide   import      and

  connotation.
Article 21
encompasses a bundle of rights

  which have been recognized from time to time by the

  legislature of this Country and Courts of this Country

  including this Court. Right to life as recognized under
Article 21
is Right to live with dignity.                        Right to

  health    is    also      recognized      as   an    important   facet    of
Article    21
of       the     Constitution.       We   may   refer    to

  pronouncement of this Court in
Devika Biswas versus
13
Union of India and others
, (2016) 10 SCC 726, where

  this Court held that Right to Health is an integral

  facet    of    Right      guaranteed     under
Article   21
of   the

  Constitution. In paragraph 107 of this Court dealing

  with Right to Health laid down following: ­

           "107. It is well established that the
           right to life under
Article 21
of the
           Constitution includes the right to lead a
           dignified and meaningful life and the
           right to health is an integral facet of
           this right.
In CESC Ltd. v. Subhash
           Chandra Bose dealing with the right to
           health of workers, it was noted that the
           right to health must be considered an
           aspect of social justice informed by not
           only
Article 21
of the Constitution, but
           also the Directive Principles of State
           Policy and international covenants to
           which India is a party.
Similarly, the
           bare minimum obligations of the State to
           ensure the preservation of the right to
           life and health were enunciated in Paschim
           banga
Khet Mazdoor Samity vs. State of
           W.B.”
20.   In   the       present      case,    Right    to    Health    under

  consideration        is    in   wake    of   pandemic   Covid­19.     The

  provisions of
Disaster Management Act, 2005
(hereinafter

  referred to as Act, 2005) has been invoked to combat

  Covid­19      by    different     authorities     constituted     under
14
Act,   2005.    Covid­19          is   a    notified      disaster       for   the

  purposes of the Act, 2005 by the Government of India.
21.
The Act, 2005
, is an act for effective management of

  disasters       and        matters          connected          therewith       and

  incidental        thereto.          Disaster          Management         includes

  prevention of danger/threat of a disaster, mitigation

  or reduction of risk of a disaster, preparedness to

  deal   with    the     disaster        and       prompt       response    to   any

  threatening disaster situation or disaster etc.. Under
Section 3
, National Disaster Management Authority is

  established     for        the    purposes       of     the    Act.
Section    8
provides    for     the     constitution          of     National     Executive

  Committee.
Section 10
deals with powers and function of

  National    Executive            Committee.       The    National     Executive

  Committee      is     to    assist         the    National       Authority      in

  discharge of its functions and have the responsibility

  for implementing the policies and plans of the National

  authority and ensure the compliance of the directions

  issued by the Central Government for the purposes of

  the Central Government. Sub­Section (2) of
Section 10
15
enumerates various powers and functions of the National

Executive Committee.
Section 10
which is relevant for

this case is as follows: ­

      "10. Powers and functions of National
      Executive Committee.—
      (1) The National Executive Committee shall
      assist the National Authority in the
      discharge of its functions and have the
      responsibility    for   implementing    the
      policies   and   plans  of   the   National
      Authority and ensure the compliance of
      directions    issued   by    the    Central
      Government for the purpose of disaster
      management in the country.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality
      of the provisions contained in sub­section
      (1), the National Executive Committee may—
(a) act as the coordinating and monitoring
      body for disaster management;
(b) prepare the National Plan to         be
      approved by the National Authority;
(c)    coordinate    and     monitor     the
      implementation of the National Policy;
(d) lay down guidelines for preparing
      disaster management plans by different
      Ministries    or  Departments   of   the
      Government   of  India  and   the  State
      Authorities;
(e) provide necessary technical assistance
      to the State Governments and the State
      Authorities for preparing their disaster
      management plans in accordance with the
      guidelines
laid down by
the National
16
Authority;
(f) monitor the implementation of the
National Plan and the plans prepared by
the Ministries or Departments of the
Government of India;
(g) monitor the implementation of the
guidelines
laid down by
the National
Authority for integrating of measures for
prevention of disasters and mitigation by
the Ministries or Departments in their
development plans and projects;
(h)    monitor,   coordinate and   give
directions regarding the mitigation and
preparedness measures to be taken by
different Ministries or Departments and
agencies of the Government;
(i) evaluate the preparedness at all
governmental levels for the purpose of
responding to any threatening disaster
situation or disaster and give directions,
where   necessary,   for  enhancing   such
preparedness;
(j)   plan   and   coordinate   specialised
training programme for disaster management
for    different   levels   of    officers,
employees and voluntary rescue workers;
(k) coordinate response in the event of
any threatening disaster situation or
disaster;
(l) lay down guidelines for, or give
directions to, the concerned Ministries or
Departments of the Government of India,
the   State  Governments  and   the  State
Authorities regarding measures to be taken
17
by them in response to any threatening
          disaster situation or disaster;
(m) require any department or agency of
          the Government to make available to the
          National Authority or State Authorities
          such men or material resources as are
          available with it for the purposes of
          emergency response, rescue and relief;
(n) advise, assist and coordinate the
          activities    of    the    Ministries    or
          Departments of the Government of India,
          State Authorities, statutory bodies, other
          governmental      or       non­governmental
          organisations   and   others   engaged   in
          disaster management;
(o) provide necessary technical assistance
          or give advice to the State Authorities
          and District Authorities for carrying out
          their functions under this Act;
(p)   promote      general   education   and
          awareness   in      relation   to   disaster
          management; and
(q) perform such other functions as the
          National Authority may require it to
          perform. ”
22. The   powers   under    sub­section   (2)   of
Section   10
clauses (i) and (l) of      Act, 2005, have been delegated

  to Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,

  Government of India, by notification dated 11.03.2020.

  The Notification dated 11.03.2020 is as follows: ­
18
"ORDER
           In exercise of the powers conferred under
Section 69
of the Disaster Management Act,
          2005, Union home Secretary being Chairman
          of the National Executive Committee(NEC)
          hereby delegates its power under clauses
(i) and (l) of sub­section (2) of
Section
          10
of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 to
          Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family
          Welfare, Government of India to enhance
          the preparedness and containment of novel
          Coronavirus(COVID­19)     and   the  other
          ancillary matters connected thereto. This
          order shall be deemed to have come into
          effect from 17th January, 2020.
(Sanjeev Kumar Jindal)
                                    Joint Secretary to the
                                       Government of India”
23. Thus it is the Secretary, Ministry of Health and

 Family Welfare, who had to lay down the guidelines or

 give     directions      to    the    concerned        Ministries     or

 Departments         of   Government     of     India,       the   State

 Governments and State Authorities regarding measures to

 be     taken   by    them     in   response     to    any   disrupting

 situation or disaster. The Pandemic has threatened the

 health    of   entire    citizenry     of     the    country   and   all

 facets relating to pandemic Covid­19, its prevention,

 mitigation and cure are to be dealt with and taken care
19
of   authorities    empowered   with   different   duties   and

  functions under different statutes including
Disaster

  Management Act, 2005
.
24. We may first refer to the advisory dated 18.04.2020

  which was issued against spraying of disinfectant on

  people    for   Covid­19   management.   The   advisory   dated

  18.04.2020 states: ­

           "Advisory against spraying of disinfectant
           on people for COVID­19 management

              Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has
           received   many   queries  regarding   the
           efficacy (if any) of use disinfectants
           such as Sodium hypochlorite spray used
           over the individuals to disinfect them.
           The strategy seems to have gained of lot
           of media attention and is also being
           reportedly used at local levels in certain
           districts/local bodies.
Purpose of the document
           To    examine    the    merit   of    using
           disinfectants as spray over human body to
           disinfect   them   from  COVID­19  and   to
           provide appropriate advisory

           Disinfectants are chemicals that destroy
           disease causing pathogens or other harmful
           microorganisms. It refers to substances
           applied on inanimate objects owing to
           their strong chemical properties.
20
Chemical disinfectants are recommended for
cleaning   and    disinfection   only   of
frequently touched areas/surfaces by those
who are suspected or confirmed to have
COVID­19. Precautionary measures are to be
adopted while using disinfectants for
cleaning – like wearing gloves during
disinfection.
In view of the above,      the   following
advisory is issued:
• Spraying of individuals or groups is NOT
recommended   under    any  circumstances.
Spraying an individual or group with
chemical disinfectants is physically and
psychologically harmful.
• Even if a person is potentially exposed
with the COVID­19 virus, spraying the
external part of the body does not kill
the virus that has entered your body. Also
there is no scientific evidence to suggest
that   they    are   effective   even   in
disinfecting the outer clothing/body in an
effective manner.
• Spraying of chlorine on individuals can
lead to irritation of eyes and skin and
potentially gastrointestinal effects such
as nausea and vomiting. Inhalation of
sodium hypochlorite can lead to irritation
of mucous membranes to the nose, throat,
respiratory tract and may also cause
bronchospasm.
• Additionally use of such measures may in
fact lead to a false sense of disinfection
&   safety  and   actually  hamper  public
observance to hand washing and social
distancing measures.”
21
25. Even     though     the   above    advisory       was     issued     by

  Directorate General of Health Services not recommending

  spraying     of     disinfectant     on    people     for     Covid­19

  management    but     several     contrary      opinion     have     been

  expressed by other bodies and organisations. In this

  context, reference has been made to the joint Press

  Release    dated     23.04.2020     by    NCL   (CSIR).     The    Press

  Release dated 23.04.2020 states: ­

             "Publication and Science Communication
                              Unit

           Press release                    April 23, 2020

              Safe concentration of disinfectant in
              walk through spray tunnels and their
                       scientific design

           Joint Press Release: CSIR­NCL Pune and ICT
                             Mumbai

             CSIR–National Chemical Laboratory (CSIR­
           NCL),      Pune      evaluated     various
           concentrations of sodium hypochlorite to
           find effective chemical disinfectants for
           the mist sanitization system.
The use    of mist­based sanitization is
           expected     to    provide  safeguards    to
           frontline       healthcare    professionals,
           including    paramedic staff, police, and
           employees    providing essential services.
22
These people are more likely to get the
          infection and unknowingly spread arising
          from various sources. A lot of advisories
          have appeared against the use of such
          tunnels from various agencies, which does
          not have any scientific basis.
Efficacy of sodium hypochlorite, also
          known as hypo or bleach, ranging from
          0.02% to 0.5% weight concentration was
          studied on personnel walking through mist
          tunnel    unit,    besides   antibacterial
          activity against standard microorganisms
          before and after exposure in the walk
          through. Results indicated that 0.02% to
          0.05% weight concentration did not show an
          adverse effect on normal skin flora and
          yet destroyed the standard microbes. Thus,
          we recommend using 0.02% ­0.05 wt. %
          sodium hypochlorite solution (200 to 500
          ppm)    for     external   body    surface
          sanitization of personnel walk through the
          mist tunnel by following standard safety
          precautions”
26. The   petitioner   has   also   referred     to   in   the   writ

  petition various articles where different experts have

  recommended for effective sanitization amid Covid­19

  pandemic by disinfection tunnels, different studies for

  and   against   disinfectment     of   human    body     has   been

  referred to and relied in the writ petition.
27. After Notice was issued in the petition, the counter
23
affidavit   was   filed.   In   the   Counter   affidavit

respondent No.1 has also brought on record the minutes

of the meeting dated 09.06.2020 chaired by Director

General Health Services where review was made on the

use of disinfection tunnels. Observations as recorded

in the minutes are as follows: ­

      "1.Use of disinfection tunnel

          The matter of spraying of disinfectant
      on people for COVID­19 management was
      discussed in the Joint Monitoring Group
      and an advisory in this regard has been
      issued by MOHFW/DGHS, EMR Division which
      is available on the website of the
      ministry. It clearly states the following:
"Spraying of individuals or groups is NOT
      recommended   under    any   circumstances.
      Spraying an individual or group with
      chemical   disinfectants   physically   and
      psychologically harmful.
• Even   if   a   person   is   potentially
          exposed    with   the   Covid­19    virus,
          spraying the external part of the body
          does not kill the virus that has
          entered your body. Also there is no
          scientific evidence to suggest that
          they     are     effective     even     in
          disinfecting the outer clothing/body
          in an effective manner.
• Additionally use of such measures may
          in fact lead to a false sense of
          disinfection and safety and actually
          hamper    public   observance   to    hand
24
washing     and     social    distancing
  measures.
It   is   reiterated   that  spraying    of
individuals with disinfectants (such as
tunnels, cabinets, chambers, etc.) is
not     recommended.    This    could    be
physically and psychologically harmful
and   would    not   reduce  an    infected
person's ability to spread the virus
through droplets or contact. Moreover,
spraying individuals with chlorine and
other toxic chemicals could result in
eye and skin irritation, bronchospasm
due to inhalation, and gastrointestinal
effects such as nausea and vomiting.
2. Use of Chemicals

As per the advisory by MOHFW/DGHS, EMR
Division:
Chemical disinfectants are recommended
for cleaning and disinfection only of
frequently   touched  areas/surfaces   by
those who are suspected or confirmed to
have COVID­19. Precautionary measures
are   to    be   adopted   while    using
disinfectants   for   cleaning   –   like
wearing gloves during disinfection.
Spraying of chlorine on individuals can
lead to irritation of eyes and skin and
potentially   gastrointestinal  effects
such as nausea and vomiting. Inhalation
of sodium hypochlorite can lead to
irritation of mucous membranes to the
nose, throat, respiratory tract and may
also cause bronchospasm.
The chemicals such as freshly prepared
25
1% sodium hypochlorite or 70% ethanol
etc., are to be used as indicated, to
disinfect   inanimate  surfaces  using
mops/wipes for the recommended contact
time.
3. Spraying disinfectants:
Spraying     disinfectants    is    not
recommended in both health care and non
health care settings.
In indoor spaces, routine application of
disinfectants to environmental surfaces
by spraying or fogging (also known as
fumigation    or   misting)    is    not
recommended    for   COVID­19   as   the
disinfectants may not be effective in
removing organic material and may miss
surfaces shielded by objects, folded
fabrics   or  surfaces   with  intricate
designs. If disinfectants are to be
applied, this should be done with a
cloth or wipe that has been soaked in
disinfectant.
Spraying   or    fumigation     of   outdoor
spaces, such as streets or marketplaces,
is also not recommended to kill the
COVID­19   virus    or    other    pathogens
because disinfectant is inactivated by
dirt and debris and it is not feasible
to manually clean and remove all organic
matter   from   such    spaces.    Moreover,
spraying   porous     surfaces,    such   as
sidewalks and unpaved walkways, would be
even less effective. Even in the absence
of organic matter, chemical spraying is
unlikely   to    adequately      cover   all
surfaces   for    the   duration    of   the
required    contact     time    needed    to
26
inactivate    pathogens.    Furthermore,
            streets and sidewalks are not considered
            to be reservoirs of infection for COVID­
19. In addition, spraying disinfectants,
            even outdoors, can be harmful for human
            health.
The committee referred to the document
            of the World Health Organisation on
            'Cleaning     and     disinfection    of
            environmental surfaces in the context of
            COVID­19.'
28. It is further relevant to notice that in              paragraph

  13   of   the    affidavit       dated    01.09.2020,   following

  statement has also been made:
"13. It is most respectfully submitted
        that as public health and hospitals are
        State subject, it is for the States/Union
        Territories to implement the guidelines
        issued by the Ministry of Health and
        Family Welfare and the role of Government
        of India is limited to providing necessary
        guidance and financial support.
.... ...       ....        ...."
29. From the pleadings brought on record on behalf of

  respondent   No.1,   it     is    clear   that   although   by   the

  advisory by respondent No.1, spraying of disinfectant

  on human body is not recommended but respondent No.1

  has not taken any further steps in the above context
27
taking any measure either to prevent or regulate the

  spraying of disinfectant on the human body.
30. We    have   noted   above    the   powers     and    functions   of

  National Executive Committee under
Section 10
of the

  Act, 2005, which specifically empowers the National

  Executive      Committee      to   give    directions      regarding

  measures to be taken by the concerned ministry and

  departments of the Government, State Governments and

  State    Authorities     in     response    to    the    threatening

  situation or disaster.
31.
Section 36
of the Act, 2005, expressly enumerates

  the responsibilities          of Ministries and departments of

  the Government of India.
Section 36
which is relevant

  for the case is as follows: ­

          "36. Responsibilities of Ministries or
          Departments of Government of India.—It
          shall be the responsibility of every
          Ministry or Department of the Government
          of India to—
(a) take measures necessary for prevention
          of disasters, mitigation, preparedness and
          capacity building in accordance with the
          guidelines
laid down by
the National
28
Authority;
(b) integrate into its development plans
and projects, the measures for prevention
or mitigation of disasters in accordance
with the guidelines
laid down by
the
National Authority;
(c) respond effectively and promptly to
any threatening disaster situation or
disaster in accordance with the guidelines
of   the   National   Authority   or   the
directions   of  the   National  Executive
Committee in this behalf;
(d) review the enactments administered by
it, its policies, rules and regulations,
with a view to incorporate therein the
provisions necessary for prevention of
disasters, mitigation or preparedness;
(e) allocate funds for measures for
prevention   of    disaster,   mitigation,
capacity­building and preparedness;
(f) provide assistance to the National
Authority and State Governments for—
(i)     drawing     up     mitigation,
    preparedness    and  response    plans,
    capacity­building,   data   collection
    and identification and training of
    personnel in relation to disaster
    management;
(ii) carrying out rescue and relief
    operations in the affected area;
(iii) assessing the damage from any
    disaster;
(iv) carrying out rehabilitation and
29
reconstruction;
(g) make available its resources to the
        National Executive Committee or a State
        Executive Committee for the purposes of
        responding promptly and effectively to any
        threatening    disaster    situation    or
        disaster, including measures for—
(i) providing emergency communication
              in a vulnerable or affected area;
(ii)   transporting   personnel   and
              relief goods to and from the affected
              area;
(iii) providing evacuation, rescue,
              temporary shelter or other immediate
              relief;
(iv) setting up temporary      bridges,
              jetties and landing places;
(v)    providing,   drinking    water,
              essential provisions, health care,
              and services in an affected area;
(h) take such other actions as it may
        consider     necessary  for    disaster
        management. ”
32. When respondent No.1 has issued advisory that use of

  disinfectant on human body is not recommended and it

  has been brought into its notice that despite the said

  advisory,   large   number    of   organizations,     public

  authorities are using disinfectants on human body, it
30
was     necessary      for    the     respondent       No.1      to     issue

  necessary       directions     either      to   prevent     such      use   or

  regulate such use as per requirement to protect the

  health    of     the   people.       The   provisions       of
Disaster

  Management Act
,
Section 10
,
36
and other provisions are

  not only provisions of empowerment but also cast a duty

  on different authorities to act in the best interest of

  the people to sub­serve the objects of the Act.
33. We     have    extracted      paragraph       13     of   the       Counter

  Affidavit where it has been stated by the respondent

  No.1 that public health and hospitals, it is for the

  States/UTs to implement guidelines by the Ministry of

  Health    and    Family      Welfare    and     role   of   the       Central

  Government is limited to provide necessary guidelines

  and financial support.
34. No exception can be taken to the above pleading but

  the provisions of the Act, 2005, confer certain more

  responsibilities        and    duties      on   the    respondent        No.1

  apart     from    issuance      of     guidelines       and       providing
31
financial      support.
The     Act,      2005
,       is     special

  legislation     containing     self­contained        provisions         to

  deal with a disaster. The Pandemic being a disaster

  within the meaning of Act, 2005, has to be dealt with

  sternly and effectively.
35. We have no doubt that the Union and the States are

  taking all measures to contain the pandemic and all

  mitigating steps but the facts which have been brought

  on record in this writ petition indicate that in the

  present case, something more was required to be done by

  respondent No.1 apart from issuing advisory                    that use

  of disinfectant on human body is not recommended. When

  public      authorities/       organizations          were           using

  disinfectants both chemical/organic on the human body

  and there are various studies to the effect that it may

  be   harmful   to   the   health      and   the   body.       Some    more

  actions     were    required     to     remove     the        cloud     of

  uncertainty and to regulate the use even if it was to

  either prevent such use or regulate the use so that

  health of citizens is amply protected.
32
36. When a statute confer power on authority and that

 power is to be exercised for the benefit of the people

 in general, the power is coupled with the duty. This

 Court   in
Commissioner     of    Police   versus   Gordhandas

 Bhanji
,      AIR   1952   SC   16,   speaking    through   Vivian

 Bose,J., had laid down the off­quoted preposition in

 paragraph 28: ­

         "28.   The   discretion   vested  in   the
         Commissioner of Police under R.250 has
         been conferred upon him for public reasons
         involving    the    convenience,   safety,
         morality and welfare of the public at
         large. An enabling power of this kind
         conferred for public reasons and for the
         public benefit is, in our opinion, coupled
         with a duty to exercise it when the
         circumstances so demand. It is a duty
         which cannot be shirked or shelved nor it
         be evaded, performance of it can be
         compelled under
S.45
.”
37. This Court again in L.Hirday Narain versus income

 Tax Officer, Bareilly, (1970) 2 SCC 355, reiterated the

 same principle in following words: ­


         "13....if a statute invests a public
         officer with authority to do an act in a
         specified set of circumstances, it is
33
imperative   upon  him  to   exercise  his
        authority in a manner appropriate to the
        case when a party interested and having a
        right to apply moves in that behalf and
        circumstances for exercise of authority
        are shown to exist. Even if the words used
        in the statute are prima facie enabling
        the Courts will readily infer a duty to
        exercise power which is invested in aid of
        enforcement of a right­public or private­
        of a citizen.”
38. Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer had elaborately dealt the

  above principle in Municipal Council, Ratlam versus

  Shri Vardichan and others, (1980) 4 SCC 162. The above

  case was a case where Municipal Council Ratlam was

  entrusted with certain duties to the public which was

  sought to be enforced by the residents through
Section

  133
Cr.P.C. where Magistrate issued certain directions

  to   the    Municipal   Corporation   which   came   to   be

  challenged in this Court. Justice Krishna Iyer quoting

  Benjamin Bisraiely, in paragraph 9 of the judgment

  stated: ­

        "9. ...”All power is a trust – that we are
        accountable for its exercise – that, from
        the people, and for the people, all
        springs, and all must exist.” Discretion
        becomes a duty when the beneficiary brings
34
home the circumstances         for   its     benign
           exercise.”
39. With      regard    to    judicial     process,          important

  observations were made by this Court in the above case

  that affirmative action taken in the judicial process

  is to make remedy effective failing which the right

  becomes    sterile.   In   paragraph    16    of    the    judgment,

  following observations have been made: ­

           "16...The nature of the judicial process
           is not purely adjudicatory nor is it
           functionally that of an umpire only.
Affirmative action to make the remedy
           effective is of the essence of the right
           which otherwise becomes sterile...”
40. Justice Krishna Iyer also laid down that improvement

  of public health is paramount principle of governance.

  In paragraph 24, following has been observed: ­


           "24. ...The State will realise that
Article 47
makes it a paramount principle
           of governance that steps are taken 'for
           the improvement of public health as
           amongst its primary duties'...”
41. An     additional   affidavit   has    been      filed    by   the
35
respondent     No.1   where       details      regarding       use   of

Ultraviolet UV rays disinfectant/sterilize edible food

items like fruits and vegetables has been quoted. In

additional    affidavit,    rules       have   been   relied    namely

'Atomic Energy (Radiation Processing of Food and Allied

Product)     Rules,2012',   which       rules    require   that      no

person shall operate the facility without obtaining a

license     for radiation processing of food and allied

products under the Rules. Facility has been defined as

radiation    processing     facility      for    food   and     allied

product.    There   are   hosts    of    regulatory     measures     of

radiation for use of UV rays with regard to food and

other articles. We are of the view that for spraying

disinfectant on human body, fumigation or use of UV

rays against the human body, there has to be regulatory

regime when respondent No.1 itself is of the view that

such use is not recommended. The respondent No.1 has

wide powers and responsibilities under Act, 2005, which

could have been utilized to remedy the situation. In

event, use of disinfectant on human body is to cause

adverse effect on the health of the people, there has
36
to be immediate remedial action and respondent No.1

  cannot    stop    only    by   saying    that    such     use    is   not

  recommended.
42. In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the

  view that ends of justice be served in disposing the

  writ petition by issuing the following directions:­
i)     The   respondent      No.1     may    consider    and     issue

    necessary directions in exercise of powers vested in

    it     under    the
Disaster      Management       Act,     2005
,

    regarding       ban/Regulation          on      the      usage       of

    disinfection           tunnels      involving         spraying       or

    fumigation of chemical/organic disinfectants for the

    human beings.
or
ii)     There    shall       be   similar     consideration         and

    directions by the respondents as indicated                       above

    with regard to exposure of human being to artificial

    ultraviolet rays.
37
iii) Looking to the health concern of the people in

    general,   the   aforesaid   exercise   be   completed   by

    respondent No.1 within a period of one month.
....................J.
                                      (Ashok Bhushan)



                                     ....................J.
                                      (R.Subhash Reddy)



                                     ....................J.
                                          (M.R. Shah)
NEW DELHI,
NOVEMBER 05, 2020.