[Cites
3
, Cited by
32
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Jayaswal Neco Ltd vs Commnr. Of Central Excise, Raipur on 6 August, 2015
Equivalent citations: 2015 AIR SCW 4647, 2015 (10) SCC 651, AIR 2015 SC (SUPP) 2187, (2016) 157 ALLINDCAS 12 (SC), (2015) 4 KCCR 558, (2015) 6 MAD LJ 248, (2015) 8 SCALE 550
Author:
A.K. Sikri
Bench:
N.V. Ramana
,
A.K. Sikri
REPORTABLE

                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1468 OF 2004


|M/S JAYASWAL NECO LTD.                     |.....APPELLANT(S)           |
|VERSUS                                     |                            |
|COMMISSIONER OF CENTRAL EXCISE, RAIPUR     |.....RESPONDENT(S)          |

                                    WITH

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7386 OF 2005


                               J U D G M E N T
A.K. SIKRI, J.
The issue involved in these appeals lies in  a  narrow  compass  which
pertains to the demand of interest calculated on the  dues  of  excise  duty
which were allegedly deposited late.  The period involved is 19.12.2000  and
18.02.2001, i.e., two months.  The  only  question  is  as  to  whether  the
excise duty was in fact deposited  late  and  therefore  interest  would  be
charged.  This issue has arisen under the following circumstances  in  Civil
Appeal No. 1468 of 2004.
The appellant/assessee is the manufacturer of pig iron and scrap of iron  on
which he pays excise duty. The Central Excise Rules, at the  relevant  time,
permitted payment of duty every fortnight instead of consignment basis.   In
this manner on the goods cleared  in  the  first  fortnight  the  duty   was
payable by  20th of the said month and for  the  goods  cleared  during  the
second fortnight the duty was payable by 5th May of  the  next  month.   The
Revenue Authorities  found  that  in  the  months  of  August,  October  and
November 2000, the appellants had not paid the central excise duty on  time.
 This led to the passing of an order by the Revenue suspending the  facility
of clearing  goods  of  paying   the  duty  every  fortnight  and  interest.
Instead, the  appellant  was  directed  to  make  the  payment  of  duty  on
consignment basis for a period of  two  months,  i.e.,  from  19.12.2000  to
18.02.2001.
After the said orders were passed the appellant  started  paying  duties  on
consignment basis.  During  this  period  the  appellant  paid  around  Rs.7
crores in cash through account current, i.e., PLA.  However,  the  appellant
also  had  credit  in  their  Cenvat  Account.  A  sum  of  Rs.   31   lakhs
(approximately) was utilized from the Cenvat Account for payment  of  excise
duty in the aforesaid period.   The  authorities  took  the  view  that  the
appellant could  not  have  utilized  the  credit  from  the  account.   The
appellant was asked to pay the said sum in cash and the  appellant  obliged.
Since this payment  was  made  later/belatedly,  the  Commissioner  (Excise)
issued the show cause notice as to why the interest at the rate of  24%  per
annum should not be charged for the belated period,  i.e.,  from  19.12.2000
to 20.05.2002.  The appellant refuted the aforesaid  averment  in  the  show
cause notice with the submission that the  payment  through  Cenvat  account
was also a  valid   payment.   This  contention  was  not  accepted  by  the
Commissioner which resulted in Order-in-Original dated  13.06.2002  charging
interest for delayed payment at the rate  of  24%  p.a.  for  the  aforesaid
period.  The reason given by the Commissioner was that  since  the  facility
to pay the central excise duty in installments given to  the  appellant  was
withdrawn under sub-rule (e) of Rule 173G of the Central Excise Rules,  1944
for a period of two months, it was not open to the appellant to make use  of
Cenvat account during this period. As per the Commissioner, the  implication
of the aforesaid withdrawal of facility was to pay the excise duty for  each
consignment by debit to the account current, i.e., by cash only.
The appellant assailed the aforesaid  order  by  filing  appeal  before  the
Customs Excise and Service Tax  Appellate  Tribunal  (CESTAT).   CESTAT  has
affirmed  the order of the Commissioner holding  that  payment  of  duty  by
debiting the Cenvat Credit was not permissible during  the  said  period  of
two months and therefore it would  amount  to  non-payment  of  duty.  As  a
consequence, interest was  held  to  be  payable  till  the  date  duty  was
actually paid through cash.
The moot question is as to whether it was not permissible for the  appellant
to utilize the Cenvat Credit during the aforesaid period of two months  when
facility for payment of duty fortnightly under Rule 173G was suspended.   To
put it otherwise, when the duty  during  this  period  was  to  be  paid  on
consignment basis, it was also incumbent to pay the same in  cash  only  and
utilisation of Cenvat Credit was also forfeited during this period.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties on  the  aforesaid  issues
who have taken us through the  relevant  provisions   contained  in
Central
Excise Act
as well as Rules.
Section 11A
of  the  Act  permits  the  Central
Excise Officer to recover duty not levied or not paid  or  short  levied  or
short paid or erroneously refunded.  It can be done  within  one  year  from
the relevant date by serving show cause notice   on  the  person  chargeable
with the duty.  It is  not  necessary  to  state  in  detail  the  procedure
prescribed therein.  For our purposes  it  is  sufficient  to  mention  that
Section 11AA
of the Act provides that where a person  chargeable  with  duty
determined under Section 11A fails to pay  such  duty  within  three  months
from the date of such determination, he is liable to  pay  interest  on  the
delayed period which is at the rate not below  18%  and  not  exceeding  36%
p.a. as for the time being fixed by the Central Government  by  Notification
in the Official Gazette.
Chapter III of the Rules deals with 'Levy and Refund of, and Exemption  from
Duty'. Rule 9 thereof stipulates time and manner of payment of duty and sub-
rule 1 thereof reads as under:
“Rule 9: Time and manner of payment of Duty:-(1) No  excisable  goods  shall
be removed from any place where they are produced,  cured,  manufactured  or
any premises appurtenant thereto, which may be specified  by  (Commissioner)
in this behalf, whether for consumption, export or manufacture of any  other
commodity in or outside such place, until (excise duty leviable  thereon  is
determined and indicated on each application in  the  proper  form  or  each
gate pass, as the case may be, presented  to  the  proper  officer  at  such
place and in such  manner  as  is  prescribed  in  these  rules  or  as  the
Commissioner may require.”

The next Rule relevant for our purpose is Rule 173G which is textually  very
long dealing with various aspects.  It prescribes the procedure that has  to
be  followed  by  the  assessee  for  the   purpose   of   discharging   his
duty/liability in respect of clearances of excisable goods  from  the  place
of permission specified under Rule 9 or from a store room  or  other  place,
storage approved by the Commissioner under Rule 47.
Eschewing the portion which is not relevant for us, we reproduce  that  part
of the Rule which is concerned with this case, reads as under:
“Rule  173G.  Procedure  to  be  followed  by  the  assessee.-[(1)(a)  Every
manufacturer, other than a manufacturer who is  availing  of  the  exemption
under a notification based on value  of  clearances  in  a  financial  year,
shall discharge his duty liability in respect  of  clearances  of  excisable
goods from the place or premises specified under rule  9  or  from  a  store
room or other place of storage approved by the Commissioner  under  rule  47
made:
(i)  during the first fortnight of the month, by the twentieth day  of  that
month;
(ii)  during the second fortnight of the month,  other  than  the  month  of
March, by the fifth day of the succeeding month; and
                          xx          xx         xx
(b)   The  manufacturer  shall  maintain  an  account   current   with   the
Commissioner and  shall  discharge  his  duty  liability  by  debiting  such
account current or by utilising CENVAT credit, in the following manner:
(I)  the manufacturer shall assess the  duty  due  on  the  excisable  goods
intended  to  be  removed,  for  each  consignment  and  shall   enter   the
particulars  of  such  consignments  [amount  of  duty  payable   had   been
substituted, the words and figures in Daily Stock Account  maintained  under
Rule 53];
(ii)  the manufacturer shall indicate on each  invoice,  issued  under  rule
52A, the amount of duty payable.
(iii)  at the end of each fortnight, the manufacturer  shall  determine  the
total amount of excise duty payable on the excisable  goods  removed  during
the fortnight, and he shall discharge the total duty  liability  so  payable
by making debit entry in the account current or by utilising CENVAT  credit,
as the case may be.
(c)  the duty of excise shall be deemed to have been paid  for  the  purpose
of these rules, on excisable goods removed in the manner prescribed in  this
sub-rule, and the credit of such duty,  as  may  be  prescribed,  under  any
rule, will be permissible.
(d)  If the manufacturer fails to pay the amount of duty payable by the  due
date, he shall be liable to pay the outstanding amount along  with  interest
at the rate of twenty four per cent per annum  on  the  outstanding  amount,
for the period starting with the first day after due date till the  date  of
actual payment of the outstanding amount.
(e)  If the manufacturer  defaults  on  account  of  any  of  the  following
reasons, namely:-
(i)  full payment of any one instalment is discharged  beyond  a  period  of
thirty days from the date on which the instalment was  due  in  a  financial
year, or
(ii)  the due date on which full payment of instalments are to  be  made  is
violated for the third time in a financial year, whether  in  succession  or
otherwise,
then the manufacturer  shall  forfeit  the  facility  to  pay  the  dues  in
instalments under this sub-rule for a period of two  months,  starting  from
the date of communication of an order passed by the proper officer  in  this
regard and during this period the manufacturer  shall  be  required  to  pay
excise duty for each consignment by debit to the  account  current  referred
to in clause (b) and in the event of any such failure it will be  deemed  as
if  such  goods  have  been  cleared  without  payment  of  duty   and   the
consequences and penalties as provided in the  Central  Excise  Rules  shall
follow.”

Clause (a) of sub-rule (1) permits the fortnight payments  of  excise  duty.
Clause (b) mandates maintaining of a current account with  the  Commissioner
and states that duty can be discharged by debiting such current  account  or
by utilizing Cenvat Credit.  As per clause (c) once the  duty  is  paid   in
the  prescribed  manner  i.e.  as  per  sub-rule  (b)  it  would  amount  to
discharging the liability of payment of excise duty.  On failure to pay  the
duty by the due date interest at the rate of 24% p.a. can be charged on  the
delayed  payment.   Sub-rule  (e)  deals  with  the  situation   where   the
manufacturer commits default on account of payment of duty for  the  reasons
mentioned therein and in  such  a  case  the  authorities  can  forfeit  the
facility to pay the dues in installments under these sub-rule for  a  period
of two months.
In the present case, no  doubt,  this  facility  was  withdrawn  under  Rule
173G(1)(e).  The effect of withdrawal of this facility  would  be  that  the
appellant was not permitted to pay the duty every fortnight  as  per  clause
(a) of sub-rule (1). Instead the appellant was required to pay the duty  for
each consignment.
It is not in dispute that the appellant  paid  the  duty  on  clearing  each
consignment.  Substantial portion of the duty, i.e., to  the  tune  of  Rs.7
crores was paid in account current through PLA.   However,  for  payment  of
small portion of a duty which was in the neighbourhood of Rs.31  lakhs,  the
appellant utilised Cenvat Credit Account.  It is this  payment  from  Cenvat
Credit  which  has  become  the  bone   of   contention.    The   respondent
communicated to the appellant that duty through Cenvat during  this  period,
when facility under Rule 173G was withdrawn,  is  not  permissible.  Without
demur, the appellant complied with the demand of the  respondent  by  paying
this portion of duty also through account current.  However,  this  happened
in May, 2002.  The respondent now took the position that the custom duty  of
Rs.31 lakhs was paid belatedly. As it was paid only in May,  2002,  on  this
delayed payment, appellant was liable to pay interest @ 24%  p.a.  from  the
period from 19.12.2000 to 20.05.2002.   Order-in-Original  dated  13.06.2002
passed by the Commissioner affirming the demand in  show  cause  notice  has
been confirmed by the Tribunal.  The reason given by the  Tribunal  is  that
it was admitted by the  appellant  that  facility  of  payment  of  duty  by
installments had been withdrawn for two months.  It  was  also  admitted  by
the appellant that during this period, the appellant  discharged  a  portion
of duty through Cenvat Credit Account but afterwards  paid  this  amount  of
duty in cash and, therefore, admitted that payment of  duty  through  Cenvat
Credit Account was not permissible under the provisions of sub-rule  (e)  of
Rule 173G(1) of the Rules.  According to the Tribunal, since these were  the
admitted facts,  the  interest  @24%  p.a.  which  is  prescribed  for  late
payment, was rightly claimed by the Department.
At the outset, we are compelled to remark that the Tribunal was not  correct
in observing that merely because the appellant paid  the  aforesaid  portion
of duty subsequently in cash,  it  had  accepted  the  legal  position  that
payment of duty through Cenvat Credit Account was not permissible under  the
provisions of Rule 173G(1)(e) of  the  Rules.   Whether  such  a  course  of
action was permissible or not had to be examined in the light of  the  legal
provisions.   There  is  no  estoppel  against  law.   Merely  because   the
appellant had yielded to the demand of the Revenue to pay  that  portion  of
duty also in cash, would not mean that  the  appellant  was  precluded  from
taking a stand that such mode of payment through Cenvat Credit Account  even
during the period when facility of payment of duty by instalments  had  been
withdrawn for two months, was permissible.  It had taken a specific  defence
in this behalf and, therefore, the Tribunal  was  required  to  examine  the
matter in the light of  the  aforesaid  Rule.   We  have  already  extracted
relevant portion of Rule 173G.  Since, we are  specifically  concerned  with
sub-rule (e) thereof, for clarity and better understanding  of  the  matter,
we reproduce the same once again:
“Section 173G(1)

                          xx          xx         xx
(e)  If the manufacturer  defaults  on  account  of  any  of  the  following
reasons, namely:-
(i)  full payment of any one instalment is discharged  beyond  a  period  of
thirty days from the date on which the instalment was  due  in  a  financial
year, or
(ii)  the due date on which full payment of instalments are to  be  made  is
violated for the third time in a financial year, whether  in  succession  or
otherwise,

then the manufacturer  shall  forfeit  the  facility  to  pay  the  dues  in
instalments under this sub-rule for a period of two  months,  starting  from
the date of communication of an order passed by the proper officer  in  this
regard and during this period the manufacturer  shall  be  required  to  pay
excise duty for each consignment by debit to the  account  current  referred
to in clause (b) and in the event of any such failure it will be  deemed  as
if  such  goods  have  been  cleared  without  payment  of  duty   and   the
consequences and penalties as provided in the  Central  Excise  Rules  shall
follow.
(emphasis supplied)”


As already mentioned above, this clause enables the authorities  to  forfeit
the facility to pay the dues in instalments for a period of  two  months  in
case the assessee commits default of the nature  specified  therein.   Thus,
the main purport of this Rule is to withdraw  the  facility  of  payment  of
dues in instalments and calling upon the assessee to  pay  the  duty  during
the aforesaid period on clearing each consignment, i.e., on everyday  basis.
 In this context, the question that arises is as to whether such a duty  has
to be necessarily paid only by debit to the account current  or  it  can  be
paid through Cenvat Credit as well.
For answering this question, first thing that is necessarily to  be  pointed
out is the purport behind Rule 49 and  Rule  173G  of  the  Rules.  Rule  49
enables the assessee to pay excise duty on fortnightly basis on  removal  of
goods from the factory premises or from an approved  place  of  removal  but
for this Rule the assessee is required  to  pay  duty  on  removal  of  each
consignment, i.e. on consignment to  consignment  basis.  That  is  what  is
provided in Rule 9 of the Rules  which  mandates  that  no  excisable  goods
shall  be  removed  from  the  place  where  they  are  produced,  cured  or
manufactured or any premises pertained thereto, which may  be  specified  by
the  Commissioner  in  this  behalf,  whether  for  consumption,  export  or
manufacture of any other commodity in or outside such  place,  until  excise
duty leviable thereon is determined and indicated  on  each  application  in
the proper form or each gate pass, as the case  may  be,  presented  to  the
proper officer at such place and in such manner, as  may  be  prescribed  in
these Rules or as the Commissioner may  require.   However,  Rule  49  gives
facility to the assessees to  remove  the  goods  without  paying  the  duty
immediately but allowing it to pay  it  on  fortnightly  basis  as  provided
therein.   At   the   same   time,   this   facility   is   given   to   the
manufacturer/assessee on the premise that he faithfully pays the duty  every
fortnight, by specified dates which are stipulated in Rule  173G.   In  case
defaults are committed by the assessee, its consequences are  also  provided
in the said Rule. For certain specified  nature  of  defaults  mentioned  in
Clause (e) of Rule 173G(1), this facility to pay the dues in instalments  on
fortnightly basis is to be forfeited for a period of two months.
What follows  from  the  aforesaid  scheme  discernible  from  the  combined
reading of Rules 9, 49 and 173G(1) is that focus of these Rules  is  on  the
manner in  which  duty  is  to  be  paid,  namely,  on  daily  basis  or  on
fortnightly basis. The mode of  payment  of  duty  is  altogether  different
aspect.
In sub-para (b) of Rule 173G, a duty has been cast on  the  manufacturer  to
maintain an account  current  with  the  Commissioner  for  the  purpose  of
discharging his duty liability by debiting such account current.  This  sub-
rule also provides that duty can be discharged by  utilising  Cenvat  Credit
in the manner mentioned in the said sub-rule.   Thus,  insofar  as  mode  of
payment is concerned, it can be through  account  current  or  by  utilising
Cenvat Credit.  Both the methods are permissible.  The mode  of  payment  of
duty through Cenvat Credit is as good  as  making  payment  through  account
current.  This Court in
Commissioner of Central Excise,  Pune  v.  Dai  Ichi
Karkaria Limited
[1] described credit under the Modvat scheme to be “as  good
as tax paid”.  The reasons for the aforesaid view taken  by  the  Court  are
contained in paras 17 and 18 of the judgment which may be  recapitulated  as
under:
“17.  It is clear from these Rules, as we read  them,  that  a  manufacturer
obtains credit for the excise duty paid on raw material to be  used  by  him
in  the  production  of  an  excisable  product  immediately  it  makes  the
requisite  declaration  and  obtains  an  acknowledgment  thereof.   It   is
entitled to use the credit at any time thereafter  when  making  payment  of
excise duty on the excisable product.  There is no provision  in  the  Rules
which provides for a reversal  of  the  credit  by  the  excise  authorities
except where it has been illegally or irregularly taken, in which  event  it
stands cancelled or, if utilised, has to be paid for.  We  are  here  really
concerned with credit that has  been  validly  taken,  and  its  benefit  is
available to the manufacturer without any limitation in  time  or  otherwise
unless the manufacturer itself chooses not to use the raw  material  in  its
excisable product.  The credit is, therefore, indefeasible.  It should  also
be noted that there is no co-relation of the  raw  material  and  the  final
product; that is to say, it is not as if credit  can  be  taken  only  on  a
final product that is manufactured out of the  particular  raw  material  to
which the credit is related.  The credit may be  taken  against  the  excise
duty on a final product  manufactured  on  the  very  day  that  it  becomes
available.
18.  It is, therefore, that in the case of
Eicher Motors Ltd.  v.  Union  of
India
[1999 (106) E.L.T. 3] this Court said that a credit under  the  Modvat
scheme was “as good as tax paid.”


When we understand the character of Cenvat Credit in the  aforesaid  manner,
the answer to the question posed  easily  becomes  available,  namely,  even
during  the  period  when  the  facility  of  payment  of  excise  duty   in
instalments on fortnightly basis is not available and remains suspended  for
a period of two years, the only obligation for the assessee is  to  pay  the
duty on each clearance and  not  on  deferred  basis.   At  the  same  time,
insofar as manner of duty is concerned, it can  be  either  through  account
current or Cenvat Credit.
We are conscious of the words “during this period the manufacturer shall  be
required to pay excise duty for each consignment by  debit  to  the  account
current referred to in Clause (b) …...” occurring in clause (e).  It  is  on
the basis of this language used in Clause (e) of Rule 173G(1), the  argument
of the learned senior counsel for the Revenue  is  that  the  only  mode  or
manner of payment of duty during this period was  through  account  current.
However, it is not possible to agree with this contention in the absence  of
specific prohibition contained in the  said  sub-rule  (e)  in  this  behalf
coupled with the fact that the payment of excise duty through Cenvat  Credit
is recognised as a valid mode of payment.  In  fact,  as  would  be  noticed
below, the Department  itself  understood  the  scope  and  purport  of  the
aforesaid provision in this very manner, as it existed at that time.
In this behalf, it also required to emphasize that  the  Central  Government
introduced a scheme namely MODVAT  Scheme  in  the  Central  Excise  Law  as
introduced by a separate Chapter containing Rule 57A  to  57(U)  from  1986.
As per the MODVAT credit scheme  introduced  by  the  aforesaid  Rules,  the
manufacture of certain final products which are  excisable  goods  specified
in the notification issued by the Government, is allowed credit of any  duty
to excise paid by him on the input which is used in the manufacture  of  the
final product.  The credit of specified  duty  allowed  is  to  be  utilised
towards payment of duty excise allowable on the final product whether  under
the Act or under any other Act as  the  case  may  be  by  the  notification
issued and subject to such conditions as may  be  specified.   As  per  Rule
57F, the inputs on which credits have been  taken  may  be  used  in  or  in
relation to the manufacture of final products and the inputs may be  removed
for home consumption or for export under bond.  As per this  rule,  all  the
removals of inputs for home consumption shall be made  on  payment  of  duty
equal to the amount of credit availed in respect of such  inputs  and  under
the cover of invoice prescribed under Rule 52A.   The  inputs  can  also  be
removed as  such  or  after  they  have  been  partially  processed  by  the
manufacturer of the final products to a place outside the factory under  the
cover of a challan specified in that behalf by the Central Board  of  Excise
and Customs,  for  the  purpose  of  test,  repair  etc.  carrying  out  any
operation necessary for manufacture of final products and  return  the  same
to his factory within the specified period.  The inputs on which credit  has
been taken may be used for the manufacture  of  final  products  or  can  be
removed after payment of duty for home consumption.  Rule 57-I provides  for
recovery of credit wrongly availed of or utilised in  an  irregular  manner.
It provides for recovery of the duty credit of  which  was  wrongly  availed
and if the manufacturer has taken the credit by reason of fraud  or  willful
misrepresentation, suppression of facts etc. with  the  intention  to  evade
payment of duty then he shall, apart from his liability to  pay  the  amount
equivalent to the credit, be liable to pay penalty equal to the same  amount
plus interest under Section 11AA.
The Scheme is thus, a self-contained one, dealing  with  its  applicability,
eligibility of credit of duty on certain inputs, adjustment to  be  made  on
the credit of inputs used  in  final  products,  manner  of  utilisation  of
inputs, procedure to be  followed  by  the  manufacturer,  procedure  to  be
followed by the persons who  have  availed  credit  issued  in  invoice  and
finally provision for recovery of credits wrongly availed  and  a  provision
for imposing penalty for violation of  the  provisions  and  availing  wrong
credit.  With the introduction of this new  scheme,  the  assessee  had  the
option to pay excise duty by availing credit of  the  duty  paid  on  inputs
provided he is a manufacturer of the finished products making  use  of  such
inputs.
This provision came up for interpretation before at least four  High  Courts
and all these Courts took the view that even when the facility is  withdrawn
for making payment in instalments, the  excise  duty  can  be  paid  through
Cenvat Credit.  It is  not  necessary  to  refer  to  all  these  judgments.
Suffice it is to  make  a  mention  of  the  decision  dated  26.10.2005  in
C.E.Appeal No. 22 of 2005 rendered  by  Kerala  High  Court  in  Thanikkudam
Bagawati Mills Limited, Thanikkudam v. The Commissioner of  Central  Excise,
Calicut.  In this judgment, the High Court  after  analysing  the  Rules  as
well as the provisions of Modvat scheme summed up the position as under:
“23.  It is true that as per rule  173G(1)(b)  also  the  payment  utilising
Cenvat credit is an approved manner of payment of duty by these  rules.   It
is equally true that even in the absence of such a  provision  contained  in
Rule 173G(1)(b) accepting the mode of payment utilising  Cenvat  credit,  an
assessee, even by virtue of the provisions  contained  under  Rule  49  read
with Rule 57A, will be entitled to utilise  such  input  credit.   In  other
words, there is force in the contention of the assessee that Rule 173G  does
not give any benefit of any input credit and  merely  by  referring  to  the
entitlement of the assessee to use the Cenvat credit again under  Rule  173G
and further providing that the assessee has  to  pay  the  duty  during  the
suspended period for each consignment by  debit  from  the  account  current
only in no way will have the effect of taking  away  the  already  conferred
benefit by separate rule. So long as no amendment is brought out to Rule  49
or Rule 57A, as the case may be, the consequences of making  an  assessee  a
defaulter and to deny him the benefit of utilising  the  input  credit  will
become unworkable and ineffective.  It has to be noticed as rightly  pointed
by the counsel appearing for the petitioner that the rule  making  authority
took notice of this lacuna and by the Central Excise Rules,  2002  –  second
amendment 2005, which came into force from  1st  April,  2005,  the  Central
Excise Rules 2002 was amended and  Rule  3A  was  inserted  which  reads  as
follows:
“If the assessee defaults in payment of duty by  the  date  prescribed
in sub-rule (2) and the same is discharged beyond a period  of  thirty  days
from the said date, then the assessee shall forfeit the facility to pay  the
duty in monthly instalments under sub-rule (1) for a period of  two  months,
starting from  the  date  of  communication  of  the  order  passed  by  the
Assistant Commissioner of Central  Excise  or  the  Deputy  Commissioner  of
Central Excise, as the case may be, in this regard  or  till  such  date  on
which all dues including interest thereof are paid, whichever is later,  and
during this period notwithstanding anything contained  in  sub-rule  (4)  of
rule 3 of CENVAT Credit Rules, 2004, the assessee shall be required  to  pay
excise duty for each consignment by debit to the account current and in  the
event of any failure, it shall be deemed that such goods have  been  cleared
without payment of duty and the consequences and penalties  as  provided  in
these rules shall follow.”
24.  It is for the first time that a non obstantive clause was added  so  as
to take away the benefit under the Cenvat Credit rules and  to  utilise  the
input credit during the operation of the suspended period and requiring  any
duty by debit to the account  current  only.   Until  then,  as  is  already
referred to above, merely because rule 173G recognises the payment  of  duty
utilising the Cenvat credit also and providing for payment of  duty  through
open and current account only during the suspended period will not have  the
effect of taking away the benefit conferred by a separate  rule  since  even
without Rule 173G by virtue of Rule 49  read  with  Rule  57A  a  right  has
already conferred on the assessee to utilise the input  credit  for  payment
of duty at the time of discharging his liability to pay duty  on  the  final
product as provided for in the rules.”


Not only we are in agreement with the  aforesaid  view  taken  by  the  High
Courts, it is imperative to point out that even the Department accepted  the
aforesaid opinion of the High Courts. For this  reason,  judgments  rendered
by the High Courts were not challenged and instead to remedy the  situation,
Rule 8 of the Central Excise Rules, 2002 itself is amended by inserting sub-
rule 3A vide  Notification  No.17/05-C.E.  (N.T.)  dated  31.03.2005  w.e.f.
01.04.2005.  This Rule now specifically provides that in case of default  in
making payment of duty, the assessee shall be required to  pay  excise  duty
for each consignment by debit to the account current and  not  by  utilising
Cenvat Credit. This also lends credence to our view which we have  taken  in
respect of unamended provision that was applicable at the relevant time.
The result of the aforesaid discussion would be to allow these  appeals  and
set aside the decision of the CESTAT.  We order accordingly.
.............................................J.
                                                                (A.K. SIKRI)


                             .............................................J.
                                                               (N.V. RAMANA)

NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 06, 2015.
-----------------------
[1]
[2]   1999 (112) ELT 353 (SC)