[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
George vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 13 December, 2024
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2024 INSC 974                                                             REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.            OF 2024
                                    (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No. 5902 of 2021)

                            GEORGE                                     …APPELLANT(S)
                                                      VERSUS
                            THE STATE OF TAMIL NADU
                            AND OTHERS                              …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                  JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   The present appeal challenges the final judgment and

                            order dated 1st November 2019 passed by the Madurai Bench

                            of Madras High Court in Crl. A. (MD) No. 479 of 2017,

                            whereby the Criminal Appeal filed by the appellant against

                            the judgment and order dated 17th November 2017 in

                            Sessions Case No. 83 of 2016 on the file of the I Additional

                            District and Sessions Judge, Thoothukudi (hereinafter, “trial

                            court”) was partly allowed. The Division Bench of the High

                            Court upheld the conviction and sentence qua the appellant
Signature Not Verified
insofar as the offence punishable under Sections 294(b), 341
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2024.12.13
13:10:51 IST
Reason:
1
and 302 of the
Indian Penal Code
, 1860 (hereinafter, “
IPC
”)

but he was acquitted of the charge under
Section 506(ii)
IPC.
3.   The facts necessary for the adjudication of the present

appeal are as given below:
3.1 The genesis of the present case is the registration of FIR

No. 224 of 2015 on 16th May 2015 at Police Station

Sathankulam, District Thoothukudi by one Mr. Kovilraj (PW-
1). Written information was received at the said Police Station

at 02:30 hours alleging commission of offence punishable

under
Sections 294(b)
,
342
,
302
and
506(ii)
IPC by the

appellant, Rajarathinam and Albert. It is stated by PW-1 that

he is a Church Member and Choir Master in Immanuel

Church at Ananthapuram. He stated that he was in favour of

Arputharaj in the Diocese Election, due to which the

appellant, who supported the rival faction of Pushparaj

entered into a wordy quarrel with his son (Praveen Kumar)

about a year prior to the day of the incident. It is stated that

the informant (PW-1), his wife Chandra and his son had gone

to Ananthapuram for a Consecration Festival on 15th May

2015. In the intervening night of 15-16th May 2015, at

around 00:30 hours, when the informant’s son was standing
2
in front of the Church and chatting with his friends Praveen

Immanuel (PW-2), Melvin Abraham (not examined) and

Gerome (not examined), the three accused persons came and

abused the informant’s son in a filthy language and

questioned him as to how after working against them in the

election, he could come and participate in the festival. It is

stated that informant’s son had replied that they had no

right to question him. Immediately thereafter, the appellant

took out a knife, which he had hid in his hip (pocket), upon

which, the informant’s son ran owing to escape. The

informant’s son was chased by the three of them, however,

he was caught by the accused persons. It is alleged that

while the other two accused persons held the informant’s

son, the appellant hacked the knife forcibly on the left side of

his neck. The informant’s son was taken to the hospital,

where he was declared dead. Hence, the FIR by PW-1.
3.2 Upon registration of the FIR, the investigation was

taken over by Vijaya Kumar (Inspector of Police) (PW-19). PW-

19 went to the scene of crime, he prepared the observation

mahazar (Ex. P-18) and a rough sketch (Ex. P-19) and also

recovered the material objects (M.O.-12 and M.O.-13) in the
3
presence of witnesses. He, thereafter, proceeded to the

hospital and prepared the inquest report (Ex. P-21). Based on

the confession of the appellant, the knife (M.O.-1) was

recovered by Nagarajan, Inspector of Police (PW-18), who had

taken over part of the investigation in the absence of PW-19

for a short period. The statements of all the witnesses were

recorded by PW-19 and after completion of investigation, on

17th August 2015, the final report was filed before Judicial

Magistrate, Sathankulam.
3.3 Since the case was exclusively triable by the Sessions

Court, it was committed to the trial court. The trial court

framed charges against the accused persons. To bring home

the guilt of accused persons, the prosecution examined 19

witnesses, marked 23 documents and 13 material objects. No

witness was examined and no document was marked on the

side of the defence. The trial court, upon consideration of the

facts and circumstances of the case and after analyzing the

oral and documentary evidence, by judgment and order

dated 17th November 2017 came to the conclusion that the

prosecution has proved the case beyond reasonable doubt

and proceeded to convict and sentence the accused persons.
4
Insofar as the appellant is concerned, the trial court held

that he is guilty of offences punishable under
Sections

294(b)
,
341
,
302
and
506(2)
of the IPC and sentenced him to

undergo simple imprisonment for three months for the

offence under
Section 294(b)
IPC, to undergo simple

imprisonment for one month for the offence under
Section

341
IPC and to undergo life imprisonment and to pay fine of

Rs.50,000/-      in   default   to       undergo   two   years   simple

imprisonment for the offence under
Section 302
IPC and to

undergo simple imprisonment for two years for the offence

under
Section 506(ii)
IPC.
3.4 Aggrieved thereby, the accused persons, including the

appellant, filed an appeal before the High Court. Vide

impugned judgment and order, the High Court, partly

allowed the appeal qua the appellant. While sustaining the

conviction and sentence for the offence under
Sections

294(b)
,
341
, and
302
IPC, the High Court acquitted the

appellant for the charge under
Section 506(ii)
IPC. Aggrieved

thereby, the appellant filed the present appeal by way of

special leave.
4.   We have heard Shri S. Nagamuthu, learned Senior
5
Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant and Shri N.R.

Elango, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the

State of Tamil Nadu.
5.   Shri Nagamuthu, learned Senior Counsel appearing on

behalf of the appellant submitted that the learned Judges of

the Division Bench of the High Court have grossly erred in

convicting   the   appellant   –       original   accused   No.1.   He

submitted that, on the basis of the very same evidence of

Kovilraj (PW-1), the learned Judges of the High Court have

disbelieved the testimony of Kovilraj (PW-1) insofar as

accused Nos.2 and 3 are concerned. However, on the basis of

the same evidence, the appellant has been convicted. It is

therefore submitted that, on this short ground alone, the

appeal deserves to be allowed.
6.   Shri Elango, learned Senior Counsel appearing on

behalf of the State has opposed the appeal submitting that in

view of the concurrent findings of fact, no interference is

warranted in the present appeal.
7.   With the assistance of the parties, we have examined

the material placed on record.
8.   As submitted by Shri Nagamuthu, learned Senior
6
Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, the conviction

is based solely on the testimony of Kovilraj (PW-1). Kovilraj

(PW-1), in his evidence, stated that a year prior to the

occurrence during Immanuel Church Consecration, accused

No.1 i.e., the appellant herein had beaten up his son

(deceased). He stated that the issue was settled in his village

by compromise, thereafter, there was no issue. It is stated

that on 15th May 2015 at 05:00 o’clock in the evening, he

along with his wife Chandra and his son (Praveen Kumar)

went to Aananthapuram from Nazareth. He stated that about

500 persons had participated in the Consecration Prayer

which began at about 06:30 in the evening and lasted up to

09:00 o’clock in the night. Thereafter, in the Church, there

was a united feast in which he and his family participated

too. He further submitted that, in order to participate in the

early morning 03:00 o’clock prayer, they all stayed in the

Church. He stated that, in the midnight at 12:30 o’clock, his

son (deceased) went out. He saw his son (deceased) standing

and talking with his friends, namely Melvin Abraham,

Praveen Immanuel and Gerome. At that time, the accused

persons hurled abuses at his son (deceased). He stated that
7
the appellant herein threatened his son (deceased) with a

knife and tried to attack the deceased. However, his son

(deceased) escaped and ran directly to the main road. He

stated that the accused persons also ran after his son

(deceased). He also stated that he along with his wife and

friends of his son (deceased) also ran behind them. He stated

that accused Nos.2 and 3 held his son (deceased) by his

hands whereas the appellant herein assaulted him with the

knife. His son (deceased) fell down on the ground. Thereafter,

his son (deceased) was taken to the hospital where he was

declared dead.
9.   The High Court has found the evidence of Kovilraj (PW-
1) unreliable insofar as accused Nos.2 and 3 are concerned

and therefore did not find it safe to convict them and granted

them benefit of doubt. The High Court has observed that the

evidence of Kovilraj (PW-1) insofar as accused Nos.2 and 3

are concerned appears to be unnatural. The High Court has

also observed that, since the incident had taken place at

around 300 metres away from the Church, it is difficult to

believe that Kovilraj (PW-1) could have actually witnessed the

overt act attributed to accused Nos.2 and 3. However,
8
strangely, the High Court, on the basis of very same evidence

of Kovilraj (PW-1), has believed it qua the appellant herein

and confirmed his conviction.
10. In paragraph 21 of the impugned judgment, the learned

Judges of the High Court have observed that in the course of

natural events, except the appellant herein (accused No.1),

no one else could have caused the injury to the deceased. In

our considered view, the said finding is based purely on

conjectures and surmises.
11. No doubt that a conviction could be based on the sole

testimony of a witness. Equally the principle that falsus in

uno, falsus in omnibus is not applicable in Indian criminal

jurisprudence. However, in the present case, on the basis of

sole testimony of the same witness (PW-1), the appellant

herein has been convicted and the other two accused,

involved in the same incident have been acquitted by giving

them benefit of doubt.
12. Further,   in   paragraph       23,   while   disbelieving   the

testimony of PW-1 qua accused Nos. 2 and 3, the High Court

has taken note of the fact that the incident occurred 300

metres away from the Church and that could not have
9
enabled PW-1 to have actually witnessed the overt act that is

attributed to accused Nos.2 and 3. However, the appellant

herein involved in the same overt act has been convicted on

the basis of the same testimony of PW-1.
13. It is further to be noted that, in the present case,

Kovilraj (PW-1) is the father of the deceased and is an

interested witness. No doubt that merely because a witness is

an interested witness, it cannot be a ground to discard the

testimony of such a witness. However, the testimony of such

a witness has to be scrutinized with greater caution and

circumspection.
14. In the present case, when the High Court comes to a

conclusion that it is difficult to believe that Kovilraj (PW-1)

could have witnessed the incident in the manner narrated by

him and granted benefit of doubt to accused Nos.2 and 3, the

conviction of accused No.1 on the basis of the evidence of the

very same witness only on the basis of conjectures and

surmises, in our view, is not permissible.
15. Insofar as the other circumstance with regard to seizure

of knife as could be found from the evidence of Inspector of

Police, the testimony of PW-18 would show that the recovery
10
was made from an open place accessible to one and all. As

such, we are of the considered opinion that only on the basis

of the circumstance of such a recovery, the conviction could

not have been based.
16. We are, therefore, of the considered view that the High

Court has grossly erred in convicting the appellant while

giving benefit of doubt to accused Nos.2 and 3.
17. In the result, we pass the following order:
(i)     The appeal is allowed;

  (ii)    The   impugned    judgment    and        order     dated      1st
November 2019 passed by the High Court is quashed

          and set aside; and
(iii)   The appellant is acquitted of all the charges levelled

          against him and is directed to be released forthwith if

          not required in any other case.
18. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
..............................J.
                                                          (B.R. GAVAI)



                                            ..............................J.
                                            (K.V. VISWANATHAN)
NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 13, 2024.
11