[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Giriyappa vs Kamalama on 20 December, 2024
1


2024 INSC 1043                                                                       REPORTABLE


                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                      EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) No.30804 of 2024
                                            [Diary No(s). 56304/2024]

        GIRIYAPPA & ANR.                                                         Petitioner(s)

                                                           VERSUS

        KAMALAMMA & ORS.                                                             Respondent(s)
O   R    D   E   R

        1.                  Delay condoned.
2.                  This petition arises from the order passed by the High Court
        of Karnataka at Bengaluru dated 23-8-2024 in Regular Second Appeal
        No.1740/2008, by which the appeal filed by the petitioners – herein
        (original defendants) came to be dismissed, thereby affirming the
        judgment and order passed by the First Appellate Court and also the
        judgment and decree passed by the Trial Court.
3.                  We have heard Mr. Anand Sanjay M. Nuli, the learned Senior
        counsel appearing for the petitioners.
4.                  It appears from the materials on record that the respondents –
        herein (original plaintiffs) instituted Original Suit No.364/1988
        for declaration of title and recovery of possession.
5.                  The suit came to be decreed in favour of the respondents
        (original                 plaintiffs).   The   Regular      First   Appeal    filed   by   the
        petitioners – herein came to be dismissed and so also the Second
        Appeal by the High Court.
6.                  In the Second Appeal, the High Court formulated the following
        substantial questions of law:-
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
"(1) Whether the Courts below were justified in decreeing
   Date: 2024.12.21
   17:19:51 IST          the suit of the plaintiff, despite the defendant seeking
   Reason:
the protection under
Section 53A
of the Transfer of
                         Property Act and also erred in not construing the law on
                         this point as has been laid down by the Apex Court in the
                         case reported in 2002 (3) SCC 676?"
2
7.   It     is   the   case   of   the   petitioners   –   herein   that   the
respondents (original plaintiffs) may be the lawful owners of the
suit scheduled property but they executed a sale agreement dated
25-11-1968 in their favour agreeing to sale 2 guntas of land out of
survey No.24/9 for total consideration of Rs.850/- and since then
the petitioners – herein came to be in possession and enjoyment of
the same.
8.   The High Court while dismissing the Second Appeal observed in
Paras 18 and 19 as under:-
“18. Perusal of the Judgment of the trial Court in as much
     as the first Appellate Court indicate that on detailed
     examination of the oral and documentary evidence placed on
     record, they have come to a conclusion that the defendant
     has failed to prove that plaintiff has executed the Sale
     Agreement dated 25.11.1968 and put the defendant in
     possession and enjoyment of the same. On the other hand,
     the plaintiff has proved that the shed in the suit
     scheduled property which is measuring one gunta was
     constructed by him during 1982-83 and during 1983-84,
     defendant illegally occupied the same. Before that he has
     also approached the Land Tribunal, Tumakuru in G LRM-67/83-
     84 claiming occupancy rights and it came to be dismissed on
     15.05.1987 and it has attained finality. The findings
     returned by the trial Court as well as the first Appellate
     Court are consistent with the oral and documentary evidence
     placed on record and as such, this Court finds no
     perversity in the same.
19. When the defendant has failed to prove that plaintiff
     has executed the Sale Agreement dated 25.11.1968 agreeing
     to sell 2 gunta out of survey No.24/9 and he came in
     possession and occupation of suit schedule property by
     virtue of the same, question of providing protection under
Section 53A
of the T.P. Act does not arise. Consequently,
     the ratio in the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
     the case of
Shrimant Shamrao Suryavanshi and Another vs.
     Pralhad Bhairoba Suryavanshi
(dead) by Lrs and Others2 is
     not applicable to the case on hand and accordingly, the
     substantial question of law is answered in the negative.”
9.   We are of the view that no error not to speak of any error of
law could be said to have been committed by the High Court in
passing the impugned judgment and order.
3
10.
Section 53-A
of the TP Act and
Section 16
of the Specific
Relief Act, 1964 (for short, hereinafter to be referred to as “the
1963 Act”), being of significant relevance are extracted hereunder:
“53-A.    Part-performance.—Where    any   person
          contracts to transfer for consideration any
          immovable property by writing signed by him or on
          his behalf from which the terms necessary to
          constitute the transfer can be ascertained with
          reasonable certainty, and the transferee has, in
          part-performance    of   the    contract,   taken
          possession of the property or any part thereof,
          or the transferee, being already in possession,
          continues in possession in part-performance of
          the contract and has done some act in furtherance
          of the contract, and the transferee has performed
          or is willing to perform his part of the
          contract, then, notwithstanding that, where there
          is an instrument of transfer, that the transfer
          has not been completed in the manner prescribed
          therefor by the law for the time being in force,
          the transferor or any person claiming under him
          shall be debarred from enforcing against the
          transferee and persons claiming under him any
          right in respect of the property of which the
          transferee has taken or continued in possession,
          other than a right expressly provided by the
          terms of the contract:
Provided that nothing in this section shall
          affect   the   rights   of   a   transferee for
          consideration who has no notice of the contract
          or of the part-performance thereof.”
          (emphasis supplied)

          “16. Personal bars to relief.—Specific performance
          of a contract cannot be enforced in favour of a
          person—
(a)   who   would   not  be   entitled   to   recover
          compensation for its breach; or
(b) who has become incapable of performing, or
          violates any essential term of, the contract that on
          his part remains to be performed, or acts in fraud
          of the contract, or wilfully acts at variance with,
          or in subversion of, the relation intended to be
          established by the contract; or
(c) who fails to aver and prove that he has performed
          or has always been ready and willing to perform the
4
essential terms of the contract which are to be
             performed by him, other than terms the performance of
             which has been prevented or waived by the defendant.
Explanation.—For the purposes of clause (c)—
(i) where a contract involves the payment of money,
             it is not essential for the plaintiff to actually
             tender to the defendant or to deposit in court any
             money except when so directed by the court;
(ii) the plaintiff must aver performance of, or
             readiness and willingness to perform, the contract
             according to its true construction.”
             (emphasis supplied)
11.   From the aforesaid, it is evident that the protection of a
prospective purchaser/transferee of his possession of the property
involved, is available subject to the following prerequisites:
(a) There is a contract in writing by the transferor
             for transfer for consideration of any immovable
             property signed by him or on his behalf, from which
             the terms necessary to constitute the transfer can be
             ascertained with reasonable certainty;
(b) The transferee has, in part-performance of the
             contract, taken possession of the property or any part
             thereof,   or  the   transferee,   being  already   in
             possession,   continues   in   possession   in   part-
performance of the contract;
(c) The transferee has done some act in furtherance
             of the contract and has performed or is willing to
             perform his part of the contract.
12. In terms of this provision, if the above preconditions stand
complied with, the transferor or any person claiming under him
shall   be    debarred   from   enforcing   against   the   transferee   and
person(s) claiming under him, any right in respect of the property
of which the transferee has taken or continue in possession, other
than a right expressly provided by the terms of the contract,
notwithstanding the fact, that the transfer, as contemplated, had
not been completed in the manner prescribed therefor by the law for
the time being in force. Noticeably, an exception to this restraint
5
is carved out qua a transferee for consideration, who has no notice
of the contract or of the part-performance thereof.
13.
Section 53-A
of the Transfer of Property Act was inserted
partly to set at rest the conflict of views in this country, but
principally for the protection of ignorant transferees who take
possession   or   spend   money   in   improvements    relying   on   documents
which are ineffective as transfers or on contracts which cannot be
proved for want of registration. The effect of this section, is to
relax the strict provisions of the
Transfer of Property Act and the
Registration Act
in favour of transferees in order to allow the
defence of part performance to be established.
14.
Section 53-A
is an exception to the provisions which require a
contract to be in writing and registered and which bar proof of
such contract by any other evidence. Consequently, the exception
must be strictly construed.
15.   In view of the aforesaid, this Special Leave Petition fails
and is hereby dismissed.
16.   Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
…………………………………………J
                                                      (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                                      …………………………………………J
                                                      (R. MAHADEVAN)
NEW DELHI
20th DECEMBER, 2024.