[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Jami Venkata Suryaprabha vs Tarini Prasad Nayak on 9 December, 2024
2024 INSC 1001                                                             REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         EXTRAORDINARY APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                  Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 29045/2024


        JAMI VENKATA SURYAPRABHA & ANR.                                   Petitioner(s)

                                                       VERSUS

        TARINI PRASAD NAYAK & ORS.                                        Respondent(s)



                                                    O R D E R
1.                  This petition arises from the order passed by the High Court of

        Orissa in CMP No.1019 of 2024 (original jurisdiction case) dated 23rd

        September, 2024 by which the petition filed by the petitioners herein

        seeking to challenge the order passed by the Civil Judge (Senior

        Division), Paralakhemundi came to be rejected thereby affirming the

        order passed by the Civil Judge rejecting the application filed by

        the petitioners herein in the capacity of being a plaintiff under

        Order XVIII Rule 1 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908.
2.                  The petitioners herein are the original plaintiffs and the

        respondents herein are the original defendants.
3.                  The petitioners have instituted a suit for specific performance

        of contract based on an agreement of sale dated 1st September, 2019,
Signature Not Verified
said to have been executed by the respondents(defendants) in their
Digitally signed by
CHANDRESH
Date: 2024.12.18
17:29:24 IST
Reason:
favour.
1
4.   The respondents herein filed their written statement stating in

para 6 thereof as under:-
“6) That the averments in Para 6 of the Plaint that
       defendants though received the said letter dated
       25/11/2019 sent by ordinary post, and knowing well
       in advance the contents of the Redg. Letter and the
       letter sent by courier they refused to receive are
       all dales and concocted stories of the plaintiff
       only to make a cause of action for the present
       proceedings. However when Plaintiffs and others
       tried to spread that the sale of the suit property
       has been finalized and Plaintiffs going to purchase
       it came to Knowledge of Defendants, they preferred
       to inform in writing about the cancelation of the
       said sham sale agreement dated 01/09/2019 about
       which well appraised before to Jami Polichetty and
       his son as aforementioned. As such the averments in
       Para 6 of the Plaint that but soon all the Defendants
       in response to said letter of Plaintiffs sent a joint
       letter by Redg post A/D to the Plaintiffs are is
       conceived and placed with a malafide intension and
       accordingly not correct. As the Defendants with
       ulterior motive began to insist creating gossips
       about sale agreement and sale of the property, the
       Defendants preferred to give the letter in writing
       to the Plaintiffs Instead of acting in good faith as
       initially the matter arose but could not take shape
       of actual agreement as placed above and coming
       forward to take refund of the token amount kept with
       Defendants, the Plaintiffs preferred to play foul
       with it”
5.   In view of the specific stance of the defendants in their written

statement referred to above, the petitioners herein as plaintiffs

preferred an application before the trial court under Order XVIII

Rule 1 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (for short the “
CPC
”) with

a prayer that as the defendants are not disputing the agreement of

sale, the defendant should be asked to begin to lead oral evidence.
6.   The trial court rejected the application.
7.   The petitioners herein being dissatisfied with the order passed

by the trial court, rejecting such application invoked the
2
supervisory jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 227
of the

Constitution of India.    The High Court also declined to interfere.
8.    In such circumstances, the petitioners are here before this

court with the present petition.
9.    We have heard Mr. Niranjan Sahu, the learned counsel appearing

for the petitioners.
10.
Order XVIII Rule 1 of the CPC
reads thus:-
“The plaintiff has the right to begin unless the
        defendant admits the facts alleged by the plaintiff
        and contends that either in point of law or on some
        additional facts alleged by the defendant the
        plaintiff is not entitled to any part of the relief
        which he seeks, in which case the defendant has the
        right to begin.”
11.   As a general rule, according to the procedural law, no doubt it

is the plaintiff who has to prove his claim by positive proof, for

the court has to see whether there is a proof of claim before it

needs to enquire, as to the truth or otherwise of the defence. It is

open to the plaintiff to say that although he has the right to begin,

yet he may rest content with relying upon the averments made in the

written statement. Yet evidence need not always be led by the party

who has the right to begin and on whom lies the burden of proof; it

is open to him to sustain the onus by facts which he may elicit in

cross examination of the other party or his witnesses. In order to

come to the conclusion, concerning on whom the legal burden of proof

rests, in addition to the substantive law, the pleadings of the

parties coupled with documents that they produced & the admissions,

if any concerning such documents have to be taken into account.
3
12.   The High Court looked into the averments    made in the plaint,

it also looked into the averments made in the written statement and

ultimately observed in para 4. The paras 4 and 4.1 read as under:-
“4. Considering the submission made by Mr. Mishra,
        learned counsel for the Plaintiffs/Petitioners and
        on perusal of the record more particularly the
        plaint and written statement, it is apparent that
        although the-defendants have admitted the existence
        of a document called 'agreement for sale', but they
        have specifically stated that it was a sham
        transaction and pleadings in tire written statement
        clearly show that they had never agreed to sell the
        property. Of course, they have accepted certain
        amount which they agreed to refund.
4.1 The aforesaid fact does not ipso facto be
        construed to be admission of material facts alleged
        in the plaint. The Defendants have categorically
        denied that in the written statement they have never
        agreed to sell the property, which is held by
        learned trial Court in the impugned order. There is
        also denial of other averments made in the plaint.
In that view of the matter. This Court is of the
        considered opinion: that the provision of
Order
        XVIII Rule 1 CPC
is not applicable to the instant
        case. Hence, I find no infirmity in the impugned
        order.”
13.   The High Court seems to have taken the view and, in our opinion,

rightly that although the defence has admitted the existence of a

document that is “agreement of sale”, yet they have specifically said

that the same is a sham transaction.
14.   The High Court is right in saying that the averments made in

the written statement sought to be relied upon by the plaintiff does

not ipso facto be construed to be admission of materials facts in

the alleged plaint.
4
15.
Section 102
of the Evidence Act states that:
“The burden of proof in a suit or proceeding lies
        on that person who would fail if no evidence at all
        were given on either side.”
16. Under
Section 102
of the Evidence Act, the burden of proof rests

on the party who would fail if no evidence at all were given on

either side. Where the defendant admits the facts alleged by the

plaintiff but contends that the plaintiff is not entitled to any part

of the relief which he seeks, it is the defendant who gets the right

to begin.
17.
Order XVIII of the Code of Civil Procedure
in terms speaks of

the ‘hearing’ of a suit and not the trial of the suit. A court is

concerned    with   the   trial   of   a       suit   from   the    time    when   it   is

instituted. The hearing of a suit is only a part of the trial of the

suit. The determination of the question as to which party has a right

to begin is an integral part of the hearing itself.
18. Order XVIII Rule 1 indeed provides for plaintiff's right to begin

the evidence but not the court's obligation to ask the plaintiffs to

begin first. There is no impediment for the court to call upon either

party   to   lead   evidence      first,        depending    upon     the    facts      and

circumstances of the case and the nature of the issues framed. Neither

party can insist that the other one should be asked to lead it first.

It all depends upon what the Court deems proper in the circumstances.

Where it finds that defendant's plea strikes of the root of the case,

there would be no hitch in asking him/her to prove such plea first

which can lead to disposal of the case. There can be no watertight

compartmentalisation in matters of justice and all rules of procedure
5
are designed and directed to achieve and secure ends of justice.
19.   In such circumstances, we see no reason to interfere with the

impugned order passed by the High Court.
20. With these observations, the SLP stands disposed of.
21.Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
…………………………………………J.
                                            (J.B. PARDIWALA)




                                           …………………………………………J.
                                             (R. MAHADEVAN)


New Delhi.
9th December, 2024.
6