[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Karan Talwar vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 19 December, 2024
Author:
C.T. Ravikumar
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
Sanjay Karol
2024 INSC 1012



                                                                     Non-Reportable

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                        Criminal Appeal No.            of 2024
                                           (@ SLP (Crl.) No. 10736 of 2022)

                             Karan Talwar
                                                                       …Appellant(s)
                                                   Versus
                             The State of Tamil Nadu
                                                                     …Respondent(s)

                                                  JUDGMENT
C.T. RAVIKUMAR, J.
Leave granted.
1.    This appeal by Special Leave is directed against
                             the order dated 14.09.2022 passed by the High Court of
                             Madras in CRLRC No.1258 of 2022 filed against the order
                             dated 26.07.2022 passed by the learned Additional
                             District     Judge-Special    Court    under
Essential
                             Commodities Act
Cases, Coimbatore (for short, the
                             “ADJ”) in CMP No.586 of 2020 under
Section 227
of the
                             Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, the
                             “
Cr.P.C
.”) to discharge him from CC No.43 of 2020. As
Signature Not Verified
per the order dated 26.07.2022 the application for
                             discharge filed by the appellant viz., accused No.13, in
Digitally signed by Dr.
Naveen Rawal
Date: 2024.12.19
16:18:03 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 15
CC No.43 of 2020, was dismissed and as per the
impugned order, the Revision Petition filed against the
same was also dismissed.
2.   The case of the prosecution in short is as follows: -
Accused No.1 owns 10 acres of coconut grove
where he runs a resort in the name and style “Agrinest”
(without approval from the Government). Accused No.2
manages the same along with others like accused Nos.3
and 15. Accused Nos.11 and 12 arranged for conducting
a music fest in the said resort and also for supplying
narcotic substances to the participants during the
programme. Accused No.14 was brought from Russia to
attract youngsters to the programme.       Accused No.1
went to Kerala and purchased 200 grams of cannabis
besides bringing drinks from other states from unknown
persons and brought all such items to the resorts on
03.05.2019. In the night of 03.05.2019, a large group of
youngsters from Tamil Nadu and Kerala thronged there
to participate in the music programme.        During the
programme narcotic substances were given to Accused
Nos.4, 6, 7, 9 & 13 and they consumed the same. Accused
Nos.15, 8 and 10 also consumed the same and abetted
commission of offences like supply of narcotics.          In
connection with the said incident, FIR No.129/2019 was
Page 2 of 15
registered on 04.05.2019 and in the said FIR, the
appellant was shown as accused No.13 and accused of
commission of offence under
Section 27(a)
of the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
(for short, the “
NDPS Act
”). After the investigation, a
final report was filed against all the accused and as per
the same, the appellant herein (accused No.13) was
charge sheeted only for offence under
Section 27(b)
of
the NDPS Act. This appeal is filed by accused No.13
against dismissal of his application for discharge.
Hence, we are confining the consideration only qua
accused No.13.
3.         Heard the learned senior counsel appearing for the
appellant and the learned counsel appearing for the
State of Tamil Nadu.
4.         As noted above, the appellant is charge sheeted
only under
Section 27(b)
of the NDPS Act, though some
of the other accused in the said crime are also charged
for offences under certain other enactments.
5.         Before dealing with the rival contentions, it is only
appropriate to refer to the scope of exercise of power
under
Section 227
, Cr.P.C. This Court in
P. Vijayan v.
State of Kerala & Anr.1
, made an in-depth consideration
1
(2010) 2 SCC 398; 2010 INSC 61
Page 3 of 15
regarding the scope of power under
Section 227
, Cr.P.C.
and held thus: -
“10. Before considering the merits of the
      claim of both the parties, it is useful to refer
      to
Section 227
of the Code of Criminal
      Procedure, 1973, which reads as under:
“227. Discharge. — If, upon consideration of
      the record of the case and the documents
      submitted therewith, and after hearing the
      submissions    of     the   accused   and    the
      prosecution in this         behalf, the Judge
      considers that there is not sufficient ground
      for proceeding against the accused, he shall
      discharge the accused and record his
      reasons for so doing.”


      If two views are possible and one of them
      gives rise to suspicion only, as distinguished
      from grave suspicion, the trial Judge will be
      empowered to discharge the accused and at
      this stage he is not to see whether the trial
      will end in conviction or acquittal. Further,
      the   words    “not    sufficient   ground   for
Page 4 of 15
proceeding against the accused” clearly
show that the Judge is not a mere post office
to frame the charge at the behest of the
prosecution, but has to exercise his judicial
mind to the facts of the case in order to
determine whether a case for trial has been
made out by the prosecution. In assessing
this fact, it is not necessary for the court to
enter into the pros and cons of the matter or
into a weighing and balancing of evidence
and probabilities which is really the function
of the court, after the trial starts.
11. At the stage of Section 227, the Judge has
merely to sift the evidence in order to find
out whether or not there is sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused. In other
words, the sufficiency of ground would take
within its fold the nature of the evidence
recorded by the police or the documents
produced before the court which ex facie
disclose     that    there     are      suspicious
circumstances against the accused so as to
frame a charge against him.”
Page 5 of 15
6.         While considering the scope of
Section 227
,
Cr.P.C. in
Sajjan Kumar v. Central Bureau of
Investigation2
, this Court laid down certain guiding
principles for discharge as under: -
“21. On consideration of the authorities
            about the scope of Sections 227 and 228 of
            the Code, the following principles emerge:
(i) The Judge while considering the question
            of framing the charges under
Section 227
CrPC has the undoubted power to sift and
            weigh the evidence for the limited purpose
            of finding out whether or not a prima facie
            case against the accused has been made out.
The test to determine prima facie case would
            depend upon the facts of each case.
(ii) Where the materials placed before the
            court disclose grave suspicion against the
            accused which has not been properly
            explained, the court will be fully justified in
            framing a charge and proceeding with the
            trial.
(iii) The court cannot act merely as a post
            office or a mouthpiece of the prosecution but
2
(2010) 9 SCC 368; 2010 INSC 624
Page 6 of 15
has to consider the broad probabilities of the
case, the total effect of the evidence and the
documents produced before the court, any
basic infirmities, etc. However, at this stage,
there cannot be a roving enquiry into the
pros and cons of the matter and weigh the
evidence as if he was conducting a trial.
(iv) If on the basis of the material on record,
the court could form an opinion that the
accused might have committed offence, it
can frame the charge, though for conviction
the conclusion is required to be proved
beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
has committed the offence.
(v) At the time of framing of the charges, the
probative value of the material on record
cannot be gone into but before framing a
charge the court must apply its judicial mind
on the material placed on record and must
be satisfied that the commission of offence
by the accused was possible.
(vi) At the stage of Sections 227 and 228, the
court is required to evaluate the material and
documents on record with a view to find out
Page 7 of 15
if the facts emerging therefrom taken at their
      face value disclose the existence of all the
      ingredients constituting the alleged offence.
      For this limited purpose, sift the evidence as
      it cannot be expected even at that initial
      stage to accept all that the prosecution states
      as gospel truth even if it is opposed to
      common sense or the broad probabilities of
      the case.
(vii) If two views are possible and one of
      them gives rise to suspicion only, as
      distinguished from grave suspicion, the trial
      Judge will be empowered to discharge the
      accused and at this stage, he is not to see
      whether the trial will end in conviction or
      acquittal.”
7.   The position of law enunciated in the said decisions
would reveal that while calling upon to exercise the
power under
Section 227
, Cr.P.C., the judge concerned
has to consider only the record of the case and the
documents produced along with the same. If on such
consideration the court forms an opinion that there is no
sufficient ground to proceed against the accused
Page 8 of 15
concerned, he shall be discharged after recording the
reasons therefor. It is also evident from the precedence
on the aforesaid question that while exercising the said
power, the Court could sift the materials produced along
with the final report only for the purpose of considering
the question whether there is ground to proceed against
the accused concerned.
8.    Bearing in mind the position(s) of law laid down as
above in the matter of exercise of power under
Section
227
, Cr.P.C., we will consider the question whether the
dismissal of the application for discharge filed by the
appellant in CC No.43 of 2020 calls for interference in
view of the nature of the charge framed against him and
the materials on record to support the same.
9.    As noted earlier, the accusation against the
appellant is commission of offence punishable under
Section 27(b)
of the NDPS Act. The said Section, in so far
as it is relevant, reads thus: -
“27. Punishment for consumption of any narcotic
      drug or psychotropic substance. — Whoever,
      consumes any narcotic drug or psychotropic
      substance shall be punishable, —
(a) …….
(b) where the narcotic drug or psychotropic
      substance consumed is other than those specified
Page 9 of 15
in or under clause (a), with imprisonment for a
          term which may extend to six months, or with fine
          which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with
          both.”
10.        As is evident from the said Section, the alleged
offence is consumption of narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance other than those specified in or under clause
(a) of
Section 27
, NDPS Act, and therefore, the question
is whether any material is available to charge the
appellant thereunder. The contention of the appellant is
that he has been arraigned as accused No.13 based on
the confession statement of co-accused viz., accused
No.1. Certainly, in the absence of any other material on
record to connect the appellant with the crime, the
confession statement of the co-accused by itself cannot
be the reason for his implication in the crime. This view
has been fortified by the law
laid down in
Suresh
Budharmal Kalani v. State of Maharashtra3
, wherein it
was stated that a co-accused’s confession containing
incriminating matter against a person would not by itself
suffice to frame charge against him.           The materials on
record would reveal that the investigating agency had
3
(1998) 7 SCC 337; 1998 INSC 364
Page 10 of 15
not subjected him to medical examination and instead,
going by complaint Witness No.23, he smelt the accused.
The less said the better and we do not think it necessary
to comment upon adoption of such a course. We need
only to say that even if he tendered such evidence, it
would not help the prosecution in anyway.              There is
absolutely no case that any recovery of contraband was
recovered from the appellant. As regards the confession
statement of the appellant in view of
Section 25
of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 there can be no doubt with
respect to the fact that it is inadmissible in evidence.
In
this context it is worthy to refer to the decision of this
Court in
Ram Singh v. Central Bureau of Narcotics4
. In
the said decision
, this Court held that
Section 25
of the
Indian Evidence Act would make confessional statement
of accused before police inadmissible in evidence and it
could not be brought on record by prosecution to obtain
conviction.             Shortly stated, except the confessional
statement of co-accused No.1 there is absolutely no
material available on record against the appellant.
11.        When this be the position, the question is whether
the two Courts were justified in holding that there is
prima facie case against the appellant to proceed against
4
(2011) 11 SCC 347; 2011 INSC 342
Page 11 of 15
him. In this contextual situation, it is relevant to refer to
the decision of this Court in Dipakbhai Jagadishchandra
Patel v. State of Gujarat and Anr.5 Paragraphs 23 and
24 of the said decision are relevant for the purpose of this
case and they read thus: -
“23. At the stage of framing the charge in
          accordance with the principles which have been
          laid down by this Court, what the court is
          expected to do is, it does not act as a mere post
          office. The court must indeed sift the material
          before it. The material to be sifted would be the
          material which is produced and relied upon by
          the prosecution. The sifting is not to be
          meticulous in the sense that the court dons the
          mantle of the trial Judge hearing arguments after
          the entire evidence has been adduced after a full-
          fledged trial and the question is not whether the
          prosecution has made out the case for the
          conviction of the accused. All that is required is,
          the court must be satisfied that with the materials
          available, a case is made out for the accused to
          stand trial. A strong suspicion suffices. However,
          a strong suspicion must be founded on some
          material. The material must be such as can be
5
(2019) 16 SCC 547; 2019 INSC 568
Page 12 of 15
translated into evidence at the stage of trial. The
strong suspicion cannot be the pure subjective
satisfaction based on the moral notions of the
Judge that here is a case where it is possible that
the accused has committed the offence. Strong
suspicion must be the suspicion which is
premised on some material which commends
itself to the court as sufficient to entertain the
prima facie view that the accused has committed
the offence.
24. Undoubtedly,       this   Court   has     in
Suresh
Budharmal          Kalani [Suresh           Budharmal
Kalani v. State of Maharashtra
, (1998) 7 SCC 337],
taken the view that confession by a co-accused
containing incriminating matter against a person
would not by itself suffice to frame charge against
it. We may incidentally note that the Court has
relied   upon    the    judgment      of    this   Court
in Kashmira     Singh v. State   of   M.P. [Kashmira
Singh v. State of M.P., (1952) 1 SCC 275]. We
notice that the observations, which have been
relied upon, were made in the context of an
appeal which arose from the conviction of the
appellant therein after a trial. The same view has
been followed undoubtedly in other cases where
Page 13 of 15
the question arose in the context of a conviction
      and an appeal therefrom.
However, in
Suresh
      Budharmal        Kalani [Suresh       Budharmal
      Kalani v. State of Maharashtra
, (1998) 7 SCC 337],
      the Court has proceeded to take the view that
      only on the basis of the statement of the co-
      accused, no case is made out, even for framing a
      charge.”
                                (underline supplied)
12.   As noted hereinbefore, the sole material available
against the appellant is the confession statement of the
co-accused viz., accused No.1, which undoubtedly
cannot translate into admissible evidence at the stage of
trial and against the appellant.         When that be the
position, how can it be said that a prima facie case is
made out to make the appellant to stand the trial. There
can be no doubt with respect to the position that standing
the trial is an ordeal and, therefore, in a case where there
is no material at all which could be translated into
evidence at the trial stage it would be a miscarriage of
justice to make the person concerned to stand the trial.
13.   In the said circumstances and in view of the settled
position of law stated and reiterated by this Court, the
Page 14 of 15
impugned judgment is liable to be interfered with and
the appeal is liable to be allowed.
14.   Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the
impugned order dated 14.09.2022 passed by the High
Court of Madras in CRLRC No.1258 of 2022 filed against
the order dated 26.07.2022 passed by the ADJ in CMP
No.586 of 2020 are quashed and set aside.             As a
necessary sequel, the appellant who is accused No.13 in
CC No.43 of 2020 pending on the files of learned
Additional District Judge-Special Court under
Essential
Commodities Act
Cases, Coimbatore is discharged from
the said case, by allowing the prayer of appellant for
discharge.
15.   Application(s),   if   any,   stands   disposed     of,
accordingly.
……………………, J.
(C.T. Ravikumar)



                                      ……………………, J.
(Rajesh Bindal)
New Delhi;
December 19, 2024
Page 15 of 15