[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Tarun Dhameja vs Sunil Dhameja on 6 December, 2024
Author:
Sanjay Kumar
Bench:
Sanjay Kumar
REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
2024 INSC 973
                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO.14005 OF 2024
                                      (arising out of SLP(C) No. 16377/2024)

        TARUN DHAMEJA                                                            .....      APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS

        SUNIL DHAMEJA & ANR.                                                     .....      RESPONDENT(S)


                                                             O R D E R
Leave granted.
In the present case, the arbitration clause in the Deed of

        Partnership dated 16.07.2016 reads as under: -
“23. Arbitration
                                      That if at any time either during the
                                      continuance of the partnership or after the
                                      retirement of any partner, any dispute or
                                      difference shall arise between the partners
                                      or their respective heirs or any one claiming
                                      through or under them, the same shall be
                                      referred to arbitration.    Arbitration shall
                                      be   optional  &   the  arbitrator   will  be
                                      appointed by partners with their mutual
                                      consent.   In any case of dispute arise then
                                      the Jurisdiction of Indore Civil Court shall
                                      be applicable & acceptable by the partners.”

                            In our opinion, it cannot be said that the arbitration clause

        is               optional    in   the     sense      that       the   arbitration    clause   is   non-
existent or that the matter would be referred to arbitration only

        if all the parties to the dispute agree to refer the dispute to

        arbitration.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
In
Vidya    Drolia        v.    Durga       Trading      Corpn.1
,   this     Court
   Deepak Guglani
   Date: 2024.12.12
   20:56:07 IST
        delineated
   Reason:
the   issue    of     interpretation         and    construction     of   an

        1 (2021) 2 SCC 1.
1
arbitration clause and referred to the following observations in

Fili Shipping Co. Ltd. v. Premium Nafta Products Ltd.2:
“6. In approaching the question of construction, it
             is therefore necessary to inquire into the purpose
             of the arbitration clause. As to this, I think there
             can be no doubt. The parties have entered into a
             relationship, an agreement or what is alleged to be
             an agreement or what appears on its face to be an
             agreement, which may give rise to disputes. They
             want those disputes decided by a tribunal which they
             have chosen, commonly on the grounds of such matters
             as its neutrality, expertise and privacy, the
             availability of legal services at the seat of the
             arbitration and the unobtrusive efficiency of its
             supervisory law. Particularly in the case of
             international contracts, they want a quick and
             efficient adjudication and do not want to take the
             risks of delay and, in too many cases, partiality,
             in proceedings before a national jurisdiction.”
Vidya   Drolia
(supra)   further   referred   to   the   judgment   in
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Narbheram Power & Steel (P) Ltd.3
to

hold:
“150. In Narbheram Power & Steel (P) Ltd. [Oriental
             Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Narbheram Power & Steel (P)
             Ltd., (2018) 6 SCC 534], this Court while dealing
             with the arbitration clause in the insurance
             agreement, has held that the arbitration clause
             should be strictly construed, relying on the
             principles of strict interpretation that apply to
             insurance contracts. These observations have been
             repeated in other cases.
151. What is true and applicable for men of commerce
             and business may not be equally true and apply in
             case of laymen and to those who are not fully aware
             of the effect of an arbitration clause or had little
             option but to sign on the standard form contract.
Broad or narrow interpretations of an arbitration
             agreement can, to a great extent, effect coverage of
             a retroactive arbitration agreement. Pro-arbitration
             broad    interpretation,    normally   applied    to
             international     instruments,     and    commercial
             transactions is based upon the approach that the
             arbitration clause should be considered as per the

2 2007 UKHL 40.
3 (2018) 6 SCC 534.
2
true contractual language and what it says, but in
               case of doubt as to whether related or close
               disputes   in  the   course   of  parties'   business
               relationship   is   covered   by  the   clause,   the
               assumption is that such disputes are encompassed by
               the   agreement.   The   restrictive   interpretation
               approach on the other hand states that in case of
               doubt the disputes shall not be treated as covered
               by the clause. Narrow approach is based on the
               reason that the arbitration should be viewed as an
               exception to the court or judicial system. The third
               approach is to avoid either broad or restrictive
               interpretation and instead the intention of the
               parties as to scope of the clause is understood by
               considering the strict language and circumstance of
               the case in hand. Terms like “all”, “any”, “in
               respect of”, “arising out of”, etc. can expand the
               scope and ambit of the arbitration clause. Connected
               and incidental matters, unless the arbitration
               clause suggests to the contrary, would normally be
               covered.
152. Which approach as to interpretation of an
               arbitration agreement should be adopted in a
               particular case would depend upon various factors
               including the language, the parties, nature of
               relationship, the factual background in which the
               arbitration agreement was entered, etc. In case of
               pure commercial disputes, more appropriate principle
               of interpretation would be the one of liberal
               construction as there is a presumption in favour of
               one-stop adjudication.”

      The first portion of the arbitration clause is clear and

states that, at any time during the continuance of the partnership

or   after     the    retirement      of     any     partner,    if    any    dispute   or

difference arises between the partners or their respective heirs or

anyone    claiming       from     them,      the     same     shall    be    referred   to

arbitration.         Therefore,      the     legal     representatives        or   anyone

claiming through a partner is entitled to invoke the arbitration

clause.   In    the     present      case,    the     legal    representative      of   the

deceased partner, Yeshwant Boolani, invoked the arbitration clause.
Reliance        placed    on   the     second    portion    of   the    arbitration
3
clause, which states that if any dispute arises, the arbitration

shall be optional and the Arbitrator will be appointed by the

partners with their mutual consent, is not to be read in isolation

but   in   the     context    of    the     earlier     portion   of   the     arbitration

clause. This means that the arbitration clause can be invoked by an

aggrieved party who wants to take recourse to arbitration. To this

extent there is mutual agreement. Thereupon, the arbitrator can be

appointed     by     mutual    consent          of    all   parties.    This    does    not

obliterate or write off the arbitration clause. In terms of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996
,4 where parties cannot agree

upon a common name as to who will act as an arbitrator, the court

can appoint the arbitral tribunal. The arbitration clauses have to

be read in a pragmatic manner. The intent of the parties while

executing the arbitration clause in the Partnership Deed is clear.
The    learned    counsel          for   the    respondents     relied    upon   two

judgments of this Court in
Wellington Associates Ltd. v. Mr. Kirit

Mehta5
and
Jagdish Chander v. Ramesh Chander & Ors.6 In
our opinion,

the facts of these cases are entirely different and the arbitration

clauses      relied    upon        were    differently       worded.
In
Wellington

Associates Ltd.
(supra), the proceedings were under the
Arbitration

Act, 1940
.
In view of the above discussion, the impugned judgment is set

aside and the appeal is allowed. The petition under
Section 11(6)
of the A&C Act, filed by the present appellant, Tarun Dhameja, the

legal representative of the deceased partner, Yeshwant Boolani,

4 For short, “the A&C Act.”
5 (2000) 4 SCC 272.
6 (2007) 5 SCC 719.
4
will be treated as allowed.
The Coordinator/Chairman of the Madhya Pradesh Arbitration

Centre or the Arbitration Centre attached to the High Court of

Madhya Pradesh at Indore, as the case may be, will appoint an

Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes inter-se the parties. The

learned Arbitrator will file his/her declaration under
Section 12
of the A&C Act within 15 days from the date of appointment. The

fees of the learned Arbitrator will be fixed by the said Centre or

will be paid as per the Fourth Schedule to the A&C Act, as may be

applicable.
We clarify that we have not made any comments on the merits

of the claims and contentions raised by the parties.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
..................CJI.
(SANJIV KHANNA)



                                               ..................J.
                                                     (SANJAY KUMAR)
NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 06, 2024.
5