[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rajesh Kumar vs National Insurance Co. Ltd on 17 December, 2024
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
2024 INSC 993                                                                REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 14615-14616/2024
                     SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NOS. 2219-2220 OF 2020


             RAJESH KUMAR                                                  ...APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS


             NATIONAL INSURANCE CO. LTD.                                …RESPONDENT(S)



                                                   JUDGMENT
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             The present appeals challenge the order dated 16.07.2019 in

                            Revision Petition Nos. 878-879/2019 passed by the National

                            Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission,1 which had

                            allowed the respondent’s appeal and reduced the amount of

                            payable insurance. The appellant here is the consumer who

                            sought   that    the   respondent-insurer   release   the   entire
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
INDU MARWAH
insurance amount in his favour. The District Consumer
   Date: 2024.12.17
   17:30:27 IST
   Reason:
1 Hereinafter, referred to as the ‘National Commission’.
1
Disputes Redressal Commission2 had allowed the complaint

      partly, whereas the State Consumer Disputes Redressal

      Commission3 modified it and allowed the complaint in full. The

      respondent then approached the National Commission,

      resulting in the impugned order. The brief facts required for

      the disposal of these appeals are as follows.
3.    The appellant had purchased a Private Car Insurance Policy

      bearing Policy No. 420503/31/12/6100000851 from the

      respondent for a vehicle he owned. This policy was applicable

      for the period 02.07.2012 to 01.07.2013 and it served to

      compensate the appellant in case the insured vehicle met with

      an accident. The maximum sum that could be claimed from

      the respondent was the ‘Insured Declared Value’, which was

      fixed at Rs. 5,02,285/-. While this policy was in force, the

      appellant met with an accident on 25.03.2013 while he was

      driving the said vehicle and a cow suddenly turned up before

      it. In an attempt to avoid the animal, he made a sudden turn

      which caused his car to turn upside down and fall in a ditch.




2 Hereinafter, referred to as the ‘District Commission’.

3 Hereinafter, referred to as the ‘State Commission’.
2
4.   At the time of the accident, the appellant had a co-passenger

     along with him. While both the occupants of the car had

     suffered some injuries, the appellant felt that the co-passenger

     needed immediate attention. The appellant rushed the co-

     passenger to a hospital, leaving the car capsized in the ditch.

     In this state, one of the wires in the car short-circuited, which

     set the car on fire and it was damaged substantially. While the

     appellant lodged an FIR on the same day, he wrote to the

     respondent only on 28.03.2013. The respondent appointed a

     surveyor, who assessed the damage to be Rs. 53,543.97/- but

     stated that the damage occurred due to the appellant’s

     omission to take care of the vehicle. Accordingly, the

     respondent denied the insurance claim citing delay in the

     intimation and on having left the vehicle unattended, exposing

     it to further damage.
5.   The appellant had approached the District Commission

     claiming Rs. 5,02,285/- being the insured value of the vehicle.

     Having   considered     the   matter   in   detail,   the   District

     Commission held that the delay in intimating the insurer was

     caused due to the appellant’s attempts to rescue his co-

     passenger and that, by itself, cannot be fatal to the insurance
3
claim. The Commission also found that the appellant’s claim

     was genuine and it is evidenced by prompt reporting to the

     police. After a detailed examination, the District Commission

     held that even assuming the short-circuiting could have been

     avoided by monitoring the vehicle, the appellant would still be

     entitled to insurance amount on a non-standard basis, that is,

     with minimal deduction. Hence, it partly allowed the complaint

     by its order dated 09.11.2016 directing the respondent to

     release 75% of the insurance amount, i.e., Rs. 3,76,713/-.
6.   Aggrieved, both the parties filed cross-appeals before the State

     Commission. The State Commission allowed the appeal of the

     appellant fully and directed the release of the entire insured

     sum of Rs. 5,02,285/- with 9% interest from the date of filing

     the complaint till actual realization.
7.   The insurance company, the respondent herein, filed a

     revision petition under
Section 21(b)
of the Consumer

     Protection Act, 1986 before the National Commission. By the

     order impugned before us, the National Commission partly

     allowed the appeal and reduced the insurance amount to just

     Rs. 53,543/-. While upholding the findings of the District and

     State Commissions to be correct in finding the delay in
4
intimation not being fatal and also that the claim of the

     accident was promptly reported to the police, the Commission,

     however proceeded to rely on Condition no. 4 of the policy to

     reduce the insurance payable. As per Condition No.4, the

     vehicle could not have been left unattended by an insured and

     if further damage is done because the vehicle is unattended

     and proper precaution is not taken, then claim is beyond the

     insurance cover. In the facts of the case, the commission came

     to the conclusion that the damage due to the short-circuiting

     was ‘damage following the accident’ and caused squarely due

     to the vehicle being unattended. Hence, it held that the

     damage due to short-circuiting was not payable and the only

     amount that needed to be paid by the respondent was the

     damage attributed solely to the accident on 25.03.2013, and

     not to the short-circuiting following the accident.
8.   Challenging the above referred reasoning and conclusions of

     the National Commission, the appellant filed the present

     appeals. We have heard Mr. Avinash Sharma, Ld. Counsel

     appearing for the appellant and Mr. Abhishek Kumar, Ld.

     Counsel appearing for the respondent.
5
9.   Mr. Sharma submitted that the National Commission went

     beyond the scope of its revisional jurisdiction and relied on the

     precedents in Momna Gauri v. Scooter India Ltd.,4 and
Rubi

     Chandra Dutta v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd.5
. He further

     submitted that in cases of insurance pertaining to motor

     vehicle accidents, the liability of the insurer must be

     interpreted strictly.
10. On the other hand, Mr. Abhishek Kumar, Ld. Counsel

     appearing for the respondent submitted that the National

     Commission had correctly exercised its revisional jurisdiction

     in the present case. He submitted that the courts below

     disregarded the survey report, which is patently erroneous. As

     for whether the National Commission’s was justified in

     interfering with the concurrent findings, he submitted that the

     District Commission also found that the vehicle was left

     unattended by the appellant however, the State Commission

     did not answer the question as to why the vehicle was left

     exposed to further damage for a period of three days. He would

     therefore submit that interference in the revisional jurisdiction




4 (2014) 13 SCC 307.
5 (2011) 11 SCC 269.
6
against the concurrent findings is fully justified. He also

      argued that the National Commission correctly applied

      Condition No. 4 of the policy in excluding the damage caused

      by the short-circuiting.
11. Analysis: We have given the matter our anxious consideration

      and considered the submissions of both the sides carefully.
Section 21(b)
6
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 vests the

      National Commission with revisionary jurisdiction. It allows

      the National Commission to invoke the same if the State

      Commission has exercised a jurisdiction not given to it by law,

      or has failed to exercise it at all, or has exercised the same but

      with illegally or with material irregularity.
12. On a careful scrutiny of the records of the case, it is seen that

      both the District and State Commissions had reached a

      concurrent finding about whether the delay in intimation to

      the respondent was justified. Both held that this delay was


6 “21. Jurisdiction of the National Commission.—

Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the National Commission shall have jurisdiction—
(a) to entertain—
(i) complaints where the value of the goods or services and compensation, if any, claimed
         exceeds rupees one crore; and
(ii) appeals against the orders of any State Commission; and
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute which is pending
before or has been decided by any State Commission where it appears to the National
Commission that such State Commission has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or
has failed to exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or has acted in the exercise of its jurisdiction
illegally or with material irregularity.”
7
justifiable and not fatal to the insurance claim. Both the courts

    had also reached the finding that the damage took place in two

    phases: (a) once when the vehicle fell into a ditch and capsized;

    and (b) when the short-circuiting took place due to the car

    remaining in that state.
13. In our opinion, the National Commission could not have

    interfered with pure finding of fact arrived at by the District

    and    State   Commissions       while   exercising   revisional

    jurisdiction. It is unclear as to how the National Commission

    perceived that the State Commission exercised jurisdiction not

    vested in it or has failed to exercise jurisdiction vested in.

    There is nothing to indicate in the decision of the National

    Commission as to whether there is any illegality in the

    approach adopted by the State Commission or that it had

    acted with material irregularity.
14. The other ground that the respondent has raised before us is

    that the survey report was disregarded by the District and

    State Commissions but the National Commission has correctly

    examined and relied on it. This submission cannot be

    accepted, since the State Commission had examined the

    survey report in detail and in fact found it to be lacking. It
8
stated that the surveyor’s claim that the vehicle was left

     unattended cannot be accepted since the appellant had

     justifiable reasons for the same. Furthermore, the finding of

     the surveyor that the short-circuiting was caused by the

     appellant himself was not based on any evidence.
15. This Court had the occasion to examine the scope and ambit

     of jurisdiction of the National Commission while exercising

     revisional jurisdiction.
In
Sunil Kumar Maity v. State Bank of

     India & Ors.,7
it was held that the conditions
laid down in
Section 21(b)
are the only parameters under which a revision

     may be invoked. If a document has already been considered

     and rejected by the State Commission, a revision does not lie

     merely because the National Commission has a different view

     on the same.
Similarly, in
Rajiv Shukla v. Gold Rush Sales &

     Services Ltd.,8
it was laid down that in cases where the courts

     below have reached findings on facts, the jurisdiction of

     revision is very limited and must be invoked only when there

     is a patent illegality in the findings.
In
Rubi Chandra
(supra) it




7 2022 SCC OnLine SC 77.
8 (2022) 9 SCC 31.
9
was held that even if no patent error, the revisional jurisdiction

    may be invoked in a case of gross miscarriage of justice.
16. In the present case, no miscarriage of justice is made out by

    the respondent. The State Commission has addressed all the

    issues raised before it and found the delay in intimation to be

    reasonable and that the insurance claim is payable on the

    damage due to the accident as well as the short-circuiting. The

    State Commission also examined the genuineness of the

    accident’s claim by considering the police report and discarded

    the surveyor’s report for lack of evidence. It then directed the

    respondent to pay the entire insured sum giving its reasons

    for the same. Hence, the appellant is correct in stating that the

    National Commission has transgressed its jurisdiction by

    interefering with the State Commission’s order.
17. The approach of the State Commission is also correct in

    interpreting and disapplying Condition no. 4 of the insurance

    policy. Condition No.4 is reproduced hereinbelow for ready

    reference:
“ […]
4. The insured shall take all reasonable steps to safeguard
        the vehicle from loss or damage and to maintain it in
        efficient condition and the company shall have at all times
        free and full access to examine the vehicle or any part
        thereof or any driver or employee of the insured. In the event
        of any accident or breakdown, the vehicle shall not be left
10
unattended without proper precautions being taken to
           prevent further damage or loss and if the vehicle be driven
           before the necessary repairs are effected any extension of
           the damage or any further damage to the vehicle shall be
           entirely at the insured's own risk.
[…]”
18.
In
TEXCO Marketing Pvt. Ltd. v. TATA AIG General Insurance

     Co. Ltd.9
, this Court explained the principles of interpreting

     and applying exclusionary clauses in insurance policy.

     Condition No. 4 merely prescribed that in the event of any

     accident, the vehicle shall not be left unattended without

     proper precaution being taken. While interpreting such a

     clause the Court/Commission or Tribunal will see whether the

     said obligation has been complied with reasonably or not. The

     context in which accident occurs and the circumstances that

     prevailed at the time of accident are extremely important to

     conclude whether the insured has taken reasonable care or

     not. The facts of the present case are amply clear that the

     appellant was acting under compelling circumstances when he

     had to take his co-passenger to a hospital immediately as his

     condition was precarious. It is not disputed that the co-

     passenger had also succumbed to the injury. It is also difficult

     to imagine that how he could have prevented short-circuiting


9 (2023) 1 SCC 428.
11
of the vehicle which had fallen into a ditch. We are of the

        opinion that the State Commission has come to a correct

        conclusion that Condition No.4 would not apply in the facts

        and circumstances of the case. In any event, the respondent

        has not explained as to how the unavailability of the appellant

        during the said period has led to further damage of the vehicle

        and that burden heavily lies on the respondent and the same

        was not discharged10.
19. As regards the delay in intimation is concerned, we may refer

        to the decision of this Court in
Om Prakash v. Reliance General

        Insurance & Anr.,11
where it was held that the delay may be

        condoned if it is properly explained.
20. Conclusion: For the reasons stated above, we allow the

        present appeals and set aside the impugned order dated

        16.07.2019 passed by the National Commission in Revision

        Petition Nos. 878-879/2019 and restore the judgment and

        order of the State Commission directing the insurer to release

        the entire insured declared value of Rs. 5,02,285/- to the

        appellant with 9% interest from the date of the consumer

        complaint till the date of realization.
10
National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Ishar Das Madan Lal
, (2007) 4 SCC 105
11 (2017) 9 SCC 724.
12
21. There shall be no order as to costs.
………………………………....J.
                          [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]



                                     ………………………………....J.
                                         [SANDEEP MEHTA]

NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 17, 2024.
13