[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Uttar Pradesh vs Suresh Chandra Tewari on 17 December, 2024
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
1


2024 INSC 989                                                      REPORTABLE
                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.         OF 2024
             (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.20021 OF 2022)



             STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ANR.                   …APPELLANT(S)

                                              Versus

             SURESH CHANDRA TEWARI & ORS.                    …RESPONDENT(S)


                                         JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
1.                 Leave granted.
2.                 Vide The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings

                    Act, 1960 in the State of Uttar Pradesh the land over and above

                    a certain limit was to be declared surplus and was then to vest

                    with the State.
The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on Land

                    Holdings Act, 1960
as well as the earlier
Uttar Pradesh

                    Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950
were enacted
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Nirmala Negi
Date: 2024.12.17
16:50:25 IST
Reason:
in the State of U.P. immediately after the independence of the
2
Country with this purpose. We must not forget that one of the

main commitments of the leaders during the freedom struggle

was that the wide disparity and inequality in distribution of land

will be changed for the better and abolition of Zamindari and

placing a ceiling on land, would be a step towards this goal

towards the redistribution of land, based on the principles of

equity and justice. Since land was in List II i.e., the State List

under the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India, these

legislations regarding land reforms were to be made by the

States, and this was done not just in U.P. but throughout the

country.
Consequently, different States brought about the legislations

in their Sates, all aimed at land reforms and redistribution of

land where one of the principal elements was putting a surplus

on the land holding, the declaration of the surplus land and

redistribution of this surplus land to those who were landless

and marginalised farmers.
The Uttar Pradesh Imposition of

Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1960
(hereinafter referred to as the

‘Act of 1960’) and the purpose of its enactment has to be seen in

this context.
3
3.   Out of the various provisions in the 1960 Act,
Section 9
and
Section 10
are important here for our purposes, which are as

     under :-
“9. General notice to tenure-holders holding land in
          excess of ceiling area for submission of statement in
          respect thereof -
— [(1)] As soon as may be, after the date of
                enforcement of this Act, the Prescribed
                Authority shall, by general notice, published
                in the Official Gazette, call upon every
                tenure-holder holding land in excess of the
                ceiling area applicable to him on the date of
                enforcement of this act, to submit to him
                within 30 days of the date of publication of
                the notice, a statement in respect of all his
                holdings in such form and giving such
                particulars as may be prescribed. The
                statement shall also indicate the plot or plots
                for which he claims exemption and also
                those which he would like to retain as part of
                the ceiling area applicable to him under the
                provisions of this Act. ]
                [(2) As soon as may be after the enforcement
                of the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling on
                Land Holdings (Amendment) Act, 1972, the
                prescribed authority shall, by like general
                notice, call upon every tenure-holder holding
                land in excess of the ceiling area applicable
                to him on the enforcement of the said Act, to
                submit to him within 50 days of publication
                of such notice, a statement referred to in
                sub-section (1).
[Provided that at any time after October 10,
                1975, the Prescribed Authority may, by
4
notice, call upon any tenure-holder holding
land in excess of the ceiling area applicable
to him on the said date, to submit to him
within thirty days from the date of service of
such notice a statement referred to in sub-
section (1) or any information pertaining
thereto. ]
 [ (2-A) Every tenure-holder holding land in
excess of the ceiling area on January 24,
1971, or at any time thereafter who has not
submitted the statement referred to in sub-
section (2) and in respect of whom no
proceedings under this act is pending on
October 10, 1975 shall, within thirty days
from the said date furnish to the Prescribed
Authority a statement containing particulars
of all land -
(a) held by him and the members of his
family on January 24, 1971 ;
(b) acquired or disposed of by him or by
members of his family between January 24,
1971 and October 10, 1975. ]
(3) Where the tenure-holder’s wife holds any
land which is liable to be aggregated with the
land held by the tenure-holder for purposes
of determination of the ceiling area, the
tenure-holder shall, along with his statement
referred to in sub-section (1), also file the
consent of his wife to the choice in respect of
the plot or plots which they would like to
retain as part of the ceiling area applicable to
them and where his wife’s consent is not so
obtained, the prescribed authority shall
cause the notice under sub-section (2) of
Section 10
to be served on her separately.]
5
10. Notice to tenure holders failing to submit a
     statement or submitting an incomplete or incorrect
     statement -
(1) In every case where a tenure-holder fails
          to submit a statement or submits an
          incomplete or incorrect statement, required
          to be submitted under
Section 9
, the
          Prescribed Authority shall, after making
          such enquiry as he may consider necessary
          either by himself or by any person
          subordinate to him, cause to be prepared a
          statement containing such particulars as
          may be prescribed. The statement shall in
          particular indicate the land, if any, exempted
          under 2[Section 6] and the plot --- proposed
          to be declared as surplus land.
(2) the Prescribed Authority shall thereupon
          cause to be served upon every such tenure-
holder in such manner as may be prescribed,
          a notice together with a copy of the statement
          prepared under sub-section (1) calling upon
          him to show cause within a period specified
          in the notice, why the statement be not taken
          as correct. The period specified shall not be
          less than ten days from the date of service of
          the notice”
Since the respondents did not submit a statement in terms of
Section 9
, the Prescribed Authority prepared a statement taking

into consideration the entire land of the tenure holder and then

a notice was issued under
Section 10(2)
of the Act of 1960 to the

main recorded land owner i.e., Shri Hari Shankar Tiwari on

16.03.1974 by the Prescribed Authority as to why from his large
6
land holding a portion be not declared as surplus. Late Shri Hari

Shankar Tiwari (father of the present respondent no.1) filed his

objections wherein he stated that there has been a family

settlement which was arrived at between the parties way back in

the year 1967 and according to this family settlement, shares of

all the family members have already been determined. Moreover,

this settlement has also been reduced to writing way back in the

year 1969 and in the year 1970 one of the sons of Late Shri Hari

Shankar Tiwari had also instituted a suit in the Court of Civil

Judge, Junior Division in respect of non-agricultural properties,

which were also then included in the memorandum of family

settlement. The said suit was decreed on 02.11.1970 and on the

basis of family settlement and memorandum dated 09.11.1969,

the land has been divided and share of each family member is

demarcated. A suit was also filed on 30.01.1971 for permanent

injunction for restraining Late Shri Hari Shankar Tiwari (father

of the respondent no.1) from interfering in the agricultural lands

on the basis of the family settlement. The suit was decreed on

09.08.1971. In other words, what was projected through family

settlement and court cases was that now each family member

has a separate share duly demarcated and therefore all of this
7
cannot be clubbed and taken as the holding of only one tenure

     holder i.e. Hari Shankar Tiwari for the purpose of declaration of

     surplus land.
The Prescribed Authority, however, after hearing all the

     objections came to the conclusion that the family settlement

     cannot be relied upon and passed an order in the year 1974

     declaring 37 Bigha 5 Biswa and 17.8 Biswansi on Late Hari

     Shankar Tiwari (father of the respondent no.1) as surplus under

     the provisions of the Act of 1960.
4.   Against the said order of the year 1974, an appeal was filed by

     Late Shri Hari Shankar Tiwari before the District Judge Hardoi,

     which was partly allowed by reducing the surplus land of late

     Hari Shankar Tiwari to 33 bigha 8 biswa and 14.8 biswansi and

     the file was sent back to the Prescribed Authority by an order

     dated 24.09.1975.    What weighed in with the District Judge,

     Hardoi was the fact that even though the land had been

     partitioned vide a Decree dated 09.08.1971 passed by the Ld.

     Munsiff, Hardoi, the partition was liable to be ignored and not

     taken into account for the purposes of imposition of ceiling in

     view of Explanation I to sub-section 7 of Section 5 of the 1960

     Act, which reads as under:
8
[5. Imposition of ceiling- (1) On and from the
commencement of the Uttar Pradesh
Imposition of Ceiling on Land Holdings
(Amendment) Act, 1972, no tenure-holder
shall be entitled to hold in the aggregate,
throughout Uttar Pradesh, any land in
excess of the ceiling area applicable to him.
………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………
(7) In determining the ceiling area applicable
to a tenure-holder, any partition of land
made after the twenty-fourth day of January,
1971 which but for the partition would have
been declared surplus land under this Act
shall be ignored and not taken into account:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section
shall apply to
(a) [ * * * * ]
(b) a partition of a holding made in a suit or
a proceeding pending on the said date :
Provided further that notwithstanding
anything contained in the preceding proviso,
the prescribed authority, if it is of opinion
that by collusion between the tenure-holder
and any other party to the partition, such
other party has been given a share which he
was no entitled to, or a larger share than he
was entitled to, may ignore such partition.
[Explanation I- If a suit is instituted after
the said date for declaration that a
partition of land has taken place on or
before the said date, then such
declaration shall be ignored and not be
taken into account, and it shall be deemed
that no partition has taken place on or
before the said date.]
                         (emphasis provided)
9
The institution of the Suit by Late Hari Shankar Tiwari was on

30.01.1971 i.e. after the cut-off date of 24.01.1971. This would

mean that in spite of the decree dated 09.08.1971, it is to be

deemed that no partition took place at all, in terms of sub-section

(7) of Section 5, read with the proviso and the explanation.
Upon remand, again by the order of the Prescribed Authority,

the land was declared as surplus. Against the declaration of this

surplus land, a writ petition was filed before the High Court of

Judicature at Allahabad, which was dismissed by the High Court

on 07.08.1978. The High Court reiterated the finding of the

District Judge that since the partition suit was instituted after

the cut-off date of 24.01.1971, the decree dated 09.08.1971 is

liable to be ignored. Against the judgment of the High Court, the

father of the respondent no.1 Late Shri Hari Shankar Tiwari

preferred a Special Leave Petition before this Court which was

subsequently dismissed as withdrawn. In other words, in the

first round of litigation the respondents had lost from all courts

including this Court (albeit by withdrawal of petition), and thus

claim based on family settlement, etc. stood rejected, and these

orders had attained a finality.
10
Late Shri Hari Shankar Tiwari (father of the respondent no.1)

     in fact gave his option on 23.07.1981 before the Prescribed

     Authority which was accepted by the Prescribed Authority and

     33 Biswa 8 Bigha and 14.8 Biswansi was declared as a surplus

     area out of plot no.1353.
5.   Meanwhile, not satisfied with the dismissal of the case right up

     to the Apex Court, an innovative ploy was devised, which is

     nothing short of an abuse of the process and has thus reached

     now to this Court. The present respondent no.1 (son of Late Hari

     Shankar Tiwari) moved an application on 23.04.1981 under
Section 11
of the Act of 1960 stating that they were joint holders

     of the land and they were not given any notice by the Prescribed

     Authority. It was said that the order passed by the Prescribed

     Authority in 1974 should be recalled, however, this objection of

     the respondent no.1 was rejected by the Prescribed Authority

     vide its order dated 14.09.1981.         The said order dated

     14.09.1981 was challenged by the respondent no.1 in an Appeal

     which was pending before the IVth Additional District Judge

     Hardoi and vide order dated 16.11.1981 the IVth Additional

     District Judge Hardoi accepted the appeal and set aside the order
11
of the Prescribed Authority and remanded the matter back to the

     Prescribed Authority.
6.   Now on this remand, the Prescribed Authority again issued a

     notice under
Section 10(2)
of the Act of 1960 to all the

     respondents and therefore, passed an order dated 23.09.1985

     holding that prior to cut off date, entire land shown in the notice

     belonged to Late Shri Hari Shankar Tiwari which had been

     partitioned through a private party settlement reduced to writing

     and through this family settlement the entire joint family,

     agricultural and non-agricultural land and property was divided

     by metes and bounds and since then each of the members of the

     erstwhile joint family have got their share separated, they ought

     to have been given a separate notice, which has not been given,

     as each of them were in exclusive possession of the property.
7.   Against the above order of the Prescribed Authority, the State

     filed an Appeal under
Section 13
of the Act of 1960 before the

     District Judge, Hardoi and due to the subsequent amendment in

     the Act of 1960, the Appeal was transferred to the Court of

     Additional Commissioner (Judicial), Lucknow Division, Lucknow

     for decision in Appeal. The Additional Commissioner (Judicial),

     Lucknow Division, Lucknow passed an order on 18.10.1994
12
holding that once the matter had been settled and had attained

     finality, it should not have been raked up again. The entire case

     of the respondents rests on a family settlement which has been

     disbelieved in the earlier round of litigation. This finding as we

     know was upheld right up to Supreme Court, or at least till the

     High Court, as we have seen the petition was withdrawn in the

     Supreme Court in the first round of litigation. In other words, the

     matter had attained finality. No benefit ought to have been given

     of this family settlement and therefore the appeal of the State

     was allowed. The order of the Prescribed Authority declaring the

     land to be surplus was upheld. Against this Order, respondent

     filed a Writ Petition before the High Court which has been

     allowed vide impugned order dated 21.02.2022 on the ground

     that after the family partition separate notice ought to have been

     given to each of the tenure holder and since it has not been given,

     the entire procedure initiated by the Prescribed Authority are

     vitiated and the High Court thus has set aside the order dated

     18.10.1994 of the Additional Commissioner (Judicial), Lucknow

     Division, Lucknow.
8.   According to us, the learned Single Judge of the High Court has

     not appreciated either the position of law or the facts in the case
13
as were required. Once the entire objection of Late Shri Hari

      Shankar Tiwari regarding the family settlement, etc. were

      rejected not only by all the authorities, but also by the High Court

      and then ultimately by this Court, where the Special Leave

      Petition itself was withdrawn, there was absolutely no occasion

      for starting a fresh round of litigation which were nothing less

      than a ruse and an abuse of the process of law, apart from being

      barred by Res Judicata.
9.    We are not surprised therefore that the order of the Additional

      Commissioner (Judicial), Lucknow Division, Lucknow in its order

      dated 18.10.1994 while allowing the appeal of the State had

      made a stringent comment on the Prescribed Authority, who

      ought not to have passed an order on 23.09.1985. The Additional

      Commissioner (Judicial) in his order has said that “this decision

      by the sub-ordinate court also raises question on the integrity of

      the learned Prescribed Authority”.
10.   In fact, we totally agree with the views of the Additional

      Commissioner that the entire mischief has been done by the

      Prescribed Authority in this matter, who should not have

      interfered in this matter. Now it is too late in the day to issue a

      notice for an order which was passed in the year 1985 by the
14
Prescribed Authority, though this is indeed a case where a

       departmental enquiry should have been instituted against the

       concerned officer.
11.    Be that as it may, the appeal is allowed and the order of the High

       Court dated 21.02.2022 is set aside.
12.    The District Magistrate, Hardoi is directed to immediately take

       possession of the surplus land as declared surplus (33 Biswa 8

       Bigha and 14.8 Biswansi) and let the same be distributed to the

       landless or in accordance with law and process which is now to

       be followed in such cases.
……...……….………………….J.
                                         [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]



                                         ..….....………………………….J.
                                         [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]

      New Delhi.
December 17, 2024.