[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Amar Sardar vs The State Of West Bengal on 12 December, 2024
REPORTABLE

                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
2024 INSC 1040                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.          /2024
                                        (@SLP (CRL.) No. 14976/2024)

                         AMAR SARDAR                                              APPELLANT(S)

                                                           VERSUS

                         THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL                              RESPONDENT(S)


                                                    J U D G M E N T
Leave granted.
The appellant herein is aggrieved by the judgment

                         dated 15.05.2024 passed in C.R.A. 111/2019 by the High

                         Court of Calcutta vis-à-vis not only on the merits of the

                         said judgment but also the approach of the High Court in

                         considering the Criminal Appeal filed by the appellant

                         herein.
The     appellant       was     charged   with      offences    under
Sections 376
,
511
,
354
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for

                         short “
IPC
”). The learned Additional District and Sessions

                         Judge,    Fast    Track,    3rd   Court,   Howrah   by    judgment   dated

                         07.01.2019 convicted the appellant herein and sentenced

                         him to rigorous imprisonment for a period of two years

                         with fine of Rs.2,000/- and in default simple imprisonment
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
RADHA SHARMA
for a period of one month with regard to
Section 354
of
   Date: 2024.12.21
   10:31:00 IST
   Reason:
the
IPC
, and also, sentenced him to rigorous imprisonment
1
for a period of seven years with fine of Rs.10,000/- and

in   default    simple    imprisonment          for   a    period   of   three

months for the offence punishable under
Sections 376
and
511
of the IPC. The sentences are to run concurrently.
Being aggrieved by the judgment and sentences imposed

by the Fast Track Court, the appellant herein preferred

C.R.A. 111/2019. By the impugned judgment, the High Court

has dismissed the appellant’s appeal and has sustained the

judgment of conviction and sentence passed by the Fast

Track Court. Hence, this appeal.
Learned    counsel       for       the   appellant    at    the    outset

submitted that on a reading of the impugned judgment, it

is   apparent   that     the   High       Court   has     not   independently

considered the evidence on record. As the High Court was

considering an appeal against                  conviction passed by the

Fast Track Court, the High Court ought to have considered

the evidence on record independently and passed a judgment

one way or the other in the appeal; however,                        instead a

reading of the judgment would indicate that the High Court

has simply reaffirmed the conviction and sentence imposed

by the Fast Track Court in the absence of any independent

reasoning given by the High Court.
In this regard, learned counsel for the appellant

pointedly drew our attention to the various portions of
2
the judgment and contended that the judgment is erroneous

owing to lack of any reasoning. He therefore, submitted

that impugned judgment may be set aside and relief may be

given to the appellant herein.
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent-State

supported the impugned judgment and submitted that the

High Court was after all sustaining the conviction and

sentence imposed by the Fast Track Court. Therefore the

High Court has considered whether the Fast Track Court was

justified in passing a judgment of conviction and imposing

the sentences. The High Court has considered the evidence

on record and thereafter analysis of the evidence of the

Fast Track Court and has rightly dismissed the appeal.

There is no merit in this appeal and hence, the same may

be dismissed.
We have considered the arguments advanced at the bar

in light of the impugned judgment and perused the material

on record. On a perusal of the impugned judgment, we note

that the judgment has been sub-divided into the following

sub-topics,     namely,   the   Appeal,   the   Prosecution,   the

Defence, the Evidence and Analysis of evidence which is

based on the Fast Track Court’s findings in the matter and

thereafter the appeal has been dismissed.
While hearing the appeals under
Section 374(2)
of the
3
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973 (for short, “
CrPC
”), the

High Court is exercising its appellate jurisdiction. There

shall be independent application of mind in deciding the

criminal appeal against conviction. It is the duty of an

appellate     court   to   independently   evaluate   the   evidence

presented and determine whether such evidence is credible.

Even if the evidence is deemed reliable, the High Court

must    further       assess   whether     the   prosecution     has

established its case beyond reasonable doubt. The High

Court though being an appellate Court is akin to a Trial

Court, must be convinced beyond all reasonable doubt that

the prosecution's case is substantially true and that the

guilt of the accused has been conclusively proven while

considering an appeal against a convication.
The necessity of this exercise arises from the fact

that a conviction curtails the personal liberty of the

accused in the incessant future. Hence, the High Court

must provide clear reasons for accepting the evidence on

record. Mere concurrence with the findings of the Trial

Court is insufficient unless supported by a well-reasoned

indepenent justification. As the first appellate court,

the    High   Court   is   expected   to   evaluate   the   evidence

including the medical evidence, statement of the victim,

statements of the witnesses and the defence’s version with
4
due care.
While the judgment need not be excessively lengthy,

it must reflect a proper application of mind to crucial

evidence.      Albeit     the       High     Court     does      not     have       the

advantage    to       examine    the       witnesses       directly,     the       High

Court shall, as an appellate Court, re-assess the facts,

evidence    on    record      and     findings       to     arrive      at    a    just

conclusion       in    deciding        whether       the     Trial      Court       was

justified in convicting the accused or not. We are also

cognizant of the large pendency of cases bombarding our

courts. However, the same cannot come in the way of the

Court’s solemn duty, particularly, when a person's liberty

is at stake.
This Court in State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Ambarish,

Criminal Appeal No 446 of 2021 held that while deciding a

criminal appeal on merits, the High Court is required to

apply its mind to the entirety of the case including the

evidence on the record before arriving at its conclusion.
In this regard, we may also refer to the orders passed by

this   Court      in
Shakuntala          Shukla     vs.      State    of       Uttar

Pradesh
, (
2021) 20 SCC 818 and State Bank of India vs.

Ajay Kumar Sood
, (2023) 7 SCC 282.
No doubt the impugned judgment has neatly sub-titled

various     aspects      of     the    case,     but       we    find    that       the
5
independent consideration of the evidence on record is

conspicuous by its absence inasmuch as ‘paragraphs 5 to

28’ record the oral evidence and also list the exhibits

which have been produced in the said case; however, the

said evidence has not been considered by the High Court so

as to ascertain whether the Fast Track Court was justified

in passing a judgment of conviction and sentencing the

appellant.       The analysis of the evidence is on the basis

of what the Fast Track Court had recorded and arrived at

its findings. The same has been reproduced in various sub-

paras and consequently, the appeal has been dismissed.

   We find that the High Court ought to have considered

the evidence on record in light of the arguments advanced

at the bar and thereafter ascertained whether the Fast

Track    Court    was    justified     in    passing    the   judgment    of

conviction       and    imposing   the      sentence.   The   same      being

absent in the impugned judgment, for that sole reason, we

set aside the same. We remand the matter to the High Court

and restore the CRA 111/2019 on the file of the High

Court. We request the High Court to rehear the appeal and

pass a fresh judgment, bearing in mind the observations we

have made above, in accordance with law.
The   appeal     is   allowed       and   disposed    of   in    the

aforesaid terms.
6
Learned    counsel         for       the   appellant     at    this       stage

submitted     that    the    appellant           had   the    benefit      of   bail

before   the    Fast      Track        Court      as   well    as    during       the

consideration        of   his     appeal         before      the    High    Court.

Therefore, this Court may pass an order of suspension of

sentence pending disposal of the appeal by the High Court.

We do not think at this stage, we could consider the said

contention, instead, we reserve liberty to the appellant

herein   to     make        an    appropriate          application         seeking

suspension of sentence, if so advised.
It is needless to observe that if such an application

is made, the same shall be considered as expeditiously as

possible and in accordance with law.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed

of.
……………………………………………………….,J.
(B.V. NAGARATHNA)


                                              …………………………………………………………….,J.
(NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH)


NEW DELHI;
DECEMBER 12, 2024
7
ITEM NO.31                 COURT NO.8              SECTION II-B

               S U P R E M E C O U R T O F     I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No(s). 14976/2024
[Arising out of final impugned judgment dated     15-05-2024 in CRA
No.111/2019 passed by the High Court at Calcutta]

AMAR SARDAR                                           Appellant(s)

                                  VERSUS

THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL                              Respondent(s)

(IA No. 149695/2024 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE IMPUGNED
JUDGMENT)

Date : 12-12-2024 This matter was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE B.V. NAGARATHNA
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE NONGMEIKAPAM KOTISWAR SINGH

For Appellant(s)    Mr. Ranjan Mukherjee, Adv.
Mr. Anindo Mukherjee, Adv.
Mr. Rameshwar Prasad Goyal, AOR
                    Ms. Aayushi, Adv.
For Respondent(s)   Mr. Srisatya Mohanty, Adv.
Ms. Astha Sharma, AOR
                    Mr. Abhijit Pattanaik, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R

          Leave granted.
The appeal is allowed and disposed of in terms of the

   signed reportable judgment.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed

   of.
(RADHA SHARMA)                                  (DIVYA BABBAR)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                          COURT MASTER (NSH)
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)
8