[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Geeta Dubey vs United India Insurance Co. Ltd on 18 December, 2024
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
2024 INSC 998                                                      REPORTABLE

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. ________ of 2024
                            (@ Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 8551 of 2024)


            GEETA DUBEY & ORS                                     APPELLANT(s)

                                                VERSUS

            UNITED INDIA INSURANCE
            CO. LTD. & ORS.                                     RESPONDENT(s)



                                             JUDGMENT
K.V. Viswanathan, J.
1.              Leave granted.
2.              The present appeal, filed by the claimants, assails the

            judgment and final order dated 24.08.2023 passed by the High

            Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur in Misc. Appeal No. 68 of

            2022. By the said appeal, the High Court, by a cryptic order, set
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2024.12.18
12:51:31 IST
Reason:
aside the award of the First Additional Motor Accident Claims
1
Tribunal, Maihar, District Satna, Madhya Pradesh dated

25.03.2021 (in short ‘MACT’). The MACT had, by the said

award, allowed the claim of appellant no. 1 and 2 herein, who are

the wife and son of the deceased Chakradhar Dubey and awarded

a compensation of Rs. 50,41,289/- against the respondents jointly

and severally.
3.   The only ground on which the High Court has set aside the

award is that the claimants have not adduced any evidence to

prove the aspect of the accident taking place with the vehicle

implicated in the case i.e. Truck bearing no. MP-19-HA-1197.

So holding, the appeal of the insurance company was allowed

and the award was completely set aside.
Brief facts :-
4.   According to the claimants, Chakradhar Dubey - the

deceased was posted as Assistant Post-Master, Post Office

Sarlanagar, Tehsil Maihar. The deceased was returning to his

house at Purani Basti, Maihar sitting in car bearing No. MP-19-
2
CB-5879 of his friend Narayan Das Tiwari, after his duty, on

18.06.2018. At about 08:15 PM, one kilometer ahead of Sonwari

Toll Plaza, respondent no. 2 herein, who was the driver of the

vehicle of respondent no. 3, while driving the vehicle, (a truck

bearing registration no. MP-19-HA-1197) in a rash and negligent

manner hit the car in which the deceased was sitting. As a result,

Chakradhar Dubey suffered serious injuries and his spine was

broken. He was admitted in Civil Hospital, Maihar for treatment.
5.   On 21.06.2018, the First Information Report in Crime No.

352 of 2018 was registered at Maihar Police Station under
Sections 279
and
337
of IPC. We have perused the First

Information Report and we find the following recorded therein:
“12. First Information contents:
I am a resident of Housing Board Colony, Mehar,
        Police Station Mehar. I was coming with my father
        Narayan Das Tiwari son of Indramani Tiwari, aged
        49 years, resident of Housing Board Colony Mehar,
        Chakradhar Dubey son of Late Liladhar Dubey, aged
        49 years, resident of Chaurasia Mohalla, Purani Basti
        Mehar and Bharatlal Tiwari from Sarlanagar at
        around 08:15 p.m. of 18/06/18 in my car No. U.V. MP
        19CB5879. As soon as we reached around 1 Km.
3
ahead of Sonwari Toll Plaza, an unknown truck came
        from behind in high speed and hit the car. As a result
        of which, the car overturned and badly damaged. Due
        to hit, injured Chakradhar Dubey sustained injuries
        on his waist, throat and shoulder and Narayan Das
        Tiwari sustained serious injuries on his left palm. The
        driver of the truck ran away taking the truck from
        there. The injured were taken to CHC Mehar in an
        auto and were admitted there. After taking treatment,
        I have come at police station to lodge the report today
        on 21.06.18. The report was registered for the
        offences punishable under
Section 279
,
337
IPC and
        investigation was taken up and handed over to beat
        incharge.”
                                         (Emphasis supplied)
6.   What is important to note is the FIR does mention material

particulars like time of the accident, the place of the accident and

also the fact that it was an unknown truck which had hit the car,

and about the injuries sustained by the deceased.
7.   The claim petition thereafter sets out that after obtaining

treatment at Maihar Civil Hospital, Chakradhar Dubey was

treated at Nagpur Arneja Institute of Cardiology Private Limited

from 19.06.2018 and when he did not recover, he was taken back

to Maihar, where he died on 28.06.2018.
4
8.   The claimant widow further avers that since she was busy

with the treatment and thereafter due to the death, the programs

relating thereto, she was not perfectly fit mentally to obtain

particulars and file a claim. The claimant widow states that on

being physically fit, she started collecting information about the

incident. She came to know that the accident was caused due to

the rash and negligent driving of respondent no. 2 who drove the

truck of respondent no. 3. The claimant widow gave the

information to the Superintendent of Police.
9.   It further transpires from the record that the police had

initially filed a closure report on 29.09.2018. However, thereafter

the claimant widow submitted an application stating that the

accident has been witnessed by Ashutosh @ Sonu Shukla, Kapil

Pandey and Janardan Paroha resident of Sarlanagar. The charge-

sheet avers that investigation was taken up again as per the order

of S.D.O.P. Maihar and the statement of Sonu Shukla S/o Ram

Lakhan was recorded along with statements of Janardan Paroha,

Kapil Pandey, Praful Dubey and Narayan Das Tiwari. It is stated
5
in the charge-sheet that as per their statements accident was

caused by the driver of the truck bearing no. MP-19-HA-1197 by

driving the truck in a rash and negligent manner and hitting the

car bearing No. MP-19-CB-5879; that Chakradhar Dubey, who

was sitting in the car had died during the course of treatment and

that the vehicle-truck bearing no. MP-19-HA-1197 was seized.

The truck was thereafter given on Supurdnama by the Court. The

charge-sheet states that on completion of investigation, Challan

No. 656/2019 dated 25.08.2019 was prepared and filed in the

court. In the charge-sheet, 20 witnesses are listed and R-2 Ajay

Kumar Saket S/o Harideen Saket was shown as accused.
10. The claimants made a claim for Rs. 59,30,000/- on the basis

that the deceased was 55 years of age and he was working as

Assistant Post Master on a salary of Rs. 7,76,820/- per annum.

A sum of Rs. 7,00,000/- was claimed towards compensation for

treatment; loss of income of Rs. 51,00,000/- and Rs. 1,00,000/-

towards mental and physical agony was claimed. In all, the

amount claimed was Rs. 59,30,000/-
6
11. The insurance company disputed the claim. Before the

MACT, PW-2 Sonu Shukla was examined as an eyewitness who

spoke about the accident having happened. The insurance

company examined Raj Kumar Kachhwah on their behalf. The

challan of the Criminal case was also perused by the MACT. The

MACT held that the statement of the eye-witnesses had not been

rebutted. It also recorded the following finding, particularly, on

the aspect of how no complaint was made about the involvement

of the alleged truck in an illegal manner in an accident:-
“16. It is not disclosed in the perspective of above
        investigation and above case laws that the said motor
        vehicle has been involved in the case in false manner,
        in that situation when any action or complaint is made
        to the higher police officer about involvement of the
        alleged truck in the case in illegal manner has been
        made by the opposite party Insurance Company.
        Therefore, it is found proved on the basis of analysis
        that Car No. U.V.M.P. 19 CB/5879 was hit from
        behind by the driver of Truck No. М.Р. 19 НА 1197
        on the date of accident while driving the said vehicle
        carelessly and negligently, as a result of which,
        Chakradhar Dubey who was sitting in the said car was
        seriously injured and had died. It is contended by
        Opposite Party No.3 that there was contributory
        negligence on the part of Car No. M.P. 19 C.D. 5879
        in which the deceased was sitting and contended that
        the accident took place due to the negligence of driver
7
of the said car but no oral and documentary evidence
        has been produced in this regard. Therefore, Issue No.
        1 is concluded in the affirmative and Issue Nos. 4 and
        5 are concluded in the negative.”
12. It will be noticed that one of the pleas of the insurance

company was that there was contributory negligence. Even the

insurance company did not dispute the factum of accident and

the factum of the death of the deceased Chakradhar Dubey. The

only dispute is about the involvement of the truck bearing no.

MP-19-HA-1197 on which the MACT found that there was

adequate evidence to show its involvement in the accident.

Thereafter, the MACT, after applying the appropriate multiplier,

awarded a compensation of Rs. 50,41,289/-.
13. The Insurance Company filed an appeal before the High

Court. The two grounds that were raised were about the denial of

the involvement of the truck bearing no. MP-19-HA-1197 and

the fact that the deceased was about 58 years of age and that the

multiplier of 9 ought to have been applied instead of 11. The

High Court has, by a very summary order, allowed the appeal.
8
14. We have heard Mr. Girijesh Pandey, learned counsel for the

appellants and Ms. Nanita Sharma, learned counsel for the

insurance company who have reiterated their respective

contentions. We have perused the records and also the written

submissions filed.
15. The only question that arises is, was the High Court

justified in setting aside the order of the MACT. The High Court,

in its cryptic order, has held as under:-
“After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going
      through the record, few things needs elaboration. Praful
      Dubey, PW-1 has though said in para 3 of his deposition
      that his mother had lost her mental balance at the time of
      the incident and his sister Pooja and Priyanka were
      residing in their in-laws house and he was studying at
      Indore pursuing his B.E., but it has not come on record
      that when author of the FIR is the occupant of the car
      namely Narayan Das Tiwari who was traveling in the car
      bearing No. M.P. No. 19 CB 5879 and he had lodged
      report against unknown vehicle and there is evidence of
      the star witness Sanu Shukla that he had visited house of
      the deceased after 8-10 days of the incident when
      Chakradhar Dubey had passed away, then it is not evident
      that why number of the offending vehicle was not given
      to the other relative including PW-1. There is no
      exp1aihition for this lacuna.
9
It is true as submitted by Shri Sanjay Kumar Kushwaha
      that Insurance Company did not lead any cogent evidence
      of any eye witness but the fact of the matter is that
      claimants were required to proof their own case. There is
      long delay of about ten months in pursuing the case. Date
      of accident i.e. 18.06.2018 is not disputed, date of taking
      statements on 20.04.2019 is also not disputed. There is a
      long gap often months in between.
Thus, when all these aspects are taken into consideration
      and also the fact that claimants never sought any
      investigation in regard to the CCTV footage or production
      of CCTV footage to prove the aspect of accident taking
      place from the vehicle which has been implicated in the
      present case i.e. truck bearing No. MP19-HA-1197,
      impugned award having being passed on misplaced
      sympathy and inappropriate appreciation of evidence
      available on record cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
Accordingly, impugned award is set aside. Appeal is
      allowed and disposed of.”
16. We are surprised that in a First Appeal filed under
Section

173
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, the High Court has made a

short shrift of the matter and by a summary order reversed the

detailed award passed by the MACT. An appeal under
Section

173
of the Motor Vehicles Act is in the nature of the First Appeal.

In our considered view, the least that is expected is a careful

marshalling of the oral and documentary evidence produced
10
before the MACT. Except for a fleeting reference to the evidence

of PW-2, there is no real discussion on the substance of his

deposition. What is matter of concern is that there is no reference

at all to Exh.P-1 final report, Exh.P-2 the First Information

Report, Exh.P-16 the seizure memo of the vehicle after the

issuance of
Section 133
notice under the
Motor Vehicles Act
and

also no discussion on the findings of the MACT.
17. It is well settled by several pronouncements of this Court

that an appeal under
Section 173
of the Motor Vehicles Act, is

essentially in the nature of the first appeal like
Section 96
of the

Civil Procedure Code. It has been held by this Court that the

High Court is under a legal obligation to decide all issues both

on    facts   and     law    after     appreciating    the   entire

evidence. [See
Sudarsan Puhan vs. Jayanta Ku. Mohanty and

Others
, (
2018) 10 SCC 552, Uttar Pradesh State Road

Transport Corporation vs. Mamta and Others
, (2016) 4 SCC

172 and National Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Naresh Kumar and
11
Others, (2000) 10 SCC 158]. This is a fortiori when the High

Court proposes to reverse the well-reasoned award.
18. We were initially considering whether the matter should be

remanded for fresh consideration by the High Court. However,

since the incident is of the year 2018, and already 6 years had

elapsed, we felt that any further delay will only compound the

agony of the already devastated family. Hence, we have

proceeded to analyse the facts ourselves.
19. Except for a bare assertion that the vehicle has been

wrongly involved, the insurance company which has setup a plea

of collusion has done nothing to make good its case. We find that

the judgment of the High Court is wholly untenable. We say so

for the following reasons.
20. Firstly, it is well settled that in claim cases, in case the

accident is disputed or the involvement of the vehicle concerned

is put in issue, the claimant is only expected to prove the same

on a preponderance of probability and not beyond reasonable
12
doubt. [See
Sajeena Ikhbal and Others, V. Mini Babu George

and Others
, (2024) SCC OnLine SC 2883].
We also deem it

appropriate to extract the following paragraphs from the

judgment of this Court in
Bimla Devi & Ors. V. Himachal Road

Transport Corporation & Ors.
, (2009) 13 SCC 530. Repelling

similar contentions raised challenging the accident and the

involvement of the vehicle in question, this Court held as

follows:
“14. Some discrepancies in the evidence of the claimant's
      witnesses might have occurred but the core question
      before the Tribunal and consequently before the High
      Court was as to whether the bus in question was involved
      in the accident or not. For the purpose of determining the
      said issue, the Court was required to apply the principle
      underlying the burden of proof in terms of the provisions
      of
Section 106
of the Evidence Act, 1872 as to whether a
      dead body wrapped in a blanket had been found at the spot
      at such an early hour, which was required to be proved by
      Respondents 2 and 3.
15. In a situation of this nature, the Tribunal has rightly
      taken a holistic view of the matter. It was necessary to be
      borne in mind that strict proof of an accident caused by a
      particular bus in a particular manner may not be possible
      to be done by the claimants. The claimants were merely to
      establish their case on the touchstone of preponderance of
13
probability. The standard of proof beyond reasonable
      doubt could not have been applied. For the said purpose,
      the High Court should have taken into consideration the
      respective stories set forth by both the parties.
16. The judgment of the High Court to a great extent is
      based on conjectures and surmises. While holding that the
      police might have implicated the respondents, no reason
      has been assigned in support thereof. No material brought
      on record has been referred to for the said purpose.”
21. Secondly, applying the test of preponderance of probability,

we find that the claimants have established their case that it was

the truck bearing registration no. MP-19-HA-1197 which was

involved in the accident with car bearing no. MP-19-CB-5879

wherein the deceased was travelling. We say so for the following

reasons:-
a. The accident occurred on 18.06.2018 and the FIR was

      lodged on 21.06.2018 clearly giving the date, time and the

      place where the accident happened. It was also mentioned that

      it was an unknown truck which came from behind in high

      speed and hit the car as at that point the claimants were
14
unaware of the number of the truck. It referred to the injuries

suffered by the deceased.
b. It is also beyond dispute that the husband of the claimant

no. 1, the deceased Chakradhar Dubey was treated at Nagpur

Arneja Institute of Cardiology Private Limited and he died on

28.06.2018.
c. The claimants have explained the delay by clearly stating

that after the death, they took time to regroup themselves and

set about investigating and collecting information about the

accident.
d. No sooner they obtained information, the claimant no. 1

submitted an application to the Superintendent of Police

giving the list of persons including the name of PW-2 Sonu

Shukla who had witnessed the accident.
e. Based on the application, the investigation which was

originally closed was taken up again as per the order of

S.D.O.P., Maihar and after recording the statements of

witnesses, a charge-sheet was filed for offences under
15
Sections 279, 337, 338 & 304A, and the case is still pending

against respondent no. 2- the driver.
f. It is also on record that after the application was given by

claimant no. 1, a notice under
Section 133
of the Motor

Vehicles Act was issued to the owner and the vehicle was

seized under Exh.P-16 by the police. It has also come on

record that the truck was thereafter given on supurdnama by

the court to the owner.
g. Sonu Shukla was examined as PW-2 and he has clearly

deposed that on 18.06.2018, when he was going from

Sarlanagar to Maihar with his colleague Kapil Pandey when

respondent no. 2, who was driving the truck bearing

registration no. MP-19-HA-1197 in a rash and negligent

manner, at around 08:15 PM hit the car bearing registration

no. MP-19-CB-5879 in which the deceased was travelling. No

doubt, the witness states that he gave the information to

claimant no. 1. The witness also states that he had taken

Chakradhar Dubey to Civil Hospital, Maihar and on the same
16
day informed the claimant’s family about the incident.

However, he states that he did not inform the police and went

back home. The witness admits that his statement was

recorded only on 20.04.2019. The witness, however, does not

mention that he mentioned the truck number to the family

when he conveyed the news of the accident. The witness was

cross-examined but he stood by his statement. The witness

also stated that on a specific question in cross that the front

part of the vehicle bearing registration no. MP-19-HA-1197

was of white colour and the body was of red colour and the

vehicle was of 12 wheels. The witness also stated that the truck

belonged to Sanjeev Kumar Vyasi and denied that the said

owner was his relative.
h. The insurance company examined Op.W.-1 Raj Kumar

Kachhwah who admitted that till the date of his deposition, no

information or complaint was given to the senior police

officers stating that an attempt is being made by the claimants

and the owner and driver of the vehicle to wrongly include the

vehicle bearing No. MP-19-HA-1197 in the case. The witness
17
also admitted that no steps to cancel the investigation of the

      police has been taken and no enquiry has been done into the

      veracity of the claim.
i. The MACT, on appreciation of the overall conspectus,

      particularly impressed by the fact that the insurance company

      did not lodge any complaint of collusion and about the

      involvement of the truck in an illegal manner concluded that

      it was truck bearing registration no. MP-19-HA-1197 which

      hit the car bearing no. MP-19-CB-5879 from behind.
22. Thirdly, the claimants having discharged the initial onus, if

the insurance company had a case that there was collusion

between the driver/owner of the truck and the claimants, it ought

to discharge that burden. It is candidly admitted by the witness

Raj Kumar Kachhwah that they had taken no steps in this regard.
23. As held in
Sajeena Ikhbal
(supra) and
Bimla Devi
(supra),

we are convinced that on the principle of preponderance of

probability, the claimants have established the involvement of
18
vehicle bearing registration no. MP-19-HA-1197. The insurance

company having set up a specific plea of collusion has not

established the same.
As was held in
Bimla Devi
(supra), here

too, we feel that there was no reason for the police to falsely

implicate the vehicle concerned in the matter and launch

prosecution against the driver. If the insurance company had

suspected collusion, they would have taken steps to file

appropriate complaints including moving the higher police

authorities or the court to order an investigation into the alleged

wrongful involvement of the vehicle. There is no case for the

insurance company that the police officer also colluded. The

investigation by the police has resulted in charge-sheet being

filed.
24. For all these reasons, we restore the findings of the MACT

that death of the claimant no.1’s husband was caused by the

driving of the truck bearing registration no. MP-19-HA-1197 by

respondent no. 2-Ajay Kumar in a rash and negligent manner at
19
about 08:15 PM on 18.06.2018, in a place one kilometer ahead

of Sonwari Toll Plaza at Maihar.
25. The only other point raised in the memo of appeal before

the High Court by the insurance company is that the deceased

was about 58 years of age and that the multiplier of 9 ought to

have been applied instead of 11. The High Court had no occasion

to discuss the same as it allowed the insurance company’s appeal

on the aspect of the vehicle not being involved in the accident.

Before us also, no arguments were advanced on the issue of the

wrong application of the multiplier. The MACT has relied on the

age, as mentioned in the postmortem report, as 55 years and has

applied the appropriate multiplier. The insurance company

claims that the school certificate and the Aadhar Card reveal the

date of birth of the deceased as 01.08.1960.
26. No evidence has been adduced by the insurance company

to show that the age was 58 years. The claimants have clearly

pleaded in the claim petition that the age of the deceased was 55
20
years and proved the same. Hence, we reject the contention of

the insurance company on this score also.
27. For the reasons stated above, the appeal is allowed. The

judgment of the High Court dated 24.08.2023 in MA No. 68 of

2022 is quashed and set aside and the award passed by the

MACT, Maihar, District Satna, Madhya Pradesh dated

25.03.2021 is restored. No order as to costs.
………........................J.
                                                [B.R. GAVAI]



                                     ……….........................J.
                                      [K. V. VISWANATHAN]

New Delhi;
18th December, 2024.
21