[Cites
13
, Cited by
59
]
Supreme Court of India
Scm Solifert Ltd. vs Competition Commission Of India on 17 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 48
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
Navin Sinha
,
Arun Mishra
REPORTABLE


                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                 CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION


                CIVIL  APPEAL NO(S). 10678 OF 2016

                                 
SCM SOLIFERT LIMITED & ANR.                             ..APPELLANT(S)

                                 VERSUS

COMPETITION COMMISSION OF INDIA                        ..RESPONDENT(S)




                            J U D G M E N T 




ARUN MISHRA, J.
1.    The   appellants   SCM   Solifert   Limited   and   another   are   in

appeal under
section 53T
of the Competition Act, 2002 (hereinafter

referred  to   as  “the  Act”) as  against the  final  judgment and  order

dated   30.08.2016   passed   in   Appeal   No.59   of   2015   by   the
1
Competition Appellate Tribunal thereby affirming the order passed

by the Competition Commission of India under
section 43A
of the

Act.
2.      The   Competition   Commission   of   India   initiated   the

proceedings against the appellants on whom due to the failure to

notify a proposed combination as required under
section 6(2)
of the

Act, the penalty of Rupees Two crores was imposed under
section

43A
of   the   Act.   On   3.07.2013,   the   appellants   had   purchased

2,89,91,150 shares of Mangalore Chemicals and Fertilisers Limited

(in   short   referred   to   as   “the   MCFL”)   constituting   24.46   paid   up

share capital of the MCFL on the Bombay Stock Exchange.
3.      The first transaction of the acquisition of the shares was by

way of the purchase of shares conducted through bulk and block

deals. It was followed by press release dated 3.7.2013 by Deepak

Fertiliser   and   Petrochemicals   Corporation   Limited   filed   with   the

Stock   Exchanges,   in   compliance   with   the   requirements   of   the

Listing Agreement.
4.      On  the  second  acquisition  of  the  shares  on  23.04.2014  the

appellants   made   a   purchase   order   in   the   open   market   for   the
2
purchase of up to 20 lacs equity shares representing 1.7 percent

shares of the MCFL. Subsequently, an open offer in terms of the

SEBI   (Substantial   Acquisition   of   Shares   and   Takeovers)

Regulations, 2011 (for short, "the Regulations, 2011") was made for

acquiring up to 26 percent of shares of the MCFL.
5.    The   appellants   filed   a   notice   disclosing   details   of   the   first

acquisition and notifying the second acquisition under
Section 6(2)
of the Act with the Commission on 22.04.2014 within thirty days of

the   public   announcement   pursuant   to   the   Regulations,   2011   for

the   acquisition   of   1.7   percent   of   the   MCFL.   The   Competition

Commission vide its order dated 30.07.2014 under
section 31(1)
of

the Act approved the proposed combination, however, directed to

initiate   penalty   proceedings   against   the   appellants   under
section

43A
of the Act. Pursuant to that, a show cause notice was issued

on the ground of failure to notify in accordance to
section 6(2)
of

the Act, in regard to first and second acquisitions of shares.
6.    It   was   the   case   on   behalf   of   the   appellants   that   first

acquisition was made solely for the purpose of investment under

Entry   I   of   Schedule   I   of   the   CCI   (Procedure   in   regard   to   the

Transaction   of   Business   Relating   to   Combinations)   Regulations,
3
2011,   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   "the   Competition   Regulations").

Thereby,  it  assumed  exemption   from  the   notification.  It  was   also

urged that the second acquisition was notified to the Commission

within the stipulated time of 30 days as specified in
section 6(2)
of

the Act. The purchase was not consummated because as per the

Escrow Agreement dated 28.04.2014, the shares purchased in the

second acquisition were credited to a specifically designated Escrow

account   of   J.M.   Financial   Services   Limited.   The   sole   purpose   of

entering   into   an   escrow   agreement   was   that   the   transaction   was

not   consummated   prior   to   approval   of   the   Commission.   The

Commission   has   imposed   the   penalty   of   2   crores;   the   appellate

tribunal has affirmed the order. The Commission has held that the

appellants have violated
section 6(2)
of the Act by failing to notify

the proposed combination.
7.     It was urged by learned counsel on behalf of the appellants

that   first   acquisition   did   not   fall   within   the   purview   of   Entry   1

Schedule   1.   The   interpretation   made   by   the   Commission   of   the

Entry   1   of   Schedule   1   is   incorrect.   With   respect   to   the   second

acquisition of shares, it was urged that the sole purpose of creation

of   Escrow   Account   was   to   ensure   that   the   appellants   could   not
4
exercise the legal and beneficial rights accruing through the shares,

as the account was operatable solely on the basis of instructions of

the Manager and to the exclusion of the appellants. After approval

of   the   proposed   combination,   penalty   ought   not   to   have   been

imposed. Violation, if any, was technical, not willful, deliberate or

mala fide.
8.     Per contra, the Commission has rightly imposed the penalty.

There   was   a   breach   of   provisions   contained   in
section   6(2)
.   The

penalty   imposed   is   meager.   The   first   acquisition   of   shares   was

notifiable. It could not have been termed solely as an investment.

Reliance   has   been   placed   on   Press   Release   issued   on   3.7.2013,

which referred investment being “very strategic”, and the appellant

also notified to the public that they “look forward to working closely

with   MCFL   in   the   future”.   The   knowledge   of   acquisition   by   the

Zuari group of 9.72% shares in MCFL on 2.4.2013 was admitted in

the   reply   filed   by   the   appellants.   There   was   the   acquisition   of   a

large   number  of   shares   on   the   same   day   through   the   block   and

bulk deals. MCFL was not very profitable. Therefore, purchase of

shares could not be said to be a sound investment by a prudent

investor.
5
9.   To appreciate the rival submissions, it is necessary to refer to

certain provisions contained in the Act.
Section 6
of the Act deals

with   regulation   of   combinations   and   the   same   is   extracted

hereunder:
“
Section 6
: Regulation of combinations 
         (1)   No   person   or   enterprise   shall   enter   into   a
         combination, which causes or is likely to cause an
         appreciable   adverse   effect   on   competition   within
         the   relevant   market   in   India   and   such   a
         combination shall be void.
(2)   Subject   to   the   provisions   contained   in   sub­
         section (1), any person or enterprise, who or which
         proposes   to   enter   into   a   combination,   13   [shall]
         give notice to the Commission, in the form as may
         be specified, and the fee which may be determined,
         by   regulations,   disclosing   the   details   of   the
         proposed combination, within thirty days of—
(a) approval of the proposal relating to merger or
         amalgamation, referred to in clause (c) of section 5,
         by   the   board   of   directors   of   the   enterprises
         concerned with such merger or amalgamation, as
         the case may be;
(b) execution of any agreement or other document
         for acquisition referred to in clause (a) of
section 5
or acquiring of control referred to in clause (b) of
         that section.
(2A)   No   combination   shall   come   into   effect   until
         two hundred and ten days have passed from  the
         day   on   which   the   notice   has   been   given   to   the
         Commission   under   sub­section   (2)   or   the
         Commission has passed orders under
section 31
,
         whichever is earlier.”
6
10.   Any person or enterprise before entering into a combination,

has to give notice to the Commission disclosing the details within

30   days   of   (a)   approval   of   the   proposal   relating   to   merger   or

amalgamation   as   provided   in   the   Act;   (b)   execution   of   any

agreement or other document for acquisition referred to in
section

5(a)
of   the   Act   or   acquiring   of   control   under
section   5(b)
.   No

combination shall come into effect as provided in
section 6(2A)
until

210 days have passed from the day when notice has been given to

the Commission.
11.
Section 42
of the Act deals with contravention of the orders of

the   Commission.   Section   43A   deals   with   the   power   to   impose   a

penalty   for   non­furnishing   of   information   on   combinations.   Any

person or enterprise who fails to give notice under
section 6(2)
of

the Act to the Commission, the Commission, in such an event, is

authorized to impose the penalty which may extend to 1% of the

total turnover or the assets, whichever is higher.
12.   Section 43A is extracted hereunder:
“Section 43A: Power to impose the penalty for
           non­furnishing of information on combinations

                    If   any   person   or   enterprise   who   fails   to
7
give   notice   to  the   Commission   under   sub­section
          (2) of
section 6
, the Commission shall impose on
          such   person   or   enterprise   a   penalty   which   may
          extend to one percent, of the total turnover or the
          assets,   whichever   is   higher,   of   such   a
          combination.”
13.   Regulation   4   of   the   Combination   Regulations   deals   with

categories of transactions not likely to have an appreciable adverse

effect on competition in India.
Regulation 5
deals with the form of

notice for the proposed combination.
Regulation 5(8)
provides that

“other document” in
section 6(2)(b)
to mean any binding document

by  whatever   name   called,   conveying  an   agreement   or  decision   to

acquire   control,   shares,   voting   rights   or   assets.   Rule   5(8)   is

extracted hereunder :
“5.   Form   of   notice   for   the   proposed
          combination ­ 
            (1)   ……

             (8)   The reference to the “other  document” in
          clause (b) of sub­section (2) of
section 6
of the Act
          shall   mean   any   binding   document,   by   whatever
          name   called,   conveying   an  agreement   or   decision
          to acquire control, shares, voting rights or assets:
Provided   that   if   the   acquisition   is   without   the
          consent   of   the   enterprise   being   acquired,   any
          document executed by the acquiring enterprise by
          whatever   name   called,   conveying   a   decision   to
          acquire control, shares or voting rights shall be the
          “other document”.
8
Provided   further   that   where   a   public
          announcement   has   been   made   in   terms   of   the
          Securities   and   Exchange   Board   of   India
          (Substantial Acquisition of Shares and Takeovers)
          Regulations,   2011,   for   the   acquisition   of   shares,
          voting   rights   or   control,   such   public
          announcement   shall   be   deemed   to   be   the   "other
          document"."
14.   Schedule   1   to   the   Combination   Regulations   provides   that

acquisition of shares or voting rights referred to in
section 5(a)(i)
or
Section 5(a)(ii)
of the Act does not entitle the acquirer to hold 25%

or more of the total shares or voting rights of the company, directly

or indirectly. The Explanation makes it clear that the acquisition of

less than 10% of the total shares or voting rights of an enterprise

shall   be   treated   solely   as   an   investment.   Schedule   1   to   the

Combination Regulations is extracted hereunder:
“(1)   An   acquisition   of   shares   or   voting   rights,
          referred   to   in   sub­clause   (i)   or   sub­clause   (ii)   of
          clause   (a)   of
section   5
of   the   Act,   solely   as   an
          investment  or   in the  ordinary  course  of  business
          in so far as the total shares or voting rights held by
          the acquirer directly or indirectly, does not entitle
          the acquirer to hold twenty five per cent (25%) or
          more   of   the   total   shares   or   voting   rights   of   the
          company,   of   which   shares   or   voting   rights   are
          being   acquired,   directly   or   indirectly   or   in
          accordance   with   the   execution   of   any   document
          including a share holders” agreement or articles of
          association, not leading to acquisition of control of
          the   enterprise   whose   shares   or   voting   rights   are
          being acquired.
9
Explanation:­   The   acquisition   of   less   than   ten
           percent  of the  total shares  or  voting   rights  of  an
           enterprise   shall   be   treated   as   solely   as   an
           investment.   Provided that in relation to the said
           acquisition – (A) the Acquirer has ability to exercise
           only   such   rights   that   the   exercisable   by   the
           ordinary   shareholders   of   the   enterprise   whose
           shares   or  voting   rights  are  being   acquired   to  the
           extent of their respective shareholding; and (B) the
           Acquirer is not a member of the board of directors
           of the enterprise whose shares or voting rights are
           being   acquired   and   does   not   have   a   right   or
           intention   to   nominate   a   director   on   the   board   of
           directors of the enterprise whose shares or voting
           rights  are being  acquired  and  does not  intend  to
           participate   in   the   affairs   or   management   of   the
           enterprise whose shares or voting rights are being
           acquired.”
15.   The   procedure   for   imposition   of   penalty   is   provided   under

Regulation 48 of the new Regulations. A show cause notice has to

be   given   and   thereafter   if   an   oral   hearing   is   granted,   then   the

Commission  is  empowered  to  impose  the penalty considering the

facts and circumstances of the case.
16.   First, we deal with the acquisition of the shares of MCFL by

the appellants on 3.11.2013. There was the acquisition of 24.46%

equity share capital of MCFL on a single day of which 19.9% were

acquired through the block and bulk deals. The contemporaneous

Press   Release   dated   3.7.2013   issued   by  the   appellants   filed   with

the   stock   exchanges,   in   compliance   with   the   requirement   of   the
10
Listing Agreement indicated that the objective was not to make an

investment in MCFL. The Press Release referred “investment is very

strategic and a good fit with the company’s business”. There was a

pointer in the Press Release of its intent when it stated that DFPCL

looks forward to working closely with MCFL to “enhance long­term

value   for   the   shareholder   of   both   companies”.   Not   only   the

appellants but another player Zuari group also made a significant

purchase of shares of MCFL i.e. 9.72% on 2.4.2013 is also not in

dispute. Thus, it is apparent that the appellant's first acquisition

was a part of the long­term plan to try and take over MCFL, which

was   simply   not   an   investment.   The   purchase   of   24.46%   equity

stake, vested power to exercise influence as was reflected in Press

Release­II also. The acquisition of less than 10% of the total shares

or   voting   rights   of   an   enterprise   is   solely   an   investment.   It   also

indicates that beyond this threshold, the transaction is required to

be looked carefully. Thus, there was a failure to comply with the

provisions of
section 6(2)
of the Act in regard to the acquisition of

24.46% of the shareholding. The provisions of
section 6(2)
were not

at all complied with.
17.    Coming   to   the   second   acquisition   of   shares   of   0.8%   equity
11
shares of MCFL, the dispute is as to whether the notifying within

30   days   of   the   purchase   was   compliance   of   the   provision   as   per

provisions   of
section   6(2)
it  should   have   been   notified   before   the

acquisition.   As   a   corollary,   it   was   also   argued   that   the   equity

shares purchased second time were placed in the Escrow Account.

The appellants could not have exercised the beneficial rights until

the Commission made the approval of the proposed combination.

What was essential under
section 2(e)
was the voting rights and the

appellants could not have exercised voting rights by placing shares

in the escrow account.
18.   We find no merits in the submissions raised. It is apparent

from
section   6(2)
of   the   Act   that   the   proposal   to   enter   into

combination   is   required   to   be   notified   to   the   Commission.   The

legislative mandate is apparent that the notification has to be made

before   entering   into   the   combination.   The   Preamble   of   the   Act

contains   that   the   Commission   has   been   established   to   prevent

practices   having   an   adverse   effect   on   the   competition.   The

combination   cannot   be   entered   into   and   shall   come   into   effect

before order is passed by Commission or lapse of certain time from

date of notice is also apparent from the terminology used in section
12
6(2A)
which   provides   that   no   combination   shall   come   into   effect

until 210 days have passed from the date of notice or passing of

orders under
section 31
by the Commission, whichever is earlier.

The   provisions   made   in
Regulation   5(8)
also   buttresses   the

aforesaid conclusion. Notice of
Section 6(2)
is to be given prior to

consummation   of   the   acquisition.   Ex   post   facto   notice   is   not

contemplated under the provisions of
section 6(2)
. Same would be

in violation of the provisions of the Act.
19.   The   expression   “proposes   to   enter   into   a   combination”   in
section 6(2)
and further details to be disclosed in the notice to the

Commission   are   of   the   ‘proposed   combination’   and   the   specific

provisions  contained  in
section  6(2A)
of  the  Act provides  that  no

combination shall come into effect until 210 days have passed from

the date on which notice has been given or passing of orders under
section 31
by the Commission, whichever is earlier. The intent of

the Act is that the Commission has  to permit combination  to  be

formed,   and   has   an   opportunity   to   assess   whether   the   proposed

combination   would   cause   an   appreciable   adverse   effect   on

competition. In case combination is to be notified ex­post facto for

approval, it would defeat the very intendment of the provisions of
13
the Act.
20.   When   the   transaction   has   been   completed   and   acquisition

has   been   made   and   the   latter   transaction   has   exceeded   holding

more than 25% by the second purchase, obviously prior permission

was required, as discussed hereinabove, as its total shareholding

increased to 25.3%. Thus, we have no hesitation to hold that the

notification under
section 6(2)
of the Act has to be ex­ante.
21.   The factum of the approval of the combination subsequently

by the Commission is not going to provide an insulation when the

provisions of the Act have been violated and prior notice had not

been   given   under
section   6(2)
.   It   was   open   to   impose   a   penalty

under section 43A. Merely by grant of approval by the Commission

violation of provisions does not become condonable ipso facto.
22.   The provisions contained in section 43A make it clear that the

Commission shall impose the penalty which may in its discretion

extend   to   1%   of   the   total   turnover   or   the   assets,   whichever   is

higher,   of   the   combination.   It   has   been   found   on   facts   that   the

turnover of the combination was Rs.3322 crores per annum, 1% of

which would be Rs.33.22 crores. The Commission had imposed a
14
nominal penalty of Rs.2 crores which amounts to only 0.06% of the

total turnover. In the facts of the case, information was disclosed

belatedly.   The   imposition   of   penalty   was   warranted   due   to   the

violation of the provision and it was rightly imposed.
23.   There was no requirement of  mens rea  under section 43A or

an intentional breach as an essential element for levy of penalty.
The Act
does not use the expression "the failure has to be willful or

mala fide” for the purpose of imposition of penalty. The breach of

the provisions of the Act is punishable and considering the nature

of the breach, it is discretionary to impose the extent of penalty.

Mens   rea  is   important   to   adjudge   criminal   or   quasi­criminal

liability, not in case of violation of the civil statutory provision.
In
Hindustan   Steel   Ltd.   v.   State   of   Orissa
AIR   1970   SC   253,   with

respect to the failure to comply with the civil obligation this Court

has laid down thus:
"In   our   opinion,   mens   rea   is   not   an   essential
          ingredient for contravention of the provision of a
          civil Act. In our view, the penalty is attracted as
          soon   as   a   contravention   of   the   statutory
          obligations   as   contemplated   by   the   Act   is
          established   and,   therefore,   the   intention   of   the
          parties   committing   such   violation   becomes
          immaterial.   In   other  words,   the   breach   of   a  civil
15
obligation   which   attracts   penalty   under   the
                    provisions of an Act would immediately attract the
                    levy of penalty irrespective of the fact whether the
                    contravention was made by the defaulter with any
                    guilty intention or not. This apart that unless the
                    language   of   the   statute   indicates   the   need   to
                    establish the element of  mens rea. It is generally
                    sufficient to prove that a default in complying with
                    the statute has occurred. The penalty has to follow
                    and only the quantum of penalty is discretionary "
In our considered opinion, the penalty is
                    attracted   as   soon   as   the   contravention   of   the
                    statutory   obligation   as   contemplated   by   the   Act
                    and   the   Regulation   is   established   and   hence
                    intention of the parties committing such violation
                    becomes wholly irrelevant.
We also further hold that unless the language
                    of the statute indicates the need to establish the
                    presence of men's rea, it is wholly unnecessary to
                    ascertain whether such a violation was intentional
                    or not. On  a careful perusal of
Section 15(D) (b)
and
Section   15
­E   of   the   Act,   there   is   nothing
                    which   requires   that   men's   rea   must   be   proved
                    before   a   penalty   can   be   imposed   under   these
                    provisions.   Hence   once   the   contravention   is
                    established then the penalty is to follow.”
24.    The imposition of penalty under section 43A is on account of

breach   of   a   civil   obligation,   and   the   proceedings   are   neither

criminal   nor   quasi­criminal.   Thus,   a   penalty   has   to   follow.

Discretion   in   the   provision   under   section   43A   is   with   respect   to

quantum. Thus, we find that in view of the submissions made by

learned counsel for the appellants no case for our interference is

made out.
16
25.   The   judgment   and   order   passed   by   the   Commission   as

affirmed by the appellate tribunal are in accordance with law. The

appeal   being   devoid   of   merit,   deserves   dismissal   and   is   hereby

dismissed. No costs.
……………………………..J.
                                                     (ARUN MISHRA)




                                                           ……………………………..J.
                                                                (NAVIN SINHA)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 17, 2018.
17