[Cites
30
, Cited by
14
]
Supreme Court of India
Lok Prahari, Thr. Its General Secretary ... vs Union Of India on 16 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2077, 2018 (16) SCC 696, 2018 (4) ALJ 680, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2081, (2018) 5 SCALE 748, (2018) 2 SCT 558, (2018) 4 SERVLR 401, (2018) 2 PAT LJR 469, (2018) 2 ESC 260, (2018) 2 JLJR 429, 2018 (7) ADJ 44 NOC, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 23
Author:
J. Chelameswar
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
J. Chelameswar
Reportable
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.  3798 OF 2018
                         (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.9584 of 2017)

         LOK PRAHARI, THROUGH ITS 
         GENERAL SECRETARY S.N. SHUKLA & ANOTHER ... Appellants

                               Versus

         UNION OF INDIA
         THROUGH ITS SECRETARY & OTHERS                                                       ... Respondents




                                                       J U D G M E N T
         Chelameswar, J.
1.               Leave granted.
2.               This appeal arises out of a Writ Petition that challenged the

         Constitutional   validity   of   certain   Amendments1  made   to   the

         Salaries,  Allowances  and  Pensions of Members of Parliament Act,

         1954   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   “the   Act”).     The   provisions
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
challenged relate to the payment of pension and other facilities to
DEEPAK MANSUKHANI
Date: 2018.04.16
14:41:56 IST
Reason:
1
By the Amendment Act 2003, Act 9 of 2004,
Amending Act
No. 40 of 2006 and
Amending Act
37 of 2010.
1
members   of   Parliament  (hereinafter  referred  to  as “MPs”)  and ex­

members   of   Parliament   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   “ex­MPs”),   and

their   spouses/companions/dependents   (collectively   hereafter

referred   to   as   “ASSOCIATES”).     The   1 st  Appellant   sought   the

following   prayers,  inter   alia,   in   the   Writ   Petition   before   the

Allahabad High Court:
1.      “Declare that the provisions of various amending
Acts to Act
30 of 1954, and particularly those of the
Amending Act
9 of
                  2004, and
Amending Act
No. 40 of 2006 and
Amending Act
37   of   2010,   providing   for   pension/family   pension   to   ex­
                  MPs/dependents, travel facilities to spouse and other non­
                  members, (in addition to the companion) and ex­MPs, as well
                  as  continuation   of  facilities,  regarding   unutilized  quotas  of
                  telephone calls electricity and water units are ultra vires of
                  the Constitution and the original Act.
2.      Issue   a   mandamus   to   the   opposite   parties   1   to   4   to   stop
                  forthwith   payment   of   pension/family   pension   to   ex­
                  MPs/dependents, and provision of other facilities in 1 above.
3.      Order   recovery   of   illegal   pension/family   pension   from   the
                  recipients thereof.”
3.        The   High   Court   dismissed   the   writ   petition   negating   all

contentions   raised   by   the   1st  Appellant   herein,   holding   that   the

issue is no longer  res integra in view of the Judgment in
Common

Cause, A Registered Society v. Union of India2
(hereafter referred

to as “Common Cause”) wherein this Court held that Parliament is
2
(2002) 1 SCC 88
2
competent to legislate on pensions for ex­MPs and as a corollary it

has   the   power   to   prescribe   any   condition   subject   to   which   the

pension may be paid. We are in total agreement with the conclusion

of the High Court on the question of legislative competence.
4.      The question which remains to be answered is whether any of

the impugned amendments which create various rights in favour of

ex­MPs & their ASSOCIATES and certain other facilities to MPs are

violative   of
Article  14
of   the Constitution of India, 1950 as being

discriminatory. It was the case of the Appellant that the
Common

Cause
case is silent in this respect. However, the High Court took

the   view   that   the   attack   on
Article   14
is   foreclosed   by  Common

Cause.
5.      It is argued before us that  Common Cause  took note of the

Petitioner’s argument therein3 that the Act is violative of
Article 14
,

however,   there   was   neither   any   discussion   on   the   issue   nor   any

binding decision on the question.4   Therefore, it is submitted that
3
“5. Reference was made by the Petitioner in WP (C) No. 246 of 1993, appearing in person, to the provisions of
Article 14
and it was submitted that there was discrimination in favor of Members of Parliament by giving them
pension when, unlike Judges, they were not subject to the process of impeachment.”
4
“7. The issue before us is squarely one of competence, namely, the competence of Parliament to enact the said
Section 8-A. We need not go into Entry 73 of List I for we are in no doubt that such competence is conferred upon
Parliament by the residuary Entry 97 of List I, and there is no provision in
Article 106
or elsewhere that bars the
3
the   High   Court   erred   in   concluding   that   the   challenge   to   the

impugned   provisions   is   impermissible.     We   propose   to   limit   our

examination   in   the   present   case   to   the   question   of   the

constitutionality   of   various   Amendments   brought   after   the
Common Cause
case on grounds other than legislative competence.
6.       To   answer   the   same,   we   may   start   with   the   analysis   of   the

various   provisions   of   the   Constitution   creating   various

constitutional offices because some of these provisions contemplate

the   possibility   of   the   payment   of   pension   in   respect   to   certain

Constitutional   offices,   while   no   express   reference   is   made   with

regard to various other offices created by the Constitution.
7.
Article 59(3)5
specifies that the President shall be entitled to

such   ‘emoluments,   allowances   and   privileges   as   may   be   determined   by

Parliament   by   law’   while
Article   158(3)
specifies   the   same   for   the

Governor. Neither of the Articles make any reference to the payment

of pension. However,
Section 2
of the President’s Emoluments and

payment of pension to Members of Parliament.”
5
Article 59(3).
Conditions of President’s office.- The President shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use
of his official residence and shall be also entitled to such emoluments, allowances, and privileges as may be
determined by Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such emoluments, allowances and
privileges as are specified in the Second Schedule.
4
Pension Act, 1951 provides for the payment of pension and other

facilities to the retiring President.6
8.
Article   75(6)7
and
Article   164(5)
respectively   speak   of   the

salaries   and   allowances   of   Ministers,   which   Parliament   and   the

State Legislature may determine by law.
9.       Articles 978 and 1869 provide for the payment of ‘salaries and

allowances’   of   the   Chairman   and   Deputy   Chairman   and   the

Speaker   and   the   Deputy   Speaker   of   Parliament   and   State

Legislatures.   The   Vice­
President's   Pension   Act,   1997
has   an
6
Section 2
. (1) Pension to retiring Presidents. There shall be paid to every person who ceases to hold office as
President, either by the expiration of his term of office or by resignation of his office, a pension of 6 one lakh twenty
thousand rupees per annum for the remainder of his life. [ (2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf,
every such person shall, for the remainder of his life, be entitled-
(a) to the use of a furnished residence (including its maintenance), without payment of rent, a telephone and
a motor- car, free of charge or to such car allowance as may be specified in the rules-,
(b) to secretarial staff consisting of a Private Secretary, a Personal Assistant and a Peon, and office expenses
the total expenditure on which shall not exceed twelve thousand rupees per annum;
(c) to medical attendance and treatment free of charge.
(d) to travel anywhere in India, accompanied by one person, by 9 highest class by air, rail or steamer.
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this sub- section" residence" shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Salaries
and allowances of Ministers Act, 1952 ]
7
Article 75.
Other Provisions as to Ministers- (6) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as
Parliament may from time to time by law determine and, until Parliament so determines, shall be as specified in the
Second Schedule.
8
Article 97.
Salaries and allowances of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman and the Speaker and Deputy
Speaker.- There shall be paid to the Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, and to the Speaker
and the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, such salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by
Parliament by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and allowances as are specified in the
Second Schedule.
9
Article 186.
Salaries and Allowances of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and the Chairman and Deputy
Chairman.- There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, and to the
Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council, such salaries and allowances as may be respectively
fixed by the Legislature of the State by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and
allowances as are specified in the Second Schedule.
5
identical provision with respect to the payment of pension and post

retirement facilities as are provided to the President. 10
10.
Article   106
of   the   Constitution   stipulates   that   MPs   shall   be

entitled   to   receive   ‘salaries   and   allowances’   to   be   determined   by

Parliament   through   legislation.11  There   is   no   express   reference   to

the payment of pension.
11.      On the other hand, the provisos to
Article 125(2) 12
and
Article

221(2)13
respectively make an express reference to the payment of

pension to judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts.
10
Section 2
. Pension to retiring Vice-Presidents.—(1) There shall be paid to every person who ceases to hold
office as Vice-President, either by the expiration of his term of office or by resignation of his office, a Pension 1 [at
the rate of fifty per cent of the salary of the Vice-President] per month, for the remainder of his life
          Provided that such person shall not be entitled to receive any pension during the period he holds the office
of the Prime Minister, a Minister or any other office or becomes a Member of Parliament and is in receipt of salary
and allowances which are defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State.
(1A) The spouse of a person who dies —
(a) while holding the office of Vice-President, or
(b) after ceasing to hold office as Vice-President either by the expiration of
          his term of office or by resignation of his office, shall be paid a family pension at the rate of fifty per cent
of pension as is admissible to a retiring Vice-President, for the remainder of her life.
11
Article 106.Salaries and Allowances of Members.-Members of either House of Parliament shall be entitled to
receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined by Parliament by law and, until
provision in that respect is so made, allowances at such rates and upon such conditions as were immediately before
the commencement of this Constitution applicable in the case of members of the Constituent Assembly of the
Dominion of India
12
Article 125.
Salaries, etc., of Judges.- (2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such privileges and allowances and to
such rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as may from time to time be determined by or under law made
by Parliament and, until so determined, to such privileges, allowances and rights as are specified in the Second
Schedule:
Provided that neither the privileges or the allowances of a Judge nor his rights in respect of leave of
absence or pension shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
13
Article 221.
Salaries, etc., of Judges.- (2) Every Judge shall be entitled to such allowances and to such rights in
respect of leave of absence and pension as may from time to time be determined by or under law made by
Parliament and, until so determined, to such allowances and rights as are specified in the Second Schedule:
Provided that neither the allowances of a Judge nor his rights in respect of leave of absence or pension shall
be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
6
12.
Article   148(3)14
provides   that   salary   and   other   conditions   of

service of the Comptroller and Auditor­General shall be as may be

determined by Parliament by law. The proviso thereto contains a

reference   to   the   payment   of   pension.   The   Comptroller   and

Auditor­General’s   (Duties,   Powers   and   Conditions   of   Service)   Act,

1971   contains   various   provisions   for   the   payment   of   pension   on

his/her demission of office.15
13.      Article   32216  declares   that   the   expenses   of   Public   Service

Commissions shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India

and   such   expenses   include   “salaries,   allowances   and   pensions”

payable to or in respect of the members or staff of the Commission.
14
Article 148.
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.- (3). The salary and other conditions of service of the
Comptroller and Auditor-General shall be such as may be determined by Parliament by law and, until they are so
determined, shall be as specified in the Second Schedule:
Provided that neither the salary of a Comptroller and Auditor-General nor his rights in respect of leave of
absence, pension or age of retirement shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
15
Section 6. Pension.- A person who demits office as the Comptroller and Auditor-General by resignation shall, on
such demission, be eligible to a pension at the rate of two thousand rupees per annum for each completed year of his
service as the Comptroller and Auditor-General:
Provided that in the case of a person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (3), the aggregate amount
of pension admissible under this sub-section together with the amount of pension including the commuted portion, if
any, of his pension, and the pension equivalent of the retirement gratuity if any which may have been admissible to
him under the rules for the time being applicable to the Service to which he belonged immediately before he
assumed office as the Comptroller and Auditor-General, shall not exceed fifteen thousand rupees per annum or the
higher pension referred to in proviso to sub-section (2) or sub-section (3), as the case may be.
16
Article 322.
Expenses of Public Service Commissions
          The expenses of the Union or a State Public Service Commission, including any salaries, allowances and
pensions payable to or in respect of the members or staff of the Commission, shall be charged on the Consolidated
Fund of India or, as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of the State.
7
14.
Article 324(5)17
stipulates that “conditions of service and tenure of

office of the Election Commissioners shall be such as the President may by rule

determine.” Though the Constitution is silent in regard to payment of

pension to the  Election Commissioners, Section 6 in the
Election

Commission (Conditions of Service of Election Commissioners and

Transaction of Business) Act, 1991
makes provision for payment of

pension to Election Commissioners which is equal to the pension

payable to a Supreme Court Judge.18
15.      From the Constitutional scheme it can be seen that no express

mandate exists for the payment of pension with respect to any one

of   the   Constitutional   offices.   However,   Articles   dealing   with   the

Judges   of   the   Supreme   Court   and   the   High   Courts   and   the

Comptroller   and   Auditor­General   stipulate   that   pensions   payable
17
Article 324.
Superintendence, direction and control of elections to be vested in an Election Commission
          (5) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions of service and tenure of office
of the Election Commissioners and the Regional Commissioners shall be such as the President may by rule
determine:
Provided that the Chief Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except in like manner
and on the like grounds as a Judge of the Supreme Court and the conditions of service of the Chief Election
Commissioner shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment:
Provided further that any other Election Commissioner or a Regional Commissioner shall not be removed
from office except on the recommendation of the Chief Election Commissioner.
18
Section 6. Pension payable to Election Commissioners.-
(2) Where the Chief Election Commissioner [or an Election Commissioner] demits office [whether in any
manner specified in [sub-section (3)] or by resignation], he shall, on such demission be entitled to
(a) a pension which is equal to the pension payable to a Judge of the Supreme Court in accordance with the
provisions of Part III of the Schedule to the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958, as amended
from time to time; and
(b) such pension (including commutation of pension), family pension and gratuity as are admissible to a
Judge of the Supreme Court under the said Act and the Rules made thereunder, as amended from time to time…”
8
may not be varied during their tenure. The implication being that if

the law dealing with the service conditions of any of the incumbents

of   any   one   of   the   said   offices   at   the   time   of   their   appointment

provides for the payment of pension, such a provision of law cannot

be varied to the detriment of the incumbent.
16.     The   provisions   under   challenge   fall   under   two   categories   (i)

provisions which confer the right of free travel etc. to the MPs and

their ASSOCIATES; and (ii) provisions which confer the benefit of

pension   and   the   right   of   free   travel   etc.   to   the   ex­MPs   and   their

ASSOCIATES.
THE PROVISIONS UNDER CHALLENGE:
17.
Section 8A19
of the Act grants pensions to (i) ex­MPs, and (ii)

upon their death, the pension is given to their respective spouses.

Section 8AC20 provides family pension to the spouse of such MPs on

the death of the MP.  It is pertinent to mention here that Section 8A
19
Section 8A. (1) With effect from the 18th day of May, 2009, there shall be paid a pension of twenty thousand
rupees per mensem to every person who has served for any period as a Member of the Provisional Parliament or
either House of Parliament
          Provided that where a person has served as a member of the Provisional Parliament or either House of
Parliament for a period exceeding five years, there shall be paid to him an additional pension of thousand five
hundred rupees per mensem for every year served in excess of five years
          Explanation. – For the purpose of this sub-section “Provisional Parliament” shall include the body which
functioned as the Constituent Assembly of the Dominion of Indian immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution
20
Inserted by Act 40 of 2006 – effective from 15-9-2006
9
as originally enacted provided that an MP, to be eligible for Pension

must have completed four years of tenure in Parliament. But this

was done away with retrospective effect by the Amendment Act No.9

of 2004.
Section   6B(1)
21
of   the   Act   confers   a   right   to   all   the   MPs  for

unlimited   travel   by   train   along   with   spouse/companion   from   any

place in India to any other place in India. Section 6B(2) 22  provides

up to 8 air journeys in a year from the MP’s usual place of residence

to Delhi and back when Parliament is in Session and also provides

the spouse of the MP unlimited train travel by First Class AC at any

time   during   the   year.     Section   8AA23  confers   a   right   of   travel

facilities to the ex­MPs  and their ASSOCIATES. It provides for free

AC­II Tier pass for one person to accompany an ex­MP in all train

journeys   and   unlimited   free   travel   by   train   along   with

spouse/companion  from  any  place in India to any  other place in

India.
18.     The provisions are impugned on the following grounds:
21
Substituted by Act 16 of 1999
22
Inserted by Act 37 of 2010 – effective from 1-10-2010
23
Substituted by Act 9 of 2004 – effective from 15-9-2006
10
(i)      the contrast in the language displayed in the various Articles
                 of   the   Constitution   dealing   with   the   salaries   and   other
                 allowances   payable   to   the   various   Constitutional   office
                 holders   should   necessarily   lead   to  the   conclusion   that   the
                 Constitution   does   not   permit   the   payment   of   pension   and
                 other benefits to MPs and ex­MPs;
(ii)     the   framers   of   the   Constitution   specifically   denied
                 pensionary benefits to the MPs and therefore giving of any
                 POST   RETIREMENT   BENEFITS   to   ex­MPs   and   their
                 ASSOCIATES   would   amount   to   treating   those   who   were
                 denied this constitutional right to pension at par with those
                 constitutional offices whose pension was expressly protected.
And   to   treat   them   on   the   same   footing   would   result   in   a
                 violation of the right to equality;
(iii)    the   impugned   provisions   are   irrational24  and   arbitrary
                 because  the  grant  of  pension  to all ex­MPs  without   taking
                 into   consideration   their   respective   tenure   and   economic
                 conditions goes against public interest25; and
(iv)     looked at from the point of view of the taxpayers and crores
                 of   poor   and   needy   people   of   the   country,   the   impugned
                 provisions are an unfair and unjust exercise of the legislative
                 authority of the Parliament.26
19.     We   shall   now   examine   the   core   submission   ­   whether   the

silence   in
Article   106
operates   as   a   prohibition   for   payment   of

pension to the former MPs?
20.     The   submissions   of   the   Appellants   proceed   on   the   wrong

assumption that certain provisions of the Constitution mandate the

payment of pension to persons who hold constitutional offices like

the Judges of this Court.  We have already examined the language
24
Written Submissions of Petitioner in WP before the Allahabad HC
25
Id.
26
Ground D of the Writ Petition
11
of the relevant provisions of the Constitution. We are of the opinion

that,   on   a   true   and   proper   construction   of   the   text   of   those

provisions, they do not mandate the payment of pension.  They only

protect the pension if payable under the relevant law applicable on

the date of appointment of a person to any one of those offices by

declaring   that   such   a   condition   could   not   be   altered   to   the

detriment of a person subsequent to his appointment.
However,   the   constitutional   obligation   to   pay   pension   to

persons   who   hold   such   offices   may   arise   by   implication   having

regard to the overall scheme of the Constitution relevant to those

offices.  The need to secure the independence of the holders of those

offices by assuring them that either the legislature or the executive

will not be able to deprive them of the financial resources necessary

to keep them away from impecuniousness, irrespective of the fact

that a decision taken by the incumbents of each of those offices in

discharge of the official responsibilities is acceptable or not either to

the legislature or the executive.   We must hasten to add that we

must not be understood to be making any final declaration of law in

this regard.
12
The   purpose   of   this   analysis   is   limited   only   to   demonstrate

that the Appellants starts on a wrong premise in assuming that the

text of the Constitution contains express provisions mandating the

payment   of   pension   in   connection   with   certain   constitutional

offices.
21.   The   fact   that   there   are   express   references  to   the   payment   of

pension in the Constitution for certain Constitutional functionaries

and not for others, in our opinion does not lead to the conclusion

that   the   Constitution   by   its   silence   prohibits   the   payment   of

pension to those constitutional functionaries. Each Constitutional

office   holder   functions   in accordance with the  powers and duties

entrusted   to   it   either   by   the   Constitution  or  the  laws  relevant  to

their powers and duties. The framers of the Constitution believed

that  certain offices  required a higher degree of protection, having

regard to the greater degree of independence expected of the holders

of their offices. The framers knew history and the attempts of the

men in power to subjugate the holders of such offices. Safeguards,

therefore,   were   provided   in   respect   of   the   various   aspects   of   the

tenure   and   other   conditions   of   service   relevant   for   their   offices.
13
When   it   comes   to   MPs,   however,   such   a   higher   degree   of

constitutional protection is not obviously required as the authority

to make laws rests only with them.
22.  The terms and conditions subject to which a person is either

appointed or elected to occupy the constitutional office is a matter

of   policy   choice.   The   appropriate   legislature   would   be   the

constitutionally designated authority to determine those conditions.

It   is   too   well   settled   in   constitutional   law   that   the   authority   of

legislature   to   make   a   policy   choice   is   only   circumscribed   by   the

limitations   imposed   by   the   Constitution,   either   by   an   express

provision or by a necessary implication arising out of the scheme of

the   Constitution.     It   is   a   well   established   principle   commencing

from  McCulloch’s  case27  and   followed   by   a   long   line   of   judicial

pronouncements28  that   whatever   is   not   prohibited   by   the

Constitution is permissible for the legislature.
27
McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 425-437, 4 L.Ed. 579 (1819):
“But we think the sound construction of the Constitution must allow to the national legislature that
     discretion with respect to the means by which the powers it confers are to be carried into execution which will
     enable that body to perform the high duties assigned to it in the manner most beneficial to the people. Let the
     end be legitimate, let it be within the scope of the Constitution, and all means which are appropriate, which are
     plainly adapted to that end, which are not prohibited, but consist with the letter and spirit of the Constitution, are
     Constitutional.”
28
See
State of Kerala v. N.M. Thomas
, (1976) 2 SCC 310, para 107; see also
State of Karnataka v. Union of India
,
(1977) 4 SCC 608, para 69
14
23.   Further   if   we   were   to   accept   the   argument   that   those

Constitutional functionaries who are entitled to pension by the text

of the Constitution form a distinct class exclusively entitled to the

payment   of   pension   the   result   would   be   that   the   CAG,   the

Chairman   and   Deputy   Chairman   of   the   Parliament   or   State

Legislature,   and   Ministers   of   the   Centre   and   State   would   be

disentitled to pension.
24.   Another argument advanced by the Appellants is that pension

is payable to an employee of State after his superannuation.  Since

MPs are not employees of State, they are not entitled for pension

nor the Parliament is competent to provide payment of pension to

the   ex­MPs.   In   our   opinion,   there   is   a   fallacy   in   the   above

submission,  insofar  as  it assures that pension is only  payable to

former   employees   of   State   and   nobody   else.     Such   a   submission

emanates from the fact that certain payments made to the former

employees of State are called pensions and the misconception of the

Appellants   that   the   expression   ‘pension’   can   only   have   one

meaning. There are various other categories of payments made by
15
State which are called ‘pensions’, such as, Old Age Pension, Widow

Pension, and Disability Pension etc.
25.       The appellants have relied upon the decision in
Alagaapuram

R. Mohanraj & Others v. Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly,29
to

argue that the activity of MPs is not an “occupation” contemplated

by
Article   19(1)(g)
of   the   Constitution   of   India   and,   therefore,   no

pension can be paid to ex­MPs or their ASSOCIATES.
26.       In our opinion, this argument is only to be rejected, because it

once again is premised on the belief that the expression ‘pension’

has only one connotation in law. The question before this Court in

Alagaapuram   R.   Mohanraj  was   whether   a   Member   of   the

Legislative   Assembly   is   carrying   on   any   occupation   within   the

meaning   of
Article   19(1)(g)
of the Constitution  of  India.   The fact

that  this  Court  held  that this is not an occupation under
Article

19(1)(g)
need not necessarily mean that the Parliament is prohibited

from making payment of such allowances to MPs if it considers it

appropriate having regard to various relevant factors.
29
(2016) 6 SCC 82.
16
27.     The expression “allowances” of MPs occurring under Entry 73

of List­I of the Seventh Schedule,30 in our opinion, is wide enough to

cover the payment of “pension” and the other benefits covered by

the   impugned   provisions   to   MPs   or   ex­MPs.     Even   otherwise   the

authority of Parliament under Entry 97 of List­I31 is wide enough to

cover the impugned legislation as held by Common Cause.
28.  In   this   context,   we   may   recall   the   remarks   made   by   two

eminent   members   of   the   Constituent   Assembly,   namely   Dr.   B.R.

Ambedkar   and   Shri   K.T.   Shah   to   illustrate   the   fallacy   of   the

Appellants’ understanding.
29.     Dr. Ambedkar, while debating the need to provide pensionary

benefit to the President of India, threw some light on the question:
whether   the   Constituent   Assembly   sought   to   exclude   post

retirement benefits to Members of Parliament:
“Therefore, in the form in which the amendment is moved, I do not
        think that it is a practical proposition for anyone to accept. But
        there is no doubt about the general view that he has expressed,
        that  after a certain period of service in Parliament, Members,
30
Entry 73 of List-I of the Constitution of India
         “Salaries and allowances of members of Parliament, the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the
    Council of States and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the House of the People.”
31
Entry 97 of List-I of the Constitution of India
         “Any other matter not enumerated in List II or List III including any tax not mentioned in either of
    those Lists.”
17
including   the   President,   ought   to   be   entitled   to   some   sort   of
           pension, and I  think it  is a laudable idea  which has been given
           effect to in the British Parliament, and I have no doubt that our
           future Parliament will bear this fact in mind.”32

                                                                          [emphasis supplied]
30.        In   debating   whether   it   was   necessary   to   make   an   express

provision for the payment of pension to Governors after they demit

office, Shri Shah observed:
“The object  of  providing  such security  for   the  persons who have
           risen to this high level is the same as that which now secures to
           every workman in civilized nations an old­age pension, a pension
           or   super­annuation   allowance,   which   would   be   calculated   to
           suffice   to  maintain   him   in   the   standard   of   life   to   which   he   was
           accustomed while at work. A pension is deferred pay, not paid to
           the worker while at work; and the analogy will hold here also.
           This   also   is   a   type   of   work­perhaps   the   highest   of   its   kind­
           which should not go unprovided for altogether by the State for
           the rest of the period on earth of the Parties who have served so
           eminently the State.”33  

                                                                          [emphasis supplied]
31.        We are of the view that these questions are in the orbit of the

wisdom   of   the   Parliament   in   choosing/changing   the   legislative

policy   whether   the   various   benefits   created   under   the   impugned

provisions are rational having regard to the affluent financial status

of some of the MPs or the poverty of the millions of the population

etc. These are not justiciable issues. In this context, we may refer to
32
Constituent Assembly of India Debates, Vol. VII - Debate on Draft
Article 48
, 27th December 1948
33
Constituent Assembly of India Debates, Vol. VIII - Debate on Draft Article 135A, 31st May, 1949
18
the   principle
laid   down   by
this   Court   in
Dr.   P.   Nalla   Thampy

Terah v. Union of India & Others34
:
“If the provisions of the law violate the Constitution, they have to
          be struck down. We cannot, however, negate a law on the ground
          that we do not approve of the policy which underlies it. Can the
          Court, for example, strike down Rule 90 on the ground that the
          limit of rupees one lakh is too high in the Indian context? We may
          have   our   own   preferences   and   perceptions   but,   they   cannot   be
          used for invalidating laws.”
32.       An   I.A.   was   filed   in   this   appeal,   which   is   required   to   be

disposed   of.   It   was   from   Respondent   No.   5,   the   Election

Commission of India, which has sought to be deleted from the array

of parties.   It is stated that neither is any relief sought from them

nor is any directive prayed for from Respondent No.5 in this appeal,

as this is a purely constitutional challenge.
I.A.   is   allowed.     Respondent   No.   5   stands   deleted   from   the

array of parties.
34
(1985) Supp SCC 189.
19
33.   In view of the foregoing, the appeal stands dismissed, with no

order as to costs.
…..................................... J.
(J. CHELAMESWAR)




                                                     …...................................... J.
(SANJAY KISHAN KAUL)
New Delhi;
April 16, 2018.
20