[Cites
13
, Cited by
12
]
Supreme Court of India
Dr. Kriti Lakhina vs The State Of Karnataka on 4 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 1657, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 1602, (2018) 3 PAT LJR 71, (2018) 2 SCT 455, (2018) 5 SCALE 329, (2018) 3 SERVLR 906, (2018) 3 KANT LJ 353, (2019) 2 ALLMR 448 (SC), (2018) 4 ALL WC 4045, (2018) 2 ESC 337, (2018) 3 JLJR 65, 2018 (2) KLT SN 85 (SC), 2018 (7) ADJ 60 NOC
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Arun Mishra
1
                                                                                  REPORTABLE


                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                       WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.204 OF 2018


                         Dr. Kriti Lakhina and Others                            ….Petitioners

                                                          Versus

                         State of Karnataka and Others                          …. Respondents



                                                        JUDGMENT
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.    This petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India has been

                         filed by 44 Doctors who did their MBBS/BDS Courses from State of

                         Karnataka and have cleared the NEET-PG, 2018 examination with high

                         merit position and are aspiring for admission to Post-Graduate Courses in

                         Karnataka. The principal prayer in the writ petition seeks issuance of an

                         appropriate writ, order or direction quashing Clause 4 of the Information
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Bulletin jointly issued by Directorate of Medical Education, Government of
NEELAM GULATI
Date: 2018.04.04
17:09:29 IST
Reason:
2
Karnataka and Karnataka Examinations Authority, Government of

Karnataka, Respondent Nos.2 and 3 respectively.
2.    The Information Bulletin in question lays down, inter alia, conditions

for admission to Post-Graduate Medical and Dental Courses in respect of

government quota seats in Medical/Dental Colleges in State of Karnataka

and was published on the website on 10.03.2018.         Relevant portion of

Clause 4 of this Information Bulletin deals with eligibility conditions in

following terms:
“4.      ELIGIBILITY

      4.1      ELIGIBILITY for Government seats (G) &GMP

      seats:
A candidate who fulfills the following criteria is eligible
      to appear for the online seat allotment process, namely:-
       He/she is a citizen of India, who is of Karnataka Origin
      and has studied MBBS or BDS degree in a Medical or Dental
      College situated in Karnataka or outside Karnataka and
      affiliated to any University established by law in India
      recognized by Medical Council of India or Dental Council of
      India and Government of India and has qualified in the NEET
      (National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test) for admission to post
      graduate medical or dental degree/diploma courses.
Note: Children for the purpose of the rule means natural born
      son/daughter and not adopted son/daughter and not
      grandson/grand daughter.
3
Explanation: A candidate of Karnataka Origin: means, a
      candidate found eligible under clause A or B below.
(Clause A)
i)     A candidate who has studied and passed in one or more
      Government or Government recognized, educational
      institutions located in the State of Karnataka for a minimum
      period of TEN academic years as on the 31st March, 2018,
      commencing for 1st standard to MBBS/BDS and must have
      appeared and passed either SSLC/10th standard or 2nd PUC/12th
      standard examination from Karnataka State. In case of the
      candidate who has taken more than one year to pass a class or
      standard, the year of academic study is counted as one year
      only (Document to be produced)

                                 (Clause B)
ii)    The candidate should have studied and passed 1st and 2nd
      year Pre-University Examination or 11th or 12th standard
      examination within the State of Karnataka from an Educational
      Institution run or recognized by the State Government or
      MBBS/BDS from a professional educational institution located
      in Karnataka and that either of the parents must have
      studied/resided in Karnataka for a minimum period of 10 years.
(Documents to be produced)”
3.    It is submitted by the petitioners that this Information Bulletin issued

by Respondent Nos.2 and 3, to the extent Clause 4.1 thereof imposes a

condition of domicile for admission to MD, MS and Post-Graduate Diploma

seats in State of Karnataka is invalid and unconstitutional. According to the

petitioners said Clause 4.1 arbitrarily and illegally deprives the petitioners

who had obtained MBBS/BDS Degrees from the Colleges situated in
4
Karnataka from competing for admission to Post-Graduate Medical/Dental

Curses in Government Medical Colleges and against Government quota

seats in non-Governmental institutions. Reliance has been placed on the

Judgment of this Court in
Vishal Goyal and Others v. State of Karnataka

and Others1
to submit that the controversy is no longer res-integra and the

view taken in
Vishal Goyal
(supra) ought to have been adhered to by

Respondent Nos.2 and 3 while issuing the Bulletin.
4.       Since the matter involves urgency and the career prospects of the

petitioners and similarly situated candidates are in question, the matter was

taken up for hearing immediately. State of Karnataka entered appearance

and has filed its reply submitting inter alia, that under the eligibility

conditions, only candidates of Karnataka origin could compete for admission

to 50% government seats in government colleges and against government

quota seats in private colleges. The reply further stated that these eligibility

conditions were stipulated in order to ensure that the State’s requirement of

skilled human resource is met with and that the Post-Graduate Medical

Education Regulation 2000 (‘2000 Regulations’ for short) of Medical

Council of India do not prohibit the State from stipulating eligibility

conditions for Post-Graduate courses. According to certain statistics given
1
(2014) 11 SCC 456
5
in the reply, candidates of Karnataka origin numbering 4093 candidates

would be competing for admission to 1828 seats while 10003 candidates of

origin other than Karnataka which number includes 1263 candidates from

outside the State who had studied and completed MBBS/BDS Courses from

the colleges situated in Karnataka would be competing for admission to

2301 seats. The reply further submitted that the State was within its right to

formulate eligibility conditions to give preference to candidates who were

most likely to serve the State.
5.
In its reply, Medical Council of India (“MCI”, for short) submitted

that the Information Bulletin (PGET-2014) issued by the State of Karnataka

in the year 2014 contained similar eligibility criteria as provided in Clause

4.1 of the present Information Bulletin (PGET-2018) which was challenged

in the case of
Vishal Goyal
(supra) and that this Court held the preference

based on domicile to be violative of the principle of equality and liable to be

set aside.   After referring to various Judgments of this Court the reply set

out the emerging legal position as perceived by MCI in following terms:-
“a. Reservation of seats at the post graduate level has been in
      principle disapproved by the Hon’ble Supreme Court;
b.    Reservation of seats at the post graduate level on the
      basis of domicile/ residence/ place of origin is impermissible
      and cannot be done by the State;
6
c.    Institutional reservation/ preference for reserving seats at
       the post graduate level is permissible subject to an outer limit of
       50%;
d.    Institutional reservation/ preference can be invalidated on
       the ground that the same is violative of the principle of equality
       enshrined under
Article 14
of the Constitution of India;
e.     There cannot be any domicile requirement imposed by
       the State while implementing institutional reservation;
f.     Institutional reservation/ preference disguised as domicile
       reservation has been held to be invalid and violative of
Article
       14
of the Constitution.”
6.     We heard Mr. Amrendra Sharan, learned Senior Advocate for the

petitioners, Mr. Basavaprabhu S. Patil, learned Senior Advocate for State of

Karnataka and official respondents and Mr. Gaurav Sharma, learned

Advocate for MCI.
7.     Mr. Sharan, learned Senior Advocate relied upon the decisions of this

Court in Dr. Pradeep Jain and Others v. Union of India and Others2,

Saurabh Chaudri and Others v. Union of India and Others3, Magan

Mehrotra and Others v. Union of India and Others4, Nikhil Himthani v.
State of Uttarakhand and Others5 and finally on the decision of this Court

in
Vishal Goyal
(supra).
In his submission these decisions as culminated in
2
(1984) 3 SCC 654 paras 20, 22 and 24
3
(2003) 11 SCC 146 paras 29, 69 and 70
4
(2003)11 SCC 186 paras 3 and 8
5
(2013) 10 SCC 237 para 3
7
the decision in
Vishal Goyal
(supra) fully conclude the matter.            These

submissions were supported by Mr. Gaurav Sharma, learned Advocate for

the MCI.
8.       Mr. Patil, learned Senior Advocate, on the other hand relied upon the

decision of this Court in
D.P. Joshi v. State of Madhya Bharat and

Another6
and on paragraphs 6, 13 and 16 of the decision in Dr. Pradeep

Jain (supra), in support of his submissions.
9.       After conclusion of hearing, written submissions were filed by the

parties. In their written submissions, petitioners inter alia submitted that

Clause 4.1 of the Information Bulletin in question was violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution and was opposed to Regulation 9 of 2000 Regulations. A

chart was appended showing similarity between Clause 2 of PGET-2014

which was subject matter of the decision in
Vishal Goyal
(supra) and the

present Clause 4.1. In its written submissions MCI also relied upon 2000

Regulations and specially Regulation 9 thereof. It was further submitted:
“It is important to note that there are primarily two types of
         courses at post-graduate level i.e. post-graduate diploma
         courses and post graduate degree courses. On a close reading
         of Regulation 9(IV) and 9(VII) the distinction between post
         graduate diploma course and post-graduate degree course is
         apparent. It needs to be emphasized that as per Regulation 9
6
AIR 1955 SC 334 = 1955 (1) SCR 1215
8
and the amendments made therein from time to time,
      reservation of seats for in-service candidates is only permissible
      in post-graduate diploma courses. Further, there is no provision
      under the
IMC Act, 1956
and the Regulations framed
      thereunder which permits reservation in post-graduate degree
      courses.”
10.   State of Karnataka in its written submissions sought to justify the

action but did not explain how the decision in
Vishal Goyal
(supra) would

not be applicable in the present case. It was however submitted:-
“The State of Karnataka has 11615 Public Health Care
      Institutions managed by the Health and Family Department of
      the State. It is the objective of the State to provide secondary
      and tertiary care services too within the reach of common
      public. This objective is sought to be fulfilled by setting up of
      new State of the art institutions and strengthen the existing
      institutions through provisions of equipments, up-gradation of
      infrastructure and recruitment of skilled man power. Today,
      there are 3435 posts of specialists about which 1312 are vacant,
      underlying the deficiency of skilled medical professional to
      address the health care needs of the State. In the medical and
      dental educational institutions out of 2700 posts of specialists,
      517 are vacant highlighting the deficiency of skilled medical
      teachers to address the medical teachers’ needs of the State. 16
      out of 39 medical colleges in Karnataka are run by the State.
      There are 970 senior resident posts in these medical colleges,
      524 of which are vacant. The State has to ensure that these
      posts are filled up at any given point of time as stipulated by
      Medical Council of India. If these remain vacant for want of
      specialist, de-recognition looms large with the risk of
      jeopardizing the future of both undergraduate and post-graduate
      candidates’ studying in these colleges. The posts of senior
      resident need to be filled by fresh post graduates passing out
      every year. There is a huge requirement of specialists to run
      these institutions. Hence the State Government has to ensure
9
availability of adequate number of post graduates to fill these
      posts.”
11.   The decision of this Court in Dr. Pradeep Jain (supra) had considered

the Judgments rendered in
Kumari N. Vasundara v. State of Mysore and

Another7
,
Minor P. Rajendran v. State of Madras and Others
8,
Minor A.

Peeriakaruppan v. State of Tamil Nadu and Others
9 and
D.N. Chanchala

v. The State of Mysore and Others10
as well as the decision in
Dr. Jagadish

Saran and others v. Union of India11
and finally concluded:
“…. We unreservedly condemn wholesale reservation made by
      some of the State Government on the basis of institutional
      preference for students who have passed the qualifying
      examination held by the university or the State excluding all
      students not satisfying this requirement, regardless of merit.
      We declare such wholesale reservation to be unconstitutional
      and void as being in violation of
Article 14
of the Constitution.”
12.   During the course of its Judgment in Dr. Pradeep Jain (supra) this

Court also considered the impact of submissions from the concerned States

as advanced in various Judgments that were considered in paragraphs 14 to

16, which submissions were similar to the ones advanced before us by the

State either in the reply or in the written submissions. Para 22 of the
7
(1971) Suppl. SCR 381 = (1971) 2 SCC 22
8
1968 (2) SCR 786
9
1971 (2) SCR 430 = (1971) 1 SCC 38 = AIR 1971 SC 2303
10
(1971) Suppl SCR 608 = (1971) 2 SCC 293
11
(1980) 2 SCC 768= 1980 (2) SCR 831
10
decision in Dr. Pradeep Jain (supra) finally summed up the matter as

regards post graduate courses as under:-
“22. ….. The Medical Education Review Committee has also
      expressed the opinion that “all admissions to the post-graduate
      courses in any institution should be open to candidates on an
      all-India basis and there should be no restriction regarding
      domicile in the State/Union Territory in which the institution is
      located”. So also in the policy statement filed by the learned
      Attorney General, the Government of India has categorically
      expressed the view that:
“So far as admission to the institutions of post-
            graduate colleges and special professional colleges
            is concerned, it should be entirely on the basis of
            all-India   merit    subject    to   constitutional
            reservations in favour of Scheduled Castes and
            Scheduled Tribes.”

             We are therefore of the view that so far as admissions to
      post-graduate courses, such as MS, MD and the like are
      concerned, it would be eminently desirable not to provide for
      any reservation based on residence requirement within the State
      or on institutional preference. But, having regard to broader
      considerations of equality of opportunity and institutional
      continuity in education which has its own importance and
      value, we would direct that though residence requirement
      within the State shall not be a ground for reservation in
      admissions to post-graduate courses, a certain percentage of
      seats may in the present circumstances, be reserved on the basis
      of institutional preference in the sense that a student who has
      passed MBBS course from a medical college or university, may
      be given preference for admission to the post-graduate course in
      the same medical college or university but such reservation on
      the basis of institutional preference should not in any event
      exceed 50 per cent of the total number of open seats available
      for admission to the post-graduate course…..”
11
13.
In
Vishal Goyal
(supra) the challenge was to the validity of Clause 2.1

of the Information Bulletin for PGET-2014. The eligibility conditions as
laid down in
said Clause 2.1 are identical to those stipulated in the present

clause, namely, Clause 4.1 of PGET-2018.
Paragraphs 4, 10 to 13 and 15 of

the decision in
Vishal Goyal
(supra) were as under:
“4. The said Clause 2.1 of the two Information Bulletins, which
      is identically worded for admissions to postgraduate medical
      and postgraduate dental courses, is extracted hereinbelow:
“2.1. No candidate shall be admitted to a professional
         educational institution unless the candidate possesses the
         following qualifications or eligibility to appear for the
         entrance test namely:
(a) He is a citizen of India who is of Karnataka
            origin and has studied MBBS/BDS degree in a
            medical/dental college situated in Karnataka or
            outside Karnataka, and affiliated to any university
            established by law in India recognised by Medical
            Council of India and the Government of India.
Explanation.—‘A candidate of Karnataka Origin’
            means a candidate found eligible under clause (i)
            or (ii) below, namely:
(i)    A candidate who has studied and passed in
            one or more government recognised educational
            institutions located in the State of Karnataka for a
            minimum period of TEN academic years as on the
            last date fixed for the submission of application
            form, commencing from 1st standard to
            MBBS/BDS and must have appeared and passed
            either SSLC/10th standard or 2nd PUC/12th
12
standard examination from Karnataka State. In
case of the candidate who has taken more than one
year to pass a class or standard, the years of
academic study is counted as one year only.
Documents to be produced, namely:
(1) SSLC or 10th standard marks card.
(2) 2nd PUC or 12th standard marks card of the
candidate.
(3) Candidates Study Certificate: A study certificate
from the Head of educational institution where he or
she had studied. Further, School Study Certificates
should be countersigned by the Block Education
Officer (BEO)/Deputy Director of Public
Instructions (DDPI) concerned COMPULSORILY
in the proforma prescribed.
(4) Qualifying degree certificate and all phases
marks card.
(5) Domicile certificate issued by the Tahsildar in
the prescribed proforma (Annexure I); and if
claiming reservation benefits: Caste/Caste Income
Certificate issued by Tahsildar concerned, for SC/ST
in Form D, Category 1 in Form E and 2-A, 2-B, 3-A
and 3-B in Form F.
(6) MCI/DCI State Council Registration Certificate.
(7) Attempt Certificate issued by the college
Principal concerned.
(ii) The candidate should have studied and
passed 1st and 2nd years Pre-University
Examination or 11th and 12th standard
examination within the State of Karnataka from an
educational institution run or recognised by the
State Government or MBBS/BDS from a
professional educational institution located in
Karnataka and that either of the parents should
13
have studied in Karnataka for a minimum period of
      10 years.
Documents to be produced, namely:
(1) SSLC or 10th standard marks card.
(2) 2nd PUC or 12th standard marks card of the
      candidate.
(3) Qualifying degree certificate and all phases
      marks card.
(4) Domicile certificate issued by the Tahsildar in
      the prescribed proforma (Annexure I).
(5) If claiming reservation benefits: Caste/Caste
      Income Certificate issued by Tahsildar concerned,
      for SC/ST in Form D, Category 1 in Form E and 2-
      A, 2-B, 3-A and 3-B in Form F; and
      (6)     (a) A study certificate for either of the parent
      having studied for at least 10 years in Karnataka
      from the Head of the educational institution where
      he/she had studied. Further, school study certificates
      should be countersigned by the Block Educational
      Officer (BEO)/Deputy Director of Public
      Instructions (DDPI) concerned COMPULSORILY
      in the proforma prescribed (Annexure III).
(b) The candidates study certificate for
      having studied both 1st and 2nd PUC or 11th and
      12th standard in Karnataka issued by the Head of
      the educational institution.
(7) MCI/DCI State Council Registration Certificate.
    (8) Attempt Certificate issued by the college Principal
 concerned.”
…………
10. We have considered the submissions of the learned counsel
for the parties and we find that the basis of the judgment of this
14
Court in Pradeep Jain case is
Article 14
of the Constitution
which guarantees to every person equality before the law and
equal protection of the laws. As explained by this Court in paras
12 and 13 of the judgment in Nikhil Himthani v. State of
Uttarakhand: (SCC pp. 244-45)

      “12.
Article 14
of the Constitution guarantees to
      every person equality before law and equal
      protection of laws. In Jagadish Saran v. Union of
      India, Krishna Iyer, J., writing the judgment on
      behalf of the three Judges referring to
Article 14
of
      the Constitution held that equality of opportunity
      for every person in the country is the constitutional
      guarantee and therefore merit must be the test for
      selecting candidates, particularly in the higher
      levels of education like postgraduate medical
      courses, such as MD. In the language of Krishna
      Iyer, J.: (SCC pp. 778-79, para 23)

      ‘23. Flowing from the same stream of equalism is
      another limitation. The basic medical needs of a
      region or the preferential push justified for a
      handicapped group cannot prevail in the same
      measure all the highest scales of speciality where
      the best skill or talent, must be handpicked by
      selecting according to capability. At the level of
      PhD, MD, or levels of higher proficiency, where
      international measure of talent is made, where
      losing one great scientist or technologist in-the-
making is a national loss, the considerations we
      have expanded upon a important lose their
      potency. Here equality, measured by matching
      excellence, has more meaning and cannot be
      diluted much without grave risk.’
13. Relying on the aforesaid reasons in
Jagadish
      Saran v. Union of India
, a three-Judge Bench of
      this Court in Pradeep Jain case held that
      excellence cannot be compromised by any other
15
consideration for the purpose of admission to
      postgraduate medical courses such as MD/MS and
      the like because that would be detrimental to the
      interests of the nation and therefore reservation
      based on residential requirement in the State will
      affect the right to equality of opportunity under
Article 14
of the Constitution….”

       In
Magan Mehrotra v. Union of India
and
Saurabh
Chaudri v. Union of India
also, this Court has approved the
aforesaid view in Pradeep Jain case that excellence cannot be
compromised by any other consideration for the purpose of
admission to postgraduate medical courses such as MD/MS and
the like because that would be detrimental to the interests of the
nation and will affect the right to equality of opportunity under
Article 14
of the Constitution.
11. Mr Mariarputham is right that in
Saurabh Chaudri v.
Union of India
this Court has held that institutional preference
can be given by a State, but in the aforesaid decision of
Saurabh Chaudri, it has also been held that decision of the
State to give institutional preference can be invalidated by the
court in the event it is shown that the decision of the State is
ultra vires the right to equality under
Article 14
of the
Constitution. When we examine sub-clause (a) of Clause 2.1 of
the two Information Bulletins, we find that the expression “A
candidate of Karnataka origin” who only is eligible to appear
for entrance test has been so defined as to exclude a candidate
who has studied MBBS or BDS in an institution in the State of
Karnataka but who does not satisfy the other requirements of
sub-clause (a) of Clause 2.1 of the Information Bulletin for
PGET-2014.
Thus, the institutional preference sought to be
given by sub-clause (a) of Clause 2.1 of the Information
Bulletin for PGET-2014 is clearly contrary to the judgment of
this Court in Pradeep Jain case.
12. To quote from para 22 of the judgment in Pradeep Jain
case: (SCC p. 693)
16
“22. … a certain percentage of seats may in the
                present circumstances, be reserved on the basis of
                institutional preference in the sense that a student
                who has passed MBBS course from a medical
                college or university, may be given preference for
                admission to the postgraduate course in the same
                medical college or university….”
13. Sub-clause (a) of Clause 2.1 of the two Information
         Bulletins does not actually give institutional preference to
         students who have passed MBBS or BDS from colleges or
         universities in the State of Karnataka, but makes some of them
         ineligible to take the entrance test for admission to postgraduate
         medical or dental courses in the State of Karnataka to which the
         Information Bulletins apply.
…………
15. In the result, we allow the writ petitions, declare sub-clause
(a) of Clause 2.1 of the two Information Bulletins for
         postgraduate medical and dental courses for PGET-2014 as
         ultra vires
Article 14
of the Constitution and null and void. The
         respondent will now publish fresh Information Bulletins and do
         the admissions to the postgraduate medical and dental courses
         in the government colleges as well as the State quota of the
         private colleges in accordance with the law by the end of June
         2014 on the basis of the results of the entrance test already held.
         We also order that the general time schedule for counselling and
         admissions to postgraduate medical courses in our order dated
         14-3-2014 in
Fraz Naseem v. Union of India12
will not apply to
         such admissions in the State of Karnataka for the academic year
         2014-2015. Similarly, the general time schedule for counselling
         and admissions for postgraduate dental courses will not apply to
         such admissions in the State of Karnataka. The parties shall
         bear their own costs.”
12
(2014) 11 SCC 453
17
14.   Paragraphs 13 and 15 of the Judgment of this Court in
Vishal Goyal
(supra) are clear that the Information Bulletin for PGET-2014 did not

actually give institutional preference to students who had passed

MBBS/BDS from Colleges or universities in State of Karnataka but made

some of them ineligible to take the entrance test for admission to Post-

Graduate Medical or Dental Course in State of Karnataka and that said

clause was held ultra vires
Article 14
of the Constitution and declared null

and void.
The relevant clause under consideration, namely, Clause 4.1 of the

Information Bulletin for PGET-2018 is identical in substance to the one that

was considered in
Vishal Goyal
(supra).
The matter is thus no longer res-

integra and is completely covered by the decision in
Vishal Goyal
(supra).
In the circumstances, we respectfully follow the decision of this Court in
Vishal Goyal
(supra) and hold Clause 4.1 of the Information Bulletin

(PGET-2018) which was published on the website on 10.03.2018 to be

invalid to the extent it disqualifies petitioners and similarly situated

candidates who completed their MBBS/BDS Degree Courses from colleges

situated in Karnataka from competing for admission to Post-Graduate

Medical/Dental Courses in Government Medical Colleges and against

government quota seats in non-governmental institutions
18
15.   This writ petition stands allowed in the aforesaid terms. State of

Karnataka and Respondent Nos.2 and 3 are directed to suitably modify and

amend the Information Bulletin in question in keeping with the observations

made in this Judgment and re-publish the Calendar of     Events in terms of

this Judgment and complete the entire process within the timeline stipulated

by the concerned regulatory authorities.
...…..…………….J.
                                                        (Arun Mishra)



                                                        ...……….……….J.
                                                       (Uday Umesh Lalit)
New Delhi
April 4, 2018