[Cites
7
, Cited by
42
]
Supreme Court of India
M.P.Power Generation Co.Ltd.. And Anr vs Ansaldo Energia Spa And Anr on 16 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1345
Author:
L. Nageswara Rao
Bench:
L. Nageswara Rao
,
S.A. Bobde
Non-Reportable


        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

     Civil Appeal No.      3804          of 2018
  (Arising out of S.L.P. (Civil) No. 39067 of 2013)


M.P. POWER GENERATION CO. LTD. & ANR.
                                   .... Appellants

                         Versus

ANSALDO ENERGIA SPA & ANR.
                                         ….Respondents

                     JUDGMENT
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
Leave granted.
1. M.P. Power Generation Co. Ltd. formerly known as

     Madhya    Pradesh   Electricity   Board   (hereinafter

     referred to as ‘the Board’) invited proposals for

     refurbishment of Units 3 and 4 of the Thermal Power

     Plants at Amarkantak having the capacity of 120 MW

     by a notice inviting tender dated 24th October, 1996.

     A provisional Letter of Intent for refurbishment of

     Thermal Power Plant of 2 x 120 MW Phase–II was

     issued by the Board to Respondent No.1, ANSALDO

     Energia SPA (for short ‘the Claimant’) on 11th May,
1
1999.     Thereafter, on 24th August, 1999 four

  Agreements were signed between the Claimants and

  the Board viz Overall Coordination Agreement,

  Offshore Supply Contract, Onshore Supply Contract

  and Onshore Services Contract.
2. A Bank Guarantee dated 22 nd February, 2000 was

  furnished by the Claimants as per Clause 9.2 (a) of

  the Onshore Supply Contract for Rs. 9,29,20,000/-

  (10 per cent of the Onshore Supply Contract price).

  Another Bank Guarantee was furnished by the

  Claimants on 23rd February, 2000 as per the

  stipulation in Clause 9.2(a) of the Offshore Supply

  Agreement for US $ 1,708,100/-.      The above Bank

  Guarantees were given towards advance payment

  that was to be made by the Board.               On 24 th

  February, 2000, a Performance Bond was executed

  by the ANZ Grindlays Bank Limited on behalf of the

  Claimants for Rs.18,48,00,000/-    (10 per cent of the

  total Contract price) pursuant to Clause 4.1 of the

  Overall   Coordination    Agreement.      The     Board

  subsequently   made      advance   payments     of   the
2
amounts equivalent to the two Bank Guarantees

  dated 22nd February, 2000 and 23rd February, 2000

  given by the Claimant.
3. The Zero Date (i.e. effective date of Contract) as per

  Clause 7 of the Overall Coordination Agreement is as

  follows:
“7. Notice to Proceed
 7.1 Zero Date (Effective Date of Contract)
       The zero date of the Contract shall mean the date
       on which the all the following conditions are
       fulfilled:
(i)     Signature of the Contract
       (ii)    Receipt by ANSALDO of the Notice to Proceed
       (iii)    Receipt by MPEB the Bank Guarantee from
ANSALDO for the Advance Payment (10% of
                the Contract Price)
(iv) Receipt by ANSALDO of the Advance Payment
(v)     Receipt by ANSALDO of the Letter of Credit
       for the       Offshore Supply and Letter of Comfort/
       Support for Onshore Supply and Onshore Services
(vi) Financial tie-up of PFC loans

 7.2   If the Start Date has not occurred on or before six
       (6) months after the date hereof, then the Contract
       will automatically expire, without any liability on
       either side and the price will cease to be valid and
       will be subject to renegotiation.
7.3   MPEB may not issue a Notice to Proceed under any
       of the Refurbishment Contracts without issuing a
       Notice to Proceed under all of the Contracts.”
4. It was agreed between the parties that the Zero

  Date would be 9th March, 2000.            Thereafter, there

  was    exchange      of   correspondence       and   several

  meetings held between the Claimant and the Board

  for resolution of certain issues.        In response to a
3
letter written by the Board on 15 th June, 2001, the

  Claimant wrote to the Board on 21 st June, 2001 to

  treat the Agreement as expired.       The Claimant

  stated in the said letter that it was suspending the

  performance of the Agreement.         There was a

  reference to violation of a fundamental condition of

  the Contract i.e. non-furnishing of a Letter of

  Comfort from the Power Finance Corporation as

  provided in Clause 5.6 of the Onshore Supply

  Contract.   The Claimant further complained of a

  misrepresentation of the warranty contained in

  Clause 19.2 (vii) of both the Onshore and Offshore

  Supply Contracts and Clause 20.2 of the Onshore

  Services Contract.
5. The Board invoked the three Bank Guarantees on

  23rd June, 2001. Thereafter, the Board proceeded to

  issue a notice for default as provided in Clause 16.3

  of the Offshore and Onshore Supply Contracts and

  Clause 17.3 of Onshore Services Contracts on 29 th

  August, 2001. The Board complained of substantial

  breach of Agreement on the part of the Claimant.

  The Claimant was given 30 days’ time for curing the
4
defaults. The Claimant responded by submitting a

 representation on 8th January, 2000. Not satisfied

 with the explanation given by the Claimant, the

 Board terminated the contract. The Claimant raised

 a dispute which was referred to Arbitration.            The

 Arbitral Tribunal passed an award in favour of the

 Claimant on 23rd September, 2004 in the following

 terms:
“1)   It is declared that:
a)     The three Bank Guarantees were
      wrongfully       invoked and encashed by
      the Respondent.
      b)     The agreements were wrongfully
      terminated       by the Respondent.
      c)     The agreements are voidable at the
      option      of the Claimants and have been
      avoided by       them.
2)    The Respondent shall pay to the Claimants:
      i)     the sum of Rs 39,80,98,429/- with
interest thereon at the rate of 12% per
      annum from       5th July, 2001 till the date of
      the Award and thereafter until payment or
      realization.
ii)    the sum of Rs.11,14,55,042/- with
      interest thereon at the rate of 12% per
      annum from       29th July, 2002, being the
      date of the claim, till the date of the
      Award and thereafter until       payment      or
      realization.
iii) The respondent shall pay to the
      Claimants        the sum of Rs.2000000 as
      and by way of costs, including the costs of
      the arbitration proceedings."
5
6. The Petition filed by the Board under
Section 34
of

  the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short

  “the Act”) was allowed by the learned 7 th Additional

  District Judge, Jabalpur and the award dated 23 rd

  September, 2004 of the Arbitral Tribunal set aside.

  The learned Additional District Judge upheld the

  findings of the Arbitral Tribunal on Issues No.1 to 7.

  Breach of contract by the Board in view of (a)

  violation of a fundamental condition of the contract

  i.e., not furnishing Letter of Comfort from Power

  Finance Corporation and, (b) misrepresentation by

  the Board in Clause 19.2 (vii) of the agreements as

  concluded by the Arbitral Tribunal were approved by

  the learned Additional District Judge. However, the

  Learned Additional District Judge found fault with the

  award pertaining to Bank Guarantees and the

  amounts specified in Exhibit- GG of the Claim

  Petition. On the basis of the opinion that the Arbitral

  Tribunal had acted in excess of its jurisdiction in

  granting relief to the Claimant under the above

  heads, the learned Additional District Judge set aside

  the award.
6
7. Aggrieved by the rejection of Issue No.13 by the

  Arbitral   Tribunal   which   pertains     to     amounts

  mentioned in Exhibit- HH to the Statement of

  Claim(Damages for the wrongful breach of Contract),

  the Claimant preferred an application under
Section

  34
of the Act. The said application was dismissed by

  the learned Additional District Judge.      The Appeal

  filed by the Claimant against the judgment of the

  learned Additional District Judge was later withdrawn

  and the dismissal has attained finality.        We are not

  concerned with the said claim in this case.
8. The Claimant filed an appeal before the High Court

  challenging the judgment of the Additional District

  Judge by which the Award of the Arbitral Tribunal

  was set aside. The High Court set aside the

  judgment of the learned Additional District Judge

  and restored the award of the Arbitral Tribunal. The

  High Court held that the Additional District Judge

  committed a serious error in interfering with the

  finding of the Arbitral Tribunal on Issues 9 to 12 after

  upholding the award in respect of Issues 1 to 7. The
7
High Court observed that Bank Guarantees are

    independent contracts between the Bank and the

    beneficiary. Relying upon the conditions in the Bank

    Guarantees which related to the invocation only on

    the ‘non-fulfillment of contractual obligations’, the

    High Court approved the findings of the Arbitral

    Tribunal that the Board could not have invoked the

    Bank   Guarantees     without    proving   breach   of

    contractual obligations on the part of the Claimant.

    Aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court, the

    Board has filed the above Appeal.
The Agreements
9. As stated above, the Contract between the Claimant

    and the Board pertains to refurbishment of Units 3

    and 4 of the Amarkantak Thermal Power Station

    located in Shadol District of Madhya Pradesh. Four

    Agreements in all were entered into between the

    Claimant and the Board.     An Overall Coordination

    Agreement was executed on 24th August, 1999

    which provided for three other Agreements which

     are :
(i)   Offshore Supply Contract,
(ii) Onshore Supply Contract,
8
(iii) Onshore Services Contract.
10.     It is necessary to refer to the relevant provisions

   of the Agreements for a better understanding of the

   issues     involved   in   this   case.         As   per    the

   Agreements, the target completion period for the

   first and the second Unit was 18 ½ months and 22 ½

   months from the issuance of notice to proceed

   respectively.
11.     Clause 4 of the Overall Coordination Agreement

   which deals with Performance Guarantees is as

   follows:
“4.    Performance Guarantees
 4.1    ANSALDO shall deliver to MPEB within fifteen days
        from the Zero Date, as defined in Clause 3 of each
        of the Offshore Supply Contract, the Onshore
        Supply Contract and the Onshore Services
        Contract, a performance bond (as per attachment
        to this Co-ordination Agreement) in the sum of ten
        per cent (10%) of the total Contract Price which
        may be drawn against only in the event that
        ANSALDO does not perform the activities towards
        faithful fulfillment of all the terms and conditions
        of this Agreement except for the fulfillment of the
        Guaranteed Parameters, which are covered in
        clauses 4.2 and 4.3 herein. The validity of the
        Bank Guarantee shall expire upon the earlier of
(i)    the Completion Date plus six (6) months towards
        Claim Period;
(ii)   the date of termination of this Agreement
        pursuant to Clause 17 of the Offshore Supply and
        Onshore Supply Contract or Clause 18 of the
        Onshore Services Contract plus six (6) months
        towards Claim Period provided the termination is
        not due to breach of Contract on part of
        ANSALDO;
9
(iii)   upon submission of Guarantee Bond as per clause
        4.3 of this Agreement.
4.2     ANSALDO shall deliver to MPEB a Bank Guarantee
        (as per attachment to this Co-ordination
        Agreement in the sum of twelve and one half per
        cent (12 ½ %) of the Total Contract Price to
        guarantee the      successful achievement of the
        Guarantee       Parameters     (Indemnity    Bank
        Guarantee). Such         Bank Guarantee shall be
        delivered to MPEB on the date ANSALDO submits
        its initial monthly invoice for payment to MPEB.
        The validity of such Bank Guarantee shall expire
        on the earlier of:
(i)     Completion Date plus six (6) months towards
        Claim Period;
(ii)    the date of termination of this Agreement
        pursuant to Clause 17 of the Offshore Supply and
        Onshore Supply Contract or Clause 18 of the
        Onshore Services Contract plus six (6) months
        towards Claim Period provided the termination is
        not due to breach of Contract on part of
        ANSALDO.
For the sake of administration of the Indemnity
        Bank Guarantee, the following will apply:
(i)     Tolerances     for    the    various   guaranteed
        parameters, will be as per the International
        Standards (BS, ASME, DIN, Japanese and Russian)
(ii)    If there are any shortfalls beyond the tolerances,
        ANSALDO will be provided reasonable time for
        rectifying the defects, with no financial
        implications to MPEB. Such reasonable periods
        will not be considered for computation of the
        Contractual Delivery Period.
(iii)   Beyond the occurrence of item (i) and (ii) above,
        the Indemnity Bank Guarantee can be drawn.
4.3     ANSLDO shall deliver to MPEB a Bank Guarantee
        (as per attachment to this Co-ordination
        Agreement) in the sum of 15% of the Total
        Contract Price no later than the First Unit
        Completion Date which may be drawn only in the
        event the Guarantee Parameters for          Three
        Years are not met, with respect to each of Unit
        No.3 and Unit No.4 during the applicable
        Guaranteed Period for Three Years. The validity of
        such Bank Guarantee shall expire at the end of
        the third year after the date of the Second Unit
        Completion Date.”
10
Clause 9.2 of the Offshore and Onshore Supply

Contracts which provides for issuance of Bank Guarantee

against submission of advance payment, reads as under:
OFFSHORE SUPPLY CONTRACT
     “9 Contract Price and Terms of Payment
     9.1 As payment for ANSALDO’S performance of the
     supplies and obligations under this Contract, MPEB shall
     pay to ANSALDO an amount of Seventeen Million Eighty
     One Thousand (17.081 Million) US Dollars, as per the
     price breakdown furnished in the Sixth Schedule.
9.2 TERMS OF PAYMENT
a) MPEB shall pay to ANSALDO an interest free
     advance payment “the Advance Payment”) equal to
     ten per cent (10 %) of the Contract Price on the date
     on which MPEB issues the Notice to Proceed Against
     submission of Advance Payment Bank Guarantee on
     declining basis, of equivalent value, valid upto the
     date of completion of the last supplies.”

     ONSHORE SUPPLY CONTRACT
     “9.   Contract Price and Terms of Payment
     9.1 As payment for ANSALDO’S performance of the
     supplies and obligations under this Contract, MPEB
     shall pay to ANSALDO an amount of Rs. Nine
     Hundred Twenty Nine Million Two Hundred thousand
     (929.20 Million Rs.), as per the price breakdown
     furnished in the Sixth Schedule.
9.2 TERMS OF PAYMENT
a) MPEB shall pay to ANSALDO an interest free
     advance payment “the Advance Payment”) equal to
     ten per cent (10 %) of the Contract Price on the date
     on which MPEB issues the Notice to Proceed Against
     submission of Advance Payment Bank Guarantee on
     declining basis, of equivalent value, valid upto the
     date of completion of the last supplies.”


     Clause 16.3 of the Offshore Supply Contract requires

a written notice to be issued to the defaulting party in case

of a substantial breach of the Agreement. A cure period of
11
30 days is provided in Clause 16.4 to the defaulting party

after receipt of the notice under Clause 16.3. Termination

of the agreement as per Clause 17 is in the following

terms:
“17. Termination
    17.1 If (i) a substantial breach specified in a notice
          under clause 16.3 is not remedied within the Cure
          Period; or (ii) a Force Majeure has occurred and
          has continued as indicated in Clause 15.5; then
          the non-Defaulting Party in the circumstances of
          sub-Clause (i), and either party, in            the
          circumstances of sub-clause (ii), may without
          prejudice to any other right or remedy in respect
          of any pre-existing breach, terminate this
          agreement by further notice in writing to the
          Defaulting Party.
17.2 Upon termination of this Agreement, MPEB shall
          pay to ANSALDO, in full the following:
(i)   the value of the Equipment supplied and any
          other work performed up to the date of
          termination which was not previously paid by
          MPEB;
(ii)  any cost incurred by ANSALDO after the date of
          termination incurred as a result of the termination
          due to fault of MPEB;
17.3 Upon termination of this Agreement, any
          remaining Equipment for which payment has
          been received by ANSALDO in the performance of
          its obligations or delays its performance under
          this agreement.”

    Representations and warranties on the part of the

Board are dealt with in Clause 19.2.           Clause 19.2 (vii)

which is relevant for the purpose of this case reads as

under:
“19.2 MPEB represents and warrants to ANSALDO that:
….
….
(vii) Each of Unit No.3 and Unit No.4 was designed and
          constructed to achieve the Operating Parameters,
12
and did in fact operate at 120 MW when operating
           in accordance with Good Industry Practice.”

     Similar    provisions     relating    to    default    notice,

termination and warranties in the Offshore Supply Contract

are there in the Onshore Supply and Onshore Services

Contracts as well.
Award of the Arbitral Tribunal
12.     The Arbitral Tribunal framed the following issues

      for determination of the dispute raised by the

      Claimant:
“1.   Whether the Respondent had supplied the
           technical documents and information to the
           Claimants as required by Clause 5.8 (iv) of the
           Onshore Services Agreement?
2.    Whether the Claimants had waived the production
                 of the Letter of Comfort of the Power
           Finance Corporation as required by Clause 5.6 of
           the Onshore Supply Contract and Schedule 7?
3.    Thereto and Clause 5.14 of the Onshore Services
           Contract and Schedule 7 thereto?
4.    Whether the issuance of the Letter Comfort/
           Support by Power Finance Corporation to Asia
           Power Projects Pvt. Ltd. (Claimant No.2) (“ASPL”)
           was a fundamental condition of the contract
           agreements?
5.    Whether Units 3 and 4 of the Amarkantak Power
           Station did in fact operate at a capacity of 120
           MW when they were first installed in 1997 when
                 operating in accordance with Good Industry
                 Practice as warranted by the Respondent in
           Clause 19.2 (vii) of the conditions of contract for
           Offshore and Onshore Supplies and Clause 20.2
(vii) of the conditions of contract for
           Onshore Services?
6.    Whether the Respondent co-operated with the
                 Claimants in carrying out the RLA tests?
7.    Whether the Respondent’s insistence on
           approving the Claimants’ vendors was legal?
13
8.   Whether the unilateral amendment by the
      Respondent of the Letter of Credit without the
             consent in writing of ANSALDO Energia
      S.P.A. – Claimant No.1 (“ANSALDO”) was wrongful
      and whether such amendment required the
      consent of ANSALDO and of its bankers?
9.   Whether the invocation and encashment by the
      Respondent of the Bank Guarantees was
 wrongful, premature, illegal and fraudulent?
10. Whether the termination of the Contract
             Agreements by the Respondent was
      wrongful?
11. Whether the Claimants are entitled to the amount
      claimed in Exhibit FF to the Statement of Claim?
12. Whether the Claimants are entitled to the amount
      claimed in Exhibit GG to the Statement of Claim?
13. Whether the Claimants are entitled to the amount
      claimed in Exhibit HH to the Statement of Claim?
14. Whether the Respondent is entitled to any of the
      amounts/ claimed by it in its Counter Claim?
15.    Whether the Tribunal should award the
             continuation of the Interim Order of the
      Jabalpur     District Court dated July 6 and 7,
      2001?
16. What order should the Tribunal pronounce for
      costs? ”
13.   The   Arbitral   Tribunal   held    that   there   was

  misrepresentation on the part of the Board in

  respect of the capacity of the Plant as well as its

  operating parameters and breach of a fundamental

  condition of the contract relating to Letter of

  Comfort not being furnished.           Termination of the

  contract was found to be bad in law.           Issues No.1

  and 4 were answered as follows:
“Dealing with Issue No.4 first, the terms of the
      representation and warranty clause needs to be
      noted.     The Respondent “represents and
      warrants” to the Claimants that “each of Unit
14
Nos.3 and 4 was designed and constructed to
achieve the operating parameters and, in fact,
operated at 120 MW when operated in
accordance with good industry practice”. The
representation that the Respondent made and
warranted was twofold; first, in respect of the
operating parameters that the Units were
designed and constructed to achieve and,
secondly that the Units did, in fact, operate at 120
MW, when operating in accordance with good
industry practice.
It would appear from the evidence of the
Respondent’s witness Saxena that the first
representation and warranty was made only of
the strength of the manufacturer’s plaque
attached to the Units, but this representation and
warranty is of far less import than the
representation and warranty that the Units had, in
fact, operated at 120 MW when operated in
accordance with good industry practice. It is an
admitted position that no performance test upon
commissioning of the Units had been carried out.
It is clear upon the evidence that the only record
which the Respondent had which showed that the
Units had in fact operated at 120 MW were the log
sheets of February 23,26, 27, 1983 for Unit Nos.3
and December 29, 30 and 31, 1982 and February
24, 25, 26 and 27, 1983 for Unit No.4. In the first
place, these do not show and it is not the case
that they show that the operation of the Units at
those times was in accordance with good industry
practice. Moreover, even if one were to ignore
the inconsistencies pointed by the Claimants’
witnesses in the log sheets, a representation and
warranty of this magnitude was unwarranted for
the language of the representation and warranty
suggests that the Units were operated over a
span of time, of about 25 years, to produce 120
MW when operated in accordance with good
industry practice. The inconsistencies cannot,
however, be ignored for they suggest that what
was recorded in the concerned log sheet was not,
in fact, the production of 120 MW. When, for the
same hour of the same day, the production is
measured at 120 MW at one spot and 115 MW at
another, it cannot be said with any confidence
that the production was in fact 120 MW.
The representation and warranty given to the
Respondent as aforesaid, must, therefore, be held
to be a positive assertion in a manner not
15
warranted by the information of the Respondent,
      of that which was not true, though the
      Respondent might believe it to be true. In other
      words, the representation and warranty was a
      misrepresentation as defined by
Section 18
of the
      Contract Act. The evidence of the Claimant’s
      witness Richetti is that the Claimants entered into
      the contracts only because of this representation
      and warranty and his evidence to that effect has
      not been dented in cross examination. Under
Section 19
of the Contract Act, when consent to
      an agreement is caused by misrepresentation, the
      agreement is a contract voidable at the option of
      the party whose consent was so caused. The
      Claimants desire to avoid the contracts and we
      think that, in the circumstances they are entitled
      to do so.
In so far as Issue No.1 is concerned, the
      Respondent contracted to make available to the
      Claimants, free of charge, “all relevant records of
      the power station and the existing Operations and
      Maintenance Manual of the power station.” Mr.
      Agnihotri submitted that the words “relevant
      records” meant such records as were in the
      possession of the Respondent. We do not find this
      interpretation acceptable. “All relevant records of
      the power station” covers each and every record
      relating to the power station that is relevant for
      the purpose of the refurbishment thereof. The
      phraseology used leads to the conclusion that the
      Respondent was stating that it had in its
      possession all the relevant records and would
      make them available to the Claimants, along with
      the operations and maintenance manual. The
      evidence on record shows clearly that the
      Respondent possessed very few of the relevant
      records of the Units. The failure of the
      Respondent to supply to the Claimants the
      relevant records of the Units was very likely to
      have a material adverse effect on the ability of
      the Claimants to perform their obligations under
      the contract and, as such, was a substantial
      breach by the Respondent of the contract.”
14.   The Arbitral Tribunal determined Issues 2 and 3

  in favour of the Claimant by observing that there
16
was no waiver on the part of the Claimant regarding

production of the Letter of Comfort. The production

of   the   Letter   of   Comfort   was   a   fundamental

condition of the Agreements and the failure to

produce the same was a breach on the part of the

Board.     The invocation of Bank Guarantees by the

Board was found to be improper by the Arbitral

Tribunal in its findings on Issues 8 and 9. According

to the Tribunal, the Contract could have been

terminated only after expiry of 30 days’ cure period.

The invocation of Bank Guarantees in this case was

done on 23rd June, 2001 which was prior to the

issuance of the notice of default on 29 th August,

2001.      The termination of the Agreement by the

Board was found to be bad in law.              Exhibit–FF

annexed to the Statement of Claim sought for by the

Claimant pertains to the return of the amounts for

which Bank Guarantees were given by the Claimant

and invoked by the Board, along with interest.

Exhibit- GG to the Statement of Claim includes

amount spent by the Claimant towards the Residual

Life Assessment (R.L.A.) Study and other material
17
procured including electric drum level indicator, UPS

     system– 20 KVA, boiler pressure parts, etc. After a

     detailed scrutiny of the evidence on record, the

     Arbitral Tribunal awarded the Claimant amounts

     mentioned in Exhibits- FF and GG appended to the

     Statement of Claim. Issue No. 13 was answered

     against the Claimant. Claim forming part of Ex. HH

     (damages for wrongful termination of contract) to

     the statement of claim was rejected.
Submissions
15.   We have heard Shri Dushyant Dave, learned

     Senior Counsel for the Appellants and Shri S.U.

     Kamdar,    learned    Senior      Counsel     for   the

     Respondents. Shri Dave submitted that the award of

     the Arbitral Tribunal suffers from fundamental flaws

     and requires interference.       He relied upon the

     judgments of this Court to contend that the award is

     perverse and is vitiated due to patent illegality. He

     found fault with the finding of the Arbitral Tribunal

     that there was misrepresentation on the part of the

     Board.     He   submitted      that   the   plant   was

     manufactured by BHEL in the year 1972 which
18
certified that the Units have the capacity of 120 MW.

Commenting on the representation and warranties

found in Clause 19.2 (vii) of the Agreements, he

stated that it cannot be said that there was any

misrepresentation on the part of the Board.              He

placed reliance on the log sheets to show that the

plant was running to its capacity of 120 MW.             He

further   submitted     that   there    were     about   13

inspections   conducted        by     experts    from    the

Claimants’ side and it is inconceivable that they did

not know about the capacity and performance of the

plant. He argued that all the available records were

furnished to the Claimant.          According to him, the

Claimant had full knowledge about the capacity and

the performance of the plant in spite of which they

did not perform their part of the Contract for reasons

best known to them. Shri Dave proceeded to submit

that after a series of meetings and exchange of

letters, the Claimant agreed for the Zero Date as 9 th

March, 2000. After such agreement, the Claimant is

said to have waived its right of claiming the Letter of

Comfort    from   the    Power      Finance     Corporation.
19
According to him, the Letter of Comfort was not a

  fundamental condition of the Contract and it had no

  bearing on the performance of the obligation on the

  part of the Claimant.    He further stated that the

  Claimant was aware of the fact that the amounts

  advanced to the Claimant were given by the Power

  Finance Corporation to the Board.     He found fault

  with the finding of the Arbitral Tribunal that the

  termination of the Contract by the Board was illegal.
16.   Shri Dave highlighted the error committed by

  Arbitral Tribunal in treating all the Bank Guarantees

  as furnished in pursuance of Clause 4 of the Overall

  Coordination Agreement.      The conclusion of the

  Arbitral Tribunal that the invocation of the Bank

  Guarantee was not proper as it was done prior to the

  termination of the Contract was challenged by Shri

  Dave.   He further urged that the award towards

  Issue No.12 deserves to be set aside as the Claimant

  has been awarded compensation for the goods

  which were not supplied.    According to Shri Dave,

  the Claimant neither supplied nor commenced any

  work according to the Contract in spite of which the
20
Arbitral Tribunal has allowed these claims. There is

  a lack of judicial approach on the part of arbitral

  Tribunal for which reason Shri Dave urged that the

  award deserves to be set aside.
17.   Shri     S.U.   Kamdar,   learned   Senior   Counsel

  contended that the award of the Arbitral Tribunal is

  well reasoned after taking into account the entire

  material on record and it does not suffer from any

  infirmity.    He submitted that the parameters for

  exercise of power by the Courts under
Section 34
of

  the Act are well settled. Applying the principles laid

  down by this Court in several judgments, Shri

  Kamdar contended that this Appeal should not be

  entertained.        He further submitted that a plain

  reading of the Clause 19.2 (vii) pertaining to the

  representation and warranties would show that there

  was a misrepresentation on the part of the Board.

  The Clause which was added after deliberations

  between the parties is to the effect that both Units 3

  and 4 operated at 120 MW when operating in

  accordance with good industry practice. He referred

  to the evidence on record before the Tribunal to
21
argue that there is no material to show that the

plant operated at 120 MW.        He stated that the

incomplete log sheets that were filed by the Board

also suffer from internal discrepancies as rightly held

by the Arbitral Tribunal.       Shri Kamdar further

submitted that the Arbitral Tribunal correctly found

furnishing a Letter of Comfort by Power Finance

Corporation to be a fundamental condition which

was breached by the Board. He relied upon Clause

22 of both the Supply Contracts to submit that the

counsel for the Board was not right in arguing that

there was a waiver on the part of the Claimant. He

further argued that there is voluminous oral and

documentary evidence on record to demonstrate

that material was procured and equipment was

manufactured for supply as per the terms of the

contract. He also stated that the equipment which

was specially designed for the Thermal Plants at

Amarkantak will be of no use to any other plant. It

was only due to the breach on the part of the Board

that the supply did not take place. Concluding his
22
submissions, Shri Kamdar submitted that the appeal

      deserves to be dismissed.
Section 34
of the Act - ‘Public Policy’
18.   It is necessary to refer to the settled law on the

      scope of
Sections 34
of the Act. In this case we are

      concerned with the point as to whether an arbitral

      award can be set aside for being in conflict with the

      public policy of India. An arbitral award can be set

      aside if it is contrary to (a) fundamental policy of

      Indian law, or (b) the interest of India, or (c) justice

      or morality.      (
Renusagar      Power Co. Ltd. v.

      General Electric Co.1
) Patent illegality was added

      to the above three grounds in ONGC v. Saw Pipes

      Ltd.2.   Illegality must go to the root of the matter

      and incase the illegality is of trivial nature it cannot

      be held that the award is against the public policy.
It

      was further observed in the said judgment (ONGC

      v. Saw Pipes (supra)) that an award could also be

      set aside if it is so unfair and unreasonable that it

      shocks the conscience of the Court. In Delhi

      Development Authority v. M/s. R.S. Sharma &

1               (1994) Supp.1 SCC 644
2               (2003) 5 SCC 705
23
Co.3 it was held that an award can be interfered with

      by the Court under
Section 34
of the Act when it is

      contrary to :
a) substantive provisions of law; or
b) provisions of the 1996 Act; or
c) against the terms of the respective contract; or
d) patently illegal; or
e) prejudicial to the rights of the parties

     The fundamental policy of India was explained in

ONGC Ltd. v. Western Geco International Co. Ltd.4 as

including all such fundamental principles as providing a

basis for administration of justice and enforcement of law

in this country. It was held inter alia, that a duty is cast on

every tribunal or authority exercising powers that affect

the rights or obligations of the parties to show a ‘judicial

approach’.    It was further held that judicial approach

ensures that an authority acts bona fide and deals with the

subject in a fair, reasonable and objective manner and its

decision is not actuated by any extraneous considerations.
It was also held that the requirement of application of mind

on the part of the adjudicatory authority is so deeply

embedded in our jurisprudence that it can be described as

a fundamental policy of Indian law.       This Court further

3               (2008) 13 SCC 80
4               (2014) 9 SCC 263
24
observed that the award of the Arbitral Tribunal is open to

challenge when the arbitrators fail to draw an inference

which ought to be drawn or if they had drawn an inference

which on the face of it is untenable resulting in miscarriage

of justice. The Court has the power to modify the offending

part of the award in case it is severable from the rest

according to the said judgment (Western Geco ltd.

(supra)).
19.     The limit of exercise of power by Courts under
Section 34
of the Act has been comprehensively

      dealt with by Justice R.F. Nariman in the case of
Associate         Builders     v.   Delhi    Development

      Authority5
. Lack of judicial approach, violation of

      principles of natural justice, perversity and patent

      illegality    have     been    identified   as   grounds   for

      interference with an award of the Arbitrator.
The

      restrictions placed on the exercise of power of a

      Court under
Section 34
of the Act have been

      analyzed and enumerated in
Associated Builders
(supra) which are as follows:
5                  (2015) 3 SCC 49
25
a) The Court under
Section 34(2)
of the Act, does not

act as a Court of appeal while applying the ground of

“public policy” to an arbitral award and consequently

errors of fact cannot be corrected.
b) A possible view by the arbitrator on facts has

necessarily to pass muster as the Arbitrator is the sole

judge of the quantity and quality of the evidence.
c) Insufficiency of evidence cannot be a ground for

interference by the Court. Re-examination of the facts to

find out whether a different decision can be arrived at is

impermissible under
Section 34 (2)
of the Act.
d) An award can be set aside only if it shocks the

conscience of the Court.
e) Illegality must go to the root of the matter and

cannot be of a trivial nature for interference by a Court. A

reasonable construction of the terms of the contract by the

arbitrator cannot be interfered with by the Court. Error of

construction is within the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator.

Hence, no interference is warranted.
f) If there are two possible interpretations of the

terms of the contract, the arbitrator’s interpretation has to
26
be accepted and the Court under
Section 34
cannot

substitute its opinion over the Arbitrator’s view.

Application of the Law
20.   The Arbitral Tribunal held that the termination of

      the contract by the Board on 08.01.2002 was illegal.

      This finding was on the basis that the Board

      committed a breach of the contract. The breach of

      the contract on the part of the Board was due to the

      failure in furnishing Letter of Comfort from the Power

      Finance Corporation, non-supply of the technical

      documents and information as required by Clause

      5.8 (iv) of the Onshore Service Agreement and

      misrepresentation.
Letter of Comfort and Waiver
21.   Clause 5.14 of the Onshore Services Contract

      and Clause 5.6 of the Onshore Supply Contract

      provide for an irrevocable Letter of Comfort to be

      issued by the Power Finance Corporation in favour of

      the Claimant, on the date of issuance of the Notice

      to Proceed by the Board.          There is a further

      requirement in the said Clauses that the Board shall

      ensure that the Letter of Comfort is maintained in
27
full force and effect throughout the term of the

  agreements. The Claimant’s contention before the

  Arbitral Tribunal was that the production of the

  Letter of Comfort was a fundamental condition of

  the agreements and the failure to produce it was a

  breach of the contract.          The Board’s response to

  such contention was that the Claimant is deemed to

  have waived the production of the Letter of Comfort.

  Waiver was pleaded by the Board on the basis of a

  letter dated 10.03.2000 written by the Claimant

  accepting the Zero Date as 09.03.2000 and the oral

  concession     made       by     Sh.   G.   Ravindran,    a

  representative of the Claimant.
22.     The Arbitral Tribunal opined that the production

  of Letter of Comfort was a fundamental condition of

  the agreements and the Claimant cannot be said to

  have waived the production of Letter of Comfort.

  The     contention   of   oral    concession    made     by

  Sh.G.Ravindran was considered by the Arbitral

  Tribunal with reference to the evidence on record.

  The oral evidence of Sh. Saxena, Superintending

  Engineer       and        Sh.Shrivastava,       Additional
28
Superintending Engineer of the Board was referred

to by the Arbitral Tribunal to hold that they admitted

to the fact that there was no waiver to the

production of Letter of Comfort in writing by the

Claimants.     Sh.Saxena, Superintending Engineer of

the    Board     stated     in    his   evidence     that

Sh.G.Ravinderan made a concession of waiver of

production of the Letter of Comfort in a meeting.

However, the details of the meeting could not be

given by Sh.Saxena. The Arbitral Tribunal refused to

accept the point canvassed by the Board relating to

waiver on the basis of the evidence of Sh.Saxena.

The contents of the letter dated 10.03.2000, written

by the Claimant to the Board were examined by the

Arbitral Tribunal to conclude that there was no

waiver of production of the Letter of Comfort.

According to the Arbitral Tribunal, the Claimant did

not insist on the Letter of Comfort to be produced as

a pre-condition to the Zero Date, which did not

preclude to their seeking the same at a later date as

per   Clause    16.5   of   the   Overall   Co-ordination

Agreement and Clause 22 & 23 of the Supply and
29
Services Contracts respectively.   The production of

     the Letter of Comfort was a fundamental condition

     of the agreements and the failure to produce the

     same was a breach by the Board. The above findings

     on the Letter of Comfort are on appreciation of

     evidence. We do not see any reason to differ with

     the said findings.
Non-Supply of Documents and Misrepresentation
23.   The evidence of Sh. Cesare Ricchetti, Electrical

     Engineer working with the Claimant is to the effect

     that he took part in the negotiations which led to the

     signing of the contract.      He deposed that he

     requested for information from the Station Director

     of the Board at Amarkantak and Sh. B.S. Chouhan,

     Member Generation, as to whether Units 3 and 4

     were originally designed and constructed to achieve

     a capacity of 120 MW.          The Station Director

     responded to the query and confirmed that the Units

     had been designed and constructed to achieve a

     capacity of 120 MW. Sh.Ricchetti further stated that

     it was not possible on a visual inspection to assess

     the originally installed capacity. The capacity could
30
have been assessed by examining the parameters

  and methods used during the original design, the

  operational log data and the original performance

  test.      These records were not furnished to the

  Claimants       despite   repeated    requests        by   the

  Claimants. As the Claimants were not satisfied with

  the material, they insisted on a formal warranty,

  which was included in Clause 19.2 (vii) of the

  Onshore Supply Agreement, Clause 19.2(vii) reads

  as follows:
“19.2 MPEB represents and warrants to ANSALDO
 that:
…….
(vii) each of Unit No.3 and Unit No.4 was designed
 and     constructed   to  achieve    the   operating
 parameters, and did in fact operate at 120 MW when
 operating in accordance with good industry
 practice.”
24.       Sh. Ricchetti categorically stated in his evidence

  that Claimants would not have signed the contracts

  without the above warranty. Sh.Saxena, Additional

  Superintending Engineer deposed before the Arbitral

  Tribunal that the warranty was made on the strength

  of the manufacturer’s plaque attached to the Units.

  He stated that the Units had, in fact, operated at

  120 MW when the performance was in accordance
31
with good industrial practice.     The Arbitral Tribunal

  took note of the fact that no performance test was

  carried    out   upon    commissioning      of    the    Units.

  Considering the log sheets that were filed on behalf

  of the Board for three days in December, 1982 and

  four days in February, 1983, the Arbitral Tribunal was

  of the opinion that the said records do not show that

  the Units operated at 120 MW was in accordance

  with good industrial practice. Moreover, the Tribunal

  found     that   there   were   inconsistencies         in   the

  readings recorded in the log sheets.             The Arbitral

  Tribunal concluded that the positive averment by the

  Board that the Units were, in fact, operating at 120

  MW for over a period of 25 years was clearly a

  misrepresentation.        According    to    the        Arbitral

  Tribunal, the Claimant was entitled to avoid the

  contract as the consent to the contract was obtained

  by a misrepresentation.
25.   Sh. Dave submitted that the Arbitral Tribunal

  committed a serious error in concluding that there

  was misrepresentation on the part of the Board. He

  also criticized the findings of the Arbitral Tribunal on
32
Section      19
of   the    contract      by    relying    upon

 illustration (b) therein. It will be useful to reproduce
Sections 18
and
19
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872

 which read as under:
“18. "Misrepresentation" defined
"Misrepresentation" means and includes-
(1) the positive assertion, in a manner not warranted by
the information of the person making it, of that which is
not true, though he believes it to be true;
(2) any breach of duty which, without an intent to
deceive, gains and advantage to the person committing
it, or any one claiming under him; by misleading another
to his prejudice, or to the prejudice of any one claiming
under him;
(3) causing, however innocently, a party to an agreement,
to make a mistake as to the substance of the thing which
is the subject of the agreement.
19. Voidability of agreements without free consent

When consent to an agreement is caused by
coercion, fraud or misrepresentation, the agreement is a
contract voidable at the option of the party whose
consent was so caused.
A party to a contract, whose consent was caused by fraud
or misrepresentation, may, if he thinks fit, insist that the
contract shall be performed, and that he shall be put on
the position in which he would have been if the
representations made had been true.
Exception: If     such   consent    was    caused      by
misrepresentation or by silence, fraudulent within the
meaning of
section 17
, the contract, nevertheless, is not
voidable, if the party whose consent was so caused had
the means of discovering the truth with ordinary
diligence.
Explanation: A fraud or misrepresentation which did not
cause the consent to a contract of the party on whom
such fraud was practiced, or to whom such
misrepresentation was made, does not render a contract
voidable.
33
Illustrations
(a) .....
(b) A, by a misrepresentation, leads B erroneously to
 believe that five hundred mounds of indigo are made
 annually at A's factory. B examines the accounts of the
 factory, which show that only four hundred maunds of
 indigo have been made. After this B buys the factory. The
 contract   is   not   voidable   on   account    of    A's
 misrepresentation.”
26.      On appreciation of the oral and documentary

   evidence produced by the parties, the assertion

   made by the Board that the Units were achieving a

   capacity of 120 MW when operating in accordance

   with the good industrial practice, was found to be

   incorrect by the Arbitral Tribunal. We do not intend

   to take a different view on the findings of the fact

   recorded by the Arbitral Tribunal.
27.      Even if the Board believed that Units 3 and 4

   were in fact designed for a capacity of 120 MW and

   operated at 120 MW, if it was found later that the

   assertion     relating     to   the     said    capacity      and

   functioning     was      not    true,    a     clear   case    of

   misrepresentation, as per
Section 18
of the Contract

   Act was made out.
34
28.   Mr.Dave relied upon the exception to
Section 19
.
According to the exception, a contract is not

      voidable if the party whose consent was taken had

      the means of discovering the truth with ordinary

      diligence, even if the consent was caused by

      misrepresentation.     He also relied upon illustration
(b), which deals with sale of a factory by B on the

      representation of A that 500 mounds of Indigo are

      made annually in the factory belonging to A. As B

      purchased the factory after examining the accounts

      of the factory, the contract was not voidable on

      account of A’s misrepresentation.      Sh. Dave relied

      upon a judgment of the Full Bench of the Judicial

      Commissioner’s Court, Nagpur, in (Hazi) Mahomad

      Hazi Wali Mahomad v. Ramappa 6. In that case,

      the Defendant in the suit represented to the Plaintiff

      that the value of the property was about Rs.9,000/-.

      Jackson A.J.C. held that even if such a statement was

      made by the Defendant, the Plaintiff was not entitled

      for a decree on the ground that it was impossible to

      believe that the Plaintiffs solely relied upon the

6              AIR 1929 Nagpur 254
35
statement of the Defendant as to the value of the

      property. It was further held that the Plaintiff could

      have obtained the value of the property without

      much trouble.        In view of the above facts, the

      Judicial Commission observed as follows:
“Under S.19, Contract Act, the rights given to a
     party who has entered into a contract under fraud or
     misrepresentation, are to avoid the contract or to
     insist on the contract being performed. The section
     does not entitle the party to insist on an entirely
     different contract being performed. Moreover, the
     rights given by
S.19
are given only to a party whose
     consent to the contract was, in fact, caused by the
     fraud or misrepresentation.”

     The said judgment has no application to the facts of

this case. Similarly, Ganga Retreat & Towers Ltd. v.
State of Rajasthan7 relied upon by Sh.Dave would not be

of any assistance to him.
29.    As discussed earlier, the evidence on record

      discloses that the Claimants could not ascertain the

      actual capacity and the functioning of the Units in

      spite of their best efforts. The relevant records were

      not furnished by the Board to enable the Claimants

      to ascertain the actual facts.            The evidence on

      record supports the contention of the Claimants that

      it was not possible to ascertain the capacity and
7                (2003) 12 SCC 91
36
functioning of the Units only on the basis of visual

     inspections. We are afraid that we cannot agree with

     the    submission     of   Sh.Dave      on    the     point   of

     misrepresentation as we find no good reason to

     differ from the view taken by the Arbitral Tribunal.

Ext.GG- Value of the Equipments Supplied and Works
Performed
30.     An amount of Rs.11,14,55,042/- with interest

     was claimed towards the value of the RLA study and

     the performance of work relating to drum level

     system, UPA system, pressure parts and engineering

     drawings which could not be supplied due to the

     termination of the agreements. A detailed affidavit

     was     filed   by   Sh.Fabio   Rolla    in    lieu     of    his

     examination-in-chief.       Voluminous evidence was

     produced to show the actual expenditure towards

     the    above works.        There was no             meaningful

     cross-examination of Sh. Fabio Rolla on behalf of the

     Board.     The determination of Issue No.12 by the

     Arbitral Tribunal holding that the Claimants are

     entitled to the amounts claimed in Ex.GG annexed to

     the statement of claim i.e. Rs.11,14,55,042/- is on
37
the basis of appreciation of evidence. We have no

     hesitation in approving the said finding of fact of the

     Arbitral Tribunal.
Ext. FF- Refund of amounts of Bank Guarantees
31.     The Claimants furnished three Bank Guarantees.

     Two     Bank      Guarantees      dated    22.02.2000      and

     23.02.2000 were for Rs.9.29 crores and US $

     1,708,100/- towards the advance payment to be

     paid by the Board. The third Bank Guarantee was

     given by ANZ Grindlays Bank, New Delhi on behalf of

     the Claimant for Rs.18.48 crores which was towards

     performance guarantee under Clause 4.1 of the

     Overall     Coordination       Agreement.         The   Bank

     Guarantees dated 22.02.2000 and 23.02.2000 were

     in terms of Clause 9.2 of the Onshore and Offshore

     Supply Contracts respectively.            All the three Bank

     Guarantees        were    invoked     by    the   Board     on

     23.06.2001.         The    Bank     Guarantees     given    on

     22.02.2000 and 23.02.2000 were conditional. The

     condition for invocation of such Bank Guarantees

     was ‘non-fulfillment of the contractual obligations by

     the    debtor’.      The    third    Bank     Guarantee     of
38
24.02.2000 was an unconditional Bank Guarantee.

  The Arbitral Tribunal was of the opinion that the

  invocation of the Bank Guarantee was improper as it

  was not preceded by a Notice of Default as

  contemplated in Clause 16.3 of the Supply Contracts

  and a subsequent notice of termination under

  Clause 17.1 of the Supply Contracts. In view of the

  finding of the Arbitral Tribunal that the Board

  committed a serious breach of the contract and

  wrongfully terminated the contract, the Claimant

  was held to be entitled to return of the amounts for

  which the Bank Guarantees were given.
32.   The Bank Guarantee given on 24.02.2000 was a

  Performance Bank Guarantee and the Claimant is

  entitled for return of the amount for which the Bank

  Guarantee was given.         The Arbitral Tribunal,

  however, failed to take notice of the fact that the

  other two Bank Guarantees were given for the

  amounts to be advanced by the Board. In fact, the

  Board had advanced the said amounts to the

  Claimants. We are of the opinion that the Claimant

  is not entitled for return of the amounts involved in
39
the    Bank    Guarantees      dated    22.02.2000    and

     23.02.2000 as they were towards the amounts

     advanced by the Board. The rejection of the claim

     pertaining to the damages mentioned in Ex. HH of

     the statement of claim which includes loss of profit,

     over-heads and loss of commercial opportunities

     clearly indicates that the Arbitral Tribunal never

     intended to grant any damages to the Claimant.

     The claims allowed by the Arbitral Tribunal pertained

     only to the return of the Claimants’ money involved

     in the Bank Guarantees and the amounts actually

     spent by the Claimants.
Conclusion
33.     We uphold the award of the Arbitral Tribunal with

     the modification that the Claimants are not entitled

     for the amounts involved in the Bank Guarantees

     dated 22.02.2000 and 23.02.2000 given by the

     Claimants.
34. To     avoid       confusion,        the    Award    of

     Rs.11,14,55,042/-, with interest at the rate of 12%

     per annum from 29th July, 2002 until payment or

     realization   towards    the    claim    in   Ex.GG   and
40
Rs.18,48,00,000/- with interest thereon at the rate of

     12% per annum from 5th July, 2001 until payment or

     realization, which is the amount pertaining to the

     Performance Bank Guarantee, is affirmed.
35.   For the afore-stated reasons, the appeals are

     dismissed with the above modification.
........................................J.
                                                [S.A. BOBDE]



                          ........................................J.
                                   [L. NAGESWARA RAO]

New Delhi,
April 16, 2018
41