[Cites
2
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Anitta Job vs The State Of Kerala on 20 April, 2018
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                                  REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.3874 OF 2018
                                  (ARISING OUT OF SLP(C)NO.3869 OF 2018)


     ANITTA JOB & ORS.                                               … APPELLANTS

                                                     VERSUS

     THE STATE OF KERALA & ORS.                  … RESPONDENTS




                                                J U D G M E N T


     ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
The   appellants,   ten   in   numbers,   have   filed   this   appeal

     against   the   Division   Bench   Judgment   of   the   High   Court   of

     Kerala   dated   04.01.2018   by   which   their   writ   petition

     challenging the order of Admission Supervisory Committee dated

     03.06.2017 has been dismissed.
2.                  The brief facts of  the case which need  to be noted for

     deciding this appeal are:
The   Malabar   Medical   College   and   Research   Centre   has
Signature Not Verified
sanctioned   intake   capacity   of   150   students   in   MBBS   Course.
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2018.04.20
16:53:24 IST
Reason:
With effect from 2016­2017 admission in MBBS Course was to be

     conducted   on   the   basis   of   NEET   examination.  This   Court   vide
2
its   order   dated   06.05.2016   in
Sankalp   Charitable   Trust   and

another vs. Union of India and others
, (2016) 7 SCC 487,  has

directed that no examination shall be permitted to be held for

admission   to   MBBS   or   BDS   studies   by   any   private   college   or

association   or   any   private/deemed   university.   All   admissions

in the MBBS Course were to be done on the basis of National

Eligibility­cum­Entrance   Test   (NEET).   All   the   appellants

appeared in the NEET examination and declared qualified with

their respective ranks. The State of Kerala has issued various

Government   orders   pertaining   to   admission   procedure   in

Government/Management/NRI seats in the private/self­financing

Colleges.   As   per   the   orders   issued   by   the   Government   of

Kerala,   the   Commissioner   of   Entrance   Examination   shall   make

allotment for MBBS in the Government Management/NRI seats in

all private/self­financing Colleges.
3.   The  Writ   petitions   were   filed   by   different   Medical

Colleges   challenging   the   Government   Orders.   The   Kerala   High

Court   in   a   bunch   of   writ   petitions,   leading   writ   petition

being No.28041 of 2016 on 26.08.2016 stayed the orders issued

by the State of Kerala with certain directions pertaining to

admission   in   MBBS/BDS   Courses.   The   Malabar   Medical   College

(hereinafter   referred   to   as   the   'College')   submitted   a
3
prospectus   to   the   Admission   Supervisory   Committee   (hereafter

referred to as the 'ASC') and got it approved on 06.09.2016.

As   per   the   order   passed   by   the   Kerala   High   Court   dated

26.08.2016   and   as   per   procedure
laid   down   by
the   ASC,   the

applications for admissions were to be made on­line. Last date

for   submitting   application   on­line   for   admission   was

09.09.2016.   The   respective   Colleges   were   also   directed   to

publish   the   list   of   applications   received   on­line   so   as   to

enable   the   ASC   to   supervise   and   guide   the   entire   admission

process.
4.   The appellants' case is that although they obtained the

demand drafts from banks pertaining to the fee for admission

prior to 09.09.2016, but their on­line applications could not

be submitted due to some snag in the website of the College.

On 13.09.2016 College published a list of 1335 candidates in

which   the   names   of   the   appellants   were   not   there.   Certain

other   candidates   whose   names   were   not   included   in   the   list

filed complaints before the ASC. The ASC taking cognizance of

the   complaints   issued   an   order   on   22.09.2016   noticing   the

stand of the College that their names shall be included in the

list   of   eligible   candidates.   After   receiving   the   aforesaid

order dated 22.09.2016 a notice was also issued by the College
4
on their website on 23.09.2016.
5.   The   notice   dated   23.09.2016   represented   to   the   students

that   applications   from   all   those   with   proof   of   (i)   their

unsuccessful   attempts   for   registration   and   (ii)   with   demand

draft   taken   before   the   scheduled   cut   off   date,   shall   be

accepted   by  the  College.   The   appellants  in   pursuance   of  the

notice 23.09.2016 by the College submitted their applications

along with proof that the demand drafts were taken before the

scheduled   cut   off   date.   Supplementary   list   of   33   eligible

students was published by the College on 27.09.2016 in which

names   of   all   the   appellants   were   included.   The   College   had

earlier   made   two   attempts   for   admission   in   the   Management

quota/NRI quota but seats could not be filled up.
6.   On   28.09.2016,   the   appellants   were   admitted   by   the

College and on 30.09.2016, the list of 142 students including

the  names   of   the   appellants  were   registered  with   the   Kerala

University   of   Health   Sciences.   Eight   seats   belonging   to

Management/NRI quota which remained unfilled were surrendered

to the Government and on the basis of order dated 05.10.2016,

8 candidates were forwarded to the College by the Commissioner

of   Entrance   Examination   which   were   also   admitted   by   the
5
College.   After   their   admissions,   the   appellants   started

attending   their   classes,   the   details   of   admissions   taken   by

the College of Management/NRI quota was forwarded to ASC. The

ASC  by   order   dated   04.03.2017   withheld   the   admissions   of   78

candidates under Management quota and 8 candidates under NRI

quota made by the College. On 05.10.2016, the Management had

already forwarded the details of all the admissions including

the admissions of the appellants to the ASC. The ASC by order

dated 03.06.2017 rejected the case of four of the candidates

who had admitted in the College in the Management quota on the

ground that their names are outside the list published by the

Medical   College   and   with   regard   to   six   appellants   who   are

admitted under NRI quota, their admissions were disapproved as

they have not included in any of the on­line application lists

submitted by the Medical College.
7.   Then aggrieved by the order dated 03.06.2017, appellants

filed Writ Petition (C) No.24133 of 2017 in which an interim

order   was   passed   on   27.07.2017   permitting   the   appellants   to

appear in the First Year MBBS Examination. The writ petition

was ultimately dismissed by the Division Bench of Kerala High

Court   vide   its   judgment   dated   04.01.2018   against   which   this

appeal has been filed.
6
8.   This   Court   while   entertaining   the   appeal   on   16.02.2018

directed that in the meantime, interim order that was passed

during   the   pendency  of   the   writ  proceedings  before   the   High

Court shall operate.
9.   We have heard Shri Huzefa Ahmadi, learned senior counsel

for   the   appellants   and   Shri   Jaideep   Gupta,   learned   senior

counsel appearing for the Admission Supervisory Committee. We

have also heard learned counsel for the State of Kerala, the

Kerala University of Health Sciences as well as Principal of

Malabar Medical College.
10. Learned   counsel   for   the   appellants   submitted   that

appellants   were   admitted   by   the   College   in   accordance   with

procedure prescribed and directions issued by the ASC. It is

submitted   that   although   the   appellants   were   unsuccessful   in

making   on­line   application   before   the   cut   off   date,   i.e.,

09.09.2016   but   when   the   notice   was   published   on   23.09.2016

permitting   all   applicants   who   could   not   successfully   submit

on­line applications along with demand draft prior to cut off

date,   they   submitted   their   applications   in   pursuance   of   the

notice   and   were   granted   admission   on   28.09.2016.   He   submits
7
that cut off date fixed by the Medical Council of India and as

approved   by   this   Court   is   30.09.2016   and   admissions   of   the

appellants having been taken prior to cut off date, there was

no   illegality.   He   further   submits   that   admissions   of   the

appellants were made according to their ranks in NEET and no

complaint had been made by any candidate or any other person

against the admissions of the appellants. No candidate having

any higher rank in the NEET has come up before ASC or before

any   Court   alleging   that   he   applied   for   admission   in   the

College and had higher rank to the appellants. The admission

of the appellants being on the basis of NEET merits ought not

to have been interfered by the ASC.
11.  Shri Jaideep Gupta, learned senior counsel appearing for

the   respondent­ASC   submits   that   only   method   for   making

application for admission to a College was on­line, the date

published   for   submitting   on­line   applications   was   09.09.2016

and   admittedly   the   appellants   had   not   submitted   their

applications prior to 09.09.2016 and their names were also not

included in the list which was published by the College of the

eligible   candidates,   they   were   clearly   not   entitled   for

admission and ASC had rightly disapproved their admissions. It

is further submitted that order dated 22.09.2016 issued by the
8
ASC could not have been availed by the College to permit the

College   to   entertain   applications   of   others   apart   from   the

candidates   who   had   made   complaints   regarding   their   on­line

applications.     The   College   could   not   have   entertained   the

appellants' applications.
12. Learned   counsel   for   the   University   as   well   as   learned

counsel   for   the   State   of   Kerala   have   also   adopted   the

arguments made by  Shri Jaideep Gupta, learned senior counsel

for the ASC. Learned counsel for the Principal supported the

case   of  the  appellants   and   submitted   that   admissions   of  the

appellants   were   properly   made   on   the   basis   of   their     NEET

ranking.
13. We have considered the submissions of the learned counsel

for the parties and perused the records.
14. We have already noticed above that Kerala High Court has

passed interim order on 26.08.2016 under which the High Court

issued   certain   directions   regarding   admission   in   MBBS/BDS

Courses   2016­2017.   Paragraph   9   of   the   judgment   which   is

relevant in this context is as follows:
“9.   Accordingly,   there   shall   be   an   interim
           stay   of   operation   and   implementation   of   the
9
impugned orders, G.O.(Rt) No. 2314/2016/H&FWD
               dated   20.08.2016   and   G.O.(Rt)   No.   2336/2016/
               H&FWD   dated   23.08.2016,   subject   to   the
               following conditions:­
(i)         Admissions to the MBBS/BDS courses shall
                     be only on the basis of the ranking of
                     candidates   in   the   rank   list   of   NEET,
                     2016, on the basis of the inter­se merit
                     among   the   candidates,   who   have   applied
                     to the respective colleges.
(ii)        All   the   colleges   agree   that,   the
                     applications   for   admission   are   received
                     only through on­line and that, the said
                     process   provides   transparency   with
                     regard   to   the   merit   as   well   as   the
                     identities   of   the   applicants.   Such
                     applications shall therefore be uploaded
                     for   the   scrutiny   of   the   Admission
                     Supervisory   Committee   also   immediately
                     on   the   expiry   of   the   last   date   for
                     submission of applications.
(iii)       Since   the   counsel   for   the   Admission
                     Supervisory   Committee   has   voiced   a
                     complaint that some of the colleges have
                     not   obtained   approval   of   the   Admission
                     Supervisory   Committee,   for   their
                     Prospectus,   the   admission   process   shall
                     be proceeded with only on the basis of a
                     Prospectus,   for   which   approval   of   the
                     Admission Supervisory Committee has been
                     obtained.
(iv)        The   Admission   Supervisory   committee   is
                     directed to either approve or disapprove
                     the   Prospectus,   submitted   to   them   for
                     approval,   within   three   days   of   such
                     submission.”
15. It   is   relevant   that   against   the   interim   order   of   the

Kerala High Court dated 26.08.2016, Union of India has filed
10
an SLP which was disposed of by this Court on 28.09.2016 in

C.A.No.9862 of 2016. This Court set aside only that part of

Condition No.1 wherein the respective Colleges are allowed to

conduct   the   counseling   and   admit   the   students   without   going

into   the   merits.   This   Court,   however,   specifically   observed

that   this   Court   is   not   interfering   with   the   admissions   of

students   which   have  been   done   by   the   respective  Colleges   as

those   were   done     after   reaching   arrangement   with   the   State

Government.   Last   two   paragraphs   of   this   Court's   order   dated

28.09.2016 are as follows:
“Having regard to the aforesaid facts as
           stated   by   the   learned   Solicitor   General   as
           well   as   the   counsel   for   the   respondents,   we
           set aside that part of Condition No.1 wherein
           the   respective   colleges   are   allowed   to
           conduct the counseling and admit the students
           without going into the merits.
This issue shall be finally thrashed out
           and   decided   by   the   High   Court   in   the   writ
           petitions   which   are   pending   before   it.
           However,   we   are   not   inclined   to   interfere
           with   the   admissions   of   students   which   have
           been done by the respective colleges as these
           are done after reaching arrangement with the
           State   Government.   In   that   behalf,   the
           conditions   which   are   mentioned   in   the
           impugned order shall continue to apply.
The   appeal   stands   disposed   of   in   the
           aforesaid terms.”
16. The admission of the appellants admittedly was completed
11
on 28.09.2016 as per the interim order of Kerala High Court

dated 28.09.2016. We thus have to consider the admissions as

per the directions of the Kerala High Court and the directives

of the ASC as applicable on the relevant date.
17. There cannot be any dispute with the procedure which was

prescribed   for   admissions   in   MBBS   Course,   students   were   to

make   applications   on­line   and   last   date   for   making   such

applications   was   09.09.2016.   There   is   also   no   dispute   that

appellants could not succeed in making any on­line application

prior   to   09.09.2016   although   they   claim   to   have   prepared   a

demand  draft before the last date of admission.
18. In the admission list which was published on 13.09.2016

by   the   College   of   all   eligible   candidates   the   names   of

appellants were not included. It has come on the record that

appellants   made   applications   to   the   College   only   after

publication   of   notice   by   the   College   on   23.09.2016   in

pursuance of order dated 22.09.2016 issued by the ASC.   The

ASC has issued order dated 22.09.2016 on complaints received

by 7 candidates alleging that their names were not included in

the published list of eligible candidates of Medical College.
The ASC issued the following order dated 22.09.2016:
12
“ORDER

Complaints   have   been   received   from   seven
complainants   alleging   that   their   names   are
not included in the Published eligible lists
of   Malabar   Medical   College,   in   short   the
Medical College.
2.   When   the   matter   was   taken   up,   Advocate
Devaprasad,   was   present   and   representing   the
Medical   College.   The   details   of   above   seven
complainants   were   handed   over   to   him.   He
submitted,   after   contacting   the   Medical
College,   that   on   receiving   the   details   of
these   seven   students,   the   Medical   College
would   list   them   also   along   with   the   already
published eligible list of the applicants.
3. Alan Philips did not give any application
details   or   other   particulars.   Hence,   he   had
been   directed   to   furnish   all   the   details   to
the   Medical   College,   so   that   his   name   will
also be considered by the College.
4. The Medical College is directed to publish
Management and NRI quota lists separately with
NEET   rank   so   as   to   enable   the   applicants   to
know   their   rank   and   position.   The   rejected
list, if any, should also be published.
5.   The   Medical   College   shall   adhere   to   the
Directives   issued   by   the   ASC,   particularly
the Directives dated 19.09.2016.
6.   Email   this   order   to   the   Principal   of   the
Malabar   Medical   College,   and   add   to   the
website of the ASC for the information of all
the   complainants,   as   no   separate
communication   is   addressed   to   them   from   the
ASC office.
Dated on this the 22nd day of September 2016.
Sd/­             CHAIR
                                                     MAN”
13
19. After   the   aforesaid   order   dated   22.09.2016,   the   College

has issued notice in its website on 23.09.2016, last paragraph

of the notice is as follows:
"As directed by the (illegible) Admission
          Supervisory   Engineer,   we   undertake   to   accept
          all such applications received in the college
          office   with   the   (illegible)   of   their
          unsuccessful   attempts   for   registration
          alongwith   DD   taken   before   the   scheduled   cut
          off   date.   These   applications   will   be
          (illegible) to vacant seats.”
20. The   ASC   has   been   constituted   in   the   State   of   Kerala   in

pursuance   of   a   State   enactment,   namely,   the   Kerala

Professional   Colleges   or   Institutions   (Prohibition   of

Capitation   Fee,   Regulation   of   Admission,   Fixation   of

Non­Exploitative Fee and Other Measures to Ensure Equity and

Excellence   in   Professional   Education)   Act,   2006.   Under   the

Act,   ASC   is   to   supervise   and   guide   the   entire   process   of

admission   of   students   to   unaided   professional   colleges   or

institutions.   Sub­sections   (6)   and   (7)   of   Section   4   are   as

follows:
“Section   4.   Admission   Supervisory
           Committee.­

                 (1)        xxx        xxx         xxx

           (6) The Admission Supervisory Committee shall
           supervise   and   guide   the   entire   process   of
           admission   of   students   to   the   unaided
           professional   colleges   or   institutions   with   a
           view   to   ensure   that   the   process   is   fair,
           transparent, merit­based and non­exploitative
           under the provisions of this Act.
14
(7)The   Admission   Supervisory   Committee
           may hear complaints with regard to admission
           in   contravention   of   the   provisions   contained
           herein.   If   the   Admission   Supervisory
           Committee after enquiry finds that there has
           been   any   violation   of   the   provisions   for
           admission   on   the   part   of   the   unaided
           professional   colleges   or   institutions,   it
           shall   make   appropriate   recommendation   to   the
           Government   for   imposing   a   fine   upto   rupees
           ten   lakhs   and   the   Government   may   on   receipt
           of   such   recommendation,   fix   the   fine   and
           collect   the   same   in   the   case   of   each   such
           violation or any other course of action as it
           deems   fit   and   the   amount   so   fixed   together
           with   interest   thereon   shall   be   recovered   as
           if it were an arrear of public revenue due on
           land. The Admission Supervisory Committee may
           also declare admission made in respect of any
           or   all   seats   in   a   particular   college   or
           institution to be de­hors merit and therefore
           invalid   and   communicate   the   same   to   the
           concerned University. On the receipt of such
           communication,   the   University   shall   debar
           such   candidates   from   appearing   for   any
           further examination and cancel the results of
           examinations already appeared for.”
21. The order dated 22.09.2016 has to be treated as passed by

the ASC in exercise of the abovesaid statutory power. It is

true that in the order dated 22.09.2016, there was no clear

direction   that   names   of   other   candidates   who   have   not   even

submitted   complaints   should   be   included   or   any   fresh

applications be invited but College taking guidance from the

aforesaid   order   issued   the   notice   extending   the   similar

protection   to   all   the   candidates   who   come   with   their
15
unsuccessful attempts for registration but with the rider that

they should come up along with demand drafts taken before the

scheduled cut off date.  The requirement of demand draft taken

before   the   scheduled   cut   off   date   was   an   important   factor

which   prohibited   the   candidates   who   had   never   thought   of

making   an   application   in   the   College   to   come   up   with   their

applications   with   any   fresh   demand   draft.   Notice   dated

23.09.2016 clearly prohibited all the candidates who had not

taken demand draft prior to 09.09.2016 which was the last date

of admission. In the present case College had filed details of

demand drafts of the appellants and it was not disputed that

they   submitted   their   applications   with   demand   drafts   taken

before the last date of application. The High Court has taken

a   view   that   since   they   have   not   made   on­line   applications

prior to 09.09.2016 they were not entitled for admission and

requirement of submitting on­line application was a condition

which   having   not   been   fulfilled,   their   applications   were

disapproved by the ASC and the High Court has also come to the

conclusion that their applications were made after 09.09.2016

and   they   were   admitted   in   the   College   on   28.09.2016.   There

cannot be any dispute that as per procedure prescribed and the

interim   order   of   the   Kerala   High   Court   dated   26.08.2016

students   were   to   submit   admission   applications   to   the
16
respective   Colleges   on­line   and   the   admissions   were   to   be

taken on merit as reflected in the NEET examination.
22. During   the   course   of   hearing   we   had   repeatedly   asked

learned   counsel   appearing   for   the   respondents   as   to   whether

any   candidate   having   merit   higher   to   the   appellants   in   the

NEET   examination,   has   submitted   any   complaint   or   made   any

protest   to   any   authority   complaining   that   he   had   made

application to the College having secured higher rank to the

appellants and has been denied the admission. The respondents

could not point out any such details of any candidate who was

included   in   the   list   published   by   the   College   and   who   had

higher   NEET  rank   to  the  appellants   and   has   raised   grievance

regarding non­admission. It is also on the record that in fact

after   admission   made   in   the   Management   quota   and   NRI   quota

still 8 seats were not filled up which were surrendered to the

Government by the College.
23. Details   of   names   of   eight   candidates,   invited   for   spot

admission   against   the   still   vacant   seats,   forwarded   to   the

College   were   admitted   on   07.10.2016   (within   the   date   as

extended).   The details of 8 candidates who were admitted on
17
the basis of the allotment made by the Government is found at

Annexure P­7 and on perusal of the names along with their NEET

rank, the inter se ranks of the candidates which were admitted

subsequent   to   the   appellants   clearly   indicate   that   four

candidates are lower in the NEET rank to the appellants. After

receiving   the   applications   from   appellants   and   after   being

satisfied that they had demand draft prior to 09.09.2016 and

had   made   unsuccessful   attempts   for   their   registration   the

College published their names on 27.09.2016 which list is also

on   the   record.   The   ASC   which   is   entrusted   to   supervise   and

guide entire admission process having issued the order dated

22.09.2016   asking  the  College  to  include   the  names  of         7

candidates whose names were not earlier included, the College

extended the said benefit and the facility to other candidates

who come with proof of unsuccessful attempts for registration

along   with   demand   drafts   taken   before   the   scheduled  cut  off

date of admission. We are unable to see any  mala fide  or any

oblique   motive in publishing notice dated 23.09.2016 by the

College.   They   received   order   for   inclusion   of   7   such

candidates whose names were included in the list and extended

the same benefits to other similarly situated.
24. The High Court has referred to the judgment of this Court
18
in
Rishabh Choudhary vs. Union of India and others
, (2017) 3

SCC 652. The High Court has relied on paragraphs 15 and 16 of

the judgment which are to the following effect:
“15.  The   question   before   this   Court   is   not
          who is to be blamed for the present state of
          affairs—whether   it   is   the   students   or   the
          College   or   the   State   of   Chhattisgarh.   The
          question   is   really   whether   the   rule   of   law
          should   prevail   or   not.   In   our   opinion,   the
          answer   is   unambiguously   in   the   affirmative.
          The   College   and   the   State   of   Chhattisgarh
          have   not   adhered   to   the   law   with   the   result
          that   the   petitioner   became   a   victim   of
          circumstances giving him a cause of action to
          proceed against the College and the State of
          Chhattisgarh   being   a   victim   of   their
          maladministration.   The   plight   of   the
          petitioner   is   unfortunate   but   it   cannot   be
          helped.
16.  We   were   told   during   the   course   of
          submissions   that   some   similarly   placed
          students   participated   in   NEET   and   qualified
          in   the   examination.   Those   students   like   the
          petitioner   who   did   not   participate   in   NEET
          and   placed   their   trust   only   in   the   College
          and   the   State   of   Chhattisgarh   took   a   gamble
          and   that   gamble   has   unfortunately   not
          succeeded.   While   our   sympathies   may   be   with
          the petitioner and similarly placed students,
          we cannot go contrary to the orders passed by
          this Court from time to time, only for their
          benefit.”
25. The   case   of
Rishabh   Choudhary
(supra)  was   a   case   of

candidate   who   was   admitted   by   the   College   in   the   year

2016­2017 in MBBS Course on the basis of examination conducted

by the College.
This Court noticed in the aforesaid judgment
19
that   this   Court   having   already   passed   an   order   dated

11.04.2016   recalling   the   judgment   of   this   Court   dated

18.07.2013   in  Christian   Medical   College,   Vellore   and   others

vs.   Union   of   Inida   and   others,   (2014)   2   SCC   305,   the

notification   issued   by   the   Medical   Council   of   India     on

21.12.2010 reviewed that the examination was to be conducted

by NEET.
This Court in
Rishabh Choudhary
case (supra) has also

noticed the order of  this Court dated 06.05.2016  in
Sankalp

Charitable Trust
(supra) where this Court has directed that no

examination   shall   be   permitted   to   be   held   for   admission   to

MBBS or BDS studies by any private college. In paragraphs 9 to

12 following was held:
“9.  By   an   order   dated   6­5­2016   in  Sankalp
           Charitable  Trust,  it  was   made   clear   that   no
           examination shall be permitted to be held for
           admission   for   MBBS   studies   by   any   private
           college   or   association   or   any   private/deemed
           university.
10.  Subsequently   on   9­5­2016   this   Court
           declined to modify the order dated 28­4­2016.
An order was also passed making it clear that
           all   such   candidates   who   could   not   appear   in
           NEET I and those who had appeared but had an
           apprehension that they had not prepared well,
           would   be   permitted   to       appear   in   NEET   II
           subject to an option from these candidates to
           give up their candidature for NEET I. It was
           further clarified that only NEET would enable
           students to get admission to MBBS studies.”
11.  In   view   of   all   these   orders   passed   by
           this Court from time to time, it is more than
20
abundantly   clear   that   the   Notification   dated
           21­12­2010   stood   resurrected   and   that
           admissions   to   the   MBBS   course   could   only   be
           through NEET I and NEET II. No other process
           of   admission   was   permissible.   Given   this
           background, the Director of Medical Education
           in   Chhattisgarh   wrote   to   the   College   on   or
           about   13­7­2016   to   take   steps   to   cancel   all
           the   admissions   made   by   the   College   in   terms
           of   the   examination   CGMAT­2016   held   for
           students   for   the   management   quota   and   NRI
           quota. Eventually by a Letter dated 28­7­2016
           the   Director   of   Medical   Education   in
           Chhattisgarh   recommended   to   the   College   to
           cancel   admissions   made   to   the   MBBS   course.
This   prompted   the   petitioner   to   file   a   writ
           petition in this Court.
12.  It   is   submitted   and   prayed   by   the
           petitioner   that   since   he   had   already   been
           granted   admission   by   the   College   after   the
           examination   CGMAT­2016   was   conducted   by   the
           College   and   supervised   and   monitored   by   the
           State of Chhattisgarh and in which there were
           no   allegations   of   impropriety,   his   admission
           should not be disturbed. It is submitted that
           the petitioner was certainly not at fault and
           there   is   no   reason   why   he   should   be   the
           victim of an apparent wrong committed by the
           College   as   also   by   the   State   of
           Chhattisgarh.”
26. The observations were made in paragraphs 15 and 16 in the

background of facts
in that case
. Present is not a case where

the appellants did not appear in the NEET examination or they

were   granted   admission   disregarding   the   merits   of   other

candidates   in   NEET.  No   details   of   any   candidate  who  secured

higher   rank   or   merit   to   the   appellants   and   was   not   given
21
admission in the College has been brought to our notice. It

may be true that the order of the ASC dated 22.09.2016 did not

expressly permit the College to invite all the candidates who

had   earlier   made   their   unsuccessful   attempts   for   on­line

registration   to   come   up   for   being   included   in   the   list   of

eligible   candidates   of   the   College   but   the   College   having

given such opportunity to others in addition to 7 candidates

who   had   complained   to   the   ASC,   such   action   of   the   College

cannot   be   termed   the  mala   fide  or   with   oblique   motive

especially when similarly situated candidates were included in

the list of eligible candidates. The High Court had not given

due consideration to the important condition which was put by

the College in the notice dated 23.09.2016 that candidates who

come,   claiming   that   they   made   unsuccessful   attempts   for

on­line registration and come up with proof to show that they

had prepared demand draft of fee which was of prior date to

the last date of admission. The above safeguard was enough to

ward   of   applicants   who   never   thought   of   admission   in   the

College prior to last date of admission.
27. It   is   not   disputed   that   the   appellants   had   proof   of

demand drafts in the name of College which were prior to the

last date of admission. In the facts of the present case where

admission   was   also   notified   by   the   University   on   30.09.2016
22
and  the  ASC  for  the  first   time   disapproved   their   admissions

only   on   03.06.2016   and   further   the   appellants   were   also

permitted to appear in the examination of MBBS First Year by

the High Court, at this distance of time, we are not inclined

to throw the appellants out of the College on account of the

above shortcomings as pointed by the ASC and the High Court.
28. In the result, we set aside the order of the High Court

as well as the order of the Admission Supervisory Committee.

The appeal is allowed.
...............................J.
                                     ( A.K. SIKRI )




                                 ...............................J.
                                    ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )
NEW DELHI,
APRIL 20, 2018.