[Cites
4
, Cited by
223
]
Supreme Court of India
Shiva Kant Jha vs Union Of India on 13 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 1975, 2018 LAB IC 2274, (2019) 1 LAB LN 303, (2018) 2 PAT LJR 305, (2018) 5 SCALE 551, (2018) 2 SCT 529, (2018) 6 ALLMR 963 (SC), (2018) 2 ESC 332, 2018 (4) KCCR SN 336 (SC), 2018 (7) ADJ 59 NOC, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 22
Author:
R.K. Agrawal
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
R.K. Agrawal
REPORTABLE

                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 694 OF 2015



                  Shiva Kant Jha                                        .... Petitioner(s)

                              Versus

                  Union of India                                   .... Respondent(s)


                                             JUDGMENT
R.K. Agrawal, J.
1)     The jurisdiction of this Court has been invoked by the

                  petitioner herein by filing this writ petition against the alleged

                  unfair treatment meted out to several retired government

                  servants in their old age and their state of affairs pertaining to

                  reimbursement         of   medical   claims   under     the    Central

                  Government Health Scheme (CGHS).
2)     Brief facts:
Signature Not Verified
(a)
Digitally signed by
ASHA SUNDRIYAL
Date: 2018.04.13
The petitioner herein is a CGHS beneficiary (retired
15:11:13 IST
Reason:
pensioner) having a CGHS Card valid for whole life for medical
1
treatment in Private Ward.        The petitioner herein submitted

two sets of his Medical bills under the Central Government

Health Scheme (CGHS) for reimbursement on account of his

treatment done in November, 2013 in the Fortis Escorts

Hospital, New Delhi for Rs. 9,86,343/- for his cardiac ailments

involving the implant of CRT-D device and two sets of bill

amounting to Rs. 3,98,097/- for his treatment at Jaslok

Hospital, Mumbai for cerebral stroke and paralytic attack.
(b)   The   petitioner   herein    submitted   the    first   Bill   on
02.01.2014 and the second Bill (two) on 19.07.2014 to the

authority concerned.      The first Bill was considered by the

Technical Standing Committee in May 2014 and the claim was

rejected without informing him of the reasons for rejection.

The case was again considered by the Standing Committee on

10.07.2014 and was rejected on the ground that CRT-D

implant was not required.           Aggrieved of the above, the

petitioner herein filed a representation before the Secretary,

Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. The said representation

was   again   considered    by    the   Standing     Committee       on

15.01.2015 and was rejected for the reason that “Prior
2
approval for such device implant was not sought”. Again, in

fourth attempt, the petitioner herein approached the Director

General of the CGHS.     After presenting the memorial to the

Director General of the CGHS, the government credited an

amount of Rs. 4,90,000/- in the petitioner’s Bank Account,

however, he was never heard on any point nor any speaking

order was ever communicated to him.
(c)   In the second set of Bills of the Jaslok Hospital, the

petitioner’s claim was curtailed to the tune of Rs. 94,885/-,

being just one-fourth of the claim and no opportunity of being

heard was granted to the petitioner.       Thus, the petitioner

herein was denied an amount of Rs. 4,96,343/- from the first

claim and Rs. 3,03,212/- from the second set of claim.       In

other way, out of the total bills amounting to Rs. 13,84,440/-,

the petitioner herein was paid Rs. 5,84,885/-, meaning

thereby, the petitioner herein was denied Rs. 7,99,555/-. To

both the hospitals, the petitioner had to pay out of his

personal resources.     However, this Court, vide order dated

01.02.2016, directed the respondent-State to pay a sum of Rs.

3,00,000/- to the petitioner as an interim relief.
3
(d)   Aggrieved by the decision of the CGHS in not allowing the

medical bills in full, the petitioner herein has filed this writ

petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India claiming

that he being in late 70s of his age, needs money to meet the

needs for his survival.
3)    Heard the petitioner-in person and Ms. Binu Tamta,

learned counsel for the respondent-State.
Rival contentions:
4)    The petitioner in person contended before this Court that

over several years, several retired government servants, in

their old age, have suffered and even died due to unfair

treatment meted out to them by the CGHS and its controlling

Ministry, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, in

discharge of their duties.   The petitioner contended that the

impugned CAG’s Report with regard to “Reimbursement of

Medical Claims to the Pensioners under CGHS” have also

expressed the indifference against the pensioners. He further

contended that every government employee during his life time

or after his retirement is entitled to get the benefit of the

medical facilities and no fetters can be placed on his rights.
4
The petitioner in-person finally contended that this Court may

exercise its jurisdiction under
Articles 32
and
142
of the

Constitution so that the fundamental rights of the petitioner

under
Articles 14
and
21
are protected and promoted by

reimbursing his medical expenditure already incurred by him

under genuine emergency and also to frame some guidelines

for effective implementation of the claims of the pensioners

under the CGHS.
5)   Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent while

refuting the claim of the petitioner submitted that the case of

the petitioner has been dealt with in accordance with the

Circulars and Office Memorandums issued by the Ministry of

Health & Family Welfare from time to time. Learned counsel

further submitted that the petitioner cannot be given any

special treatment beyond the terms of the circulars which

would amount to violation thereof and would lead to

arbitrariness and discrimination qua a large number of such

like beneficiaries.
6)    Learned counsel for the respondent further contended

that the government has empanelled several hospitals under
5
the CGHS and the petitioner did not approach the empanelled

hospital during medical emergency and he was charged by the

hospital as per their own rates whereas the rates charged for

such facility shall be only at the CGHS rates and that too after

following a proper procedure given in the Circulars issued on

time to time by the concerned Ministry. Further, the CGHS

has a complete set of rules and guidelines to be followed in

each case and if the petitioner is compensated beyond the

policy, it would have large scale ramifications.         Learned

counsel for the respondent-State finally submitted that the

petition is devoid of merits and is liable to be dismissed.

Discussion:-
7)   Union of India-the respondent herein, while complying

with the order passed by this Court dated 11.04.2016 filed an

affidavit describing the in-house procedure to be followed in

dealing with the claims under CGHS, the remedy/appeal

available in dealing with the claims and also the nature of

claims pending in respect of card holders.          The detailed

procedure which is followed for the purpose of medical

reimbursement claims of CGHS beneficiaries have been set out
6
in Circular dated 14.11.2011 and further supplemented by the

instructions dated 11.12.2012. The steps provided in the said

procedure are given hereinbelow:-
Procedure for Medical Reimbursement Claim
     (MRC) in Central Government Health Scheme
     (CGHS)
(a) The patient or beneficiary has to approach the
     in-charge of the wellness centre where he/she is
     registered.
(b) That after getting all the documents required for
     MRC from the beneficiary, CMO in-charge submits
     the same online to CMO (R&H) of the respective
     Zonal Office and also send one hard copy through
     official dak to the respective Zonal Office CMO
     (R&H) who process the MRC as per CGHS rates.
(c) The CMO (R&H) processes the MRC as per
     CGHS Rates. If CGHS rates are not available,
     reimbursement is considered at AIIMS rates. And if
     AIIMS     rates   are    also   not  available,  the
     reimbursement is made as per actual rates.
(d) The CMO (R&H) gets the approval of Additional
     Director (AD) of the respective Zonal Office for the
     MRC. Then approved amount of MRC is sent as bill
     to the Pay & Accounts Office (PAO) CGHS Rajinder
     Nagar.
(e) Pay & Accounts Office credits the approved
     amount of MRC in the account of beneficiary
     through Electronic Clearing System (ECS).
7
The procedure of appeal/remedy in CGHS regarding MRC is

given hereunder:-
(a) If the beneficiary is not satisfied with the claim,
      he can request in writing to the Competent
      Authority in CGHS. The request is then forwarded
      to the higher authority by the respective Zonal
      Office for consideration.
(b) If the higher authority considers it necessary to
      have the opinion of the specialist of concerned
      speciality, a Special Technical Committee (STC)
      meeting is held.
(c) On the basis of the recommendation of the
      Special Technical Committee, the approval of the
      competent authority is taken and the approved
      amount is paid to the beneficiary by PAO.
8)    Union of India, by filing an affidavit before this Court,

submitted that most of the claims are reimbursed only

through the CGHS sources as per the package rates of CGHS.
However, there are few such cases received occasionally where

reimbursement is done from two sources i.e. from CGHS and

from the insurance companies.           Such claims are first

processed by insurance companies and then by the CGHS.

The   claim   of   CGHS   is   reimbursed   as   per   the   Office

Memorandum dated 19.02.2009. It is further submitted that
8
no such cases involving reimbursement from two sources is

pending in CGHS.
9)    Further, the writ petitioner was admitted in emergency

condition with complaint of breathlessness on 11.11.2013 in

Fortis Escorts Health Institute, which was a non-empanelled

hospital at the relevant time. He underwent angiography on

12.11.2013 which revealed diffused disease in left anterior

descending coronary artery 50-60%. He had been implanted

the CRT-D device (Combo) as part of cardiac resynchronization

therapy (CRT) on 12.11.2013.        The hospital charged an

amount of Rs. 11,56,293/- for the said treatment, out of

which, an amount of Rs. 10,70,000/- was for the cost of the

unlisted cardiac implant (CRT-D) and an amount of Rs.

3,19,950/- was paid by the Insurance company directly to the

hospital.
10)   A Special Technical Committee meeting was held on

29.04.2014 to consider the case of the petitioner. However, on

examining the same, the Committee did not find any

justification for the implant of CRT-D device of the petitioner.

On a further request by the petitioner, the Special Technical
9
Committee again did not find any justification for the implant

of    CRT-D    device   on   10.07.2014.         On   a   request    for

reconsideration by the petitioner, on 15.01.2015, the case of

the petitioner was again reconsidered by the Special Technical

Committee which denied the claim of CRT-D.
11)   The total expenditure incurred by the petitioner towards

his medical treatment at Fortis Escorts Heart Hospital, Delhi

was Rs. 9,86,343/- and at Jaslok Hospital, Mumbai was Rs.

3,98,097/-, hence, the total amount claimed by the petitioner

was    Rs.    13,84,440/-.     Though      the    Special   Technical

Committee did not find the implant justified, the competent

authority, keeping in view the emergency nature of the case of

the petitioner, approved the reimbursement of implant as per

AIIMs rate.      Therefore, out of the total amount i.e., Rs.

13,84,440/-, an amount of Rs. 4,90,000/- was paid to the

petitioner on the direction of the authority and Rs. 94,885/-

for the treatment at Jaslok Hospital.            As per this Court’s

direction dated 01.02.2016, a sum of Rs. 3,00,000/- has also

been paid by the respondent. Hence, a sum of Rs. 4,99,555/-

is the claim of the petitioner in the present writ petition.
10
12)      With a view to provide the medical facility to the

retired/serving   CGHS    beneficiaries,   the   government      has

empanelled a large number of hospitals on CGHS panel,

however, the rates charged for such facility shall be only at the

CGHS rates and, hence, the same are paid as per the

procedure. Though the respondent-State has pleaded that the

CGHS has to deal with large number of such retired

beneficiaries and if the petitioner is compensated beyond the

policy, it would have large scale ramification as none would

follow the procedure to approach the empanelled hospitals and

would rather choose private hospital as per their own free will.

It cannot be ignored that such private hospitals raise

exorbitant bills subjecting the patient to various tests,

procedures and treatment which may not be necessary at all

times.
13)   It is a settled legal position that the Government

employee during his life time or after his retirement is entitled

to get the benefit of the medical facilities and no fetters can be

placed on his rights. It is acceptable to common sense, that

ultimate decision as to how a patient should be treated vests
11
only with the Doctor, who is well versed and expert both on

academic qualification and experience gained.            Very little

scope is left to the patient or his relative to decide as to the

manner in which the ailment should be treated.           Speciality

Hospitals are established for treatment of specified ailments

and services of Doctors specialized in a discipline are availed

by patients only to ensure proper, required and safe

treatment. Can it be said that taking treatment in Speciality

Hospital   by   itself   would   deprive   a    person   to   claim

reimbursement solely on the ground that the said Hospital is

not included in the Government Order. The right to medical

claim cannot be denied merely because the name of the

hospital is not included in the Government Order. The real

test must be the factum of treatment.          Before any medical

claim is honoured, the authorities are bound to ensure as to

whether the claimant had actually taken treatment and the

factum of treatment is supported by records duly certified by

Doctors/Hospitals concerned.       Once, it is established, the

claim cannot be denied on technical grounds. Clearly, in the

present case, by taking a very inhuman approach, the officials
12
of the CGHS have denied the grant of medical reimbursement

in full to the petitioner forcing him to approach this Court.
14)   This is hardly a satisfactory state of affairs. The relevant

authorities are required to be more responsive and cannot in a

mechanical manner deprive an employee of his legitimate

reimbursement.      The Central Government Health Scheme

(CGHS) was propounded with a purpose of providing health

facility scheme to the central government employees so that

they are not left without medical care after retirement. It was

in furtherance of the object of a welfare State, which must

provide for such medical care that the scheme was brought in

force. In the facts of the present case, it cannot be denied that

the writ petitioner was admitted in the above said hospitals in

emergency conditions. Moreover, the law does not require that

prior permission has to be taken in such situation where the

survival of the person is the prime consideration.   The doctors

did his operation and had implanted CRT-D device and have

done so as one essential and timely.      Though it is the claim

of the respondent-State that the rates were exorbitant whereas

the rates charged for such facility shall be only at the CGHS
13
rates and that too after following a proper procedure given in

the Circulars issued on time to time by the concerned

Ministry, it also cannot be denied that the petitioner was taken

to hospital under emergency conditions for survival of his life

which requirement was above the sanctions and treatment in

empanelled hospitals.
15)   In the present view of the matter, we are of the

considered opinion that the CGHS is responsible for taking

care of healthcare needs and well being of the central

government employees and pensioners.          In the facts and

circumstances of the case, we are of opinion that the

treatment of the petitioner in non-empanelled hospital was

genuine because there was no option left with him at the

relevant time.   We, therefore, direct the respondent-State to

pay the balance amount of Rs. 4,99,555/- to the writ

petitioner. We also make it clear that the said decision is

confined to this case only.
16)   Further, with regard to the slow and tardy pace of

disposal   of   MRC   by   the   CGHS   in   case   of   pensioner

beneficiaries and the unnecessary harassment meted out to
14
pensioners who are senior citizens, affecting them mentally,

physically and financially, we are of the opinion that all such

claims shall be attended by a Secretary level High Powered

Committee in the concerned Ministry which shall meet every

month for quick disposal of such cases.      We, hereby, direct

the concerned Ministry to device a Committee for grievance

redressal of the retired pensioners consisting of Special

Directorate General, Directorate General, 2 (two) Additional

Directors and 1 (one) Specialist in the field which shall ensure

timely and hassle free disposal of the claims within a period of

7 (seven) days. We further direct the concerned Ministry to

take steps to form the Committee as expeditiously as possible.

Further, the above exercise would be futile if the delay

occasioned at the very initial stage, i.e., after submitting the

relevant claim papers to the CMO-I/C, therefore, we are of the

opinion that there shall be a timeframe for finalization and

disbursement of the claim amounts of pensioners.        In this

view, we are of the opinion that after submitting the relevant

papers for claim by a pensioner, the same shall be reimbursed

within a period of 1 (one) month.
15
17)   In view of the foregoing discussion, we dispose of the

petition filed by the writ petitioner with the above terms.
...…………………………………J.
                              (R.K. AGRAWAL)


                           …………….………………………J.
                            (ASHOK BHUSHAN)



NEW DELHI;
APRIL 13, 2018.
16