[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Asok Pande vs Supreme Court Of India on 11 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 13
Author:
D Y Chandrachud
Bench:
D Y Chandrachud
,
A M Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1

                                                                           REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO 147 OF 2018


         ASOK PANDE                                                     ..Petitioner


                                                 VERSUS


         SUPREME COURT OF INDIA THR.ITS
         REGISTRAR AND ORS.                                             ..Respondents




                                              JUDGMENT
Dr D Y CHANDRACHUD, J



         1               The petitioner, who is a member of the Bar, has instituted these

         proceedings under
Article 32
of the Constitution, claiming to be “a public spirited

         person”. He states that he is a “scholar in the field of the Constitution” and that

         he has filed nearly two hundred petitions in the public interest before the

         Allahabad High Court, Gujarat High Court and in this Court as well. The reliefs

         which he seeks are as regards the constitution of Benches of this Court and the

         Allahabad High Court. What is sought in these proceedings is depicted in the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.04.11
two prayers for relief which are extracted below:
11:22:36 IST
Reason:
2
“(a) to issue a writ of mandamus to the first respondent
             (Supreme Court of India) to evolve the set Procedure for
             constituting the benches and allotment of jurisdiction to
             different benches in Supreme Court. The Petitioner seeks
             mandamus to the first respondents to have a specific rule
             in Supreme Court Rules that the three judges bench in
             Chief Justice court shall consist of the chief justice and two
             senior most judges and the Constitutional bench shall
             consist of five senior most judges or three senior most
             Judges and two junior most judges. The Petitioner also
             seeks a writ of mandamus to the first respondent to
             constitute :
Supreme Criminal Court
             Supreme PIL Court
             Supreme Tax Court
             Supreme Service Court
             Supreme Land Dispute Court
             Supreme Misc. Matter Court…. Etc.
(b)      The Petitioner also seeks writ of mandamus to the
             second respondent i.e. Allahabad High Court to evolve set
             rules with respect to formation of benches and vesting of
             jurisdiction to them on the pattern of rules so framed by the
             Supreme Court. The rule should also contain that the bench
             of Advocate judges will be constituted with Advocate judges
             and the bench of service judges coming from eligibility
             criteria number one of
article 217 (3)
of Constitution with the
             judges coming from District judiciary not with Advocate
             judges.”
2     The petitioner has a litany of grievances, many of which are personal to

him. The averments contained in the petition indicate that a proceeding was

initiated against the petitioner under the
Contempt of Courts Act
1971. The

petitioner seems to have a grievance with an order which was passed

restraining his entry into the premises of the High Court. The nature of his

allegations is evinced in the following extract:
“For prosecuting the Petitioner under the
Contempt of Courts
             Act
on the charge of writing a letter to the Chief Justice against
3
the Misbehaviour of a judge, a Chief Justice ordered the listing
             of my case before the bench headed by Sri Sudhir Agrawal J.
             And he sitting with a judge coming from district judiciary
             convicted and sentenced me. He sitting with an advocate
             judges threatened me on the very first date of hearing to
             restrain my entry in high court except on the date fixed in the
             contempt case but as the second judge was not agree and so
             he could not pass the order but as the judge sitting on that also
             not agree and the order of suspension from practice could not
             be passed and so he managed the formation of bench with a
             third judge on the next date. He was a judge coming from
             district court. He agreed for passing the order of suspension
             and so the Petitioner was suspended from practice and his
             entry in the high court was banned. This happened as in place
             of the regular bench assigned the matters of criminal contempt
             as per the prevailing roaster, the chief justice nominated a
             bench headed by Sri Sudhir Agrawal.”
3     The petitioner has then proffered his suggestions about how the benches

of this Court should be constituted. He suggests that the same principle should

be followed in the High Court.
4     We must, at the outset, express our disapproval of the manner in which

the petitioner has sought to cast aspersions on the bench of the Allahabad High

Court which was assigned with the hearing of the contempt proceedings against

the petitioner. What the petitioner has averred is not based or founded upon

any judicial order. The aspersions which he has cast on the judges of the High

Court are unwarranted. Significantly, the correctness of an order passed by the

High Court in the contempt proceedings initiated against the petitioner is not in

question in the present proceedings. If the petitioner was aggrieved by a judicial

order of the High Court, remedies were available to him under
Article 136.
As
4
a member of the Bar, the petitioner should know better than to question the

conduct of a judicial proceeding before the High Court in a writ petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution.     This is yet another instance of reckless

allegations being levelled against judges of the High Court in a proceeding

where the correctness of the orders passed by the High Court is not in issue;

necessary parties to that proceeding are not before the court; and though the

legality of a judicial order cannot be questioned in an original proceeding under
Article 32.
5     We would now deal with the relief which has been sought in terms of

prayer (a). The petitioner seeks the evolution of a “set procedure” for

constituting Benches and allotment of cases to different Benches in this Court.

Second, as part of the same prayer the petitioner seeks a Mandamus for the

making of a rule, in the Rules of Procedure of this Court, to the effect that a

three judge Bench in the Court of the Chief Justice should consist of the Chief

Justice and the two senior-most judges while a Constitution Bench should

consist of five senior-most judges (or three ‘senior-most’ judges and two ‘junior-

most’ judges). Third, the petitioner seeks a bifurcation of this court into what he

describes as a “Supreme criminal court”, with similar divisions to hear PIL, tax,

service, land disputes and miscellaneous matters (etc.).
5
6     The Supreme Court Rules, 2013 have been notified with the approval of

the President in pursuance of the provisions of
Article 145
of the Constitution.
Article 145
reads thus:
“145. (1) Subject to the provisions of any law made by
            Parliament, the Supreme Court may from time to time, with the
            approval of the President, make rules for regulating generally
            the practice and procedure of the Court including—
(a) rules as to the persons practising before the Court;
(b) rules as to the procedure for hearing appeals and other
            matters pertaining to appeals including the time within which
            appeals to the Court are to be entered;
(c) rules as to the proceedings in the Court for the enforcement
            of any of the rights conferred by Part III;
1[(cc) rules as to the proceedings in the Court
            under 2[
article 139A];]
(d) rules as to the entertainment of appeals under sub-clause
(c) of clause (1) of
article 134;
(e) rules as to the conditions subject to which any judgment
            pronounced or order made by the Court may be reviewed and
            the procedure for such review including the time within which
            applications to the Court for such review are to be entered;
(f) rules as to the costs of and incidental to any proceedings in
            the Court and as to the fees to be charged in respect of
            proceedings therein;
(g) rules as to the granting of bail;
(h) rules as to stay of proceedings;
(i) rules providing for the summary determination of any appeal
            which appears to the Court to be frivolous or vexatious or
            brought for the purpose of delay;
(j) rules as to the procedure for inquiries referred to in clause
            (1) of
article 317.
Rules of Court, etc.

            (2) Subject to the provisions of clause (3), rules made under
            this article may fix the minimum number of Judges who are to
            sit for any purpose, and may provide for the powers of single
            Judges and Division Courts.
(3) The minimum number of Judges who are to sit for the
            purpose of deciding any case involving a substantial question
            of law as to the interpretation of this Constitution or for the
            purpose of hearing any reference under
article 143
shall be
            five:
Provided that, where the Court hearing an appeal under any of
            the provisions of this Chapter other than
article 132
consists of
6
less than five Judges and in the course of the hearing of the
            appeal the Court is satisfied that the appeal involves a
            substantial question of law as to the interpretation of this
            Constitution the determination of which is necessary for the
            disposal of the appeal, such Court shall refer the question for
            opinion to a Court constituted as required by this clause for the
            purpose of deciding any case involving such a question and
            shall on receipt of the opinion dispose of the appeal in
            conformity with such opinion.
(4) No judgment shall be delivered by the Supreme Court save
            in open Court, and no report shall be made under
article 143
save in accordance with an opinion also delivered in open
            Court.
(5) No judgment and no such opinion shall be delivered by the
            Supreme Court save with the concurrence of a majority of the
            Judges present at the hearing of the case, but nothing in this
            clause shall be deemed to prevent a Judge who does not
            concur from delivering a dissenting judgment or opinion.”
7     Order VI of the Supreme Court Rules 2013 deals with the constitution of

Division Courts and powers of a Single Judge. Rules 1, 2 and 4 provide thus:
“1. Subject to the other provisions of these rules every cause,
            appeal or matter shall be heard by a Bench consisting of not
            less than two Judges nominated by the Chief Justice.
2. Where in the course of the hearing of any cause, appeal or
            other proceeding the Bench considers that the matter should
            be dealt with by a larger Bench, it shall refer the matter to the
            Chief Justice, who shall thereupon constitute such a Bench for
            the hearing of it.
…
4. If a Bench of less than three Judges, hearing a cause,
            appeal or matter, is of the opinion that the accused should be
            sentenced to death it shall refer the matter to the Chief
            Justice who shall thereupon constitute a Bench of not less
            than three Judges for hearing it.”



Rule 1 indicates that it is the Chief Justice who is to nominate the Judges who


would constitute a Bench to hear a cause, appeal or matter. Where a reference
7
has been made to a larger Bench, the Bench making the reference is required


to refer the matter to the Chief Justice who will constitute a Bench.



8     Order XXXVIII of the Supreme Court Rules 2013 deals with applications

for enforcement of fundamental rights under
Article 32.
Rule (1) of Order

XXXVIII provides thus:
“(1) Every petition under
article 32
of the Constitution shall be
             in writing and shall be heard by a Division Court of not less than
             five Judges provided that a petition which does not raise a
             substantial question of law as to the interpretation of the
             Constitution may be heard and decided by a Division Court of
             less than five Judges, and, during vacation, by the Vacation
             Judge sitting singly.
(2) All interlocutory and miscellaneous applications connected
             with a petition under
article 32
of the Constitution, may be
             heard and decided by a Division Court of less than five Judges,
             and, during vacation, by the Vacation Judge sitting singly,
             notwithstanding that in the petition a substantial question of law
             as to the interpretation of the Constitution is raised.”



Rules 12 deals with public interest litigation. Rule 12 is extracted below:
“12. (1) A public Interest Litigation Petition may commence in
             any of the following manners:
(a)     as a suo moto petition in pursuance of the order of the
             Chief Justice or Judge of the Court.
(b)     in pursuance of an order of the Chief Justice or a Judge
             nominated by the Chief Justice on a letter or representation.
(c) by an order of the Court to treat a petition as a Public
             Interest Litigation Petition.
(d)     by presentation of a petition in the Court.
             (2)     In a petition filed under clause (d) of sub-rule (1) the
             petitioner shall

             (i) disclose:
(a) his full name, complete postal address, e-mail address,
             phone number, proof regarding personal identification,
             occupation and annual income, PAN number and National
             Unique Identity Card number, if any;
8
(b)      the facts constituting the cause of action;

                     (c)      the nature of injury caused or likely to be caused to the
                     public;
                     (d)      the nature and extent of personal interest, if any, of the
                     petitioner (s);
(e) details regarding any civil, criminal or revenue litigation,
                     involving the petitioner or any of the petitioners, which has or
                     could have a legal nexus with the issue (s) involved in the
                     Public Interest Litigation; and
(f) whether the concerned Government Authority was moved
                     for relief (s) sought in the petition and if so, with what result.
(ii) file and affidavit stating that there is no personal gain,
                     private motive or oblique reason in filing the Public Interest
                     Litigation.
(3)     The Court may impose exemplary costs on the
                     petitioner (s) if it finds that the petition was frivolous or instituted
                     with oblique or mala fide motive or lacks bona fides.”
9          The position of the Chief Justice of a High Court was elucidated in a

judgment of a three judge Bench of this Court in
State of Rajasthan v Prakash

Chand1
. During the course of the judgment the following broad conclusions

were formulated in regard to the position of the Chief Justice:
“(1) That the administrative control of the High Court vests in
                     the Chief Justice alone. On the judicial side, however, he is
                     only the first amongst the equals.
(2) That the Chief Justice is the Master of the Roster.
He alone has the prerogative to constitute Benches of the court
                     and allocate cases to the Benches so constituted.
(3) That the puisne Judges can only do that work as is allotted
                     to them by the Chief Justice or under his directions.
(4) That till any determination made by the Chief Justice lasts,
                     no Judge who is to sit singly can sit in a Division Bench and no
                     Division Bench can be split up by the Judges constituting the
                     Bench themselves and one or both the Judges constituting
                     such Bench sit singly and take up any other kind of judicial
                     business not otherwise assigned to them by or under the
                     directions of the Chief Justice.
1
(1998) 1 SCC 1
9
(5) That the Chief Justice can take congnizance of an
                      application laid before him under Rule 55 (supra) and refer a
                      case to the larger bench for its disposal and he can exercise
                      this jurisdiction even in relation to a part-heard case.
                      (6) That the puisne Judges cannot “pick and choose” any case
                      pending in the High Court and assign the same to himself or
                      themselves for disposal without appropriate orders of the Chief
                      Justice.
(7) That no Judge or Judges can give directions to the Registry
                      for listing any case before him or them which runs counter to
                      the directions given by the Chief Justice. ”




10        Recently, a Constitution Bench of this Court in Campaign for
Judicial

Accountability and Reforms v Union of India2
held that the principle which

was noticed and recognised in the decision of this court in
Prakash Chand
(supra) in relation to the jurisdiction and authority of the Chief Justice of the

High Court “must apply proprio vigore as regards the power of the Chief Justice

of India”. The position of the Chief Justice was reiterated with the following

observations:
“The aforesaid position though stated as regards the High
                      Court, we are absolutely certain that the said principle is
                      applicable to the Supreme Court. We are disposed to think so.
                      Unless such a position is clearly stated, there will be utter
                      confusion. Be it noted, this has been also the convention of this
                      Court, and the convention has been so because of the law. We
                      have to make it clear without any kind of hesitation that the
                      convention is followed because of the principles of law and
                      because of judicial discipline and decorum. Once the Chief
                      Justice is stated to be the Master of the Roster, he alone has
                      the prerogative to constitute Benches. Needless to say, neither
                      a two-Judge Bench nor a three-Judge Bench can allocate the
                      matter to themselves or direct the composition for constitution
                      of a Bench. To elaborate, there cannot be any direction to the
                      Chief Justice of India as to who shall be sitting on the Bench or
                      who shall take up the matter as that touches the composition
2
(2018)1 SCC 196
10
of the Bench. We reiterate such an order cannot be passed. It
             is not countenanced in law and not permissible.
An institution has to function within certain parameters and that
             is why there are precedents, rules and conventions. As far as
             the composition of Benches is concerned, we accept the
             principles      stated      in
Prakash        Chand [State     of
             Rajasthan v. Prakash Chand
, (1998) 1 SCC 1] , which were
             stated in the context of the High Court, and clearly state that
             the same shall squarely apply to the Supreme Court and there
             cannot be any kind of command or order directing the Chief
             Justice of India to constitute a particular Bench.”



11    In view of this binding elucidation of the authority of the Chief Justice of

India, the relief which the petitioner seeks is manifestly misconceived. For one

thing, it is a well settled principle that no mandamus can issue to direct a body

or authority which is vested with a rule making power to make rules or to make

them in a particular manner. The Supreme Court has been authorised under
Article 145
to frame rules of procedure. A mandamus of the nature sought

cannot be issued. Similarly, the petitioner is not entitled to seek a direction that

Benches of this Court should be constituted in a particular manner or, as he

seeks, that there should be separate divisions of this Court. The former lies

exclusively in the domain of the prerogative powers of the Chief Justice.



12    Quite apart from the fact that the relief sought is contrary to legal and

constitutional principle, there is a fundamental fallacy in the approach of the

petitioner, which must be set at rest. The petitioner seeks the establishment of

a binding precept under which a three judge Bench in the Court of the Chief

Justice must consist of the Chief Justice and his two senior-most colleagues
11
alone while the Constitution Bench should consist of five senior-most judges

(or, as he suggests, three ‘senior-most’ and two ‘junior-most’ judges). There is

no constitutional foundation on the basis of which such a suggestion can be

accepted. For one thing, as we have noticed earlier, this would intrude into the

exclusive duty and authority of the Chief Justice to constitute benches and to

allocate cases to them.      Moreover, the petitioner seems to harbour a

misconception that certain categories of cases or certain courts must consist

only of the senior-most in terms of appointment. Every Judge appointed to this

Court under
Article 124
of the Constitution is invested with the equal duty of

adjudicating cases which come to the Court and are assigned by the Chief

Justice. Seniority in terms of appointment has no bearing on which cases a

Judge should hear. It is a settled position that a judgment delivered by a Judge

speaks for the court (except in the case of a concurring or dissenting opinion).

The Constitution makes a stipulation in
Article 124(3)
for the appointment of

Judges of the Supreme Court from the High Courts, from the Bar and from

amongst distinguished jurists.      Appointment to the Supreme Court is

conditioned upon the fulfilment of the qualifications prescribed for the holding

of that office under
Article 124(3).
Once appointed, every Judge of the Court is

entitled to and in fact, duty bound, to hear such cases as are assigned by the

Chief Justice. Judges drawn from the High Courts are appointed to this Court

after long years of service. Members of the Bar who are elevated to this Court

similarly are possessed of wide and diverse experience gathered during the

course of the years of practise at the Bar. To suggest that any Judge would be
12
more capable of deciding particular cases or that certain categories of cases

should be assigned only to the senior-most among the Judges of the Supreme

Court has no foundation in principle or precedent. To hold otherwise would be

to cast a reflection on the competence and ability of other judges to deal with

all cases assigned by the Chief Justice notwithstanding the fact that they have

fulfilled the qualifications mandated by the Constitution for appointment to the

office.
13        The submissions which have been made by the petitioner in regard to

the constitution of benches in the High Courts are, in view of the above

discussion, equally lacking in merit.        We emphatically disapprove of the

insinuations sought to be made against judges drawn from the cadre of the

district judiciary. The Constitution has made specific provisions in
Article 217(2)
for the appointment of judges to the High Court. Judges of the High Court drawn

from the Bar or from those who have held judicial office for at least ten years

discharge the same functions as judges of the court upon their appointment

under
Article 217.
To suggest that there is a distinction between the two is

contrary to constitutional tenets.
14        The Chartered High Courts of Allahabad, Bombay, Calcutta and Madras

have a long history of over a hundred and fifty years. Each of them has marked

its sesquicentennial. Many High Courts are not far behind in vintage. Some are

of a recent origin. Over the course of their judicial history, High Courts have
13
evolved conventions in matters governing practice and procedure. These

conventions provide guidance to the Chief Justice in the allocation of work,

including in the constitution of benches. The High Courts periodically publish a

roster of work under the authority of the Chief Justice. The roster indicates the

constitution of Benches, Division and Single. The roster will indicate the subject

matter of the cases assigned to each bench. Different High Courts have their

own traditions in regard to the period for which the published roster will continue,

until a fresh roster is notified. Individual judges have their own strengths in

terms of specialisation. The Chief Justice of the High Court has to bear in mind

the area of specialisation of each judge, while deciding upon the allocation of

work. However, specialisation is one of several aspects which weigh with the

Chief Justice. A newly appointed judge may be rotated in a variety of

assignments to enable the judge to acquire expertise in diverse branches of law.

Together with the need for specialisation, there is a need for judges to have a

broad-based understanding of diverse areas of law.          In deciding upon the

allocation of work and the constitution of benches, Chief Justices have to

determine the number of benches which need to be assigned to a particular

subject matter keeping in view the inflow of work and arrears. The Chief Justice

of the High Court will have regard to factors such as the pendency of cases in

a given area, the need to dispose of the oldest cases, prioritising criminal cases

where the liberty of the subject is involved and the overall strength, in terms of

numbers, of the court. Different High Courts have assigned priorities to certain

categories of cases such as those involving senior citizens, convicts who are in
14
jail and women litigants. These priorities are considered while preparing the

roster. Impending retirements have to be borne in mind since the assignment

given to a judge who is due to demit office would have to be entrusted to another

Bench when the vacancy arises. These are some of the considerations which

are borne in mind. The Chief Justice is guided by the need to ensure the orderly

functioning of the court and the expeditious disposal of cases.                            The publication

of the roster on the websites of the High Courts provides notice to litigants and

lawyers about the distribution of judicial work under the authority of the Chief

Justice. This Court was constituted in 1950. In the preparation of the roster and

in the distribution of judicial work, some of the conventions which are adopted

in the High Courts are also relevant, subject to modifications having regard to

institutional requirements.
15      Underlying the submission that the constitution of Benches and the

allocation of cases by the Chief Justice must be regulated by a procedure cast

in iron is the apprehension that absent such a procedure the power will be

exercised arbitrarily. In his capacity as a Judge, the Chief Justice is primus inter

pares: the first among equals. In the discharge of his other functions, the Chief

Justice of India occupies a position which is sui generis.
Article 124(1)
postulates that the Supreme Court of India shall consist of a Chief Justice of

India and other Judges. Article 1463 reaffirms the position of the Chief Justice
3
146. (1) Appointments of officers and servants of the Supreme Court shall be made by the Chief Justice of India
or such other Judge or officer of the Court as he may direct:
15
of India as the head of the institution. From an institutional perspective the

Chief Justice is placed at the helm of the Supreme Court. In the allocation of

cases and the constitution of benches the Chief Justice has an exclusive

prerogative. As a repository of constitutional trust, the Chief Justice is an

institution in himself. The authority which is conferred upon the Chief Justice, it

must be remembered, is vested in a high constitutional functionary.                                        The

authority is entrusted to the Chief Justice because such an entrustment of

functions is necessary for the efficient transaction of the administrative and

judicial work of the Court. The ultimate purpose behind the entrustment of

authority to the Chief Justice is to ensure that the Supreme Court is able to fulfil

and discharge the constitutional obligations which govern and provide the

rationale for its existence. The entrustment of functions to the Chief Justice as

the head of the institution, is with the purpose of securing the position of the

Supreme Court as an independent safeguard for the preservation of personal

liberty. There cannot be a presumption of mistrust. The oath of office demands

nothing less.
Provided that the President may by rule require that in such cases as may be specified in the rule, no person not
already attached to the Court shall be appointed to any office connected with the Court, save after consultation
with the Union Public Service Commission.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by Parliament, the conditions of service of officers and servants of
the Supreme Court shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice of India or by some
other Judge or officer of the Court authorized by the Chief Justice of India to make rules for the purpose:
Provided that the rules made under this clause shall, so far as they relate to salaries, allowances leave or
pensions, require the approval of the President.
(3) The administrative expenses of the Supreme Court, including all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to
or in respect of the officers and servants of the Court, shall be charged upon the Consolidated Fund of India, and
any fees or other moneys taken by the Court shall form part of that Fund.
16
16    Some of the averments which have been made by the petitioner are

scandalous. However, we have considered it appropriate to allow the matter to

rest with a caution that the petitioner must be more responsible for the manner

in which he seeks to draft pleadings in future filings.




17    For the above reasons, we find no merit in the petition. The writ petition

is, accordingly, dismissed.
...........................................CJI
                                               [DIPAK MISRA]


                                               ...........................................J
                                               [A M KHANWILKAR]


                                               ...........................................J
                                               [Dr D Y CHANDRACHUD]
New Delhi;
April 11, 2018.