[Cites
2
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Pirthwi Singh on 24 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1225
Author:
Madan B. Lokur
Bench:
Deepak Gupta
,
Madan B. Lokur
REPORTABLE
                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO.               OF 2018
                                           (Arising out of Diary No. 8754 of 2018)

                         Union of India & Ors.                                  …. Appellants

                                                              Vs.

                         Pirthwi Singh & Ors.                                  …. Respondents

                                                            WITH

                         (IA No. 52059 of 2018, IA No. 52058 of 2018, IA. No.52056 of 2018 and
                         IA No. 52057 of 2018)


                                                         JUDGMENT
Madan B. Lokur, J.
1.     Leave to appeal is granted.
2.     Delay condoned.
3.     The couldn’t-care-less and insouciant attitude of the Union of India

                         with regard to litigation, particularly in the Supreme Court, has gone a
Signature Not Verified
little too far as this case illustrates.
Digitally signed by
MEENAKSHI KOHLI
Date: 2018.04.25
11:11:53 IST
Reason:
C.A. No. ______of 2018 (@Diary No. 8754 of 2018)
Page 1 of 7
4.    The Union of India had filed a batch of appeals which was

      dismissed by this Court by a judgment and order dated 8 th December,

      2017. The decision is reported as
Union of India v. Balbir Singh Turn.1
5.    After dismissal of the batch of appeals, the Union of India filed yet

      another appeal on the same subject being Civil Appeal No. (blank) of

      2018 (Diary No. 4893 of 2018) entitled
Union of India & Ors. v. Ex. Nk.

      Balbir Singh
. That appeal came up for consideration before this Court

      on 9th March, 2018 and was dismissed following the decision in Balbir

      Singh Turn. While dismissing the appeal, it was noted that it was filed

      well after several similar matters were dismissed by this Court. The

      conduct of the Union of India in filing Civil Appeals/Special Leave

      Petitions after the issue is concluded by this Court was not appreciated. It

      was noted that the Union of India must take full responsibility for

      unnecessarily adding to the burden of the justice delivery system.
6.    To ensure that the Union of India is far more circumspect, costs of

      Rs.1,00,000/- were imposed and it was observed that the Union of India

      must shape up its litigation policy.Unfortunately, the Union of India has

      learnt no lesson and has continued its non-cooperative attitude.
7.    The present appeal was filed on 8th March, 2018 which is also well

      after the decision in Balbir Singh Turn. We would have expected that

      with the dismissal of the appeal relating to Balbir Singh Turn and Ex.
1     2017 (14) SCALE 189

          C.A. No. ______of 2018 (@Diary No. 8754 of 2018)
Page 2 of 7
Nk. Balbir Singh, the Union of India would take steps to withdraw this

      appeal from the Registry of this Court so that it is not even listed and

      there is no unnecessary burden on the judges. But obviously, the Union

      of India has no such concern and did not withdraw its appeal from the

      Registry itself.
8.       The Union of India must appreciate that by pursuing frivolous or

      infructuous cases, it is adding to the burden of this Court and collaterally

      harming other litigants by delaying hearing of their cases through the

      sheer volume of numbers. If the Union of India cares little for the justice

      delivery system, it should at least display some concern for litigants,

      many of whom have to spend a small fortune in litigating in the Supreme

      Court.
9.       On 23rd June, 2010 the Union of India released the ‘National Legal

      Mission to Reduce Average Pendency Time from 15 Years to 3 Years’ and

      this document is called ‘National Litigation Policy’. The vision/mission

      of the National Litigation Policy is as follows:
“1. The National Litigation Policy is based on the recognition that
                Government and its various agencies are the pre-dominant litigants
                in courts and Tribunals in the country. Its aim is to transform
                Government into an Efficient and Responsible litigant. This policy is
                also based on the recognition that it is the responsibility of the
                Government to protect the rights of citizens, to respect fundamental
                rights and those in charge of the conduct of Government litigation
                should never forget this basic principle.
C.A. No. ______of 2018 (@Diary No. 8754 of 2018)
Page 3 of 7
“EFFICIENT LITIGANT” MEANS
                Focusing on the core issues involved in the litigation and
                 addressing them squarely.
 Managing and conducting litigation in a cohesive, coordinated
                 and time-bound manner.
 Ensuring that good cases are won and bad cases are not
                 needlessly persevered with.
 A litigant who is represented by competent and sensitive legal
                 persons: competent in their skills and sensitive to the facts that
                 Government is not an ordinary litigant and that a litigation does
                 not have to be won at any cost.
“RESPONSIBLE LITIGANT” MEANS
                  That litigation will not be resorted to for the sake of litigating.
                  That false pleas and technical points will not be taken and
                    shall be discouraged.
 Ensuring that the correct facts and all relevant documents will
                    be placed before the court.
 That nothing will be suppressed from the court and there will
                    be no attempt to mislead any court or Tribunal.
2. Government must cease to be a compulsive litigant.           The
                  philosophy that matters should be left to the courts for ultimate
                  decision has to be discarded. The easy approach, “Let the court
                  decide,” must be eschewed and condemned.
3. The purpose underlying this policy is also to reduce Government
                litigation in courts so that valuable court time would be spent in
                resolving other pending cases so as to achieve the Goal in the
                National Legal Mission to reduce average pendency time from 15
                years to 3 years. Litigators on behalf of Government have to keep in
                mind the principles incorporated in the National mission for judicial
                reforms which includes identifying bottlenecks which the
                Government and its agencies may be concerned with and also
                removing unnecessary Government cases. Prioritisation in litigation
                has to be achieved with particular emphasis on welfare legislation,
                social reform, weaker sections and senior citizens and other
                categories requiring assistance must be given utmost priority.”
                [Emphasis supplied by us].
C.A. No. ______of 2018 (@Diary No. 8754 of 2018)
Page 4 of 7
10.   None of the pious platitudes in the National Litigation Policy have

      been followed indicating not only the Union of India’s lack of concern for

      the justice delivery system but scant regard for its own National

      Litigation Policy.
11.   The website of the Department of Justice shows that the National

      Litigation Policy, 2010 is being reviewed and formulation of the National

      Litigation Policy, 2015 is under consideration.        When this will be

      finalized is anybody’s guess. There is also an Action Plan to Reduce

      Government Litigation which was formulated on 13th June, 2017.
12.   Nothing has been finalised by the Union of India for the last almost

      about 8 years and under the garb of ease of doing business, the judiciary

      is being asked to reform. The boot is really on the other leg.
13.   Interestingly, the Action Plan mentions, among others, two

      interesting steps to reduce pendency:
(i)    Avoid unnecessary filing of appeals –appeals should not be

                   filed in routine matters – only in cases where there is a

                   substantial policy matter.
(ii)   Vexatious litigation should be immediately withdrawn.
14.   These pendency reduction steps (particularly (ii) above) have been

      conveniently overlooked as far as this appeal is concerned.
15. To make matters worse, in this appeal, the Union of India has

      engaged 10 lawyers, including an Additional Solicitor General and a

          C.A. No. ______of 2018 (@Diary No. 8754 of 2018)
Page 5 of 7
Senior Advocate! This is as per the appearance slip submitted to the

      Registry of this Court. In other words, the Union of India has created a

      huge financial liability by engaging so many lawyers for an appeal whose

      fate can be easily imagined on the basis of existing orders of dismissal in

      similar cases. Yet the Union of India is increasing its liability and asking

      the taxpayers to bear an avoidable financial burden for the misadventure.

      Is any thought being given to this?
16.   The real question is: When will the Rip Van Winkleism stop and

      Union of India wake up to its duties and responsibilities to the justice

      delivery system?
17.   To say the least, this is an extremely unfortunate situation of

      unnecessary and avoidable burdening of this Court through frivolous

      litigation which calls for yet another reminder through the imposition of

      costs on the Union of India while dismissing this appeal. We hope that

      someday some sense, if not better sense, will prevail on the Union of

      India with regard to the formulation of a realistic and meaningful

      National Litigation Policy and what it calls ‘ease of doing business’,

      which can, if faithfully implemented benefit litigants across the country.
18.   The appeal is dismissed with costs of Rs.1,00,000/- as before to be

      deposited with the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee within four




          C.A. No. ______of 2018 (@Diary No. 8754 of 2018)
Page 6 of 7
weeks from today for utilization for juvenile justice issues. Pending I.As.
are also disposed of.
19.   List for compliance after five weeks.
…………………………..J
                                                    ( Madan B. Lokur )



                                                    …………………………..J
                                                    ( Deepak Gupta )
      New Delhi;
April 24, 2018




          C.A. No. ______of 2018 (@Diary No. 8754 of 2018)
Page 7 of 7