[Cites
19
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Tamil Nadu Medical Officers ... vs Union Of India on 24 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2127, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 420, (2018) 3 SCT 73, (2018) 6 SCALE 289, (2018) 4 ALLMR 452 (SC), (2018) 2 ESC 251, 2018 (131) ALR SOC 55 (SC), 2018 (189) AIC (SOC) 6 (SC), 2018 (7) ADJ 38 NOC
Author:
D Y Chandrachud
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
D Y Chandrachud
,
A M Khanwilkar
,
A K Sikri
,
Dipak Misra
1                      REPORTABLE

                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                         WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 196 OF 2018


          TAMIL NADU MEDICAL OFFICERS
          ASSOCIATION AND ORS.                              .... PETITIONERS



                                          VERSUS




          UNION OF INDIA AND ORS                         ..... RESPONDENTS




                                         WITH
                         WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 252 OF 2018

                                         WITH
                         WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 295 OF 2018


                                         AND
                                         WITH


Signature Not Verified
                         WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 293 OF 2018
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2018.04.24
15:13:49 IST
Reason:
                                              2


                                        ORDER
Dr D Y CHANDRACHUD, J

1         The judgment rendered by a three judge Bench in
State of Uttar Pradesh

v Dinesh Singh Chauhan1
, construed the provisions of Regulations 9(IV) and

9(VII) of the Medical Council of India Post-Graduate Medical Education

Regulations 2000, as amended on 15 February 2012. In the present batch of

cases, a Bench of three Judges opined, by an order dated 13 April 2018, that these

petitions require consideration by a larger Bench.



2         In making this reference, the referring order primarily indicated the following

reasons :
(i)       The decision in Dinesh Singh Chauhan has not considered the entries in
          the legislative lists of the Seventh Schedule, more particularly Entry 66 of
          the Union List and Entry 25 of the Concurrent List;
(ii)      The main contention of the petitioners is that while coordination and
          determination of standards in institutions for higher education falls within the
          exclusive domain of the Union (Entry 66 List I), medical education is a
          subject in the Concurrent List (Entry 25 List III). Though, Entry 25 of List III
          is subject to Entry 66 of List I, the State is not denuded of its power to




1   (2016) 9 SCC 749
3
legislate on the manner and method of making admissions to post-graduate
        medical courses;
(iii)   The contentions which have been raised in the present batch of petitions
        were not addressed before this Court in Dinesh Singh Chauhan;
(iv)    The judgment in Dinesh Singh Chauhan does not consider three decisions
        of the Constitution Bench in R Chitralekha v State of Mysore2, Kumari
        Chitra Ghosh v Union of India3 and Modern Dental College and
        Research Centre v State of Madhya Pradesh4; and
(v)     There are decisions rendered by Benches of an equal strength as in Dinesh
        Singh Chauhan.
3       While making a reference to a larger Bench, the referring order observed

that it would be “appropriate that even the interim relief should be considered by

the larger Bench”. Accordingly, on the directions of the learned Chief Justice, the

proceedings have been placed before the Constitution Bench to consider the

question of interim relief.
4       We have heard Mr Arvind Datar and Mr K V Vishwanathan, learned Senior

Counsel for the petitioners, Mr Aman Lekhi, learned Additional Solicitor General

and Mr A K Sinha, learned Senior Counsel for the Respondents - Union of India,




2 ((1964) 6 SCR 368
3 (1969) 2 SCC 228
4 (2016) 7 SCC 353
4
Mr Vikas Singh learned Senior Counsel for the MCI and Mr V Giri, learned Senior

Counsel for the State of Tamil Nadu.
5         In
Tamil Nadu Medical Officers Association v Union of India5
, the

following reliefs have been sought :
“(a) Declare by issuance of a writ of mandamus or any other
                   suitable writ/order/direction that Regulation 9 of the Post-
                   Graduate Medical Education Regulations, 2000 (more
                   particularly, Regulation 9(iv) and 9(vii), does not take away the
                   power of the States under Entry 25, List III to provide for a
                   separate source of entry for in-service candidates seeking
                   admission to Degree Courses;
(b) Alternatively, if Regulation 9 of the Post Graduate Medical
                   Regulations, 2000 is understood to not allow for States to
                   provide for a separate source of entry for in-service candidates
                   seeking admission to Degree Courses, declare by issuance of
                   a writ of mandamus or any other suitable writ/order/direction,
                   Regulation 9 (more particularly, Regulations 9(iv) and 9 (vii) as
                   being arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of
Article 14
and
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution and also ultra vires the
                   provisions of the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956
;”
6         The interim prayer is that this Court should stay the operation of
Regulation

9
of the Post-Graduate Medical Education Regulations 2000, to the extent that it

is deemed to prohibit the states from providing a separate source of entry to in-

service candidates seeking admission to post-graduate degree courses. A

direction has been sought permitting the State of Tamil Nadu to implement its
5   WP (C) No. 196 of 2018
5
policy of providing for a separate source of entry to in-service candidates for

admissions to post-graduate degree courses for academic year 2018-2019.




7      Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners submit that

since 1989, the State of Tamil Nadu has had a policy of providing a separate

source of entry to in-service candidates to the extent of 50 per cent of the state’s

seats in degree courses. Further, since 2007 the State of Tamil Nadu has, by a

government order, provided a preferential weightage to those in-service

candidates who have served in rural, hilly and difficult areas. This policy has been

adopted to ensure the provision of adequate healthcare facilities in government

hospitals particularly in rural, hilly and difficult locations. In this backdrop, the

following submissions have been urged :
(i)   Though, Entry 25 of List III of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution
      (“education, including..medical education..”) is subject to the provisions of
      Entry 66 of State List I (“coordination and determination of standards in
      institutions for higher education”), the state is not denuded of its power to
      determine the manner or method for making admissions to post-graduate
      medical courses;
(ii) The relationship between Entry 66 of List I and Entry 25 of List III has been
      considered by three Constitution Bench decisions of this Court in
      R Chitralekha, Kumari Chitra Ghosh and Modern Dental College (supra);
6
(iii) In its decisions in
K Duraisamy v State of Tamil Nadu6
,
AIIMS Students’
      Union v AIIMS7
and State of M P v Gopal D Tirthani8, this Court has upheld
      the right of the State Governments to set apart a definite percentage of seats
      at the post-graduate level in degree and diploma courses with a separate
      source of entry for a defined classes of persons. The exercise of such a power
      has been held to be valid so long as it is based on a legitimate classification;
(iv) The classification between in-service doctors in government and others is
      reasonable and has a nexus with the object of ensuring adequate and
      affordable healthcare facilities in the public sector; and
(v) The interpretation placed on
Regulation 9
in Dinesh Singh Chauhan that
      reservation for in-service candidates in post-graduate degree courses is not
      permissible since it has been provided only for diploma courses under
Regulation 9(VII)
requires reconsideration for the following reasons :
(a)     There is no express or implied bar in
Regulation 9
, prohibiting the State
              under Entry 25 of List III from providing a separate channel of entry to
              in-service candidates. On the contrary, the grant of preference to in-
service candidates is perceived to be a laudable object by virtue of the
              proviso to Regulations 9(IV) and 9(VII);
(b)     An implied inclusion cannot be inferred in regard to the states providing
              reservations for in-service candidates in degree courses merely on the
              basis that
Regulation 9(VII)
provides a reservation for diploma courses;




6 (2001) 2 SCC 538
7 (2002) 1 SCC 428
8 (2003) 7 SCC 83
7
(c)     While holding that
Regulation 9
is a complete code in itself, the decision
                in Dinesh Singh Chauhan has not appropriately dealt with the
                decisions in Sudhir N v State of Kerala9 and Gopal D Tirthani (supra);
(d)     Providing a separate source of entry for in-service candidates would not
                result in a lowering of standards prescribed by the Medical Council of
                India10 since all eligible candidates would have met the minimum
                qualifying marks in the NEET examination and admissions would take
                place on the inter se merit of in-service candidates; and
(e)     In its decision in Modern Dental College and Research Centre, the
                Constitution Bench has observed that a State being responsible for the
                welfare and development of its residents, it is the prerogative of the
                State to adopt appropriate steps;
(f)     Merely providing a weightage for in-service candidates in degree
                courses will not ensure that an adequate number of in-service
                candidates qualify, having regard to the difficulties faced by such
                candidates while working in difficult conditions.

                Since counselling in the first round has already taken place, it has been
                submitted that interim orders are necessary to ensure that States are
                not precluded from providing a separate source of entry to in-service
                candidates in post-graduate degree courses.
8         On the other hand, it has been submitted on behalf of the Union of India and

MCI that Entry 25 of List III is expressly subject to Entry 66 of List I. Hence, the

authority of the States under
Article 246
to legislate on medical education is subject

9   (2015) 6 SCC 685
10   The MCI
8
to the overriding authority of the Union in matters relating to the coordination and

determination of standards in higher education.
Regulation 9
is a complete code

in itself.
Regulation 9(iv)
provides an incentive to in-service candidates at the rate

of 10 per cent of the marks obtained, for each year of service in remote and/or

difficult areas upto a maximum 30 per cent of the marks obtained in the NEET

examination. MCI, as an expert policy making authority constituted under central

legislation, has formulated statutory regulations under which only incentive marks

can be granted for in-service candidates in post-graduate degree admissions to

medical courses. In the considered view of the Union government and MCI, the

grant of reservations or a separate source of entry for in-service candidates would

directly impinge on the authority of MCI to coordinate and determine standards of

medical education. The decision in Dinesh Singh Chauhan specifically construes

the provisions of the
Regulation 9
as amended in 2012. The grant of any interim

relief at this stage cannot be contemplated so long as the three judge Bench

decision holds the field. Prescribing a separate source of entry for in-service

degree candidates would, in the submission of the MCI, directly result in a lowering

of standards in medical education. Merit would be compromised and the

prescription of criteria under Entry 66 of List I would be a casualty.




9     Rule 9, as amended on 15 February 2012, reads as follows :
“9. Procedure for selection of candidate for postgraduate courses
             shall be as follows.—
9
(I) There shall be a single eligibility-cum-entrance examination,
    namely, “National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for admission to
    Postgraduate Medical Courses” in each academic year. The
    superintendence, direction and control of National Eligibility-
cum-Entrance Test shall vest with National Board of
    Examinations under overall supervision of the Ministry of Health
    & Family Welfare, Government of India.
(II) 3% seats of the annual sanctioned intake capacity shall be filled
     up by candidates with locomotory disability of lower limbs
     between 50% to 70%:
Provided that in case any seat in this 3% quota remains
        unfilled on account of unavailability of candidates with
        locomotory disability of lower limbs between 50% to 70%
        then any such unfilled seat in this 3% quota shall be filled
        up by persons with locomotory disability of lower limbs
        between 40% to 50% before they are included in the
        annual sanctioned seats for general category
        candidates:
Provided further that this entire exercise shall be
        completed by each medical college/institution as per the
        statutory time schedule for admissions.
(III) In order to be eligible for admission to any postgraduate course
      in a particular academic year, it shall be necessary for a
      candidate to obtain minimum of marks at 50th percentile in
      “National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test for Postgraduate
      courses” held for the said academic year. However, in respect
      of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
      Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward Classes, the minimum
      marks shall be at 40th percentile. In respect of candidates as
      provided in clause (II) above with locomotory disability of lower
      limbs, the minimum marks shall be at 45th percentile. The
      percentile shall be determined on the basis of highest marks
      secured in the all-India common merit list in “National Eligibility-
cum-Entrance Test” for postgraduate courses:
Provided when sufficient number of candidates in the respective
    categories fail to secure minimum marks as prescribed in
    National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test held for any academic
    year for admission to postgraduate courses, the Central
    Government in consultation with the Medical Council of India
    may at its discretion lower the minimum marks required for
    admission to postgraduate course for candidates belonging to
    respective categories and marks so lowered by the Central
    Government shall be applicable for the said academic year only.
(IV) The reservation of seats in medical colleges/institutions for
    respective categories shall be as per applicable laws prevailing
10
in States/Union Territories. An all-India merit list as well as
    State-wise merit list of the eligible candidates shall be prepared
    on the basis of the marks obtained in National Eligibility-cum-
Entrance Test and candidates shall be admitted to postgraduate
    courses from the said merit lists only:
Provided that in determining the merit of candidates who are in
    service of Government/public authority, weightage in the marks
    may be given by the Government/competent authority as an
    incentive at the rate of 10% of the marks obtained for each year
    of service in remote and/or difficult areas up to the maximum of
    30% of the marks obtained in National Eligibility-cum-Entrance
    Test, the remote and difficult areas shall be as defined by the
    State Government/competent authority from time to time.
(V) No candidate who has failed to obtain the minimum eligibility
    marks as prescribed in clause (II) above shall be admitted to
    any postgraduate courses in the said academic year.
(VI) In non-governmental medical colleges/institutions, 50% (fifty
    per cent) of the total seats shall be filled by the State
    Government or the Authority appointed by them, and the
    remaining 50% (fifty per cent) of the seats shall be filled by the
    medical colleges/institutions concerned on the basis of the merit
    list prepared as per the marks obtained in National Eligibility-
    cum-Entrance Test.
(VII) 50% of the seats in postgraduate diploma courses shall
    be reserved for medical officers in the government service, who
    have served for at least three years in remote and/or difficult
    areas. After acquiring the PG diploma, the medical officers shall
    serve for two more years in remote and/or difficult areas as
    defined by State Government/competent authority from time to
    time.
(VIII) The Universities and other authorities concerned shall
     organise admission process in such a way that teaching in
     postgraduate courses starts by 2nd May and by 1st August for
     super specialty courses each year. For this purpose, they shall
     follow the time schedule indicated in Appendix III.
(IX) There shall be no admission of students in respect of any
    academic session beyond 31st May for postgraduate courses
    and 30th September for super specialty courses under any
    circumstances. The Universities shall not register any student
    admitted beyond the said date.
(X) The Medical Council of India may direct, that any student
    identified as having obtained admission after the last date for
    closure of admission be discharged from the course of study, or
    any medical qualification granted to such a student shall not be
    a recognized qualification for the purpose of the Indian Medical
11
Council Act, 1956
. The institution which grants admission to any
             student after the last date specified for the same shall also be
             liable to face such action as may be prescribed by MCI including
             surrender of seats equivalent to the extent of such admission
             made from its sanctioned intake capacity for the succeeding
             academic year.”                      (Id at pages 764-766)




Entry 66 of List I provides thus :
“66. Coordination and determination of standards in institutions
             for higher education or research and scientific and technical
             institutions.”




Entry 25 of List III provides thus :
“25. Education, including technical education, medical education and
            universities, subject to the provisions of Entries 63, 64, 65 and 66 of
            List I; vocational and technical training of labour.”
10    In Modern Dental College and Research Centre (supra), a Constitution

Bench of this Court held that the expression “coordination and determination of

standards” means laying down standards. Hence, when it comes to prescribing the

standards for institutions of higher learning, the exclusive domain is given to the

Union. Dr Justice A K Sikri speaking for the Constitution Bench held thus :
“102. Most educational activities, including admissions, have two
             aspects: the first deals with the adoption and setting up the
             minimum standards of education. The objective in prescribing
             minimum standards is to provide a benchmark of the calibre and
             quality of education being imparted by various educational
             institutions in the entire country. Additionally, the coordination of
12
the standards of education determined nationwide is ancillary to
            the very determination of standards. Realising the vast diversity
            of the nation wherein levels of education fluctuated from lack of
            even basic primary education, to institutions of high excellence, it
            was thought desirable to determine and prescribe basic minimum
            standards of education at various levels, particularly at the level
            of research institutions, higher education and technical education
            institutions. As such, while balancing the needs of States to impart
            education as per the needs and requirements of local and regional
            levels, it was essential to lay down a uniform minimum standard
            for the nation. Consequently, the Constitution-makers provided for
            List I Entry 66 with the objective of maintaining uniform standards
            of education in fields of research, higher education and technical
            education.”                                   (id at page 430)




Implementing the standards of education determined by Parliament and regulating

the complete activity of education entails the application of the standards so

determined. The balance between Entry 66 of List I and Entry 25 of List III has

been drawn succinctly, on a review of the earlier Constitution Bench decisions,

thus :
“104…In Gujarat University [Gujarat University v. Krishna
            Ranganath Mudholkar
, AIR 1963 SC 703 : 1963 Supp (1) SCR
            112] , a Bench of five Judges examined the scope of List II
            Entry 11 (which is now List III Entry 25) with reference to List I
            Entry 66. It was held that the power of the State to legislate in
            respect of education to the extent it is entrusted to Parliament,
            is deemed to be restricted. Coordination and determination of
            standards was in the purview of List I and power of the State
            was subject to power of the Union on the said subject. It was
            held that the two entries overlapped to some extent and to the
            extent of overlapping the power conferred by List I Entry 66
            must prevail over power of the State. Validity of a State
            legislation depends upon whether it prejudicially affects
            “coordination or determination of standards”, even in absence
            of a Union legislation.
In R. Chitralekha v. State of Mysore [R.
            Chitralekha v. State of Mysore, AIR 1964 SC 1823 : (1964) 6
13
SCR 368] , the same issue was again considered. It was
             observed that if the impact of the State law is heavy or
             devastating as to wipe out or abridge the Central field, it may
             be struck down.
In
State of T.N. v. Adhiyaman Educational &
             Research Institute [State of T.N.
v. Adhiyaman Educational &
             Research Institute, (1995) 4 SCC 104 : 1 SCEC 682] , it was
             observed that to the extent that State legislation is in conflict
             with the Central legislation under Entry 25, it would be void and
             inoperative.
To the same effect is the view taken in
Preeti
             Srivastava [Preeti Srivastava v. State of M.P.
, (1999) 7 SCC
             120 : 1
SCEC 742] and State of Maharashtra v. Sant
             Dnyaneshwar Shikshan Shastra Mahavidyalaya [State of
             Maharashtra
v. Sant       Dnyaneshwar      Shikshan       Shastra
             Mahavidyalaya, (2006) 9 SCC 1 : 5 SCEC 637] .
Though the
             view taken in
State of M.P. v. Nivedita Jain [State of
             M.P.
v. Nivedita Jain, (1981) 4 SCC 296] and Ajay Kumar
             Singh v. State of Bihar[Ajay Kumar Singh v. State of Bihar,
             (1994) 4 SCC 401] to the effect that admission standards
             covered by List I Entry 66 could apply only post admissions
             was overruled in
Preeti Srivastava [Preeti Srivastava v. State
             of M.P.
, (1999) 7 SCC 120 : 1 SCEC 742] , it was not held that
             the entire gamut of admissions was covered by List I as
             wrongly      assumed          in
Bharati     Vidyapeeth [Bharati
             Vidyapeeth v. State of Maharashtra
, (2004) 11 SCC 755 : 2
             SCEC 535] .                                (Id at page 431)



The Constitution Bench held that while Entry 25 of List III is subject to Entry 66 of

List I, the entire gamut of admissions is not excluded from the purview of the

statutes. However, the “exercise of any power under List III Entry 25 has to be

subject to a Central law referable to Entry 25”.
11    The provisions of
Regulation 9
have been construed by the three judge

Bench decision in
Dinesh Singh Chauhan
(supra). The decision, it must be

emphasised, has construed the amended provisions of
Regulation 9
.
Regulation
14
9
is held it to be a self-contained code regarding the procedure to be followed for

admissions to medical courses. In that context, it has been held :
“24. By now, it is well established that
Regulation 9
is a self-
            contained code regarding the procedure to be followed for
            admissions to medical courses. It is also well established that the
            State has no authority to enact any law much less by executive
            instructions that may undermine the procedure for admission to
            postgraduate medical courses enunciated by the Central
            legislation and regulations framed thereunder, being a subject
            falling within Schedule VII List I Entry 66 of the Constitution
            (see
Preeti Srivastava v. State of M.P. [Preeti Srivastava
v. State
            of M.P., (1999) 7 SCC 120 : 1 SCEC 742] ). The procedure for
            selection of candidates for the postgraduate degree courses is
            one such area on which the Central legislation and regulations
            must prevail.”                           (Id at page 766)



The above statement of the law in Dinesh Singh Chauhan is consistent with the

principles which have been reaffirmed by the Constitution Bench in Modern Dental

College and Research Centre. The referring order notes that the decision in

Modern Dental College and Research Centre was published in the reports after

the decision in Dinesh Singh Chauhan. In our view, the fundamental basis of the

three judge Bench decision is in accord with the principles which have been
laid

down by
the Constitution Bench.
12    While interpreting
Regulation 9(IV)
, Dinesh Singh Chauhan holds that the

reservations referred to in the opening sentence are obviously constitutional

reservations for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and the socially and
15
educationally backward classes of citizens and not those for in-service candidates.
Explaining the proviso to Rule 9 (IV) it has been held :
“25.4…This provision, however, contains a proviso. It
             predicates that in determining the merit of candidates who are
             in service of the Government or a public authority, weightage
             in the marks may be given by the Government/competent
             authority as an incentive @ 10% of the marks obtained for each
             year of service in specified remote or difficult areas of the State
             up to the maximum of 30% of the marks obtained in NEET.
             This provision even if read liberally does not provide for
             reservation for in-service candidates, but only of giving a
             weightage in the form of incentive marks as specified to the
             class of in-service candidates (who have served in notified
             remote and difficult areas in the State).” (Id at page 767)



This interpretation of the proviso plainly follows the natural and ordinary meaning

of the words used. The proviso to Rule 9(IV) does not contemplate a reservation

for in-service candidates in post-graduate courses but the grant of incentive marks.
Dinesh Singh Chauhan has categorically rejected the submission that there is no

express prohibition on reservations for in-service candidates and hence it would

be permissible for the State Governments to provide them :
“27…As there is no express provision prohibiting reservation
             to in-service candidates in respect of admission to
             postgraduate “degree” courses, it was contended that
             providing for such reservation by the State Government is not
             impermissible in law. Further, there are precedents of this
             Court to suggest that such arrangement is permissible as a
             separate channel of admission for in-service candidates. This
             argument does not commend to us. In the first place, the
             decisions pressed into service have considered the provisions
             regarding admission process governed by the regulations in
             force at the relevant time. The admission process in the
             present case is governed by the regulations which have come
             into force from the academic year 2013-2014. This
Regulation
16
is a self-contained code. There is nothing in this Regulation to
            even remotely indicate that a separate channel for admission
            to in-service candidates must be provided, at least in respect
            of postgraduate “degree” courses. In contradistinction,
            however, 50% seats are earmarked for the postgraduate
            “diploma” courses for in-service candidates, as is discernible
            from clause (VII). If the regulation intended a similar separate
            channel for in-service candidates even in respect of
            postgraduate “degree” courses, that position would have been
            made clear in
Regulation 9
itself.”       (Id at pages 767-768)



13    The judgment has noticed that in framing
Regulation 9
, reservations have

been provided for in-service candidates of the government in diploma seats.
Where the delegate of the legislature intended to provide reservations, a specific

provision has been made, as in
Regulation 9(VII)
. On the other hand, for post-

graduate degree seats, there is only a prescription of incentive marks in
Regulation

9(IV)
. Noticing that these regulations have been framed by an expert body, it has

been held thus :
“35. As aforesaid, the Regulations have been framed by an
            expert body based on past experience and including the
            necessity to reckon the services and experience gained by the
            in-service candidates in notified remote and difficult areas in
            the State. The proviso prescribes the measure for giving
            incentive marks to in-service candidates who have worked in
            notified remote and difficult areas in the State. That can be
            termed as a qualitative factor for determining their merit. Even
            the quantitative factor to reckon merit of the eligible in-service
            candidates is spelt out in the proviso. It envisages giving of
            incentive marks @ 10% of the marks obtained for each year of
            service in remote and/or difficult areas up to 30% of the marks
            obtained in NEET. It is an objective method of linking the
            incentive marks to the marks obtained in NEET by the
            candidate.”                             (Id at page 772)
17
It may be noted that in arriving at this conclusion, the court has taken due note of

the decision of the Constitution Bench in
Dr Preeti Srivastava v State of M P11
as well as of the decisions in
Tirthani, AIIMS Students’ Union and Sudhir N
(supra) among other decisions.
14         The decision in Dinesh Singh Chauhan holds the field. It is based on a

construction of
Regulation 9(IV)
which, at least at the present stage, cannot be

brushed aside. The principle which has been adopted in that decision is consistent

with the primacy which is attributed by the Constitution to Entry 66 of List I. This is

the clear intendment of the words “subject to” in Entry 25 of List III. The grant of

any interim relief at the present stage would amount to a mandatory final order

which cannot be countenanced. MCI has, as an expert body, proceeded on a

principled basis. Any attempt at this stage to read into
Regulation 9(IV)
, a separate

source of entry or a reservation for in-service candidates in degree courses would

impinge upon Entry 66 of List I and the exercise of regulatory powers under the

central statute.
15         For these reasons, we are unable to accede to the prayer for interim relief

which has been urged on behalf of the petitioners. Interim relief is accordingly

refused. We, however, clarify that the counselling which takes place shall

11(1999)   7 SCC 120
18
ultimately abide by the result of the reference. I.A. No 33686 of 2018 is disposed

of accordingly.
…........................................... CJI
                                                [DIPAK MISRA]



                                              ....................................................J
                                                [A K SIKRI]



                                              ....................................................J
                                                [A M KHANWILKAR]




                                             .....................................................J
                                               [D Y CHANDRACHUD]



                                             ......................................................J
                                                [ASHOK BHUSHAN]



New Delhi;
April 24, 2018.