[Cites
27
, Cited by
736
]
Supreme Court of India
Mangla Ram vs The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd on 6 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 1900, (2018) 2 ACC 118, (2018) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 248, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 1582, (2018) 4 RAJ LW 2996, 2018 (2) SCC (CRI) 819, (2019) 1 CIVLJ 483, (2018) 2 ACJ 1300, (2018) 2 CGLJ 8, (2018) 4 ALL WC 3933, (2018) 2 CURCC 467, (2018) 130 ALL LR 218, (2018) 4 BOM CR 79, (2018) 185 ALLINDCAS 102 (SC), (2018) 4 ANDHLD 89, (2018) 3 JCR 3 (SC), (2018) 2 TAC 337, 2018 (5) SCC 656
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
D.Y. Chandrachud
1

                                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS.2499­2500 OF 2018
                                (Arising out of SLP (Civil) Nos.28141­42 of 2017)


                         Mangla Ram                                         …Appellant(s) 
                                                  :Versus:

                         The Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.
                         & Ors.                                              ….Respondent(s)




                                                   J U D G M E N T

                         A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.    In   the   present   appeals,   the   appellant/claimant   has

                         challenged the judgment dated 5th January, 2017 passed by

                         the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan, Jodhpur Bench,

                         in SB Civil Miscellaneous Appeal Nos.273 of 2001 and 290

                         of 2001, which set aside the award of the Motor Accident

                         Claims Tribunal [‘the Tribunal’] granting compensation to
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
the   appellant   at   the   instance   of   respondent   Nos.2   and   3
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2018.04.06
17:14:42 IST
Reason:
(driver and owner of the offending vehicle, respectively) as
2
also negatived the appellant’s prayer for enhancement of the

compensation amount.
2.    The appellant alleges that on or about 10th  February,

1990, while he was riding his motorcycle, bearing No. RJ­

19­6636,   he   was   hit   by   jeep   No.   RST­4701,   owned   by

respondent   No.3   and   purportedly   being   driven   by

respondent No.2 at the time, resulting in serious   injuries

and ultimately, amputation of his right leg above the knee.

The appellant subsequently filed an application before the

Tribunal,   Jodhpur,   seeking   compensation   against   the

respondents,   including   the   respondent   No.1   insurance

company. He claimed 40% permanent disability and 100%

functional disability, contending that his primary livelihood

of   driving   heavy   transport   vehicles   (HTVs)   had   been

curtailed   on   account   of   his   amputation,   and   sought

compensation  to the  tune of Rs. 11,17,000/­. Respondent

Nos.2 and 3 denied the accident and the involvement of the

jeep in question. The respondent No.1 insurance company

argued that the cover note purportedly taken for the jeep in

question   was   fraudulent.   The   cover   note   had   been   given

unauthorisedly   by   its   then   Development   Officer,   no
3
premium   had   been   deposited   with   the   company   and   no

policy had been issued in that regard. Thus, the jeep was

not validly insured.
3.    In   its   judgment   dated   22nd  November,   2000,   the

Tribunal   discussed   the   evidence   on   record   in   detail.   PW2

(Chainaram)   and   PW4   (Thanaram),   who   had   taken   the

appellant   to   the   hospital   after   the   accident,   deposed   that

after   the   accident,   the   jeep   which   caused   the   accident

stopped   ahead   and   they   noted   the   jeep   number   in   the

backlight and  further, they  heard the driver’s name being

called   out   by   the   passengers   in   the   jeep.   The   Tribunal,

however, found that their version of having noted the jeep

number   and   heard   the   driver’s   name   seemed   to   be

unnatural.   The   Tribunal  also discarded the version  of the

appellant (PW1) about the details of the vehicle as being not

reliable. The Tribunal then noted the evidence of the defence

witnesses, that the jeep in question was nowhere near the

area   of   the   accident.     The  Tribunal,  however,  opined  that

the accident had been caused by the jeep in question, based

on   the   investigation   report   filed   by   the   police   mentioning

that   when   they   seized   the   jeep   after   one   month   of   the
4
accident, the jeep bore a scratch on the mudguard of the

tyre on the upper footboard on the left side. The Tribunal

also relied on the charge sheet (Exh.1) filed by the police,

wherein it has been stated that the accident was caused by

the jeep in question on the basis of statements made by the

appellant   and   other   witnesses   (Roopram,   Thanaram   and

Pratap Singh). The Tribunal held that there was no reason

to disagree with the conclusion of the police. In short, the

Tribunal   disbelieved   the   evidence   of   the   appellant’s

witnesses, regarding the commission of accident by the jeep

in question, as unreliable but nevertheless relied upon the

investigation   report   as   also   the   charge   sheet   filed   by   the

police   in   that   regard   which   was   supported   by   two   other

witnesses who did not depose before the Tribunal.
4.    The   Tribunal   then   referred   to   the   site   map   of   the

accident (Exh.2), to conclude that the appellant was riding

his motorcycle one foot on wrong side from the middle of the

road and hence, had contributed to the accident by being

negligent.   The   Tribunal   also   accepted   the   plea   of   the

respondent No.1 insurance company that the cover note  as

regard   the   offending   jeep   was   fraudulent.   The   Tribunal
5
accepted the evidence of witness DW4, the branch manager

of   the   respondent   No.1   insurance   company,   that   the

company  did  not   receive any  premium under  the relevant

cover note and had not issued any insurance policy in that

regard.   DW   4   had   deposed   that   the   cover   note   was   not

deposited   with   the   company.   Further,   the   concerned

development officer, whose signature was on the cover note,

had   been   removed   from   the   respondent   No.1   insurance

company   but   had   in   his   possession   certain   cover   notes,

including   the   relevant   cover   note.   DW   4   stated   that   no

insurance policy was issued on the basis of the said cover

note. The Tribunal then found that it was possible that the

Development Officer had backdated the cover note and had

not   deposited   the   money   for   issuing   a   policy   with   the

company. The Tribunal thus held that the vehicle was not

insured by the company and, therefore, the company was

not liable.
5.    Based on the aforesaid observations, the Tribunal took

into   account   the   injuries   caused   to   the   appellant   and

calculated compensation of Rs. 1,27,000/­ but, owing to the
6
purported negligence of the appellant, reduced the amount

by half and finally awarded a sum of Rs. 63,500/­ to the

appellant payable by the respondent Nos. 2 and 3 jointly.
6.    The   appellant   filed   an   appeal   (SB   Civil   Misc.   Appeal

No.273 of 2001) for enhancement whereas respondent Nos.

2   and   3   (driver   and   owner   of   the   jeep,   respectively)

challenged the Tribunal’s award (by way of SB Civil Misc.

Appeal No.290 of 2001), before the High Court of Rajasthan,

Jodhpur  Bench.  In its judgment dated 5th  January, 2017,

the High Court concluded that the Tribunal’s findings were

incorrect,   unconvincing   and   not   supported   by   evidence.

Further, the Tribunal’s reasoning, that it did not believe the

oral evidence of the parties but had nevertheless answered

the issue in favour of the claimant solely on the basis of the

police report, on the ground that there was no reason not to

believe the conclusion arrived at by the police, was flawed

and incorrect. The High Court noted that the Tribunal was

not convinced about the involvement of the vehicle, despite

which it held that involvement was proved. Furthermore, no

finding   regarding   negligence   of   the   driver   of   the   jeep   had

been   recorded   by   the   Tribunal   rather   it   found   that   the
7
appellant   was   negligent   while   riding   his   motorcycle.   The

High Court took the view that mere filing of a charge­sheet,

without any finding of conviction, was insufficient to prove

negligence   by   respondent   Nos.   2   and   3.   Additionally,   the

High   Court   also   held  that   the  statement  of  the  appellant,

wherein he claimed that the bumper of the jeep had hit the

rear of his motorcycle, was contradicted by the investigation

report of the jeep which recorded that it did not bear out

that   the   jeep   had   been  involved  in an  accident.  The High

Court,   therefore,   was   pleased   to   set   aside   the   Tribunal’s

award and allowed the appeal filed by the driver and owner

of   the   jeep   (respondent   Nos.   2   and   3   respectively)   while

dismissing the appeal filed by the appellant.
7.    We have heard Mr. Rishabh Sancheti, learned counsel

appearing for the appellant. He contends that the evidence

on record clearly indicates that the accident was caused due

to the rash and negligent driving of Jeep No. RST­4701 by

respondent   No.2,   which   fact   has   been   established   by   the

eye­witnesses.   The   respondent   No.2   failed   to   adduce   any

cogent evidence in his defence. He also contends that the

vehicle in question was seized by the police but there was a
8
strong   possibility   that   it   had   been   repaired   in   the

interregnum creating a discrepancy between the accounts of

the witnesses who were present at the time of the accident

and the actual condition of the vehicle at the time of seizure.

Further, the Tribunal’s reliance on the site map to infer that

the appellant was riding his motorcycle on the wrong side of

the road is erroneous as the site map merely reflected the

position of the motorcycle after the accident and not at the

time of the accident. The High Court, contends the learned

counsel, erroneously decided the matter on the principle of

‘beyond   reasonable   doubt’   whereas   proceedings  under   the
Motor Vehicles Act
were required to be decided on the basis

of   preponderance   of   probabilities   and   thus,   the   degree   of

proof required was much less.
Additionally, the proceedings

under  the
Motor  Vehicles Act
were not  adversarial and in

that regard, the evidence on record was sufficient to reach

at the conclusion that respondent No.2’s negligence led to

the   accident   and   that   the   appellant   was   entitled   to   full

compensation.   Finally,   the   appellant   suffered   40%

permanent disability and 100% functional disability and on

that   basis,   the   Tribunal   erred   by   not   granting   higher
9
compensation   to  the  appellant.  He also  contends that  the

      courts   below   erred   in   absolving   the   respondent   No.1

      insurance   company   from   its   liability.   The   following   cases

      were   cited   by   the   learned   counsel   in   support   of   the

      submissions:
Kaushnuma   Begum   &   Ors.   vs.   The   New

      India Assurance Co. Ltd. and Ors.1
,
Dulcina Fernandes

      and Ors. vs. Joaquim Xavier Cruz and Anr.2
,
Bimla Devi

      and Ors. vs. Himachal Road Transport Corporation and

      Ors.3
,
Ravi   Kapur   v   State   of   Rajasthan4
,
National

      Insurance   Co.   Ltd.   v   Pranay   Sethi   &   Ors.5
,
Kishan

      Gopal & Anr. v Lala & Ors.6
,
Harbans Lal v Harvinder

      Pal7
,
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. v Pazhaniammal &

      Ors.8
,
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v Deepak Goel9
,
Manisha   v   Umakant   Marotrao   Kolhe10
and
Mahawati

      Devi v Branch Manager11
.
1
(2001) 2 SCC 9
2
(2013) 10 SCC 646
3
(2009) 13 SCC 530
4
(2012) 9 SCC 284
5
AIR 2017 SC 5157
6
(2014) 1 SCC 244
7
2015 SCC OnLine P& H 9926
8
2011 SCC OnLine Ker 1881
9
2014 SCC OnLine Del 362
10
2015 SCC OnLine Bom 4613
11
2017 SCC OnLine Pat 1145
10
8.    We   have   also   heard   Ms.   Aishwarya   Bhati,   learned

counsel for respondent Nos.2 and 3 [in SLP (Civil) No. 28141

of 2017 and respondent Nos.1 and 2 in SLP (Civil) No.28142

of 2017] the driver and owner, respectively, of the offending

jeep   and   Mr.   K.K.   Bhat,   learned   counsel   appearing   for

respondent   No.1   Insurance   Company.   They   contend   that

the appellant did not have a valid driving licence at the time

of   the   accident   and   was   negligently   driving   on   the   wrong

side of the road. Even the driving licence produced by the

appellant was for a different class of vehicles and not for a

motorcycle, which he was riding at the time of the accident.

Further,   the   Tribunal  sans  examination   of   the   witnesses

whose statement were recorded by the police in furtherance

of the FIR filed in relation to the subject accident could not

have based its conclusion merely due to filing of a charge

sheet in that regard and without any information as to any

conviction. Mere filing of the charge sheet by the police is

not   enough.   That   is   not   a   legal   evidence,   much   less

sufficient to record a finding of fact that either that the jeep

in question was involved in the accident or that respondent

No.2   was   negligently   driving   the   said   vehicle.   The   High
11
Court has also categorically opined that no finding on the

     factum of negligence on the part of respondent No.2 driver

     of the jeep has been recorded by the Tribunal; and that the

     selfsame   police   report   indicates   that   the   jeep   was   not

     involved in the accident in question.
9.     On the issue of whether the jeep was validly insured,

     Ms.   Bhati   contends   that   the   respondent   No.3   owner   took

     insurance for the jeep and even paid premium for the same

     and   hence,   any   objection   taken   by   the   respondent   No.3

     insurance   company   that   such   insurance   was   fraudulently

     obtained, is untenable.   Reliance is placed on the decision

     in
New   India   Assurance   Co.   Ltd.   Vs.   Rula   &   Ors
12,  to

     buttress   this   submission.   Mr.   Bhat,   however,   argues   that

     the   jeep   was   not   insured   and   that   the   official   of   the

     company  who  had  issued the cover  note had fraudulently

     issued   the   same.   It   is   possible   that   the   said   official   had

     backdated   certain   cover   notes,   for   which   he   had   been

     expelled from the company. The evidence in that regard is

     conclusive   and   there  is a finding   by   the Tribunal  on  that

     count.
Mr.   Bhat   relies   upon   the   decisions   in
Oriental
12
(2000) 3 SCC 195
12
Insurance Co. Ltd. v Meena Variyal13
,
Minu B Mehta &

      Anr. v Balakrishna Ramachandra Nayan & Anr.14
and
Surender   Kumar   Arora   &   Anr.   v   Dr.   Manoj   Bisla   &

      Ors.15
.
10. The moot question which arises for our consideration

      in these appeals is about the justness of the decision of the

      High Court in reversing the finding of fact recorded by the

      Tribunal on the factum of involvement of Jeep No.RST­4701

      in the  accident  occurred on 10 th  February, 1990 at about

      8.00­8.30 P.M. and also on the factum of negligence of the

      driver of the jeep causing the accident in question.  On the

      first   aspect,   the   High   Court   has   noted   that   the   Tribunal

      having discarded the oral evidence adduced by the appellant

      (claimant)   could   not  have  based  its  finding   merely   on  the

      basis of the FIR and the charge­sheet filed against the driver

      of   the   offending   vehicle   and   also   because   the   mechanical

      investigation report (Exh.5) merely indicated that on the left

      side of the offending vehicle a scratch mark was noticed on

      the   mudguard   of   the   left   tyre   which   contradicted   the
13
(2007) 5 SCC 428
14
(1977) 2 SCC 441
15
(2012) 4 SCC 552
13
statement   of   the   claimant   and   the   Police   Investigation

Report much less showing involvement of the vehicle in the

accident.   As   regards   the   second   aspect   on   the   factum   of

negligence, the High Court noted that the Tribunal did not

record any finding about the negligence of the driver of the

jeep   and   the   site   map   (Exh.   2)   would   indicate   that   the

appellant/claimant   himself   was   negligent   in   driving   the

motorcycle in the middle of the road.
11. As the judgment of the High Court has been assailed

in   the   appeal   filed   by   the   appellant   (claimant)   for

enhancement of compensation, including the finding of the

Tribunal in discarding the evidence of PW­1, PW­2 and PW­

4 on the factum of involvement of the offending vehicle in

the accident and also on the factum of the said vehicle being

driven   rashly   and   negligently   by   the   driver   (respondent

No.2),   we   have   been   called   upon   to   examine   even   the

correctness   of   the   approach   of   the   Tribunal.   We   are

conscious of the fact that in an appeal under
Article 136
of

the Constitution, ordinarily this Court will not engage itself

in re­appreciation of the evidence as such but can certainly

examine the evidence on record to consider the challenge to
14
the findings recorded by Tribunal or the High Court, being

perverse   or  replete   with error apparent on  the face of the

record and being manifestly wrong.
12. From   the   evidence   which   has   come   on   record,   the

finding   recorded   by   the   Tribunal   that   the   appellant   while

riding his motorcycle on 10th  February, 1990 between 8.00

P.M. and 8.30 P.M., met with an accident when a jeep being

driven   rashly   and   negligently,   struck   his   motorcycle

resulting in falling down and suffering severe injuries on his

right leg, which was required to be amputated from above

the knee level at MGH Hospital, seems to us to be a possible

view. That position is established from the oral evidence of

PWs­1, 2 and 4 and the charge sheet and its accompanying

documents   filed   by   the   police.   Even   the   High   Court   has

broadly agreed with this finding recorded by the Tribunal.
13.   The   debatable   issue   is   about   the   factum   of

involvement   of   Jeep   No.RST­4701   allegedly   driven   by

respondent   No.2   and   whether   it   was   driven   rashly   and

negligently as a result of which the accident occurred.
15
14.    Indeed,   the   Tribunal   did   not   accept   the   version   of

PW­1,   PW­2   and   PW­4   about   the   involvement   of   Jeep

No.RST­4701,  but has not discarded their version in toto.

The   evidence   of   these   witnesses   to   the   extent   they   have

consistently   stated that  when  the appellant was riding on

his motorcycle bearing No.RJ 19­6636 at the relevant time,

going to Basni from Panwara Phanta and when he reached

near Siviya Nada, a green jeep coming at a high speed from

Salawas side, hit the motorcycle from back side, as a result

of which the appellant fell down and suffered severe injuries

including to his right leg which was eventually amputated

from   above   the   knee   level,   has   not   been   doubted.

Pertinently,   besides   mentioning   the   description   of   the

offending vehicle as a “jeep” they have also spoken about its

colour (green) and that it was displaying the Congress Party

flags and banners on the side of the jeep. In other words,

their version limited to having noted the jeep number, has

not   been   accepted.   Besides,   the   Tribunal   relied   upon   the

evidence   of   respondent   No.2   Chail   Singh   (DW­1)   and

Bhanwar   Singh   (DW­2) who  had  stated  that  the  jeep  was

deployed in the election campaign of Sarpanch of Somdar
16
Village   on   the   Salawas   Road   and   thus   denied   the

involvement   of   the   vehicle   in   the   accident   in   question.

Nevertheless, the Tribunal then adverted to the FIR and the

charge­sheet   filed   in   respect   of   the   accident   naming

respondent No.2 as accused. The Tribunal
placed reliance

upon
the copy of challan (Exh.1), copy of FIR (Exh.32), Site

Map   (Exhs.3   &   4),   Jeep   Seizure   Report   (Exh.5),   X­Ray

(Exh.6)  and Injury Report (Exh.7), to opine that these police

records gathered during the investigation of the crime not

only   confirmed   that   an   accident   had   occurred   but   also

indicated   the   involvement   of   the   offending   Jeep   No.RST­

4701, which was driven by respondent No.2 at the relevant

time. The Tribunal went on to conclude that there was no

reason   to   disagree   with   the   opinion   of   the   Investigating

Agency in  that behalf. The charge­sheet was accompanied

by   the   statements   of   the   appellant   and   the   witnesses

Rooparam, Thanaram and Pratap Singh. On the basis of the

entirety   of   the   evidence,   the   Tribunal   had   held   that   Jeep

No.RST­4701 which was driven by respondent No.2 at the

relevant   time   was   involved   in   the   accident   in   question,

causing severe injuries to the appellant.
17
15. The High Court, however, reversed this finding of fact

rendered by the  Tribunal essentially on two counts: First,

that the Tribunal having discarded the oral evidence about

the   involvement   of   Jeep   No.RST­4701   in   the   accident   in

question,   allegedly   driven   by   respondent   No.2,   could   not

and ought not to have recorded the finding on the relevant

issue against respondent Nos.2 & 3 merely by relying on the

documents forming part of the police charge sheet.  Second,

the jeep seizure report (Exh. 5) indicated that only a scratch

on the mudguard of the left tyre of the vehicle was noticed,

which   contradicted   the   claim   of   the   appellant   about   the

involvement of the vehicle.
16. The   question   is:   whether   this   approach   of   the   High

Court can be sustained in law?  While dealing with a similar

situation,   this   Court   in
Bimla   Devi
(supra)   noted   the

defence of the driver and conductor of the bus which  inter

alia was to cast a doubt on the police record indicating that

the   person   standing   at   the   rear   side   of   the   bus,   suffered

head   injury   when   the   bus   was   being   reversed   without

blowing any horn.   This Court observed that while dealing

with the claim petition in terms of
Section 166
of the Motor
18
Vehicles Act, 1988
, the Tribunal  stricto sensu  is not bound

by the pleadings of the parties, its function is to determine

the amount of fair compensation. In paragraphs 11­15, the

Court observed thus:
“11.  While   dealing   with   a   claim   petition   in   terms   of
Section   166
of   the   Motor   Vehicles   Act,   1988,   a
     tribunal stricto sensu is not bound by the pleadings of
     the   parties;   its   function   being   to   determine   the
     amount of fair compensation in the event an accident
     has taken place by reason of negligence of that driver
     of   a   motor   vehicle.   It   is   true   that   occurrence   of   an
     accident having regard to the provisions contained in
Section   166
of   the   Act   is   a   sine   qua   non   for
     entertaining a claim petition but that would not mean
     that despite evidence to the effect that death of the
     claimant’s predecessor had taken place by reason  of
     an   accident   caused   by   a   motor   vehicle,   the   same
     would be ignored only on the basis of a post­mortem
     report   vis­à­vis   the   averments   made   in   a   claim
     petition.
12. The deceased was a constable. Death took place near
     a police station. The post­mortem report clearly suggests
     that   the   deceased   died   of   a   brain   injury.   The   place   of
     accident is not far from the police station. It is, therefore,
     difficult to believe the story of the driver of the bus that
     he slept in the bus and in the morning found a dead body
     wrapped in a blanket. If the death of the constable had
     taken   place   earlier,   it   is   wholly   unlikely   that   his   dead
     body   in   a   small   town   like   Dharampur   would   remain
     undetected throughout the night particularly when it was
     lying at a bus­stand and near a police station. In such an
     event,   the   court   can   presume   that   the   police   officers
     themselves   should   have   taken   possession   of   the   dead
     body.
13.  The learned Tribunal, in our opinion, has rightly
     proceeded   on   the   basis   that   apparently   there   was
     absolutely no reason to falsely implicate Respondents
     2 and 3. The claimant was not at the place of occurrence.
19
She,   therefore,   might   not   be   aware   of   the   details   as   to
      how   the   accident   took   place   but   the   fact   that   the   first
      information   report   had   been   lodged   in   relation   to   an
      accident could not have been ignored.
14.  Some discrepancies in the evidence of the claimant’s
      witnesses   might   have   occurred   but   the   core   question
      before   the   Tribunal   and   consequently   before   the   High
      Court was as to whether the bus in question was involved
      in the accident or not. For the purpose of determining the
      said issue, the Court was required to apply the principle
      underlying the burden of proof in terms of the provisions
      of
Section 106
of the Evidence Act, 1872 as to whether a
      dead body wrapped in a blanket had been found at the
      spot   at   such   an   early   hour,   which   was   required   to   be
      proved by Respondents 2 and 3.
15.  In   a   situation   of   this   nature,   the   Tribunal   has
      rightly   taken   a   holistic   view   of   the   matter.   It   was
      necessary to be borne in mind that strict proof of an
      accident   caused   by   a   particular   bus   in   a   particular
      manner   may   not   be   possible   to   be   done   by   the
      claimants.   The   claimants   were   merely   to   establish
      their   case   on   the   touchstone   of   preponderance   of
      probability. The standard of proof beyond reasonable
      doubt   could   not   have   been   applied.   For   the   said
      purpose,   the   High   Court   should   have   taken   into
      consideration the respective stories set forth by both
      the parties.”
                                                           (emphasis supplied)
17. The   Court   restated   the   legal   position   that   the

claimants   were   merely   to   establish   their   case   on   the

touchstone of preponderance of probability and standard of

proof   beyond   reasonable   doubt   cannot   be   applied   by   the

Tribunal while dealing with the motor accident cases. Even
in that case
, the view taken by the High Court to reverse
20
similar   findings,   recorded   by   the   Tribunal   was   set   aside.

Following the enunciation in Bimla Devi’s case (supra), this

Court in  Parmeswari  (supra) noted that when filing of the

complaint   was   not   disputed,   the   decision   of   the   Tribunal

ought not to have been reversed by the High Court on the

ground that nobody came from the office of the SSP to prove

the complaint.   The Court appreciated the testimony of the

eye­witnesses in paragraphs 12 & 13 and observed thus:
“12. The other ground on which the High Court dismissed
      the   case   was   by   way   of   disbelieving   the   testimony   of
      Umed Singh, PW 1. Such disbelief of the High Court is
      totally   conjectural.   Umed   Singh   is   not   related   to   the
      appellant but as a good citizen, Umed Singh extended his
      help to the appellant by helping her to reach the doctor’s
      chamber in order to ensure that an injured woman gets
      medical   treatment.   The   evidence   of   Umed   Singh   cannot
      be   disbelieved   just   because   he   did   not   file   a   complaint
      himself.   We   are   constrained   to   repeat   our   observation
      that the total approach of the High Court, unfortunately,
      was not sensitised enough to appreciate the plight of the
      victim.
13.  The other so­called reason in the High Court’s order
      was that as the claim petition was filed after four months
      of the accident, the same is “a device to grab money from
      the insurance company”. This finding  in the absence of
      any   material   is   certainly   perverse.   The   High   Court
      appears to be not cognizant of the principle that in a road
      accident claim, the strict principles of proof in a criminal
      case are not attracted…….”
21
18. It will be useful to advert to the dictum in N.K.V. Bros.

     (
P) Ltd. Vs. M. Karumai Ammal and Ors.
16, wherein it was

     contended   by   the   vehicle   owner   that   the   criminal   case   in

     relation   to   the   accident   had   ended   in   acquittal   and   for

     which reason the claim under the
Motor Vehicles Act
ought

     to be rejected.   This Court negatived the said argument by

     observing   that   the   nature   of   proof   required   to   establish

     culpable   rashness,   punishable   under   the
IPC
,   is   more

     stringent  than negligence sufficient under the law of tort to

     create liability.  The observation made in paragraph 3 of the

     judgment would throw some light as to what should be the

     approach   of   the   Tribunal   in   motor   accident   cases.     The

     same reads thus:
“3.  Road   accidents   are   one   of   the   top   killers   in   our
            country,   specially   when   truck   and   bus   drivers   operate
            nocturnally. This proverbial recklessness often persuades
            the courts, as has been observed by  us earlier  in other
            cases,   to   draw   an   initial   presumption   in   several   cases
            based   on   the   doctrine   of   res   ipsa   loquitur.   Accidents
            Tribunals   must   take   special   care   to   see   that   innocent
            victims   do   not   suffer   and   drivers   and   owners   do   not
            escape   liability   merely   because   of   some   doubt   here   or
            some   obscurity   there.   Save   in   plain   cases,   culpability
            must be inferred from the circumstances where it is fairly
            reasonable.   The   court   should   not   succumb   to   niceties,
            technicalities   and   mystic   maybes.   We   are   emphasizing
            this aspect because we are often distressed by transport
            operators   getting   away   with   it   thanks   to   judicial   laxity,
            despite   the   fact   that   they   do   not   exercise   sufficient
16
(1980) 3 SCC 457
22
disciplinary   control   over   the   drivers   in   the   matter   of
      careful   driving.   The   heavy   economic   impact   of   culpable
      driving of public transport must bring owner and driver to
      their responsibility to their neighbour. Indeed, the State
      must seriously consider no­fault liability by legislation. A
      second   aspect   which   pains   us  is   the   inadequacy   of   the
      compensation   or   undue   parsimony   practised   by
      tribunals. We must remember that judicial tribunals are
      State organs and
Article 41
of the Constitution lays the
      jurisprudential   foundation   for   State   relief   against
      accidental   disablement   of   citizens.   There   is   no
      justification   for   niggardliness   in   compensation.   A   third
      factor   which   is   harrowing   is   the   enormous   delay   in
      disposal   of   accident   cases   resulting   in   compensation,
      even   if  awarded,   being   postponed   by   several   years.   The
      States  must  appoint   sufficient   number  of  tribunals and
      the   High   Courts   should   insist   upon   quick   disposals   so
      that the trauma and tragedy already sustained may not
      be   magnified   by   the   injustice   of   delayed   justice.   Many
      States are unjustly indifferent in this regard.”
19.
In
Dulcina   Fernandes
(supra),   this   Court   examined

similar   situation   where   the   evidence   of   claimant’s   eye­

witness   was   discarded   by   the   Tribunal   and   that   the

respondent
in that case
was acquitted in the criminal case

concerning the accident. This Court, however, opined that it

cannot   be   overlooked   that   upon   investigation   of   the   case

registered   against   the   respondent,  prima   facie,   materials

showing   negligence   were   found   to   put   him   on   trial.
The

Court restated the settled principle that the evidence of the

claimants   ought   to   be   examined   by   the   Tribunal   on   the

touchstone of preponderance of probability and certainly the
23
standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt could not have

     been applied as noted in
Bimla Devi
(supra).
In paragraphs

     8 & 9, of the reported decision, the dictum in
United India

     Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Shila Datta17
, has been adverted

     to as under:
“8. In
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Shila Datta
while
           considering the nature of a claim petition under the
Motor
           Vehicles Act, 1988
a three­Judge Bench of this Court has
           culled out certain propositions of which Propositions (ii),
(v) and (vi) would be relevant to the facts of the present
           case and, therefore, may be extracted hereinbelow: (SCC
           p. 518, para 10)
                  ‘10.   (ii)   The   rules   of   the   pleadings   do   not   strictly
                  apply   as   the   claimant   is   required   to   make   an
                  application in a form prescribed under the Act. In
                  fact, there is no pleading where the proceedings are
                  suo motu initiated by the Tribunal.
*        *        *
(v) Though the Tribunal adjudicates on a claim and
                  determines the compensation, it does not do so as
                  in an adversarial litigation. …
(vi)   The   Tribunal   is   required   to   follow   such
                  summary procedure as it thinks fit. It may choose
                  one or more persons possessing special knowledge
                  of   and   matters   relevant   to   inquiry,   to   assist   it   in
                  holding the enquiry.’
9.  The following further observation available in para 10
           of   the   Report   would   require   specific   note:   (
Shila   Datta
case, SCC p. 519)

                   ‘10.
… We have referred to the aforesaid provisions
                   to show that an award by the Tribunal cannot be
                   seen   as   an   adversarial   adjudication   between   the
                   litigating   parties   to   a   dispute,   but   a   statutory
                   determination   of   compensation   on   the   occurrence
                   of   an   accident,   after   due   enquiry,   in   accordance
                   with the statute.’ ”
17
(2011) 10 SCC 509
24
In   paragraph   10   of   the   reported   decision   [
Dulcina

Fernandes  and Ors.
(supra)], the Court opined that non­

examination of witness  per se  cannot be treated as fatal to

the   claim   set  up   before  the   Tribunal.   In  other   words,  the

approach of the Tribunal should be holistic analysis of the

entire pleadings and evidence by applying the principles of

preponderance of probability.
20. In the  above conspectus, the appellant is justified in

contending that the High Court committed manifest error in

reversing the holistic view of the Tribunal in reference to the

statements   of   witnesses   forming   part   of   the   charge­sheet,

FIR,   Jeep   Seizure   Report   in   particular,   to   hold   that   Jeep

No.RST­4701 driven by respondent No.2 was involved in the

accident in question. Indeed, the High Court was impressed

by   the   Mechanical   Investigation   Report   (Exh.   5)   which

stated that only a scratch mark on the mudguard of the left

tyre   of   the   vehicle   had   been   noted.   On   that   basis,   it

proceeded to observe that the same was in contradiction to

the   claim   of   the   appellant   (claimant),   ruling   out   the

possibility   of   involvement   of   the   vehicle   in   the   accident.
25
This conclusion is based on surmises and conjectures and

also   in  disregard   of   the relevant  fact that  the  vehicle was

seized by the police after investigation, only after one month

from the date of the accident and the possibility of the same

having   been  repaired in the meantime could not  be ruled

out.   In other words, the reasons which weighed with the

High Court for reversing the finding of fact recorded by the

Tribunal upon holistic analysis of the entire evidence, about

the   involvement   of   Jeep   No.RST­4701   in   the   accident,

cannot   be  countenanced.  For, those reasons do not  affect

the other overwhelming circumstances and evidence which

has come on record and commended to the Tribunal about

the   involvement   of   the   subject   jeep   in   the   accident   in

question.   This   being   the   main   edifice,   for   which   the   High

Court allowed the appeal preferred by respondent Nos.2 &

3, it must necessarily follow that the finding of fact recorded

by the Tribunal on the factum of involvement of Jeep No.

RST­4701   in   the   accident   in   question   will   have   to   be

restored for reasons noted hitherto.
21. Another reason which weighed with the High Court to

interfere in the First Appeal filed by respondent Nos.2 & 3,
26
was absence of finding by the Tribunal about the factum of

negligence of the driver of the subject jeep.   Factually, this

view is untenable. Our understanding of the analysis done

by   the   Tribunal   is   to   hold   that   Jeep   No.   RST­4701   was

driven   rashly   and   negligently   by   respondent   No.2  when  it

collided with the motorcycle of the appellant leading to the

accident.     This   can   be   discerned   from   the   evidence   of

witnesses and the contents of the charge­sheet filed by the

police,   naming   respondent   No.2.   This   Court   in   a   recent

decision in
Dulcina Fernandes
(supra), noted that the key

of   negligence   on   the   part   of   the   driver   of   the   offending

vehicle   as   set   up   by   the   claimants   was   required   to   be

decided by the Tribunal on the touchstone of preponderance

of probability and certainly not by standard of proof beyond

reasonable doubt.   Suffice it to observe that the exposition

in the judgments already adverted to by us, filing of charge­

sheet   against   respondent   No.2  prima   facie  points   towards

his complicity in driving the vehicle negligently and rashly.

Further, even when the accused were to be acquitted in the

criminal case, this Court opined that the same may be of no

effect on the assessment of the liability required in respect
27
of  motor  accident cases by  the Tribunal.
Reliance placed

upon the decisions in
Minu B Mehta
(supra)  and
Meena

Variyal
(supra), by the respondents, in our opinion, is of

no   avail.     The   dictum   in   these   cases   is   on   the   matter   in

issue in the concerned case.
Similarly, even the dictum in

the   case   of
Surender  Kumar   Arora
(supra) will be of no

avail.   In the present case, considering the entirety of the

pleadings,   evidence   and   circumstances   on   record   and   in

particular   the   finding   recorded   by   the   Tribunal   on   the

factum of negligence of the respondent No.2, the driver of

the offending jeep, the High Court committed manifest error

in taking a contrary view which, in our opinion, is an error

apparent on the face of record and manifestly wrong.
22.
In
Kaushnuma Begum
(supra), whilst dealing with an

application under
Section 163A
of the Motor Vehicles Act,

1988, this Court expounded that negligence is only one of

the   species   for   compensation   in   respect   of   the   accident

arising   out   of   the   use   of   motor   vehicles.   There   are   other

premises for such cause of action.
After observing this, the

Court adverted to the principle expounded in  Rylands Vs.
28
Fletcher18.  It may be useful to reproduce paragraphs 12­14

      which read thus:
“12.  Even   if   there   is   no   negligence   on   the   part   of   the
            driver   or   owner   of   the   motor   vehicle,   but   accident
            happens   while   the   vehicle   was   in   use,   should   not   the
            owner   be   made   liable   for   damages   to   the   person   who
            suffered   on   account   of   such   accident?   This   question
            depends upon how far the rule in Rylands v. Fletcher  can
            apply   in   motor   accident   cases.   The   said   rule   is
            summarised by Blackburn, J., thus:
‘[T]he true rule of law is that the person who, for his
                   own purposes, brings on his land, and collects and
                   keeps   there   anything   likely   to   do   mischief   if   it
                   escapes, must keep it in at his peril, and, if he does
                   not do so, he is prima facie answerable for all the
                   damage   which   is   the   natural   consequence   of   its
                   escape. He can excuse himself by showing that the
                   escape   was   owing   to   the   plaintiff’s   default,   or,
                   perhaps,   that   the   escape   was   the   consequence   of
                   vis major, or the act of God; but, as nothing of this
                   sort exists here, it is unnecessary to inquire what
                   excuse would be sufficient.’
13. The House of Lords considered it and upheld the ratio
            with the following dictum:
‘We   think   that   the   true   rule   of   law   is   that   the
                   person   who,   for   his   own   purposes,   brings   on   his
                   land, and collects and keeps there anything likely
                   to do mischief if it escapes, must keep it in at his
                   peril, and, if he does not do so, he is prima facie
                   answerable for all the damage which is the natural
                   consequence  of its escape.  He can excuse  himself
                   by   showing   that   the   escape   was   owing   to   the
                   plaintiff’s default, or, perhaps, that the escape was
                   the   consequence   of   vis   major,   or   the   act   of   God;
                   but,   as   nothing   of   this   sort   exists   here,   it   is
                   unnecessary   to   inquire   what   excuse   would   be
                   sufficient.’
14.  The above rule eventually gained approval in a large
            number of decisions rendered by courts in England and
18
(1861­73) All ER Rep 1
29
abroad.  Winfield on Tort  has brought out even a chapter
            on the “Rule in Rylands v. Fletcher”. At p. 543 of the 15th
            Edn.   of   the   celebrated   work   the   learned   author   has
            pointed out that
                     ‘over   the   years  Rylands  v.  Fletcher    has   been
                     applied to a remarkable variety of things: fire, gas,
                     explosions,   electricity,   oil,   noxious   fumes,   colliery
                     spoil, rusty wire from a decayed fence, vibrations,
                     poisonous vegetation’.
He   has   elaborated   seven   defences   recognised   in
                     common law against action brought on the strength
                     of the rule in Rylands v. Fletcher. They are:
(1)   Consent   of   the   plaintiff   i.e.   volenti   non   fit
                     injuria.
(2)   Common   benefit   i.e.   where   the   source   of   the
                     danger is maintained for the common benefit of the
                     plaintiff   and   the   defendant,   the   defendant   is   not
                     liable for its escape.
(3) Act of stranger i.e. if the escape was caused by
                     the unforeseeable  act  of a stranger, the rule does
                     not apply.
(4) Exercise of statutory authority i.e. the rule will
                     stand excluded either when the act was done under
                     a   statutory   duty   or   when   a   statute   provides
                     otherwise.
(5) Act of God or vis major i.e. circumstances which
                     no   human   foresight   can   provide   against   and   of
                     which human prudence is not bound to recognise
                     the possibility.
(6)   Default   of   the   plaintiff   i.e.   if   the   damage   is
                     caused solely by the act or default of the plaintiff
                     himself, the rule will not apply.
(7) Remoteness of consequences i.e. the rule cannot
                     be applied ad infinitum, because even according to
                     the formulation of the rule made by Blackburn, J.,
                     the defendant is answerable only for all the damage
                     ‘which is the natural consequence of its escape’. ”

     And   again,   the   Court,   after   adverting   to   the   decisions   in
Charan   Lal   Sahu   Vs.   Union   of   India19
,
Union   Carbide
19
(1990) 1 SCC 613
30
Corpn.   Vs.   Union   of   India20
and
Gujarat   SRTC   Vs.

     Ramanbhai   Prabhatbhai
21,     in   paragraphs   19   &   20,

     observed thus:
“19.  Like   any   other   common   law   principle,   which   is
            acceptable   to   our   jurisprudence,   the   rule   in  Rylands  v.
            Fletcher  can   be   followed   at   least   until   any   other   new
            principle which excels the former can be evolved, or until
            legislation provides differently. Hence, we are disposed to
            adopt   the   rule   in   claims   for   compensation   made   in
            respect of motor accidents.
20. ‘No fault liability’ envisaged in
Section 140
of the MV
            Act is distinguishable from the rule of strict liability. In
            the   former,   the   compensation   amount   is   fixed   and   is
            payable even if any one of the exceptions to the rule can
            be applied. It is a statutory liability created without which
            the   claimant   should   not   get   any   amount   under   that
            count. Compensation on account of accident arising from
            the   use   of   motor   vehicles   can   be   claimed   under   the
            common   law   even   without   the   aid   of   a   statute.   The
            provisions of the
MV Act
permit that compensation paid
            under “no fault liability” can be deducted from the final
            amount   awarded   by   the   Tribunal.   Therefore,   these   two
            are resting on two different premises. We are, therefore, of
            the opinion that even apart from
Section 140
of the MV
            Act, a victim in an accident which occurred while using a
            motor   vehicle,   is   entitled   to   get   compensation   from   a
            Tribunal unless any one of the exceptions would apply.
The   Tribunal   and   the   High   Court   have,   therefore,   gone
            into error in divesting the claimants of the compensation
            payable to them.”
23. Be   that   as   it   may,   the   next   question   is   whether   the

     Tribunal was justified in concluding that the appellant was

     also   negligent   and   had   contributed   equally,  which   finding
20
(1991) 4 SCC 584
21
(1987) 3 SCC 234
31
rests only on the site map (Exh. 2) indicating the spot where

the   motorcycle   was   lying   after   the   accident?   We   find

substance   in   the   criticism   of   the   appellant   that   the   spot

where the motor vehicle was found lying after the accident

cannot   be   the   basis   to   assume   that   it   was   driven   in   or

around   that   spot   at   the   relevant   time.     It   can   be   safely

inferred that after the accident of this nature in which the

appellant suffered severe injuries necessitating amputation

of his right leg above the knee level, the motorcycle would be

pushed forward after the collision and being hit by a high

speeding jeep. Neither the Tribunal nor the High Court has

found that the spot noted in the site map, one foot wrong

side   on   the   middle   of   the   road   was   the   spot   where   the

accident actually occurred. However, the finding is that as

per   the   site   map,   the   motorcycle   was   found   lying   at   that

spot. That cannot be the basis to assume that the appellant

was driving the motorcycle on the wrong side of the road at

the relevant time. Further, the respondents did not produce

any   contra   evidence   to   indicate   that   the   motorcycle   was

being driven on the wrong side of the road at the time when

the offending vehicle dashed it.   In this view of the matter,
32
the finding of the Tribunal that the appellant contributed to

the occurrence of the accident by driving the motorcycle on

the wrong side of the road, is manifestly wrong and cannot

be   sustained.   The   High   Court   has   not   expressed   any

opinion   on   this   issue,   having   already   answered   the   issue

about the non­involvement of the offending vehicle in favour

of respondent Nos.2 & 3.
24. In other words, we are inclined to hold that there is no

tittle   of   evidence   about   the   motorcycle   being   driven

negligently   by   the   appellant   at  the   time   of   accident.     The

respondents did not produce any such evidence.  That fact,

therefore, cannot be assumed.  Resultantly, the argument of

the respondents that the appellant did not possess a valid

motorcycle driving licence at the time of accident, will be of

no   significance.     Thus,   we   hold   that   there   is   no   legal

evidence   to   answer   the   issue   of   contributory   negligence

against the appellant.
25. The   next   question   is   about   the   quantum   of

compensation   amount   to   be   paid   to   the   appellant.     The

Tribunal   noted   the   claim   of   the   appellant   that   he   was

getting   Rs.1500/­   per   month   towards   his   salary   and
33
Rs.600/­ per month towards food allowance from Bhanwar

Lal.   The   fact   that   the   appellant   had   possessed   heavy

transport   motor   vehicle   driving   licence   has   not   been

doubted.   The   driving   licence   on   record   being   valid   for   a

limited period, cannot be the basis to belie  the claim of the

appellant   duly   supported   by   Bhanwar   Lal,   that   the

appellant was employed by him on his  new truck.   Besides

the  said income, the appellant claimed to have earning of

Rs.1000/­ per month from farming fields.   In other words,

we find that the Tribunal has not analysed this evidence in

proper perspective. The Tribunal, however, pegged the loss

of monthly income to the appellant at Rs.520/­ per month

while  computing  the  compensation  amount on the finding

that there was no convincing evidence about complete non­

employability   of   the   appellant.   Further,   no   provision   has

been made by the Tribunal towards future prospects.   The

Tribunal,   therefore,   should   have   computed   the   loss   of

income on that basis.  Additionally, the appellant because of

amputation of his right leg would be forced to permanently

use   prosthetic   leg   during   his   life   time.     No   provision   has

been made by the Tribunal in that regard. On these heads,
34
the   appellant   is   certainly   entitled   for   enhanced

compensation.
26. The   next   question   is about  the  liability   of  insurer  to

pay the compensation amount.   The Tribunal has absolved

the insurance company on the finding that no premium was

received   by   the   insurance   company   nor   any   insurance

policy was ever issued by the insurance company in relation

to the offending vehicle.   The respondents no.2 and 3 had

relied on a Cover Note which according to respondent No.1 –

Insurance   Company   was   fraudulently   obtained   from   the

then   Development   Officer,   who   was   later   on   sacked   by

respondent   No.1     Insurance   Company.   The   possibility   of

misuse   of   some   cover   notes   lying   with   him   could   not   be

ruled   out.     The   respondent   Nos.2   &   3   have   relied   on   the

decision of this Court in
Rula
(supra).  That decision will be

of no avail to respondent Nos.2 & 3.  In that case, the Court

found   that   the   insurance   policy   was   already   issued   after

accepting   the   cheque;   whereas   in   the   present   case,   the

respondent No.1 Insurance Company has been able to show

that no payment was received by the company towards the
35
insurance   premium   nor   any   insurance   policy   had   been

issued   in   respect   of   the   offending   vehicle   (jeep).   However,

the claim of respondent Nos.2 & 3 to the extent that they

possessed   a   cover   note   issued   by   the   then   Development

Officer   of   the   Oriental   Insurance   Company   (respondent

No.1)   will   have   to   be   accepted   coupled   with   the   fact   that

there is no positive evidence to indicate that the said Cover

Note   is   ante   dated.   Pertinently,   the   Cover   Note   has   been

issued by the then Development Officer at a point of time

when he was still working with respondent No.1 Insurance

Company. It must follow that the then Development Officer

was   acting   on   behalf   of   the   Insurance   Company,   even

though  stricto   sensu  the   respondent   No.1   Insurance

Company may not be liable to pay any compensation as no

insurance policy has been issued in respect of the offending

vehicle,   much   less   a   valid   insurance   policy.
But   for   the

Cover Note issued by the Development Officer of respondent

No.1 Insurance Company at a point of time when he was

still working with respondent No.1, to do substantial justice,

we may invoke the principle of   “pay and recover”,   as has
36
been   enunciated   by   this   Court   in   the   case   of
National

      Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Swaran Singh & Ors.22
27. Reverting to the calculation of compensation amount,

      taking   the   loss   of   monthly   income   due   to   permanent

      disability   of   40%,     the   appellant   will   be   entitled   to

      Rs.2,25,792/­  [Rs.840 per month (i.e. 40 % of Rs.2,100/­)

      + 40% future prospects [as per
Pranay Sethi
(supra)] x 12 x

      16,   i.e.   (840   +   336)   x   12   x   16.     We   uphold   the   amounts

      quantified   by   the   Tribunal   towards   the   heads   for   medical

      treatment after the accident, motorcycle repair, mental and

      physical   problem,   as   it   is.   However,   the   appellant,   in   our

      opinion,   is   additionally   entitled   to   medical   expenses   for

      procurement   of   a   prosthetic   leg,   which   is   quantified   at

      Rs.25,000/­   (Rupees   twenty   five   thousand   only).   In

      summation, the appellant would be entitled to the following

      compensation:
(i) Medical treatment after accident                   : Rs.       5,000/­
(ii) Motorcycle repair                                 : Rs.       2,000/­
(iii) Mental and physical problem                      : Rs.     20,000/­
(iv) Loss of income due to 
           40% permanent disability                         : Rs.  2,25,792/­
(v) Cost of prosthetic leg                            : Rs.    25,000/­
                                                      Total: Rs. 2,77,792/­
22
(2004) 3  SCC 297 (para 110)
37
(Rupees Two Lakh Seventy Seven Thousand Seven Hundred
Ninety Two only)
28. The appellant would also be entitled to interest on the

total amount of compensation at the rate of 9% per annum

from the date of filing of the claim application i.e. 11 th June,

1990   till   the   date   of   realization.   The   respondents   will   be

entitled   for   adjustment   of   amount   already   paid   to   the

appellant, if any.
29.  The appeals are allowed in the above terms with costs.
……………………………...CJI.
(Dipak Misra)




                                         …..…….…………………..….J.
                                        (A.M. Khanwilkar)

New Delhi;
April  06, 2018.