[Cites
18
, Cited by
13
]
Supreme Court of India
Champa Lal vs State Of Rajasthan And Ors. on 26 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2352
Author:
J. Chelameswar
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
J. Chelameswar
1

                                                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              CIVIL APPEAL NO.4554 OF 2018
                                          (Arising out of SLP(C)No.38618/2016)

     CHAMPA LAL                                                                               APPELLANT(S)

                               VERSUS


     STATE OF RAJASTHAN AND ORS.                                                              RESPONDENT(S)


                                              CIVIL APPEAL NO.4556 OF 2018
                                          (Arising out of SLP(C)No.11091/2017)


                                                          J U D G M E N T

     Chelameswar, J.
Leave granted.
These two appeals are inter connected tossing up an important

     question of law regarding the interpretation of
Article 243
Q of

     the Constitution of India.
It   is    not    necessary      for     us   to   give     the     complete           factual

     details and history of the case for the purpose of this order

     except                   the   bare       minimum.     The    litigation           revolves       around        the

     upgradation by a notification dated 6.10.2008 of Gram Panchayat of

     Napasar Village as Nagar Palika (Municipality) Class IV1 category

     by            the         State      of    Rajasthan       purportedly        in     exercise         of     power

     conferred under Section 3(1)(A) of the Rajasthan Municipalities
Signature Not Verified
Ordinance 20082. Legality of the said notification was challenged
Digitally signed by OM
PRAKASH SHARMA
Date: 2018.05.02
16:33:17 IST
Reason:
1 State Government while exercising power conferred to it under section 3 (1) (A) of the Nagar Palika ordinance 2008,
     State Government hereby declares Gram Panchayat Napasar as Nagar Palika Fourth category. Existing limit/area of the
     Gram Panchayat Napasar will be the area of Nagar Palika Napasar.
     2 The ordinance was eventually replaced by
Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009
.
2
before        the      Rajasthan           High      Court        in     a    writ       petition.                It   was

dismissed by a learned Single Judge.                                     Aggrieved by the dismissal,

the matter was carried in a writ appeal.                                          During the pendency of

the     writ       appeal,         the     impugned          notification              dated          6.10.2008        was

withdrawn by another State of Rajasthan by a notification dated

18.9.2009.            The writ appeal was therefore, rendered infructuous.
Challenging            the      notification              dated       18.9.2009,              another         writ

petition came to be filed.                          The said writ petition was allowed by a

Division          Bench        by      its      judgment           dated        13.5.2015             quashing          the

notification and directing the State to take consequential steps.3

Aggrieved           by     the      same,        SLP(C)No.11091/2017                    came          to    be    filed.

Pursuant to the direction of the High Court, a fresh notification

dated 2.6.2016 came to be issued once again for establishing a

Nagarpalika              for       the       Napasar          village.            Challenging               the        said

notification, another writ petition came to be filed before the

Rajasthan           High       Court.          It     was      dismissed           by      a     judgment          dated

3.8.2016.           On appeal, the same was confirmed by the Division Bench

by      its       judgment            dated         12.9.2016.               Aggrieved          by         the     same,

SLP(C)No.38618 of 2016 is filed.
The      correctness             of     the      two      judgments            of     the         High    Court

impugned in these two appeals, is questioned on various grounds.

In     our      opinion,          it      is     not      necessary           to      examine          the       various

submissions made before us.                           The impugned actions of the respondent

State which culminated in the two impugned judgments of the High

Court suffers from a fundamental infirmity which goes to the root


3 The consequent act referred to by the court is that a new notification was directed to be issued.
3
of the matter.
The establishment of municipalities and their organisations is

governed by Part IX A (consisting of
Articles 243P
to 243ZG) of the

Constitution     of   India   inserted     in   the    Constitution         by   the

Constitution 74th (Amendment) Act, 1992 with effect from 1.6.1993.
Article 243P (e)
defines the expression “Municipality” to mean an

institution of self-government constituted under
Article 243
Q.
Article 243
Q of the Constitution of India declares as follows:
“243Q.      Constitution of Municipalities:- (1)There shall be
    constituted in every State-
(a) a Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called) for a
    transitional area, that is to say, an area in transition from a rural
    area to an urban area;
(b)   a Municipal Council for smaller urban area; and
(c)   a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area,

    in accordance with provisions of this Part:
Provided that a Municipality under this clause may not be
    constituted in such urban area or part thereof as the Governor
    may, having regard to the size of the area and the municipal
    services being provided or proposed to be provided by an
    industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as
    he may deem fit by public notification, specify to be an
    industrial township.
(2) In this article, “a transitional area”, “a smaller urban area”
    or “ a larger urban area” means such area as the Governor
    may, having regard to the population of the area, the density of
    the population therein, the revenue generated for local
    administration, the percentage of employment in non-
agricultural activities, the economic importance or such other
    factors as he may deem fit, specify by public notification for the
    purposes of this Part.”
4
Article 243Q
contemplates the constitution of three different

categories      of      bodies       known        as     (i)        Nagar     Panchayat         for      a

transitional area, (ii) Municipal Council for a smaller urban areas

and (iii) Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area.
It is declared under
Article 243Q(2)
that the expressions “a

transitional area”, “a smaller urban area” and “a larger urban

area” (hereinafter collectively referred to as “AREAS”) would mean

such    areas   as      may    be    specified         by      the    Governor       by    a     public

notification for the purpose of Part IX A of the Constitution of

India.
Article 243Q(2)
further obligates the Governor to have due

regard to the various factors mentioned therein before specifying

the    AREAS    i.e.       population        of    the      area,       the    density          of    the

population,       the       revenue        generated           in     the     area        for        local

administration,            percentage       of     employment           in     non-agricultural

activities, the economic importance or such other factors as he may

deem fit.
It, therefore, appears from the scheme of
Article 243Q(2)
that

the    Governor       is    not     free    to     notify         ‘AREAS’     in     his    absolute

discretion      but    is     required      to     fix      the      parameters      necessary          to

determine whether a particular AREA is a transitional area or a

smaller urban area or a larger urban area with due regard to the

factors mentioned above.              It is implicit that such parameters must

be uniform for the entire State. It is only after the determination

of    the   parameters,        various      municipal          bodies       contemplated             under
Article 243Q(1)
could be constituted.
5
In   response        to    a     specific         query     whether       any    notification

contemplated under
Article 243(Q)(2)
had been issued by the State

of    Rajasthan,         Mr.     Guru        Krishnakumar         learned        senior        counsel

appearing for the State of Rajasthan, produced two notifications

dated 4.7.1995 and 30.4.2012.                        On a plain reading of both the

notifications, it appears that these notifications had been issued

in    exercise      of    the     statutory          powers       conferred       on     the     State

Government    by     two       different          enactments      known     as    “The      Rajasthan

Municipality        Act,        1959       (since         repealed)       and     the
Rajasthan

Municipalities Act, 2009
.                  Apart from the declaration regarding the

source of power for the issuance of these notifications to be

authority     conferred          by     the       various        provisions       of     the     above

mentioned two enactments, it appears from the tenor and scheme of

the   notifications           that     these       notifications         purport       to    classify

municipalities only on the basis of population.                                The various other

parameters to which regard is required to be had under
Article

243Q(2)
were     not       taken     into       consideration         for     the    purpose     of

classification made under the above mentioned two notifications.

Therefore,     in    our        opinion,          these    two    notifications          cannot     be

treated as notifications contemplated under
Article 243(Q)(2).
In    the     absence           of     any        notification        which        meets    the

requirements of
Article 243Q(2)
, the entire exercise undertaken by

the   State   of     Rajasthan          in    upgrading          the    Napasar       village     Gram

Panchayat     to    be    a     Nagarpalika         –     [that    is    equivalent         to   Nagar

Panchayat as mentioned in
Article 243Q(1)(a)]
is unconstitutional

as it is inconsistent with the requirements of the Constitution
6
under
Article 243Q
of the Constitution of India.                                                 Therefore, the

initial         notification              dated        6.10.2008           itself         is      unsustainable.

Unfortunately, this aspect has not been noticed by the High Court

obviously because it was not brought to the notice of the High

Court.         The fact that a litigant before the court does not point

out the relevant principles and provisions of law does not prevent

the court from examining the issues involved in the                                                       lis, more

particularly,              when      the      process         which       is     the      subject         matter        of

litigation before the court is inconsistent with the mandate of the

Constitution. It is a settled principle of law that courts are

bound to take note of the constitution and the laws.4


         We, therefore, have no choice but to hold that the initial

notification dated 6.10.2008 is unconstitutional.                                                Therefore, the

legality of various actions which followed that notification and

4
S.C. Prashar & Another v. Vasantsen Dwarkadas & Others
, AIR 1963 SC 1356
98. The Department in this case had relied on the amending Act of 1953 before the High Court. Though the
  High Court considered the case from the angle of the second proviso to sub-
section 3
of
Section 34
and also struck it
  down as unconstitutional it did not take into consideration
Section 31
. sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of
Section 34
of the
  principal Act (including It was argued before us that we cannot take
Section 31
into account if it was not referred
  to by the High Court. But a court is required to take judicial notice of statutes and if
Section 31
of the Act 1953
  said that of course the amendments as made by the 1953 Act) shall apply and shall be deemed always to have applied
  to any assessment or re-assessment for any year ending before April 1, 1948, it is the duty of court, and tribunals to
  read
Section 34
in that manner and in no other. In our opinion it was not open to the High Court to read
Section 34
without
Section 31
which contained a legislative construction and made
Section 34
retrospective. This omission has
  vitiated the High Court's reasoning.
121. The questions as framed refer to the provisions of
Section 34(3)
of the Income Tax Act. They also
  mentioned two sets of dates, namely, the dates of the returns (7-3-1951 and 14-1-1952) and the date of the assessment
  (17-11-1953). Now we know that before the first day of April, 1952, there was a four-year limit for assessments or re-
  assessments under sub-
section 3
of
Section 34
but thereafter that limit was removed by the proviso added by
Section
  18
of the amending Act of 1953 and by
Section 31
of the same Act assessments made before or after the
  commencement of the amending Act of 1953 (1-4-1-952) were declared valid if proceedings commenced after
  September 8, 1948. The question as framed cannot be answered without reference to
Section 31
and even if
  parties did not bring it to the notice of the High Court it was the duty of the High Court to look into the
  validating provisions of
Section 31
. If the High Court did not, we know of no rule or decision of this Court
  which prevents us from looking into a validating provision which existed at the time of the High Court's
  decision and was overlooked by it and which by itself furnished the answer to the question propounded for the
  opinion of the High Court. No decision of this Court lays down that in determining the true answer to a question
  referred under
Section 66
, this Court is confined only to those sections to which the Tribunal or the High Court
  referred.
Indeed, there are many cases which say the contrary: see
Kusumben Mahadevia v. CIT
[(
1960) 3 SCR
  417], Zoraster & Co. v. CIT
[(1961) 1 SCR 210] and the recent case of
Scindia Steam Navigation Co. v. CIT
[(1961)
  42 ITR 589]. We must, therefore, look into
Section 31
to determine these appeals.
7
the judgments of the High Court which examined the legality of

those   actions,   in   our   view,   need    not   be   examined.   All   such

subsequent action of the State which led to litigation suffer from

a fundamental constitutional flaw. The impugned judgments of the

High Court rendered without examining the true scope and scheme of

Part IXA of the Constitution and more particularly
Article 243Q(2)
are per incuriam.
Mr. A. Subba Rao, learned counsel appearing for the non-State

respondents in SLP(C)No.11091/2017 submitted that in view of the

findings recorded by the High court that in the interregnum, lot of

development (such as the establishment of industries, educational

institutions and hospitals etc.) took place in the geographical

area in question, and therefore, this Court may not interfere with

the notification upgrading the area in question to a Nagarpalika as

such interference would have the effect of reducing the Nagarpalika

into a Gram Panchayat once again.            Confronted with the question as

to what would be the prejudice the non-State respondents would

suffer by such consequence, Mr. Rao submitted that there is a

possibility of the industries being shifted away from the area in

question.    It is only an apprehension.            We find no basis in the

pleading for such apprehensions nor do we see any reason which

might lead to such a possibility. Therefore, the submission is

rejected.
8
The appeals are disposed of accordingly.
......................J.
                                        (J. CHELAMESWAR)



                                       ......................J.
                                        (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL)

NEW DELHI
APRIL 26, 2018