[Cites
18
, Cited by
38
]
Supreme Court of India
Gaurav Aseem Avtej vs U.P.State Sugar Corporation Ltd. on 20 April, 2018
Author:
L. Nageswara Rao
Bench:
L. Nageswara Rao
,
S.A. Bobde
Non-Reportable

               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6919-6920 OF 2009


GAURAV ASEEM AVTEJ
                                                  ………APPELLANT (S)
                                Versus
U.P.STATE SUGAR CORPORATION LTD. & ORS.
                                                ……..RESPONDENT (S)
                          JUDGMENT
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
1. I.A. No.131233 of 2013 is an application for substitution filed by

  Gaurav Aseem Avtej which was allowed on 08.03.2018. The said

  application was filed on the ground that the first Plaintiff, Sh.Vinod

  Chandra Gupta died during the pendency of these appeals on

  12.11.2010. He asserts his rights over the property in dispute on

  the basis of a sale deed executed on 29.11.2004 by the first

  Plaintiff, Sh. Vinod Chandra Gupta.
2. For the sake of convenience, the parties will be referred to as

  arrayed in Suit No.212 of 1981.
3. Suit No.212 of 1981 was filed before the learned Munsif, Bijnor by

  Sh. Vinod Chandra Gupta and his mother Smt. Prakashwati

  seeking eviction of the Defendant-Corporation and for recovery of
1
the arrears of rent.   The learned Munsif refused to decree the suit

  for eviction. However, the Defendant-Corporation was directed to

  pay Rs.1700/- towards arrears of rent for the period 1979-81.

  Both the Plaintiffs and the Defendant-Corporation filed appeals

  against the judgment of the Trial Court. The First Appellate Court

  dismissed the appeal filed by the Defendant-Corporation and

  allowed the Plaintiff’s appeal. Consequently, the suit was decreed

  in favour of the Plaintiffs and eviction was ordered. The second

  appeals filed by the Defendant-Corporation before the High Court

  challenging the judgment of the First Appellate Court were

  allowed.    The High Court reversed the judgment of the First

  Appellate Court and dismissed the suit.      Aggrieved by the said

  judgment, the present appeals are filed.
4. In the plaint it was averred that the first Plaintiff along with his

  father, Sh.Ram Narain Gupta, were bhumidars of an area

  admeasuring 4 bighas 3 biswas in Mauza Rashidpur, Garhi

  Pargana, Bijnor. According to them, the land was grove land. 3

  bighas 8 biswas from the said land which is adjacent to M/s Shiv

  Prasad Banarasi Das Sugar Mills, Bijnor was given on lease for

  being used to park vehicles. It was averred that the lease was in

  existence for a considerably long period.     As the period of the

  earlier lease expired in 1976, another lease deed was executed by

  the father of plaintiff No.1 on 25.06.1976 for a period of five
2
years. It was stated in the plaint that the lease was determined

by a notice dated 10.07.1979 and that the Defendant-Corporation

was also in arrears of rent for the period 1979-1980. On the basis

of the said pleadings, relief of eviction and recovery of arrears of

rent was sought.      The Defendant-Corporation filed a written

statement in which it was stated that the Plaintiffs have lost all

rights in respect of the land as they could not have leased out

agricultural land.   It was also urged that the Plaintiffs cannot

derive any benefit from the declaration made by the competent

authority under
Section 143
of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari

Abolition and Land Reforms Act, 1950 (the 1950 Act) that the land

was    used    for    non    agricultural     purposes.           The

Defendant-Corporation submitted in the written statement that

the land in dispute vested with the State Government by virtue of

the
Uttar Pradesh Sugar Undertakings (Acquisition) Act, 1971
(the

1971 Act) and Defendant No.1 became the title holder of the

property after the scheduled undertaking was transferred to it.

The Defendants further pleaded that they have made permanent

construction on the land which was being used for the purpose of

the factory and they had become permanent lessees. The Trial

Court relied upon the order passed by the S.D.O.          Bijnor under
Section 143
of the 1950 Act on 20.01.1972 declaring that the land

in dispute was not agricultural land.       On the basis of the said
3
order, the Trial Court held that the land was not agricultural land

     and the Plaintiffs had the right to lease out the land. The Trial

     Court found that the land did not vest in the State Government

     under the 1971 Act as, according to the Trial Court, only the

     leasehold interest in the land vested with the State Government.

     The Trial Court refused to grant a decree of eviction on the ground

     that the notice dated 10.12.1979 was not proved to have been

     served on the concerned person. The Plaintiffs were held to be

     entitled for recovery of arrears of rent for the years 1979-1981.
5.    The Appellate Court affirmed the findings of the Trial Court

     regarding interpretation of the 1971 Act and held that it was only

     the leasehold interest in the land that stood vested in the

     Government.    The First Appellate Court recorded a finding that
Section 111
of the Transfer of Property Act would apply to the

     instant case as the lease was for a fixed period between

     1976-1980 and the lease stood determined automatically on

     30.06.1980.     The First Appellate Court decreed the suit by

     allowing the appeal filed by the Plaintiffs. The appeal filed by the

     Defendant-Corporation was dismissed.
6. The High Court allowed the appeals filed by the Defendants and

     dismissed the suit by holding that the land stood vested in the

     State Government under the 1950 Act as the lease executed by
4
the Plaintiffs in favour of the Defendants was in violation of
Section 156
of the 1950 Act.       The High Court also relied upon
Section 167
of the 1950 Act to hold that the Plaintiffs lost their

       rights over the land and as a consequence of void transfer, the

       land stood vested with the State Government free from all

       encumbrances. The High Court further observed that by virtue of
Section 3
of the 1971 Act the land which was occupied for the

       purposes of the factory stood vested in the State Government

       free from all encumbrances.
7. The Appellant submits that the 1950 Act is not applicable to the

       land in dispute and that the vesting under the 1971 Act is only in

       respect of the leasehold rights. It is relevant to mention at the

       outset that the pleadings in this case are not very clear.   After a

       detailed scrutiny of the material on record, we refer to the

       undisputed facts which are as follows:-
i.     The land in dispute admittedly belongs to the Plaintiffs. They

         leased out the said land to M/s Shiv Prasad Banarasi Das Sugar

         Mills, Bijnor prior to 1950.
ii.     The land was being used for the purpose of parking of vehicles

         which brought sugarcane to the factory.
iii.     The 1950 Act came into force on 26 January, 1951
iv.      The S.D.O., Bijnor by an order dated 20.01.1972 declared the

         land as non agricultural land under
Section 143
of the 1950

         Act.    The said order was passed on the basis of a report
5
submitted by the Tehsildar on 17.12.1970.
v.      The Plaintiffs were unsuccessful in their challenge to the 1971

         Act. Though the Act was passed in 1971, the possession of the

         scheduled undertaking was handed over only in the year 1979

         to the Government.
vi.      A notice of termination of the lease was issued on 10.12.1979.
The suit filed by the Plaintiffs was partly decreed by the trial

         Court on 14.04.1982 and fully decreed by the First Appellate

         Court on 01.08.1984.
vii.      During the pendency of the second appeal in the High Court,

         the Plaintiffs executed a sale deed in favour of the present

         Appellant on 29.11.2004.      Notice was issued in the SLP on

         20.07.2007    and   leave   was   granted   by   this   Court   on

         05.10.2009.
8. The point of vesting of the lands under the 1971 Act was

       adjudicated by all the three Courts below. We are of the opinion

       that determination of this issue will set at rest the controversy in

       this case. The Trial Court and the First Appellate Court held that

       the land did not vest in the Government under the 1971 Act and it

       was only the leasehold interest in the land that vested in the

       Government. Whereas, the High Court held that the land vested

       in the Government.
9. The 1971 Act was promulgated for acquisition of certain sugar

       undertakings.
The Act
was made in view of the serious problems
6
created by the owners of certain sugar mills for the cane growers

  and   the    labourers.         Immediate        need     for   renovation   and

  rehabilitation of the mills by the Government was the reason for

  the statute being brought into force.
Section 2 (a)
defines the

  appointed day in relation to the undertakings specified under

  Schedule I as July 3, 1971. M/s Shiv Prasad Banarasi Das Sugar

  Mills, Bijnor is at serial No.10 of Schedule I.
Section 3
of the Act

  provides for vesting of every scheduled undertaking on the

  appointed day free from any debt, mortgage, charge or any other

  encumbrances. Scheduled undertaking as defined in
Section 2(h)
of the Act reads as follows:-
"2(h) "scheduled undertaking" means an undertaking engaged in
        the manufacture or production of sugar by means of vacuum pans
        and with the aid of mechanical power in factory specified [in any
        of the schedules of this Act], and comprises-
xxx xxx xxx
(vi) all lands (other than lands held or occupied for purposes of
        cultivation and grovelands) and buildings held or occupied for
        purposes of that factory (including buildings pertaining to any of
        the properties and assets hereinbefore specified, and guest houses
        and residences of directors, managerial personnel, staff and
        workmen or of any other person as lessee or licensee, and any store
        houses, molasses, tanks, roads, bridges, drains culverts, tubewells,
        water storage or distribution system and other civil engineering
        works) including any leasehold interest therein"
10. This Court examined the scope of the definition of scheduled

  undertaking in
State of U.P. v. Lakshmi Sugar & Oil Mills

  Ltd.
, (2013) 10 SCC 509 and held as follows:
“15. A plain reading of the above would show that all lands other
7
than those held or occupied for purposes of cultivation and
     grovelands are treated as being part of the “Scheduled
     Undertaking” which would upon acquisition vest in the appellant
     Corporation, provided such lands and buildings are “held or
     occupied for purposes of the sugar factory”. What is important is
     that buildings pertaining to any of the property and assets
     specified in
Sections 2(h)(i)
to (xii) including guest houses and
     residences of Directors, managerial personnel, staff and workmen
     or of any other person as lessee or licensee including any store
     houses, molasses, tank, roads, bridges, drains, culverts,
     tubewells, water storage or distribution system and other civil
     engineering works including leasehold interest therein are also
     treated as part of the Scheduled Undertaking. The test, therefore,
     is whether the asset or any interest therein is held or occupied
     “for purpose of a sugar factory”. If the answer is in the
     affirmative, the same is treated to be a part of the Scheduled
     Undertaking that would vest in the appellant Corporation upon
     acquisition.”
11. A statute is best interpreted when we know why it is enacted. If

  a statute is looked at, in the context of its enactment, with the

  glasses of the statute maker, provided by such context, its

  scheme, the sections, clauses, phrases and words may take

  colour and appear different than when the statute is looked at

  without the glasses provided by the context. (
Reserve Bank of

  India v. Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd.

  And Others
(1987) 1 SCC 424 para 33).                     Reasons for the

  enactment of the 1971 Act are set out in the statement of objects

  and reasons. The serious problems created for the cane growers

  and labourers due to mismanagement of certain sugar mills led to

  a situation where the only solution was to acquire the said sugar

  mills with a view to renovate and rehabilitate the mills.               The

  interpretation of the provisions of the 1971 Act should be made

  by keeping in mind the above background.            The contention of the
8
Appellant is that the land belonging to him was leased out to the

sugar mill and the vesting is only of the leasehold interest in the

land and that he continues to be the title holder. We are unable

to agree.     A detailed examination of the provisions of the Act

would make it clear that the intention was to secure all assets

which were being used for the purposes of the factory.
(
State of

U.P. v. Lakshmi Sugar & Oil Mills Ltd.
(supra)).
The crucial

words in
Section 2 (h) (vi)
are “held or occupied for purposes of

that factory.”        The scope of the word ‘held’ arose for

consideration in
A.G. Varadarajulu v. State of T.N.
, (1998) 4

SCC 231 and this Court observed :-
“26. The word “hold” or “held” in the context of land has come
  up for consideration in several cases before this Court.
In
State of
  U.P. v. Sarjoo Devi
[(1977) 4 SCC 2] while dealing with the said
  word in
Section 3(14)
of the U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land
  Reforms Act, 1950, as follows: (SCC p. 8, paras 8 and 10)
  “The word ‘held’ occurring in the above definition which is a past
  participle of the word ‘hold’ is of wide import. In the Unabridged
  Edition of The Random House Dictionary of the English Language,
  the word ‘hold’ has been inter alia stated to mean ‘to have
  the ownership or use of; keep as one's own’.
***
  In Webster's New Twentieth Century Dictionary (Second Edition),
  it is stated that in legal parlance the word ‘held’ means to possess
  by ‘legal title’. Relying upon this connotation, this Court
  in
Bhudan Singh v. Nabi Bux
[(1969) 2 SCC 481] interpreted the
  word ‘held’ in
Section 9
of U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land
  Reforms Act, 1950 as meaning possession by legal title.”
  (emphasis supplied)
  Again in
State of A.P. v. Mohd. Ashrafuddin
[(1982) 2 SCC 1] it was
  held as follows: (SCC p. 4, para 8)
  “According to Oxford Dictionary ‘held’ means: to possess; to be
  the owner or holder or tenant of; keep possession of; occupy.
  Thus, ‘held’ connotes both ownership as well as possession.
And
  in the context of the definition it is not possible to interpret the
  term ‘held’ only in the sense of possession.”
  The word “holds” was again interpreted in
Hari Ram v. Babu
  Gokul Prasad
[1991 Supp (2) SCC 608] where it occurs in
Section
  185(1)
of the Madhya Pradesh Land Revenue Code, 1959. It was
9
observed: (SCC p. 611, para 5)
     “The word ‘holds’ is not a word of art. It has not been defined in
     the Act. It has to be understood in its ordinary normal meaning.
     According to Oxford English Dictionary, it means, to possess, to
     be owner or holder or tenant of. The meaning indicates
     that possession must be backed with some right or title.”
12. Black’s Law Dictionary defines ‘Hold’ as under:-
“To possess in virtue of a lawful title; as in the expression,
     common in grants, “to have and to hold,” or in that applied to
     notes, “the owner and holder.”




     In the context of the 1971 Act, the word “held” connotes

  a wide meaning. All lands held or occupied lawfully and

  which were used for the purposes of the factory stood

  vested in the Government on the appointed day. The word

  ‘held’ in
Section 2 (h) (vi)
cannot be interpreted as limited

  only to a holding as an owner of the property.                Legal

  possession is sufficient for the lands to vest in the

  Government by forming part of the scheduled undertaking.
13. Black’s Law Dictionary defines ‘occupy’ as under:-
“To take or enter upon possession of; to hold possession of; to
     hold or keep for use; to possess; to tenant; to do business in; to
     take or hold possession. Actual use, possession, and cultivation.
     See occupancy; occupant; occupation; possession.
The words ‘held’ or ‘occupied’ carry the same meaning and

there is no manner of doubt that if the land is in the lawful

possession of the factory and was being used for the purposes of the

factory, the said land vested in the Government as per
Section 3
of

the 1971 Act.
Section 3
of the 1971 Act provides for the vesting of
10
the scheduled undertaking free from all encumbrances. There is no

dispute that, in the instant case, the land was held and occupied by

the sugar factory for a long period of time pursuant to a lease deed

executed by the Plaintiffs and was being used for the purpose of the

factory.
14. The point that remains to be considered is about the reason for

  the insertion of the words “including any leasehold interest

  therein”.     The submission of the Appellant which found favour

  with the Trial Court and the First Appellate Court is that the

  vesting under the 1971 Act is only of the leasehold interest in the

  land.    We disagree.        We are of the opinion that all lands

  including those which are held pursuant to a lease vest in the

  State.      It is only ex abundant cautela that these words are

  included in the definition clause. The intention of the legislature

  is made very clear in the definition of ‘scheduled undertaking’ by

  insertion of the words “including any leasehold interest.”      The

  words ‘including any leasehold interest’ cannot be read in the

  manner that is canvassed by the Appellant which is that vesting is

  only of leasehold interest. A plain reading of
Section 2 (h) (vi)
of

  the 1971 Act provides that a scheduled undertaking would

  comprise of all lands and buildings held or occupied for the
11
purpose of the factory. The word ‘including’ would clearly indicate

  that the lands held by way of lease are also part of a scheduled

  undertaking. In any case the words “including any leasehold

  interest therein” cannot be understood to have a limiting effect

  and result in the acquisition of only the leasehold interest in the

  land.
15. If the intention of the Legislature was to exclude leasehold lands it

  could have expressed the same by adding lands held on lease

  along with agricultural and grove lands. As per
Section 2(h) (vi)
all lands other than lands held or occupied for purpose of

  cultivation and grove lands are part of scheduled undertaking. In

  view of above, we are of the opinion that the land in dispute stood

  vested in the State Government on the appointed day i.e.

  03.07.1971.
16. The findings recorded above would have been sufficient to

  dispose of the controversy in this case.         But it has become

  necessary for us to deal with the findings of the High Court that

  the Plaintiffs are not entitled for any compensation for their lands.

  The reason given by the High Court is that the lease executed by

  the Plaintiffs was contrary to
Section 156
of the 1950 Act.       And,

  the consequence of the violation of
Section 156
is that the

  transaction is void and the Plaintiffs lost all rights in the property

  as per
Section 167
of the Act.
12
17. Undisputedly, the lease of the land was entered into between the

  parties prior to the 1950 Act coming into force.
The Act
of 1950

  is not applicable to the land which was being used for non

  agricultural purposes prior to 1950.   Land as defined in
Section 3

  (14)
of the 1950 Act means land, held or occupied for purposes

  connected with agriculture, horticulture or animal husbandry.

  Moreover, there is also a declaration under
Section 143
of the

  1950 Act that the land was being used for non agricultural

  purposes. The said order under
Section 143
passed by the SDO,

  Bijnor on 20.01.1972 was on the basis of a report submitted by

  the Tehsildar made on 17.12.1970. In view of the above, we are

  of the opinion that the land did not vest in the Government under

  the 1950 Act.
18. We are not in agreement with the findings of the High Court

  regarding the vesting of the land in the Government under the

  1950 Act due to which the Plaintiffs were held disentitled for any

  compensation.     The land owners may resort to any remedy

  available to them for payment of compensation to which they are

  entitled to.
13
19. For the aforesaid reasons, the appeal are dismissed.
........................................J.
                                                             [S.A. BOBDE]

                                       ........................................J.
                                                 [L. NAGESWARA RAO]
New Delhi,
April 20, 2018.
14