[Cites
22
, Cited by
35
]
Supreme Court of India
Sisters Of St. Joseph Of Cluny vs The State Of Bengal State Of West Bengal . on 18 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2183, 2018 (6) SCC 772, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 182, (2018) 5 MAD LJ 596, (2018) 5 MAD LW 464, (2018) 6 SCALE 63, (2018) 2 SCT 640, (2018) 2 KER LT 521, (2018) 2 CAL LJ 85, (2018) 5 ANDHLD 108, (2018) 2 CAL HN 183, (2018) 2 ESC 235, 2018 (7) ADJ 32 NOC, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 31
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
R.F. Nariman
,
Adarsh Kumar Goel
REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3945        OF 2018
                                 (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO.35786 OF 2016)

                         SISTERS OF ST. JOSEPH OF CLUNY        …APPELLANT

                                               VERSUS

                         THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ORS.       ...RESPONDENTS

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3946        OF 2018
                                 (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO.34894 OF 2016)


                         NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITY
                         EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS              …APPELLANT

                                               VERSUS

                         BAISAKHI BANERJEE & ORS.              ...RESPONDENTS


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3947       OF 2018
                                 (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO.34900 OF 2016)

                         NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITY
                         EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS              …APPELLANT
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
                                               VERSUS
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2018.04.18
16:03:07 IST
Reason:
                         MILLI AL-AMEEN COLLEGE & ORS.         ...RESPONDENTS


                                                                                1
          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3948      OF 2018
       (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO.35026 OF 2016)

NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITY
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS             …APPELLANT

                      VERSUS

PRAVEEN KAUR MAROLIA & ORS.          ...RESPONDENTS


          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3949      OF 2018
       (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO.34933 OF 2016)

NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITY
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS             …APPELLANT

                      VERSUS

DR. ZARINA KHATOON & ORS.            ...RESPONDENTS


           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3950      OF 2018
        (ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO.1836 OF 2017)

NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITY
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS             …APPELLANT

                      VERSUS

STATE OF WEST BENGAL & ORS.          ...RESPONDENTS




                                                      2
                           JUDGMENT

  R.F. Nariman, J.
1. Leave granted.
2. In order to decide the present batch of appeals, for the sake of

  convenience, the facts from the civil appeal arising out of

  Special Leave Petition (Civil) No.35786 of 2016 have been

  taken. The Sisters of St. Joseph of Cluny is a society registered

  under the
West Bengal Societies Registration Act, 1961
, being

  founded on 26.3.1973. Clause 3(b) of the Memorandum of

  Association of the petitioner-society states:
“To acquire, take over, rent, provide, establish, aid,
        maintain, administer and/or run colleges, schools,
        institutions, hostels, houses, associations, libraries,
        reading rooms, or any other activity with education
        for its purpose for all persons, primarily for Catholics
        but also for all other persons, irrespective of
        religion, race, caste, community or social status.”
3. The society, in a letter dated 16.12.1997 addressed to the

  Inspector of Colleges, North Bengal University, made it clear

  that it did not seek minority status or special concessions – it

  wished to establish a college on secular lines. On 10.1.1998,

  the Inspector of Colleges, North Bengal University, submitted
3
his inspection report, in which he mentioned that originally the

  society did desire to have minority status for the proposed

  college. However, they subsequently changed their mind. As a

  result, the Deputy Secretary, Higher Education Department,

  Government of West Bengal, by its letter dated 21.7.1998,

  approved the proposal for the establishment of Cluny Women’s

  College, on the footing that it would be a non-minority secular

  institution. On this basis, the first governing body of the college

  was constituted in accordance with Statute 1 of the Statutes

  relating to the Governing Bodies of Colleges of North Bengal

  University. On 13.9.2004, the University granted permanent

  affiliation to Cluny Women’s College from the academic year

  2003-2004.
4. Following yet another change of heart, the society issued a

  letter to the Chairman, National Commission for Minority

  Educational Institutions (hereinafter referred to as the NCMEI),

  dated 27.6.2007, seeking the issuance of a status certificate of

  a minority educational institution for Cluny Women’s College.

  The NCMEI passed an ex-parte order declaring the said

  women’s college as a minority educational institution on
4
23.10.2007. Pursuant to this order, on 25.10.2007, the NCMEI

   issued a minority status certificate. On 5.9.2008, the Registrar,

   University of North Bengal, filed an application for cancellation

   of the said certificate. This was dismissed by the NCMEI on

   5.11.2009.
5. These events led to the society filing a writ petition, being W. P.

   No. 4406 of 2010, praying:
“A.    A declaration that statute 1 of the statutes
         relating to governing bodies of colleges of University
         of North Bengal is ultra vires and unconstitutional;
B. A writ of mandamus or any other writ, direction
         or order restraining the 3rd respondent from
         exercising the functions of the governing body of
         Cluny Women’s College and to restrain them from
         interfering with the functions of the governing body
         of Cluny Women’s College constituted by the
         petitioner society.”
6. Likewise, the Governing Body, Cluny Women’s College

   (respondent No.3 herein), which was the governing body set up

   under the statute of the University, also filed a writ petition,

   being W. P. No. 5002(W) of 2010, in which it prayed for:
“(a) A writ of and/or in the nature of mandamus do
         issue directing the respondent authorities to
         forthwith cancel and/or rescind and/or withdraw the
         purported declaration being F. No. 506 of 2007
         dated 25th October, 2007 issued by the respondent
         no.3.
5
(b) A writ of and/or in the nature of mandamus do
issue directing the respondents, particularly the
respondent nos. 4, 5 and 6, to forbear from acting
and/or further acting and/or taking any steps and/or
claiming any right on the basis of the purported
declaration being F. No. 506 of 2007 dated 25 th
October, 2007 issued by the respondent no.3 in any
manner whatsoever.
(c) A declaration do issue declaring that the
respondent no.2 does not have any jurisdiction to
declare an existing educational institution to be a
minority educational institution.
(d) A writ of and/or in the nature of mandamus do
issue directing the respondents to forthwith cancel
and/or rescind and/or withdraw the purported letter
dated 20th February, 2010 issued by the respondent
no.9.
(e) A writ of and/or in the nature of mandamus do
issue directing the respondents, particularly the
respondent no.9, to allow the petitioner to operate
the bank account being S.B. Account No. 3936 0201
000 3495 maintained with Union Bank of India,
Kalimpong Branch, District-Darjeeling as per the
Resolution of the petitioner adopted on 29 th January,
2010.
(f) A writ of and/or in the nature of certiorari do issue
commanding the respondents to transmit the entire
records of the case to this Hon’ble Court forming the
basis of the purported declaration being F. No. 506
of 2007 dated 25th October, 2007 issued by the
respondent no.3 and the purported letter dated 20 th
February, 2010 issued by the respondent no.9 and
on being so certified quash the same so that
conscionable justice may be rendered.”
6
7. A learned single Judge disposed of both the writ petitions

  holding that the NCMEI had no original jurisdiction to declare

  the minority status of Cluny Women’s College, as a result of

  which the order dated 23.10.2007 and the consequent

  certificate issued thereupon were declared as invalid.        An

  appeal to the Division Bench met with the same result.
8. Shri Sanjay R. Hegde, learned senior counsel appearing on

  behalf of the NCMEI, has argued before us that on a true

  construction of
Sections 10(1)
and
Section 11(f)
of the National

  Commission for Minority Education Institutions Act, 2004

  (hereinafter referred to as the 2004 Act), an institution which

  seeks a declaration as a minority educational institution has the

  option to apply either to the competent authority established

  under the 2004 Act, or apply directly to the NCMEI. According

  to the learned senior counsel, the power to decide an original

  application, which is contained in
Section 11(f)
, is separate and

  distinct from the power contained in Section 12A and 12B,

  which is an appellate power of the NCMEI. According to the

  learned senior counsel, the 2004 Act must thus be construed to

  be an Act which confers concurrent power on three sets of
7
authorities, namely, the competent authority set up by the

  statute, authorities set up by the Central or the State

  Government for this purpose, as well as the NCMEI. According

  to him, therefore, the judgment was wrong in law and should be

  set aside.
9. Shri Chander Uday Singh, learned senior counsel appearing on

  behalf of the petitioner-society, was at pains to point out that

  even under the impugned judgment, it was clear that there was

  no competent authority set up under the statute for the society

  to apply to, to establish a new college at the time such

  application was made by the society. Consequently, according

  to the learned senior counsel, it is clear that it was only the

  NCMEI which the society could have approached. Further,

  according to the learned senior counsel, the institution, being a

  minority institution which had already been established prior to

  the coming into force of the 2004 Act, could only go under
Section 11(f)
to have its status declared as a minority

  educational institution.
Section 10(1)
, according to the learned

  senior counsel, is only for the limited purpose of establishing a

  new minority institution for which alone one would have to go to
8
the competent authority set up under the 2004 Act. According

  to the learned senior counsel, the impugned judgment,

  therefore, deserves to be set aside.
10.    Shri Rajeev Dhavan, learned senior counsel appearing on

  behalf of respondent No.3, referred us to the National

  Commission for
Minorities Act, 1992
and also referred to

  various provisions of the 2004 Act in some detail. He pointed

  out, however, that the 2004 Act was amended in 2006 and then

  in 2010, leading to the position that
Section 10
would only deal

  with the grant of a certificate to a person who desires to

  establish a minority educational institution for the first time.

  Otherwise, the functions of the NCMEI under
Section 11(f)
would be wide enough to include the power to declare the

  status   of   minority   educational   institutions,   which   were

  established before the commencement of the 2004 Act.

  According to the learned senior counsel, it was clear that Cluny

  Women’s College had been set up as a secular college and it

  was only in 2007 that a volte-face was taken by the society to

  get it declared as a minority educational institution. As none of

  the orders passed by the NCMEI have looked in detail into the
9
aspect of whether such a college can be declared to be a

  minority educational institution, after it has opted to be a secular

  institution, this is a case which should be remanded to the

  NCMEI to decide.
11.     We have heard learned counsel appearing for all the

  parties.
12.     The 2004 Act was set up with the initial idea of providing

  direct affiliation for minority educational institutions to central

  universities. It was subsequently amended twice in order to

  further broad base and expand the functions as well as the

  quasi-judicial powers of the NCMEI. The sections relevant for

  our discussion are set out hereinbelow:
“2. Definitions.— In this Act, unless the context
        otherwise requires,—

        (aa) “appropriate Government” means,—
(i) in relation to an educational institution recognized
        for conducting its programmes of studies under any
        Act of Parliament, the Central Government; and
(ii) in relation to any other educational institution
        recognized for conducting its programmes of
        studies under any State Act, a State Government in
        whose jurisdiction such institution is established

        xxx xxx xxx
10
(c) “Commission” means the National Commission
     for Minority Educational Institutions constituted
     under
section 3
;
(ca) “Competent authority” means the authority
     appointed by the appropriate Government to grant
     no objection certificate for the establishment of any
     educational institution of their choice by the
     minorities;
Section 10
has been amended in three stages since the

enactment of the 2004 Act as follows:
“Stage I (as enacted in 2004)
10. Right of a Minority Educational Institution to
     seek affiliation to a Scheduled University:
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
     law for the time being in force, a Minority
     Educational Institution may seek recognition as an
     affiliated college of a Scheduled University of its
     choice.
(2) The Scheduled University shall consult the
     Government of the State in which the minority
     educational institution seeking affiliation under
     sub-section (1) is situated and views of such
     Government shall be taken into consideration
     before granting affiliation.
Stage II (as amended in 2006)
10. Right to establish a Minority Educational
     Institution:
(1) Any person who desires to establish a Minority
     Educational Institution may apply to the Competent
     authority for the grant of no objection certificate for
     the said purpose.
11
(2) The Competent authority shall,-
(a) on perusal of documents, affidavits or other
evidence, if any; and
(b) after giving an opportunity of being heard to the
applicant, decide every application filed under
sub-section (1) as expeditiously as possible and
grant or reject the application, as the case may be:
Provided that where an application is rejected, the
Competent authority shall communicate the same to
the applicant.
(3) Where within a period of ninety days from the
receipt of the application under sub-section (1) for
the grant of no objection certificate-
(a) the Competent authority does not grant such
certificate; or
(b) where an application has been rejected and the
same has not been communicated to the person
who has applied for the grant of such certificate,
it shall be deemed that the Competent authority has
granted a no objection certificate to the applicant.
(4) The applicant shall, on the grant of a
no-objection certificate or where the Competent
authority has deemed to have granted the no
objection certificate, be entitled to commence and
proceed with the establishment of a Minority
Educational Institution in accordance with the rules
and regulations, as the case may be, laid down by
or under any law for the time being in force.
Explanation.- For the purpose of this section,-
(a) “applicant” means of person who makes an
application under sub-section (1) for establishment
of a Minority Educational Institution;
(b) “no objection certificate” means a certificate
stating therein, that the Competent authority has no
objection for the establishment of a Minority
Educational Institution.
12
Stage III (as amended in 2010)
10. Right to establish a Minority Educational
Institution.—
(1) Subject to the provisions contained in any other
law for the time being in force, any person, who
desires to establish a Minority Educational
Institution may apply to the competent authority for
the grant of no objection certificate for the said
purpose.
(2) The Competent authority shall,—
(a) on perusal of documents, affidavits or other
evidence, if any; and
(b) after giving an opportunity of being heard to the
applicant, decide every application filed under
sub-section (1) as expeditiously as possible and
grant or reject the application, as the case may be:
Provided that where an application is rejected, the
Competent authority shall communicate the same to
the applicant.
(3) Where within a period of ninety days from the
receipt of the application under sub-section (1) for
the grant of no objection certificate,—
(a) the Competent authority does not grant such
certificate; or
(b) where an application has been rejected and the
same has not been communicated to the person
who has applied for the grant of such certificate,
it shall be deemed that the Competent authority has
granted a no objection certificate to the applicant.
(4) The applicant shall, on the grant of a no
objection certificate or where the Competent
authority has deemed to have granted the no
objection certificate, be entitled to commence and
proceed with the establishment of a Minority
Educational Institution in accordance with the rules
13
and regulations, as the case may be, laid down by
     or under any law for the time being in force.
     Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “applicant” means any person who makes an
     application under subsection (1) for establishment
     of a Minority Educational Institution;
(b) “no objection certificate” means a certificate
     stating therein, that the Competent authority has no
     objection for the establishment of a Minority
     Educational Institution.”
Section 11
has been amended since the enactment of the 2004

Act as follows:
“
Section 11
(as enacted in 2004)
11. Functions of Commission.—Notwithstanding
     anything contained in any other law for the time
     being in force, the Commission shall-
(a) advise the Central Government or any State
     Government on any question relating to the
     education of minorities that may be referred to it;
(b) look into specific complaints regarding
     deprivation or violation of rights of minorities to
     establish and administer educational institutions of
     their choice and any dispute relating affiliation to a
     Scheduled University and report its findings to the
     Central Government for its implementation; and
(c) to do such other acts and things as may be
     necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment
     of all or any of the objects of the Commission.
Section 11
(as amended in 2006)
11. Functions of Commission.— Notwithstanding
     anything contained in any other law for the time
     being in force, the Commission shall—
14
(a) advise the Central Government or any State
     Government on any question relating to the
     education of minorities that may be referred to it;
(b) enquire, suo motu, or on a petition presented to
     it by any Minority Educational Institution, or any
     person on its behalf into complaints regarding
     deprivation or violation of rights of minorities to
     establish and administer educational institutions of
     their choice and any dispute relating to affiliation to
     a University and report its finding to the appropriate
     Government for its implementation;
(c) intervene in any proceeding involving any
     deprivation or violation of the educational rights of
     the minorities before a court with the leave of such
     court;
(d) review the safeguards provided by or under the
     Constitution, or any law for the time being in force,
     for the protection of educational rights of the
     minorities and recommend measures for their
     effective implementation;
(e) specify measures to promote and preserve the
     minority status and character of institutions of their
     choice established by minorities;
(f) decide all questions relating to the status of any
     institution as a Minority Educational Institution and
     declare its status as such;
(g) make recommendations to the appropriate
     Government for the effective, implementation of
     programmes and schemes relating to the Minority
     Educational Institutions; and
(h) do such other acts and things as may be
     necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment
     of all or any of the objects of the Commission.”
Section 12
, 12A, 12B, 12C, 12F and
Section 22
are as follows:
15
“12. Powers of Commission.—
(1) If any dispute arises between a minority
educational institution and a University relating to its
affiliation to such University, the decision of the
Commission thereon shall be final.
(2) The Commission shall, for the purposes of
discharging its functions under this Act, have all the
powers of a civil court trying a suit and in particular,
in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any
person from any part of India and examining him on
oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any
document;
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) subject to the provisions of
sections 123
and
124
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, (1 of 1872)
requisitioning any public record or document or
copy of such record or document from any office;
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses or documents; and
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.
3) Every proceeding before the Commission shall
be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the
purposes of
section 196
, of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860) and the Commission shall be deemed
to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195
and Chapter XXVI of the
Code of Criminal
Procedure
, 1973 (2 of 1974).].
12A. Appeal against orders of the Competent
authority.—
(1) Any person aggrieved by the order of refusal to
grant no objection certificate under sub-section (2)
of
section 10
by the Competent authority for
establishing a Minority Educational Institution, may
16
prefer an appeal against such order to the
Commission.
(2) An appeal under sub-section (I) shall be filed
within thirty days from the date of the order referred
to in sub-section (I) communicated to the applicant:
Provided that the Commission may entertain an
appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty
days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause
for not filing it within that period.
(3) An appeal to the Commission shall be made in
such form as may be prescribed and shall be
accompanied by a copy of the order against which
the appeal has been filed.
(4) The Commission, after hearing the parties, shall
pass an order as soon as may be practicable, and
give such directions as may be necessary or
expedient to give effect to its orders or to prevent
abuse of its process or to secure the ends of justice.
(5) An order made by the Commission under
sub-section (4) shall be executable by the
Commission as a decree of a civil court and the
provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 (5
of 1908), so far as may be, shall apply as they apply
in respect of a decree of a civil court.
12B. Power of Commission to decide on the
minority status of an educational institution.—
(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in
the National Commission for
Minorities Act, 1992
(19 of 1992), where an authority established by the
Central Government or any State Government, as
the case may be, for grant of minority status to any
educational institution rejects the application for the
grant of such status, the aggrieved person may
appeal against such order of the authority to the
Commission.
(2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be
preferred within thirty days from the date of the
17
order communicated to the applicant: Provided that
the Commission may entertain an appeal after the
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is
satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing
it within that period.
(3) An appeal to the Commission shall be made in
such form as may be prescribed and shall be
accompanied by a copy of the order against which
the appeal has been filed.
(4) On receipt of the appeal under sub-section (3),
the Commission may, after giving the parties to the
appeal an opportunity of being heard, decide on the
minority status of the educational institution and
shall proceed to give such direction as it may deem
fit and, all such directions shall be binding on the
parties.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section and
section 12C, “authority ” means any authority or
officer or commission which is established under
any law for the time being in force or under any
order of the appropriate Government, for the
purpose of granting a certificate of minority status to
an educational institution.
12C. Power to cancel.—

The Commission may, after giving a reasonable
opportunity of being heard to a Minority Educational
Institution to which minority status has been granted
by an authority or Commission, as the case may be,
cancel     such     status    under    the   following
circumstances, namely:-
(a) if the constitution, aims and objects of the
educational institution, which has enabled it to
obtain minority status has subsequently been
amended in such a way that it no longer reflects the
purpose or character of a Minority Educational
Institution;
18
(b) if, on verification of the records during the
        inspection or investigation, it is found that the
        Minority Educational Institution has failed to admit
        students belonging to the minority community in the
        institution as per rules and prescribed percentage
        governing admissions during any academic year.
xxx xxx xxx

        12F. Bar of jurisdiction.— No court (except the
        Supreme Court and a High Court exercising
        jurisdiction under
articles 226
and
227
of the
        Constitution) shall entertain any suit, application or
        other proceedings in respect of any order made
        under this Chapter.
xxx xxx xxx
22. Act to have overriding effect.—

        The provisions of this Act shall have effect
        notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
        contained in any other law for the time being in
        force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of
        any law other than this Act.”
13.     The National Commission for Minority Educational

  Institutions Act, as it originally stood in 2004, by
Section 10
only

  concerned itself with the recognition of minority educational

  institutions to an affiliated college of a scheduled university of

  its choice.   At this stage, the functions of the NCMEI were

  limited to only three things, namely, an advisory function under

  sub clause (a); looking into specific complaints relating to

  deprivation or violation of rights of minorities to establish and
19
administer educational institutions of their choice and any

disputes relating to affiliation to scheduled universities under

sub-clause (b); and a residuary clause to do all such other acts

as may be necessary to the attainment of the objects of the

NCMEI under sub-clause (c). A sea change came about by the

Amendment Act of 2006. By this amendment, a person who

desires to establish a minority educational institution is to apply

to the competent authority for a no objection certificate for the

said purpose under
Section 10
. Concomitantly, under
Section

11
, the functions and powers of the NCMEI were expanded

beyond the original sub-clauses (a) to (c) referred to

hereinabove, to include, under sub-clause (f), decisions as to all

questions relating to the status of any institution as a minority

educational institution and declaration of its status as such.

The same Amendment Act of 2006 also conferred powers of

appeal against orders of the competent authority to the NCMEI

under Section 12A as well as over authorities that were

established by the Central or State Government, who rejected

applications for the grant of minority status to an educational

institution, under Section 12B. A power of cancellation was also
20
vested in the NCMEI to cancel a certificate granted either by an

  authority or the NCMEI under certain circumstances.
14.     The Amendment Act of 2010 added the expression

  “subject to the provisions contained in any other law for the time

  being in force…” to
Section 10(1)
of the 2004 Act.
15.     At first blush, it does appear that there is a clash between

  the provisions of
Section 10(1)
and
Section 11(f)
of the 2004

  Act. Harmoniously construed, however, it would be clear that

  the NCMEI’s powers under
Section 11(f)
are to be exercised,

  notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time

  being in force. On the other hand, the competent authority who

  grants a no objection certificate under
Section 10
can only do

  so subject to the provisions contained in any other law for the

  time being in force.
16.     Secondly,
Section 11(f)
is a very wide provision which

  empowers the NCMEI to decide all questions relating to the

  status of an institution as a minority educational institution and

  to declare its status as such. The expression “all questions” as

  well as the expression “relating to”, which are words of wide

  import, clothe the NCMEI with the power to decide any question
21
that may arise, which may relate directly or indirectly, with

  respect to the status of an institution as a minority education

  institution. Looked at by itself,
Section 11(f)
would include the

  declaration of the status of an institution as a minority

  educational institution at all stages.
Article 30
of the Constitution

  of India grants a fundamental right to all minorities, whether

  based on religion or language, to establish and administer

  educational institutions of their choice.       The power under
Section 11(f)
, read by itself, would clothe the NCMEI with the

  power to decide any question that may arise with regard to the

  right to establish and/or administer educational institutions by a

  minority. The power does not stop there. It also includes the

  power to declare such institution as a minority educational

  institution, which is established and administered as such, so

  that it can avail of the fundamental right guaranteed under
Article 30
of the Constitution.
17.     However,
Section 10(1)
, which was introduced at the

  same time as
Section 11(f)
by the Amendment Act of 2006,

  carves out one facet of the aforesaid power contained in
Section 11(f)
, namely the grant of a no objection certificate to a
22
minority educational institution at its inception.         Thus, any

  person who desires to establish a minority educational

  institution after the Amendment Act of 2006 came into force,

  must apply only to the competent authority for the grant of a no

  objection certificate for the said purpose. It is a little difficult to

  subscribe to Shri Hegde’s argument that the said powers are

  concurrent.    Harmoniously read,        all   applications   for   the

  establishment of a minority educational institution after the

  Amendment Act of 2006 must go only to the competent

  authority set up under the statute. On the other hand, for the

  declaration of its status as a minority educational institution at

  any stage post establishment, the NCMEI would have the

  power to decide the question and declare such institution’s

  minority status.
18.     We find that various High Courts have taken conflicting

  views on the reach of these provisions. The Calcutta, Bombay

  and Punjab High Courts have taken the view that an appellate

  power cannot be confused with an original power and that,

  therefore,
Section 11(f)
cannot be pressed into service at all

  when it comes to declare of the status of a minority institution.
23
This view, apart from stultifying
Section 11(f)
, also ignores
Section 12(2)
of the Act, which confers certain powers of a Civil

  Court, which powers refer only to a Court of first instance. On

  the other hand, the Allahabad High Court has taken the view

  that
Section 10
and
11(f)
operate in different fields:
Section 10
being the power to grant a no objection certificate to establish

  an institution and
Section 11(f)
relating to the determination of

  all questions relating to the status of an institution.
19.     This Court has touched upon the subject without directly

  answering the question posed before us. Thus, in Governing

  Body OF P.A.E.M. College v. State of Jharkhand, decided on

  6.12.2012, this Court, after referring to
Section 11(f)
and 12B of

  the 2004 Act, held:
“From the above provisions, it is clear that the
         Commission has the power to decide all questions
         relating to the status of any institution as minority
         educational institution and declare its status as
         such. More over under Section 12B, where an
         authority established by the Central Government
         or any State Government has rejected the
         application for grant of minority status to any
         educational institution, the aggrieved person may
         appeal against such order of the authority to the
         Commission. The provisions contained in
Section
         11(f)
of 2004 Act and Section 12B of the
         Amendment Act are, thus, wholesome provisions
         for deciding all questions relating to the status of
24
any institution as minority educational institution
         and for declaration of such status.”
20.
In
Corporate Educational Agency v. James Mathew
,

  (2017) 15 SCC 595 (at 600-601), a Division Bench of this Court

  dealt with a judgment of the High Court, which in turn dealt with

  the appointment of teachers in minority educational institutions.
This Court, after noticing that the appellant was already an

  existing minority educational institution, went on to hold:
“9. Chapter III deals with rights of minority
        educational institutions. Under
Section 10
,
        whosoever desires to establish a minority
        educational institution, has to apply to the
        competent authority for a “no-objection certificate”.
        The “competent authority” is defined under
Section
        2(ca)
of the Act to mean, the authority appointed by
        the appropriate Government to grant “no-objection
        certificate” for the establishment of any educational
        institution of their choice by the minorities.
        xxx xxx xxx
11. Therefore, after the introduction of the National
        Commission for
Minority Educational Institutions
        Act, 2004
, it is also within the jurisdiction and
        mandate of the National Commission to issue the
        certificate regarding the status of a minority
        educational institution. Once the Commission thus
        issues a certificate, it is a declaration of an existing
        status.”
21.     This judgment unequivocally holds that, insofar as

  existing minority institutions are concerned,
Section 11(f)
clearly
25
confers jurisdiction on the NCMEI to issue a certificate

  regarding the status of the minority educational institution. We

  respectfully concur with the aforesaid view.
22.     Shri Dhavan, however, exhorted us to send back the
  matter to the NCMEI for a hearing de novo on merits. We may
  mention that the fact that the college was begun as a secular
  institution and wished to change into a minority educational
  institution midstream, which was not permissible according to
  Shri Dhavan, is not a plea taken up before the learned single
  Judge. This plea, however, was raised before the Division
  Bench and answered by both Judges stating that the
  fundamental right under
Article 30
cannot be waived. While
  agreeing with this view, it is necessary to point out, on the facts
  of the case, that the University of North Bengal has accepted
  the NCMEI’s order dated 5.11.2009, in which the NCMEI went
  into the aforesaid question. It would not, therefore, be in the
  fitness of things to send back this matter to be decided afresh
  at the behest of a governing body which can no longer claim to
  govern the college set up by the society. It needs only be
  pointed out that, by a letter dated 4.5.2009, the Principal of
  Cluny Women’s College requested the Vice-Chancellor of the
  University to extend the term of the governing body set up
  under the statutes of the University only until the constitution of
  a new governing body. As the new governing body has been
  constituted on the footing that Cluny Women’s College is a
  minority educational institution, we are of the view that the
26
parallel governing body, which claims to continue as such, has
  no legs to stand after the formation of a new governing body.
This being the case, we are not inclined to send the matter
  back to the NCMEI for a de novo hearing on merits at the
  behest of Shri Dhavan’s client.
23.     The appeal is, accordingly, allowed and the judgment of

  the Calcutta High Court is set aside.           The order dated

  23.10.2007 and the certificate dated 25.10.2007 are declared to

  be valid in law.
24.     In view of the above, the present batch of appeals is

  disposed of in accordance with this judgment.
…………………………..J.
                                    (Adarsh Kumar Goel)



                                    …………………………..J.
                                    (R.F. Nariman)
  New Delhi;
April 18, 2018.
27