[Cites
7
, Cited by
72
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Public Service Commission vs M.Sathiya Priya And Ors. on 13 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2790, 2018 LAB IC 3059 2018 (7) ADJ 54 NOC, 2018 (7) ADJ 54 NOC, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 46
Author:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
Bench:
Kurian Joseph
,
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
Navin Sinha
1


                                                                         REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10854 OF 2014


         Union Public Service Commission                                     ..Appellant


                                                   Versus


         M. Sathiya Priya and others                                   . .Respondents



                                                J U D G M E N T




         MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.
1.              This   appeal   is   directed   by   the   Union   Public   Service

         Commission (for short, ‘UPSC’) against the judgment and order

         dated   24.06.2013,   passed   by   the   High   Court   of   Judicature   at
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Madras   in   Writ   Petition   No.   15367   of   2010,   whereby   the   High
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2018.04.13
18:22:34 IST
Reason:
Court has dismissed the aforesaid writ petition filed by the UPSC
2
and confirmed the order of the Central Administrative Tribunal,

Chennai   Bench,   Chennai   (for   short,   ‘CAT’),   dated   07.04.2010

directing   the   official   respondents   to   consider   the   name   of     the

first respondent herein for appointment to the IPS by taking into

account   the   service   records   for   the   period   from   1.4.2003   to

31.3.2008, and appoint her to the IPS by notionally treating such

appointment   with   effect   from   the     date   of   notification,   i.e.,

5.5.2009, and also by giving appropriate place of seniority to the

first respondent amongst the private respondents.
2.    Brief facts leading to this appeal are:
The   first   respondent   (contesting   respondent)   was   appointed   as

Deputy Superintendent of Police in the State of Tamil Nadu; she

joined   for   duties   on   26.05.1997;   she   was   promoted   as

Superintendent   of   Police   on   10.06.2006   and   has   worked   at

different  places   on  the   said post.   In the seniority list of State

Police   Service   (for   short  ‘SPS’)  Officers,  the first respondent,  at

the given point of time, stood at serial No.11.   Since the fourth

person   in   the   seniority   list  was  over­aged,  the  first  respondent

was effectively considered at serial No.10 in the seniority list for

the   purpose   of   this   case.     For   the   year   2008,   there   were   ten

vacancies  for  SPS  to  the Indian Police Service (for short, ‘IPS’),
3
which is an All India Service.  The appointment by promotion to

the   IPS   is   governed   by   the   IPS   (Appointment   by   Promotion)

Regulations,   1955   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   the   ‘Regulations’).
The zone of consideration is three times the number of vacancies

and, therefore, at least thirty names ought to be considered for

appointment to the IPS.  The names of the first thirty officers in

the SPS including the name of the first respondent, were placed

before the Selection Committee for consideration for appointment

to the IPS for the year 2008.   The name of the first respondent

was considered at serial No. 9 in the zone of consideration.   On

an   oral   assessment   of   her   service   records,   the   Selection

Committee graded the first respondent as “Good”.   On  the basis

of   this   grading,   she   could   not   be   included   in   the   select   list   of

2008 due to the statutory limit of its size and the availability of

officers   with   higher   grading   for   inclusion   in   the   select   list.
Though, at an earlier point of time, it was found that disciplinary

proceedings   were   pending   against
Srimati   V.   Jayashree
(respondent no.6 herein), subsequently on being cleared by the

disciplinary   authority,   the   Government   of   India   issued   a

notification   appointing
Srimati   V.   Jayashree
also   to   the   IPS.
4
Thus, all the ten vacancies were filled by the Government of India

including that of respondent no.6 herein.
3.    Aggrieved by the non­inclusion of her name in the select list

of 2008, the first respondent filed Original Application No. 441 of

2009   before   the   CAT,   inter   alia   contending   that   on   valid

assessment of her service records, the Selection Committee ought

to have graded her as “Outstanding” or at least “Very Good”, and

in that event she would have been selected for appointment to

the IPS. She also contended that her service records are better

than   those   of   almost   all   the   private   respondents   and   that   the

Selection Committee had acted in an arbitrary manner in making

the selection by superseding her for appointment to the IPS.
4.    The CAT allowed the Original Application No. 441 of 2009

filed   by   the   first   respondent   herein   by   its   judgment   dated

07.04.2010.   The judgment of the CAT is confirmed by the High

Court   of   Judicature   at   Madras   in   Writ   Petition   No.   15367   of

2010, vide impugned judgment and order dated 24.06.2013.  The

judgments of the CAT and the High Court are called in question

in this appeal by the UPSC.
5.    There cannot be any dispute that the UPSC discharges the

functions   and   duties   assigned   to   it   under
Article   320
of   the
5
Constitution.  By virtue of the provisions in the
All India Services

Act, 1951
, separate recruitment rules have been framed for the

IAS/IPS/IFS.   In pursuance of Sub­rule (1) of Rule 9 of the IPS

(Recruitment) Rules, 1954, the IPS (Appointment by Promotion)

Regulations,   1955   have   been   framed.     The   method   of

appointment is provided in Regulation 5, which reads thus:
“5. PREPARATION   OF   A   LIST   OF   SUITABLE
          OFFICERS:­

          5(1) Each Committee shall ordinarily meet every
          year and prepare a list of such members of the
          State   Police   Service   as   are   held   by   them   to   be
          suitable   for   promotion   to   the   Service.   The
          number of members of the State Police Service to
          be included in the list shall be determined by the
          Central   Government   in   consultation   with   the
          State   government   concerned,   and   shall   not
          exceed   the   number   of   substantive   vacancies   as
          on the first day of January of the year in which
          the   meeting   is   held,   in   the   posts   available   for
          them under rule 9 of the Recruitment Rules. The
          date and venue of the meeting of the Committee
          to make the selection shall be determined by the
          Commission;
Provided that no meeting of the Committee
                  shall   be   held,   and   no   list   for   the   year   in
                  question shall be prepared when;
a. there are no substantive vacancies
                          as on the first day of January of the
                          year   in   the   posts   available   for   the
                          members of the state Police Service
                          under   rule   9   of   the   recruitment
                          rules; or
6
b.  the   Central   Government   in
                consultation   with   the   State
                Government   decides   that   no
                recruitment   shall   be   made   during
                the   year   to   the   substantive
                vacancies   as   on   the   first   day   of
                January   of   the   year   in   the   posts
                available   for   the   members   of   the
                State Police Service under rule 9 of
                the Recruitment Rules;
Provided further that where no meeting of
        the Committee could be held during a year
        for any reason other than that provided for
        in   the   first   proviso   as   and   when   the
        Committee   meets   again,   the   Select   List
        shall be prepared separately for each year
        during   which   the   Committee   could   not
        meet as on the 31st December of each year.
EXPLANATION:­ In case of Joint Cadres, a
        separate   select   list   shall   be   prepared   in
        respect of each State Police Service.
5(2) The Committee shall consider for inclusion
to the said list, the cases of members of the State
Police   Services   in   the   order   of   seniority   in   that
service of a number which is equal to three times
the number referred in sub­regulation (1).
Provided   that   such   restriction   shall   not
        apply in respect of a State where the total
        number   of   eligible   officers   is   less   than
        three times the maximum permissible size
        of  the   Select List and in such a case the
        Committee   shall   consider   all   the   eligible
        officers;
Provided   further   that   in   computing   the
        number   for   inclusion   in   the   field   of
        consideration,   the   number   of   officers
7
referred   to   in   sub­regulation   (3)   shall   be
excluded;
Provided also that the Committee shall not
consider the case of a member of the State
Police   Service   unless   on   the   first   day   of
January   of   the   year   for   which   the   Select
List   is   prepared   he   is   substantive   in   the
State Police Service and has completed not
less than eight years of continuous service
(whether   officiating   or   substantive)   in   the
post of Deputy Superintendent of Police or
in   any   other   post   or   posts   declared
equivalent   thereto   by   the   State
Government.
Provided   also   that   in   respect   of   any
released   Emergency   Commissioned   or
Short   Service   Commissioned   officers
appointed to the State Police Service, eight
years   of   continuous   service   as   required
under   the   preceding   proviso   shall   be
counted   from   the   deemed   date   of   their
appointment to that service, subject to the
condition that such officers shall be eligible
for   consideration   if   they   have   completed
not   less   than   four   years   of   actual
continuous   service,   on   the   1 st day   of
January   of   the   year   for   which   the   Select
List   is   prepared,   in   the   post   of   Deputy
Superintendent   of   Police   or   in   any   other
post   or   posts   declared   equivalent   thereto
by the State Government.
EXPLANATION:   The   powers   of   the   State
Government under the third proviso to the
sub­regulation   shall   be   exercised   in
relation to the members of the State Police
Service   of   constituent   State,   by   the
Government of that State.
8
5(2)(A)       Deleted.
5(3) The Committee shall not consider the cases
    of  the  members of the State Police Service who
    have attained the age of 54 years on the first day
    of January of the year for which the Select List is
    prepared:
Provided that a member of the State Police
            Service whose name appears in the Select
            List prepared for the earlier year before the
            date of the meeting of the Committee and
            who has not been appointed to the service
            only because he was included provisionally
            in that Select List shall be considered for
            inclusion in the fresh list to be prepared by
            the   Committee,   even   if   he   has   in   the
            meanwhile,   attained   the   age   of   fifty   four
            years.
Provided   further   that   a   member   of   the
            State  Police Service who has attained the
            age   of   fifty   four   years   on   the   first   day   of
            January   of   the   year   for   which   the   Select
            List is prepared shall be considered by the
            Committee,   if   he   was   eligible   for
            consideration on the first day of "January
            of the year or any of the years immediately
            preceding the year in which such meeting
            is held but could not be considered as no
            meeting of the Committee was held during
            such   preceding   year   or   years   under   item
(b) of the proviso to sub­regulation(1)".
5(3)(A) The Committee shall not consider the case of
such   member   of   the   State   Police   Service   who   had
been included in an earlier select list and :
a) had   expressed   his   unwillingness   for
          appointment to the service under regulation
          9;
9
Provided   that   he   shall   be   considered   for
           inclusion   in   the   Select   List,   if   before   the
           commencement   of   the   year,   he   applies   in
           writing, to the State Government expressing
           his   unwillingness   to   be   considered   for
           appointment to the service;
b) was   not   appointed   to   the   service   by   the
          Central Government under regulation 9 (a).
5(4)   The   Selection   Committee   shall   classify   the
eligible   officers   as  "Outstanding", "Very   Good",   
"Good" and "unfit"  as the case may be on an overall
relative assessment of their service records.

5(5)   The   List   shall   be   prepared   by   including   the
required   number   of   names   first   from   amongst   the
officers   finally   classified   as "Outstanding" then   from
amongst those similarly classified as "Very Good" and
thereafter   from   amongst   those   similarly   classified
as "Good" and   the   order   of   names   inter­se   within
each category shall be in the order of their seniority
in the State Police Service.
Provided   that   the   name   of   an   officer   so
       included   in   the   list   shall   be   treated   as
       provisional if the State Government withholds
       the   integrity   certificate   in   respect   of   such   an
       officer   or   any   proceedings,   departmental   or
       criminal are pending against him or anything
       adverse   against   him   which   renders   him
       unsuitable for appointment to the service has
       come to the notice of the State Government.
Provided further that while preparing yearwise
       select lists for more than one year pursuant to
       the 2nd proviso to sub regulation (1), the officer
       included provisionally in any of the Select List
       so prepared shall be considered for inclusion in
       the Select List of subsequent year in addition
       to the normal consideration zone and in case
10
he   is   found   fit  for  inclusion in  the  suitability
               list   for   that   year   on   a   provisional   basis   such
               inclusion   shall   be   in   addition   to   the   normal
               size of the select list determined by the Central
               Government for such year.
EXPLANATION   I:   The   proceedings   shall   be
               treated as pending only if a charge­sheet has
               actually been issued to the officer or filed in a
               Court as the case may be.
EXPLANATION   II:   The   adverse   thing   which
               came   to   the   notice   of   the   State   Government
               rendering   him   unsuitable   for   appointment   to
               the service shall be treated as having come to
               the notice of the State only if the details of the
               same have been communicated to the Central
               Government   and   the   Central   Government   is
               satisfied that the details furnished by the State
               Government  have a bearing  on the suitability
               of   the   officer   and   investigation   thereof   is
               essential.
5 (6)  Omitted.
5 (7)  Deleted.”
6.    Ms. Binu Tamta, learned counsel representing the appellant

herein, while taking us to the material on record, submits that

the   CAT,   as   well   as   the   High   Court,   has   fallen   into   error   by

virtually assessing the performance of the first respondent as an

appellate   authority   and   that   too   wrongly;   they   have   erred   in

taking into consideration the Annual Confidential Reports from

1.4.2003 to 31.03.2008; the relevant Annual Confidential Reports

to be considered for the purpose of the selection in question were
11
from 1.4.2002 to 31.03.2007, the Selection Committee has rightly

taken into consideration the Annual Confidential Reports of those

years   only,   and   therefore   the   impugned   judgments   are   bad   in

law; the selection is to be made by the Selection Committee not

only   based   on   Annual   Confidential   Reports   in   respect   of   the

concerned   officer   but   also   based   on   other   relevant   factors

including   the   examination   of   service   records   of   the   officer   in

comparison   to   the   other   officers   in   the   eligibility   list/zone   of

consideration and on the basis of overall relative assessment.
Contrary to the afore­mentioned procedure prescribed and

being followed throughout, the CAT, as well as the High Court,

has decided the matter purely on the basis of the grading found

in the Annual Confidential Reports of the first respondent, and

that too of the year 01.04.2003 to 31.03.2008.
7.    Per   contra,   Shri   Venkatramani,   learned   senior   counsel

argued   in   support   of   the   judgments  of  the  CAT  as well  as  the

High   Court   contending   that   the   service   record   of   the   first

respondent     has   been   mostly   “Outstanding”   throughout   till

31.03.2008, or even till 31.03.2007; the first respondent ought to

have   been   graded   as   “Outstanding”   or   at   least   “Very   Good”;

absolutely   no   reasons   are   assigned   to   supersede   the   first
12
respondent   by   making   the   appointment   of   her   juniors   in

preference to the first respondent; the other private respondents

were graded as “Very Good” but none of the six juniors selected

had the “Outstanding” grading in their service records, and some

of them did not even have the “Very Good” grading; the Selection

Committee and the UPSC have not objectively evaluated the first

respondent in accordance with the regulations, and hence the list

prepared   which   was   impugned   before   the   CAT   was   rightly

modified with a direction to appoint the first respondent in IPS.

Relying upon the judgment in the case of
R.S. Dass vs. Union of

India   and   others
1986   (Supp)   SCC   617,   he   contended   that

Regulation   5   examines   the   role   of   seniority   in   the   process   of

selection, and importance and primacy was given to merit.   The

categorisation of meritorious candidates is done on the basis of

service   records   including   Confidential   Character   Roll   as

mentioned by senior officers holding high positions.   He further

contended that it cannot be said now­a­days, if one is aware of

the facts and currents of life, that simply because categorization

and judgment of the service records of officers are in the hands of

senior   officers,   it   is   a   sufficient   safeguard.     There   has   been

considerable erosion in the intrinsic sense of fairness and justice
13
in some of the senior officers.  From instances of the conduct of

many,  some  of   the   senior officers and men in high position,  it

cannot be said that such thinking on the subject of erosion is not

wholly unjustified.  Selection on merits confers wide discretion on

the authority making the selection, and in the absence of reasons

there would be no objectivity, and the members of the State Civil

Service might receive discriminatory treatment by the Selection

Committee.     On   these,   among   other   things,   he   prayed   for

dismissal of the appeal.
8.    This   Court   in   the   case   of
R.   S.   Dass   vs   Union   of   India
(supra)  has   observed   that   in   order   to   rule   out   any   grievance,

actual or fancied, some objective basis for categorisation in the

manner indicated should be laid down.  If such objective basis is

made   known,   and   after   categorisation   the   selection   of   junior

officers   in   preference   to   senior   officers   is   made,   the   Selection

Committee need not state reasons, and the same would not be

violative   of   the   canons   of   justice.     In   order   to   ward   off   any

suspicion in the minds of the candidates, this Court suggested to

the government and the authorities concerned that there should

be   some   basis   for   the   categorisation   of   the   officers,   and   such

basis  should  be  objective  and not merely subjective evaluation,
14
and furthermore such basis should be formulated in the form of

guidelines.   Pursuant to such observations made by this Court,

the   Central   Government   framed   guidelines   which   have   to   be

followed by the Selection Committee and the UPSC.  The relevant

parts of the Guidelines, as on 12.03.2008, are as under:
“2.1 For   preparing   the   Select   Lists,   the   crucial
      date   for   reckoning   the eligibility  of officers is taken
      with respect to the first day of the “year” as defined
      under
Regulation 2(1)(l)
of the IAS (Appointment and
      Promotion)   Regulations,   and   which   is   presently   the
      calendar   year.     The   year   in   which   the   Selection
      Committee   actually   meets   {i.e.   SCM   year}   is   co­
      terminus with the definition under
Regulation 2(1)(l)
.
      Further, in these Guidelines, while reference is made
      to   the   provisions   of   the   IAS   (Appointment   by
      Promotion) Regulations, the corresponding provisions
      of   the   IPS   &   IFS   Regulations   would   be   applicable
      while   preparing   the   IPS   &   IFS   Select   Lists
      respectively.
2.2 As   per   the   provisions   of   the   Promotion
      Regulations,   where   year­wise   Select   Lists   are   being
      prepared   by   the   Selection   Committee,   the   crucial
      date   for   determining   the   eligibility   of   the   officers   is
      taken as on 1st  January of the Select List year and
      the notional due date for preparing the Select List of
      an   earlier   year   is   taken   as   31 st  December   of   that
      Select   List   year   for   reckoning   the   availability   of
      eligible   officers.     For   the   Select   List   of   the   current
      year, the availability of eligible officer is reckoned on
      the date of the Selection Committee Meeting.
2.3 In   accordance   with   Regulation   5(4)   of   the
      Promotion Regulations, the Selection Committee has
      to classify the eligible officers as ‘Outstanding’, ‘Very
      Good’,   ‘Good’   or   ‘Unfit’   as   the   case   may   be   on   an
15
overall   relative   assessment   of   their   service   records
(i.e.   ACRs   and   the   documents   kept   therein   by   the
competent authority).  For making an overall relative
assessment, the committee will not depend solely on
the          grading             recorded          by        the
reporting/reviewing/accepting   authority   but   will
make   its   independent   assessment   of   the   service
records   of   the   eligible  officers as  per  the  procedure
indicated below.
3.1 The   Selection   Committee  would  go   through   the
service   records   of   each   of   the   eligible   officers,   with
special   reference   to   the   performance   of   the   officer
during   the   last   five   years,   preceding   the   year   for
which   the   Select   List   is   prepared   and   after
deliberation   will   record   the   assessment   of   the
Committee in the Assessment Sheet comprising the
Assessment  Matrix  [Officer  x Year­wise assessment]
and   the   column   for   Overall   Assessment   of   the
officers.
3.2 As the crucial date for preparation of the Select
List is 1st  January of the year of the Select List, the
ACRs upto the year ending 31 st  March (where ACRs
are   written   on   a   financial   year­wise   basis)   or   31st
December (where ACRs are written on calendar year­
wise   basis)   of   the   year   preceding   the   year   of   the
Select List are to be taken into consideration by the
Selection Committee.
4.1 The   Selection   Committee   will   go   through   the
records   of   the   eligible   officers   and   make   their
assessment   after   deliberating   on   the   quality   of   the
officer as indicated in the various columns recorded
by   the   Reporting/Reviewing   Officer/   Accepting
Authority   in   the   ACRs   for   different   years   and   then
finally   arrive   at   the   classification   to   be   assigned   to
each   officer.     The   Selection   Committee   would   take
into   account   orders   regarding   appreciation   for   the
meritorious   work   done   by   the   concerned   officers.
Similarly it would also keep in view orders awarding
16
penalties   or   any   adverse   remarks   communicated   to
the officer, which, even after due consideration of his
representation, have not been completely expunged. 

4.2 The   Selection   Committee   would   not   be   guided
merely   by   the   overall   grading,   if   any,   that   may   be
recorded   in   the   ACRs   but   would   make   its   own
assessment on the basis of the entries in the ACRs
because   sometimes   the   overall   grading   in   an   ACR
may be inconsistent with the grading under various
parameters or attributes.   Further, if the Reviewing
Authority or the Accepting Authority, as the case may
be,   has   differed   from   the   assessment   made   by   the
reporting   officer   or   the   Reviewing   Authority,   as   the
case   may   be,   the   remarks   of   the   latter   authority
should be taken as the final remarks for the purpose
of   assessment   provided   it   is   apparent   from   the
relevant entries that the higher authority has come to
a   different   assessment   consciously   after   due
application of mind.  If the remarks of the Reporting
Officer,   Reviewing   Authority   are   complementary   to
each other and does not have the effect of overruling
the other, then the remarks should be read together
and   final   assessment   made   by   the   Selection
Committee as indicated in para 4.1.   This is also in
accordance   with   the   DPC   guidelines   of   DOP&T,   as
contained in its OM No. 22011/5/86­Estt.(D) dated
10.04.1989 as amended from time to time.
4.4 While   finalising   the   Overall   Assessment   of   the
officers   [para   3.1   above   refers],   an   officer   shall   be
graded as:
A.     “Outstanding”,   if   in   the   opinion   of   the
     Selection   Committee,   the   service   records   of   the
     officer   reflect   that   he   is   of   outstanding   merit
     possessing   exceptional   attributes   and   abilities
     and these characteristics are reflected in at least
     four of the ACRs for the last five years including
     the ACR for the last year (i.e. upto the preceding
     year   for   which   the   Select   List   is   prepared)
     provided he is graded at least “Good” in the ACR
17
of the remaining year.   While grading an officer
as   “Outstanding”,   the   following   indicative
guidelines would be observed.
(i)     Whilst the overall grading in the ACRs will
        have   its   relevance,   however,   in   order   to
        have   a   final   view,   it   will   be   essential   to
        carefully   peruse   and   assess   all   the
        individual attributes/columns in the ACRs
        like,   Work   Performance,   Targets   Achieved,
        Supervision,   Managerial   capabilities,
        personality traits etc. before the Committee
        decides to grade an officer as ‘Outstanding’.
(ii)    Thus, there should be an in­depth analysis
        of the performance of the officer before he is
        rated  as  ‘Outstanding’.   There should also
        be   consistency   in   the   grading   given   by
        different Committees in different years.
(iii)   Considering   the   fact   that   such
        ‘Outstanding’   officers   are   going   to
        supersede other officers, there is a greater
        need to ensure that such an officer has met
        the   stringent   norms   of   being   graded   as
        ‘Outstanding’.     For   such   purposes,   the
        ACRs   of   the   concerned   officer   should
        elaborate   his   significant   achievements   or
        exceptional nature of work in the areas of
        law   and   order,   disaster   management,
        implementation   of   developmental   schemes
        etc.
(iv)    Postings   are not within  the  competence  of
        an   officer   for   which   he   ought   not   to   be
        discriminated.     However,   the   Committee
        may   also   like   to   examine   the   various
        positions   that   such   ‘Outstanding’   officers
        have   occupied   and   the   nature   of   duties
18
performed   by   him   over   the   years   in   the
                  process of assessing the officer.
B.      “Very   Good”,   if   in   the   opinion   of   the
           Selection   Committee,   his   ACRs   reflect   that   the
           officer   has   done   highly   meritorious   work   and
           possesses   positive   attributes   and   these
           characteristics are reflected in at least four of the
           last   five   ACRs   (i.e.   upto   the   preceding   year   for
           which the Select List is prepared) provided he is
           graded   at   least   “Good”   in   the   ACR   of   the
           remaining year.
C.      “Good”,   if   in   the   opinion   of   the   Selection
           Committee,   the   service   records   reflect   that   the
           officer’s performance is generally satisfactory and
           he   is   considered   fit   for   promotion   and   those
           characteristics are reflected in each of the ACRs
           for   the   last   five   years   (i.e.   up   to   the   preceding
           year for which the select list is to be prepared).

           D.     An   officer   may   be  categorised as “Unfit”  if
           his   reports   are   lacking   any   positive   merit   or
           whose   performance   is   not   generally   satisfactory
           or if there are entries in some of the latest ACRs
           which   adversely   reflect   on   his   suitability   for
           promotion   of   if   the   ACRs   contain   orders   of
           penalty   which   in   the   opinion   of   the   Selection
           Committee   would   render   the   officer   unsuitable
           for promotion.”


     Paras 2.1 and 2.2 of the Guidelines are relating to the fixing

of crucial dates for determining the eligibility of the officers i.e. 1 st

January of the select list year.  Para 2.3 declares that the overall

relative   assessment   will   not   solely   depend   on   the   grading
19
recorded   by   the   Reporting/Reviewing/Accepting   Authority,   but

the   Selection   Committee   will   make   its   own   independent

assessment of the service records.   Para 3.1 deals with scope of

assessment.     The   Selection   Committee   will   consider   the

performance of each of the officers, i.e., service records during the

last five years, preceding the year for which the selection list is

prepared.   Para 3.2 states that as the crucial date for reckoning

the eligibility of the officers is 1st  January of the select list year,

the Annual Confidential Reports up to the year ending 31 st March

of the year preceding the year of selection list are to be taken into

account.  Para 4.1 prescribes the procedure for assessment. The

said   guideline   mandates   that   the   Selection   Committee   shall   go

through all the relevant records and make its assessment after

deliberating on the quality of the officer as indicated in various

columns   in   the   Annual   Confidential   Reports,   and   then   finally

arrive   at   the   conclusion.     Para   4.2   specifies   that   the   Selection

Committee would not be guided merely by the overall grading in

the   Annual   Confidential   Report,   but   would   make   its   own

assessment on the basis of all entries in the Annual Confidential

Report, because sometimes the overall grading in an ACR may be

inconsistent   with   the   grading   under   various   parameters   or
20
attributes.  This virtually means that the Selection Committee will

not act as a post office but will take a decision on due application

of   mind.             Para   4.4   mentions   the   overall

assessment/categorisation   of   officers.     It   states   that   while

finalising the overall assessment of the officers as per para 3.1,

an officer shall be graded as “Outstanding”, “Very Good”, “Good”

and   “Unfit”.     The   para  states in  detail  as to  how  such  grading

should be assigned, and on what basis.
9.   The Regulations as well as the Guidelines are to be applied

jointly at the time of making the selection list.  In our considered

opinion,   the   Regulations   and   the   Guidelines   jointly   prescribe

adequate procedure and they form a complete code in themselves.
In   accordance   with   the   provisions   of   the   Regulations   and

Guidelines,   the   Selection   Committee,   presided   over   by   the

Chairman/Member of the UPSC, makes a list for the selection of

SPS Officers for promotion to the IPS.    As per Regulation 5(1) of

the   Regulations,   the   number   of   members   of   the   SPS   to   be

included in the Select List   of a particular recruitment year for

promotion to the IPS, is determined by the Government of India

(Ministry   of   Home   Affairs)   in   consultation   with   the   State

Government   concerned,   keeping   in   mind   the   number   of
21
substantive vacancies as of 1st  January of the year the Selection

Committee   meets.   Thereafter, the State Government  forwards a

proposal to the UPSC along with the Seniority List, an Eligibility

List (up to a maximum of three times the number of vacancies) of

the   SPS   Officers,   Integrity   Certificates,   certificates   regarding

disciplinary/criminal   proceedings,   certificates   regarding

communication of adverse remarks, details of penalties imposed

on   the   eligible   officers   etc.   and   complete   ACR   dossiers   of   the

eligible officers.
On   receipt   of   the   afore­mentioned   records   from   the   State

Government, the UPSC places such records before the Selection

Committee when the Selection Committee meets for selection for

the   recruitment   year.     In   accordance   with   the   provisions   of

Regulation   5(4)   of   the   Regulations,   the   Selection   Committee

classifies   the   eligible   SPS   Officers   included   in   the   zone   of

consideration as “Outstanding”, “Very Good”, “Good” or “Unfit”,

as   the   case   may   be,   on   an  overall  relative assessment   of  their

service records. Thereafter, the Selection Committee prepares a

list as per the provisions of Regulation 5(5) of the Regulations by

including   the   required   number   of  names first  from  the  officers

finally   classified   as   “Outstanding”,   then   from   amongst   those
22
similarly classified as “Very Good” and thereafter from amongst

those   similarly   classified   as   “Good”.     As   per   the   provisions   of

Regulations   6   and   6A,   the   State   Government   and   the   Central

Government   are   required   to   furnish   their   observations   on   the

recommendations of the Selection Committee.   After taking into

consideration the observations of the State Government and the

Central Government and the requisite records received from the

State  Government  or  the   Central Government, the Commission

will take a final decision on the recommendations of the Selection

Committee   with   or   without   modifications   in   terms   of   the

provisions of Regulation 7.   Appointments to the IPS are made

from the select list by the Government of India (Ministry of Home

Affairs).     From   the   afore­mentioned,   it   is   clear   that   complete

procedure is prescribed for selection and appointment to the IPS

cadre from the SPS.
10.   As   mentioned  supra,   it   is   the   contention   of   the   first

respondent that the  Selection Committee ought to have graded

her   as   “Outstanding”   or   at   least   “Very   Good”,   on   an   overall

relative assessment of her service records, and consequently she

would   have   been   selected   for   the  year  2008.     It   is   her   further

contention   that   on   a   comparative   assessment   of   her   service
23
records with those of the private respondents, who were junior to

her, she could not have been excluded from the selection list as

her service records are better than those of almost all of them.

Thus,   according   to   her,   the   Selection   Committee   has   acted

expressly in an arbitrary manner in the said process of selection

by superseding the first respondent.
11.   The   CAT   and   the   High   Court   have   virtually   assessed   the

performance   of   the   first   respondent   afresh,   mainly   taking   into

account   the   service   records   for   the   period   from   1.4.2003   to

31.03.2008, and have directed the official respondents to appoint

her to the IPS by notionally treating such appointment with effect

from   the   date   of   notification,   i.e.,  with  effect  from   5.5.2009  by

giving   her   appropriate   place   of   seniority   amongst   the   private

respondents.
12.   In   our   considered   opinion,   the   error   that   crept   into   the

findings of the Tribunal, as confirmed by the High Court, was on

account   of   the   basic   fact   that   they   erred   in   not   properly

appreciating   the   span/scope   of   selection   by   a   Selection

Committee. For the purpose of consideration of a candidate for

selection   to   the   IPS   in   respect   of   the   select   list   of   2008,   the

Annual Confidential Reports from 1.4.2003 to 31.03.2008 could
24
not have been taken into account by the Selection Committee, as

observed by the CAT and the High Court.  As per para 3.1 of the

Guidelines, the assessment of the eligible officers is with special

reference   to   the   performance   of   the   officer   during   the   last   five

years, preceding the year for which the select list is prepared. As

the   crucial   date   for   determining   the   eligibility   of   the  officers  is

taken 1st January of a particular year for which the selections are

being   made,   the   Annual   Confidential   Reports   upto   the   year

ending 31st March of the year preceding the year of selection list

are to be taken into account as per   para 3.2 of the Guidelines.

In the matter on hand, the selection list was to be prepared for

the year 2008.  Thus, the crucial date for reckoning the eligibility

of   the   officers   in   the   matter   on   hand   is   1 st  January,   2008.

Accordingly,   the   Annual   Confidential   Reports   upto   the   year

ending 31st  March, 2007 i.e., the year preceding the year of the

selection list, are to be taken into account.  As mentioned supra,

the   Selection   Committee   will   consider   the   performance   of   the

officer   i.e.,   the   service   records   including   the   last   five   years,

preceding the year for which the selection list is to be prepared as

per   para   3.1   of   the   Guidelines.     Accordingly,   only   the   Annual

Confidential   Reports   of   five   years   upto   the   year   ending   31 st
25
March, 2007 are relevant i.e. Annual Confidential Reports from

01.04.2002 to 31.03.2007 needed to be taken into account at the

time   of   selection.     The   same   was   being   done   by   the   Selection

Committee in the matter on hand.  Hence, no fault can be found.

It seems that the CAT, as well as the High Court, has misdirected

in   coming   to   the   wrong   conclusion   that   Annual   Confidential

Reports from 1.4.2003 to 31.03.2008 ought to have been taken

into  consideration  inasmuch as such conclusion is against the

Regulations & the Guidelines.
13.   The   CAT   and   the   High   Court   have   mainly   relied   on   the

grading given in the Annual Confidential Reports of the officers at

the State level while coming to their conclusion. But, in terms of

the   Regulations   and   the   Guidelines   framed   therein,   for

categorising the officers, the Selection Committee was required to

consider the overall relative assessment of the service records of

each   of   the   eligible   officers.     The   Selection   Committee   is   not

guided merely by the grading recorded in the Annual Confidential

Reports but makes its own assessment on the basis of the quality

of   the   officer   as   indicated   in   various   columns   recorded   by   the

Reporting/Reviewing/Accepting   Authority   thereunder.     In   other

words, the Selection Committee is not required to compulsorily
26
accept the gradings given in the Annual Confidential Reports as it

would   amount  to  merely   acting   as a post  office and  the  whole

process would be nothing but a farce.   The grading recorded in

the   Annual   Confidential   Report   of   a   particular   year   may   differ

from the grading arrived at by the Selection Committee in respect

of the said  Annual Confidential Report depending on all relevant

material.
14.   Learned counsel for the UPSC, drawing the attention of the

Court to the contents of the affidavit filed by the UPSC before the

CAT,   submits   that   the   Selection   Committee   also   reviews   and

determines   the   overall   grading   recorded   in   the   Annual

Confidential   Reports   to   ensure   that   the   overall   grading   in   the

Annual   Confidential   Reports   is   not   inconsistent   with   the

grading/remarks under various specific parameters or attributes.

It   is   brought   to   the   notice   of   the   Court   that   the   Selection

Committee takes into account orders regarding appreciation for

meritorious work done by the officers concerned and also keeps

in view orders awarding penalties or any adverse remarks duly

communicated to the officers, which even after due consideration

of their representation by the suitable forum, are not expunged.

The   afore­mentioned   norms   are   uniformly   applied   to   all   the
27
States/Cadres   in   the   matter   of   induction   into   the   All   India

Services.
15.   The Selection Committee consists of experts in the field.  It

is presided over by the Chairman or a Member of the UPSC and

is duly represented by the officers of the Central Government and

the State Government who have expertise in the matter.   In our

considered opinion, when a High Level Committee or an expert

body   has   considered   the   merit   of   each   of   the   candidates,

assessed the grading and considered their cases for promotion, it

is   not   open   to   the   CAT   and   the   High   Court   to   sit   over   the

assessment   made   by   the   Selection   Committee   as   an   appellate

authority.  The question as to how the categories are assessed in

light   of   the   relevant   records   and   as   to   what   norms   apply   in

making the  assessment, is exclusively to be determined by the

Selection Committee.  Since the jurisdiction to make selection as

per law is vested in the Selection Committee and as the Selection

Committee  members  have  got expertise in the matter, it is not

open for the Courts generally to interfere in such matters except

in cases where the process of assessment is vitiated either on the

ground of bias, mala fides or arbitrariness.  It is not the function

of   the   Court   to   hear   the   matters   before   it   treating   them   as
28
appeals   over   the   decisions   of   the   Selection   Committee   and   to

scrutinise the relative merit of the candidates.  The question as to

whether a candidate is fit for a particular post or not has to be

decided   by  the   duly  constituted expert body, i.e., the Selection

Committee.  The Courts have very limited scope of judicial review

in such matters.
We are conscious of the fact that the expert body’s opinion

may   not   deserve   acceptance  in   all   circumstances   and   hence   it

may not be proper to say that the expert body’s opinion is not

subject   to   judicial   review   in   all   circumstances.     In   our

constitutional   scheme,   the   decision   of   the   Selection

Committee/Board of Appointment cannot be said to be final and

absolute.  Any other view will have a very dangerous consequence

and one must remind oneself of the famous words of Lord Acton

“Power   tends   to   corrupt,   and   absolute   power   corrupts

absolutely”.  The aforementioned principle has to be kept in mind

while deciding such cases.  However, in the matter on hand, it is

abundantly   clear   from   the   affidavit   filed   by   the   UPSC   that   the

Selection   Committee   which   is   nothing   but   an   expert   body   had

carefully   examined   and   scrutinised   the   experience,   Annual

Confidential   Reports   and   other   relevant   factors   which   were
29
required to be considered before selecting the eligible candidates

for the IPS.  The Selection Committee had in fact scrutinised the

merits and demerits of each candidate taking into consideration

the   various   factors   as   required, and  its recommendations were

sent to the UPSC.  It is the settled legal position that the Courts

have   to   show   deference   and   consideration   to   the

recommendations of an Expert Committee consisting of members

with   expertise   in   the   field,   if   malice   or   arbitrariness   in   the

Committee’s   decision   is   not   forthcoming.       The   doctrine   of

fairness,   evolved   in   administrative   law,   was   not   supposed   to

convert tribunals and courts into appellate authorities over the

decision of experts.  The constraints – self­imposed, undoubtedly

– of writ jurisdiction still remain.   Ignoring them would lead to

confusion   and   uncertainty.     The   jurisdiction   may   become

rudderless.
16.   No  doubt,   the   Selection  Committee  may  be guided by   the

classification   adopted   by   the   State   Government   but,   for   good

reasons,   the   Selection   Committee   may   evolve   its   own

classification which may be at variance with the grading given in

the Annual Confidential Reports.  As has been held by this Court

in the case of  UPSC vs. K. Rajaiah and others (2005) 10 SCC
30
15, the power to classify as “Outstanding”, “Very Good”, “Good”

and   “Unfit”   is   vested   with  the   Selection  Committee.     That  is   a

function   incidental   to   the   selection   process.   The   classification

given by the State authorities in the Annual Confidential Reports

is not binding on the Selection Committee.  Such classification is

within the prerogative of the Selection Committee and no reasons

need be recorded, though it is desirable that in a case of grading

at   variance   with   that   of   the   State   Government,   reasons   be

recorded.   But having regard to the nature of the function and

the power confined to the Selection Committee under Regulation

5(4), it is not a legal requirement that reasons should be recorded

for classifying an officer at variance with the State Government’s

decision.   It is relevant to note that no allegations of malice or

bias   are   made   by   the   first   respondent   at   any   stage   of   the

proceedings against the Selection Committee or the UPSC.
This Court has repeatedly  observed and concluded that the

recommendations   of   the   Selection   Committee   cannot   be

challenged except on the ground of mala fides or serious violation

of   the   statutory   rules.     The   courts   cannot   sit   as   an   appellate

authority or an umpire to examine the recommendations of the

Selection Committee like a Court of Appeal.  This discretion has
31
been given to the Selection Committee only, and the courts rarely

sits as a Court of Appeal to examine the selection of a candidate;

nor is it the business of the Court to examine each candidate and

record its opinion.  Since the Selection Committee constituted by

the UPSC is manned by experts in the field, we have to trust their

assessment   unless   it   is   actuated   with   malice   or   bristles   with

mala fides or arbitrariness.
17.
In the case of
Union of India vs. A.K. Narula
reported in

(2007) 11 SCC 10, this Court in similar circumstances observed

thus:
“15. The guidelines give a certain amount of play in
        the   joints   to   DPC   by   providing   that   it   need   not   be
        guided   by   the   overall  grading   recorded   in  CRs,   but
        may   make   its   own   assessment   on   the   basis   of   the
        entries  in  CRs. DPC is required to make an overall
        assessment   of   the   performance   of   each   candidate
        separately,   but   by   adopting   the   same   standards,
        yardsticks and norms. It is only when the process of
        assessment is vitiated either on the ground of bias,
        mala fides or arbitrariness, that the selection calls for
        interference.   Where   DPC   has   proceeded   in   a   fair,
        impartial   and   reasonable   manner,   by   applying   the
        same   yardstick   and   norms   to   all   candidates   and
        there is no arbitrariness in the process of assessment
        by DPC, the court will not interfere (vide SBI v. Mohd.
        Mynuddin [(1987) 4 SCC 486 : 1987 SCC (L&S) 464 :
(1987) 5 ATC 59] , UPSC v. Hiranyalal Dev [(1988) 2
        SCC 242 : 1988 SCC (L&S) 484 : (
1988) 7 ATC 72]
        and Badrinath v. Govt.   of   T.N.
[(2000)   8   SCC   395   :
2001 SCC (L&S) 13] ). The Review DPC reconsidered
32
the matter and has given detailed reasons as to why
       the case of the respondent was not similar to that of
       R.S. Virk. If in those circumstances, the Review DPC
       decided not to change the grading of the respondent
       for the period 1­4­1987 to 31­3­1988 from “good” to
       “very   good”,   the   overall   grading   of   the   respondent
       continued   to   remain   as   “good”.   There   was   no
       question of moving him from the block of officers with
       the   overall   rating   of   “good”   to   the   block   of   officers
       with the overall rating of “very good” and promoting
       him with reference to DPC dated 13­6­1990. In the
       absence of any allegation of mala fide or bias against
       DPC and in the absence of any arbitrariness in the
       manner   in   which   assessment   has   been   made,   the
       High   Court   was   not   justified   in   directing   that   the
       benefit of upgrading be given to the respondent, as
       was done in the case of R.S. Virk.”
18.   In   the   case   of  M.V.   Thimmaiah   vs.   UPSC  reported   in

(2008)   2   SCC   119,   this   Court,   after   considering   various

judgments on the 

subject, observed thus:
“30. We fail to understand how the Tribunal can
       sit as an Appellate Authority to call for the personal
       records   and   constitute   Selection   Committee   to
       undertake   this   exercise.   This   power   is   not   given   to
       the Tribunal and it should be clearly understood that
       the   assessment   of   the   Selection   Committee   is   not
       subject to appeal either before the Tribunal or by the
       courts.   One   has   to   give   credit   to   the   Selection
       Committee for making their assessment and it is not
       subject to appeal. Taking the overall view of ACRs of
       the candidates, one may be held to be very good and
       another   may   be   held   to   be   good.   If   this   type   of
       interference   is   permitted   then   it   would   virtually
33
amount that the Tribunals and the High Courts have
       started   sitting   as   Selection  Committee or  act as an
       Appellate Authority over the selection. It is not their
       domain, it should be clearly understood, as has been
       clearly   held   by   this   Court   in   a   number   of
       decisions. ......”
19.   In the matter on hand, we find that neither the decision nor

the decision making process was actuated with malice, and no

grave mistake was committed by the Selection Committee leading

to arbitrariness. We find that it is not a case of pick and choose,

but   the   selection   has   been   made   rationally.     The   applicant­

respondent   no.1   was   duly   considered   by   the   Selection

Committee.     However,   on   an   overall   assessment   of   her   service

records, her name was not included in the select list due to the

statutory limit of its size and as officers with higher grading were

available for inclusion in the select list as per the provisions of

Regulation 5(5) of the Regulations.
20.   So far as the case of respondent no.6 –
Srimati V. Jayashree
is   concerned,   initially   some   disciplinary   proceedings   were

pending against her.
Though the disciplinary proceedings were

pending,   the   name   of
Srimati   V.   Jayashree
,   respondent   no.6

herein, on an overall relative assessment of her service records,

was provisionally included in the select list, subject to clearance
34
in the disciplinary proceedings. Since the State Government had

certified the integrity of the said officer, in view of the fact that

the   disciplinary   proceedings   ended   with   a   negative   report,   her

name was finally included in the select list. Such procedure was

adopted by the Selection Committee in accordance with the first

proviso to Regulation 5(5) of the Regulations, which reads thus:
“Provided that the name of an officer so included in
         the   list   shall   be   treated   as   provisional   if   the   State
         Government   withholds   the   integrity   certificate   in
         respect   of   such   an   officer   or   any   proceedings,
         departmental or criminal are pending against him or
         anything   adverse   against   him   which   renders   him
         unsuitable for appointment to the service has come
         to the notice of the State Government.”


        The   proviso   to   Regulation   5(5)   specifically   provides   for

inclusion   of   officers   in   the   select   list   against   whom

departmental/criminal   proceedings  are  pending,  their  inclusion

in   the   select   list   remains   provisional,   subject   to   clearance   of

departmental/criminal   proceedings.                          However,   their

appointments to the IPS can be made only after their names are

made   unconditional   in   the   select   list,   in   accordance   with   the

second proviso to Regulation 7(4) of the Regulations, which reads

thus:
35
“7(4) The Select List shall remain in force till the 31st
             day   of   December   of   the   year   in   which   the
             meeting   of   the   selection   committee   was   held
             with   a   view   to   prepare   the   list   under   sub­
             regulation (1) of regulation 5 or up to sixty days
             from the date of approval of the Select List by
             the Commission under sub­regulation (1) or, as
             the   case   may   be,   finally   approved   under   sub­
             regulation (2), whichever is later:
xxx          xxx          xxx

                   Provided that where the State Government
                   has   forwarded   the   proposal   to   declare   a
                   provisionally  included officer  in the select
                   list as “Unconditional”, to the Commission
                   during the period when the select list was
                   in force, the Commission shall decide the
                   matter within a period of forty five days or
                   before   the   date   of   meeting   of   the   next
                   Selection   Committee,   whichever   is   earlier
                   and   if   the   Commission   declares   the
                   inclusion   of   the   provisionally   included
                   officer   in   the  Select   List  as   unconditional
                   and   final,   the   appointment   of   the
                   concerned   officer   shall   be   considered   by
                   the   Central   Government   under   regulation
                   9   and   such   appointment   shall   not   be
                   invalid   merely   for   the   reason   that   it   was
                   made after the Select List ceased to be in
                   force.”
21.   Since   the   name   of
Srimati   V.   Jayashree
,   respondent   no.6

herein, was provisionally included in the select list and was made
36
unconditional   in   the   select   list   after   her   exoneration   in   the

disciplinary proceedings, she was appointed in the 2008 batch.
22.   Having   regard   to  the entire material on record, we do  not

find any ground to agree with the reasons assigned by the CAT

and the High Court while coming to their conclusion.   The High

Court has strangely made out a fresh additional point in favour of

the first respondent by observing that, on perusal of the records

maintained by the Selection Committee, the High Court was not

able   to   find   the   grading   of   the   officers   recorded   by   the   State

Government.  In other words, the High Court was of the view that

since the records submitted before the Selection Committee did

not   include   the   grading   of   the   officers   recorded   by   the   State

Government,   the   Selection   Committee   did   not   have   an

opportunity   to   take   into   account   the   grading   recorded   by   the

State   Government   while   coming   to   its   conclusion.     We   do   not

agree   with   the   said   observations.     The   CAT   while   deciding   the

matter   has   taken   into   account   all   the   records   including   the

grading of the State Government, which means such records were

very   much   available   at   the   time   of   consideration   before   the

Selection   Committee,   as   well   as   at   the   time   of   decision   by   the

CAT.   In this context, it is brought to the notice of the Court by
37
the   learned   counsel   representing   the   UPSC   that   after   the

selection   process   is   over,   the   Annual   Confidential   Reports

maintained by the State Government with the grading given to the

officers   by   the   State   Government   were   sent   back   to   the   State

Government, since those records belong to the State Government;

the   rest   of   the   records   remained   with   the   UPSC.     The   records

which   were   available   with   the   UPSC   were   produced   before   the

High Court.  However, the records pertaining to the grading of the

officers   recorded   by   the   State   Government   could   have   been

secured by the High Court from the State Government.  Instead of

securing records from the State Government, the High Court has

strangely observed that such records were not available before the

Selection   Committee.     It   is   but   natural   for   the   Selection

Committee   to   send   back   the   records   to   the   State   Government

after the selection process is ended and appointments are made.
23.   In   view   of   the   above,   the   judgments   of   the   CAT   dated

07.04.2010, and the High Court of Judicature at Madras dated

24.06.2013, stand set aside.
24.   Accordingly, the instant civil appeal is allowed.  There shall

be no order as to costs.
38
…………………………………….….J.
                  [MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR




New Delhi;        ………………………………………..J.
April 13, 2018.   [NAVIN SINHA]