[Cites
2
, Cited by
13
]
Supreme Court of India
Chennai Port Trust vs The Chennai Port Trust Industrial ... on 27 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2272, 2018 LAB IC 2603, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2126, (2018) 3 LAB LN 1, (2018) 6 SCALE 461, (2018) 2 SCT 760, (2018) 3 SERVLR 572, (2018) 2 SERVLJ 91, (2018) 2 CURLR 426, (2018) 157 FACLR 855, 2018 (6) SCC 202, (2018) 2 ESC 217, 2018 (7) ADJ 26 NOC, AIRONLINE 2018 SC 55
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
,
R. K. Agrawal
REPORTABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CIVIL APPEAL No.1381 OF 2010


                         Chennai Port Trust                ….Appellant(s)

                                              VERSUS

                         The Chennai Port Trust
                         Industrial Employees Canteen
                         Workers Welfare Association
                         And Ors.                         …Respondent(s)


                                       JUDGMENT
Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.   This appeal is directed against the final

                         judgment and order dated 21.02.2006 passed by

                         the High Court of judicature at Madras in Writ

                         Appeal No.66 of 2006 whereby the Division Bench of

                         the High Court dismissed the appeal filed by the

                         appellant herein and affirmed the judgment and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHA SUNDRIYAL
Date: 2018.04.27
order dated 24.08.2005 passed by the Single Judge
16:11:26 IST
Reason:
1
of the High Court in Writ Petition No.6872 of 2001

by which the Single Judge allowed the writ petition

filed by respondent No.1 herein.
2.     Few relevant facts need to be mentioned

hereinbelow to appreciate the question involved in

the appeal.
3.     The appellant is “Chennai Port Trust” at

Chennai. It has been in existence for the last many

decades    and     has    a    large   administrative     and

technical set up to run their multifarious activities

on the Port.
4.     Large    numbers       of   workers/employees       are

employed by the Port Trust who work round the

clock in shifts to run and maintain the activities of

the Port Trust.           These           Port           Trust

workers/employees are provided with the facility of

canteen.       A Co-Operative Society called “Chennai

Port    Trust     Industrial       Employees   Co-operative

Canteen Limited” runs the Canteen.               It has been
2
running since 1964. This canteen has employed a

large number of employees to run the canteen. The

employees working in the canteen have formed an

Association     known        as    “Chennai          Port       Trust

Industrial Employees Canteen Workers Welfare

Association”              (for         short                    called

“Association”)-respondent No.1 herein.
5.   The Association-respondent No.1 herein filed a

writ petition being W.P. No.6872 of 2001 in the High

Court at Madras against the appellant herein

(Chennai Port Trust) espousing the cause of their

members (employees working in the Canteen) and

sought a writ of mandamus against the appellant -

Chennai Port Trust (respondent No.3 in the writ

petition)   directing     the     appellant     to     treat      the

employees working in the Canteen to be the regular

employees      of   the     Chennai      Port        Trust        and

accordingly pay them all attendant and monetary
3
benefits at par with the regular employees of the

Chennai Port Trust.
6.   According to the writ petitioner (employees

concerned), they have been working in the Canteen

for decades and regularly catering and fulfilling the

needs of the employees of the Port Trust. According

to the Association, the members of the Association -

employees working in the canteen are entitled to

claim the same benefit and perks which are being

given to the regular permanent employees of the

Chennai Port Trust. The Association also pointed

out the similar instances of other government

organizations wherein the benefits of this nature

were given to the employees working          in the

organizations alike the members of the Association

in question.
7.   The Chennai Port Trust mainly opposed the

writ petition on two issues. First, the Chennai Port

Trust has no control whatsoever over any of the
4
activities of the Canteen in question including any

control over its employees and second, the question

as to whether the canteen employees are to be

treated as employees of the Chennai Port Trust or

not is a question of fact and, therefore, the writ

petition is not the effective remedy to decide this

question.   According to the Chennai Port Trust,

such issues should be raised before the Industrial

Tribunal for its adjudication.
8.   The Writ Court (Single Judge) allowed the writ

petition filed by the Association(respondent No.1

herein) and accordingly issued a writ of mandamus

against the appellant (Chennai Port Trust), as

prayed by the writ petitioner in their writ petition. In

other words, the writ Court granted the reliefs

claimed by the writ petitioner in their writ petition.
9.   The    appellant   (Chennai    Port   Trust)   felt

aggrieved and filed intra court appeal before the

Division Bench in the High Court. By impugned
5
judgment, the Division Bench dismissed the appeal

and upheld the order of the Single Judge, which has

given rise to filing of the present appeal by way of

special leave by the Chennai Port Trust.
10.   Heard Mr. Keshav Thakur, learned counsel for

the appellant and Mr. Anil Kaushik, Mr. B. Vinodh

Kanna and Mr. Jayanth Muth Raj, learned counsel

for the respondents.
11.   Having heard the learned counsel for the

parties and on perusal of the record of the case, we

find no merit in the appeal.
12.   In our considered view, the Writ Court (Single

Judge) and the Division Bench were right in their

reasoning and the conclusion.
13.   The Division Bench, in our opinion, rightly

relied upon the decision of this Court in
Indian

Petrochemicals Corporation Ltd. and Anr. vs

Shramik Sena & Ors.
, (1999) 6 SCC 439 and

compared the facts of
the above case
with that of
6
the case at hand and found great similarities in

both for granting relief to the members of the

respondent (Association).
14.   The Division Bench in Paras 14 and 15 of the

impugned judgment took note of 20 factors of this

case, which were found identical to the facts

involved in Indian Petrochemicals’s case (supra)

wherein this Court had issued a writ of mandamus

against the main employer in relation to such

employees working in the canteen run for the

benefit of the employer. It is apposite to reproduce

Paras 14 and 15 of the impugned judgment which

read as under:
“14. Even before the learned single Judge,
      the Port Trust objected to deciding the
      factual issues in proceedings under
Article
      226
since the appropriate forum is only the
      Labour Court or the Tribunal. The learned
      single Judge observed that the averments in
      the affidavit have not been specifically
      denied in the counter affidavit except to
      state that the Management of the Port Trust
      has no control over the functioning of the
      canteen. Therefore, apart from a general
7
denial, the various assertions were not
specifically denied. The learned single Judge
then proceeded to set down the various facts
and     circumstances     that    show    the
administrative control exercised by the Port
Trust over the Canteen, and they are as
follows :
(i) The fact that the establishment is
     kept open during the entire 24 hours
     with employees working in several
     shifts is not denied. Thereby, the
     necessity of the workmen to have their
     food inside the factory itself is
     confirmed and that the canteen is
     mainly intended only for the workers.
(ii) The fact that the Rules framed by
     the Society for running the canteen
     shall be subject to the approval of the
     Chairman is not denied. This proves
     that the ultimate control of the
     administration of the canteen is with
     the Port Trust.
(iii) It is only the workers belonging to
     the Port Trust who are eligible to
     become members of the Society and not
     others.
(iv) It is only the nominee of the Port
     Trust who can act as the Chairman of
     the Co-operative Society.
(v) The Port Trust administration has
     the right to audit the accounts of the
     canteen.
(vi) Electricity and water are supplied
     by the Port Trust free of charge. The
     premises is also held by the Society
     rent free.
8
(vii) As per bye-law 15, the fourth
respondent Society, the President as
well as four other contractors shall be
nominated by the Registrar only in
consultation with the Chairman of the
Chennai Port Trust.
(viii) The Port Trust provides cost of the
staff    employed    by    the   canteen,
maintains the building, reimburses
100% of the fuel costs and all the
benefits to the canteen employees.
(ix) The prices of the food stuff are very
cheap and the food is carried in trickles
to the workers in the Marshalling Yard,
ONGC Pipeline, Oil Dock, Diesel Loco
and such other places where a canteen
cannot be established and specifically
intended only for the workers.
(x) The Executive Engineer (Mechanical)
of the Port Trust has been nominated as
the President of the canteen and the
entire canteen affairs are handled and
controlled by the Chief Mechanical
Engineer of the Port Trust.
(xi) The financial matters are controlled
by the Financial Adviser and Chief
Accounts Officer of the Port Trust.
(xii) The President of the fourth
respondent controls all policy matters
concerning the canteen.
(xiii) It is a matter of common
knowledge that at least as far as
Chennai Port Trust is concerned, it is
located in a place that the nearest
restaurant or canteen would be at least
two to three kilometres away from the
entrance of the Port Trust. Therefore,
9
the canteen is a must not only for
     employees, but also for the entire staff
     at various levels and also visitors
     having official and commercial dealings
     with the Port Trust. The Port Trust
     itself is a very large and sprawling area
     from one end to the other. Therefore,
     the canteen is an indispensable
     necessity to the Port Trust.
The learned single Judge thereafter observed
that none of the aforesaid positive claims of
the writ petitioner are denied by the
respondents. It is only because there was no
dispute on facts that the learned single Judge
proceeded to decide the matter, though the
workmen had directly filed the writ petition
without approaching the Tribunal.
15. If we see the
Indian Petrochemical
's case,
the similarity of the factual issues is quite
startling. In that case –
(a) The canteen has been there since
     the inception of the appellant's factory.
(b) The workmen have been employed
     for long years and despite a change of
     contractors,    the   workers    have
     continued to be employed in the
     canteen.
(c) The premises, furniture, fixture,
     fuel, electricity, utensils etc. have been
     provided for by the appellant.
(d) The wages of the canteen workers
     have to be reimbursed by the appellant.
(e) The supervision and control on the
     canteen is exercised by the appellant
     through its authorised officer, as can be
     seen from the various clauses of the
10
contract between the appellant and the
           contractor.
(f) The contractor is nothing but an
           agent or a manager of the appellant,
           who works completely under the
           supervision, control and directions of
           the appellant.
(g) The workmen have the protection of
           continuous     employment    in    the
           establishment.
On the basis of the above facts, the Supreme
      Court arrived at the opinion that the
      workmen      were    the  workmen     of   the
      management and by the same process of
      reasoning, the learned single Judge also came
      to the conclusion that the canteen workmen
      were the workmen of the Port Trust. We see
      no error in this reasoning.”
15.   We find no fault in the aforementioned findings

recorded by the Division Bench as, in our view,

these findings were recorded on the basis of

undisputed facts and documents on record of the

case. That apart, these findings were recorded

keeping in view the facts involved and law
laid down

by
this Court in the case of
Indian Petrochemicals
(supra)
11
16.   Mere perusal of the decision rendered in the

case of
Indian Petrochemicals
(supra) would go to

show that
in that case
also, somewhat similar

question, which is the subject matter of this appeal,

had arisen at the instance of the employees working

in canteen.     This Court (Three Judge Bench)

elaborately examined the question and took note of

the relevant undisputed facts, which had bearing

over the question, granted the reliefs to the

employees concerned.
17.
In our considered opinion, the approach and

the reasoning of the two Courts below (Writ Court

and Division Bench) while deciding the writ petition

and the appeal arising out of the writ petition

keeping in view the law
laid down by
this Court in

the case of
Indian Petrochemicals
(supra) is just,

proper and legal.
18.
In other words, if on the undisputed facts, this

Court has granted benefit to the canteen workers in
12
the case of
Indian Petrochemicals
(supra) then

there is no reason that on the same set of

undisputed facts arising in this case, the Court

should     not     grant     the   benefit     to     the

employees/workers in this case. It is more so when

no distinguishable facts are pointed out in this case

qua Indian Petrochemicals’s case(supra).
19.   We are, therefore, in agreement with the

approach, reasoning and the conclusion arrived at

by the two Courts below.
20.   We   are,   however,   not   impressed    by    the

submission of the learned counsel for the appellant

(Chennai Port Trust) when he contended that the

writ Court should not have entertained the writ

petition   and    instead    the   respondent        (Writ

Petitioner-Association) should have been granted

liberty to approach the Industrial Tribunal/Labour

Court for adjudication of the dispute raised by them

in the writ petition.
13
21.   In the first place, writ Court having entertained

the writ petition and granted relief on merits, this

objection has lost its significance now; Second, the

appellate Court also having gone into the merits of

the case and affirmed the order of the writ Court on

merits, it is too late to entertain such submission,

which is technical in nature; and third, the findings

on merits have been recorded by the two Courts on

the basis of undisputed facts/documents requiring

no trial on facts.
22.   It is for these reasons, we are of the view that

the submission of learned counsel for the appellant

has no merit.
23.   Though learned counsel for the appellant

argued some more issues but they did not impress

us so as to reverse the findings of the two courts

below and in any case, in the light of the findings

recorded by the two Courts below, which are based

on the law
laid down by
this Court in the case of
14
Indian    Petrochemicals
(supra),     we    need      not

entertain his submissions.
24.   In the light of the foregoing discussion, we find

no    merit   in   the    appeal,     which      fails   and    is

accordingly dismissed.
………...................................J.
                          [R. K. AGRAWAL]


                         …...……..................................J.
                          [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]

New Delhi;
April 27, 2018
15