[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Gauhati High Court Through The ... vs Goto Ete on 23 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3252, 2018 LAB IC 3626, 2018 (4) KCCR SN 403 (SC), 2018 (7) ADJ 45 NOC
Author:
A.K.Sikri
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
REPORTABLE

                                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4298 OF 2018
                          (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 23780 OF 2016)


                         THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
                         THROUGH THE REGISTRAR GENERAL                        .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                       VERSUS

                         GOTO ETE AND OTHERS.                              .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                                          JUDGMENT
A.K.SIKRI, J.
Leave granted.
2.     Pursuant to the advertisement dated July 13, 2001 issued by the

                                Government of Arunachal Pradesh, respondent Nos. 1 to 3

                                (hereinafter referred to as the ‘writ petitioners’) were appointed as

                                Additional Deputy Commissioners with the powers of Additional

                                Sessions Judge, on contract basis, with the stipulation that their

                                period of contract is up to March 31, 2005. They were to man the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NIDHI AHUJA
Date: 2018.04.23
Fast Track Courts (for short, ‘FTCs’). This contract period was
17:25:47 IST
Reason:
extended for a further period of five years, i.e. up to March 31,
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                     Page 1 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       2010. These respondents put their claims for regularisation to the

       said posts and to be allowed to work as Additional Sessions

       Judges, invoking the provisions of Rule 7 of the Arunachal

       Pradesh Judicial Service Rules, 2006.                  There has been a

       protracted litigation in this behalf, as would be noticed hereinafter

       at the relevant stage.                At this juncture, while narrating the

       background in which the matter has landed in this Court, we may

       only mention that request for appointment on regular basis was

       rejected by the High Court (the appellant herein) and services of

       respondent Nos. 1 to 3 were dispensed with on January 07, 2013.

       This termination was challenged by the writ petitioners by filing

       Writ Petition (Civil) No. 776 of 2013. The proceedings of this writ

       petition have culminated in the judgment dated January 19, 2016

       passed by the Division Bench of the High Court.                   Vide this

       judgment the writ petition has been allowed, thereby quashing the

       order of dispensing the ad hoc services of the writ petitioners with

       further direction that the State/respondent No.4 (hereinafter

       referred to as the ‘State Government’) should start consultation

       process for absorption of the writ petitioners in Grade-I of the

       Arunachal Pradesh Judicial Service with effect from January 07,

       2013 and directed the appellant, i.e. the Gauhati High Court

       (hereinafter referred to as the ‘High Court’) to consider the cases
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                            Page 2 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       of the writ petitioners for absorption in the light of the

       observations made in the said judgment. The High Court feels

       aggrieved by these directions and that is the reason for

       challenging the judgment dated January 19, 2016. Notice in this

       Special Leave Petition was issued on August 08, 2016 and

       simultaneously this Court had granted the stay of the impugned

       judgment. The result is that the writ petitioners have not been

       taken back into service.
With this background, we now state the factual matrix in

       some detail.
3.     An advertisement was issued on July 13, 2001 by the

       Government of Arunachal Pradesh inviting applications for filling

       up of three posts of Additional Deputy Commissioners with the

       powers of Additional Sessions Judge, on contract basis, for the

       period up to March 31, 2005.          Pursuant thereto, on June 04,

       2002, the writ petitioners were selected for the aforesaid posts by

       the High Court.           The State Government issued appointment

       orders in their favour for the aforesaid post, on contract basis, up

       to March 31, 2005. This term was subsequently extended for

       another five years, i.e. up to March 31, 2010. The purpose was

       to post the incumbents in Fast Track Courts.
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                    Page 3 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
4.     It is relevant to point out that at that time there was no

       segregation of executive branch from the judicial wing in the State

       of Arunachal Pradesh.                 This was, however, accomplished by

       promulgating the Arunachal Pradesh Judicial Service Rules, 2006

       (hereinafter referred to as the ‘2006 Rules’), which were notified

       on December 06, 2006. Rule 7 of the 2006 Rules relate to the

       method of recruitment and the relevant portion thereof is couched

       in the following manner:
“7. Method of recruitment, qualification, reservation
               and age limit.
In respect of each category of posts specified in Column
               (2) of the Table below, the method of recruitment and
               minimum qualification, age limit etc. are specified in the
               corresponding entries in column (3) and (4) thereof.
Provided that the 3 (three) adhoc Additional Sessions
               Judges who were selected and appointed by the
               Government, in consultation with the Gauhati High Court,
               in the year 2002 as Presiding Officers of the 3(three) Fast
               Track Courts on contract basis under the specific scheme
               of the Central Government and have since been rendering
               services under the control and supervision of the Gauhati
               High Court, may be considered for absorption in the Grade-
               I of the Service.
xx             xx        xx”
5.     On December 13, 2007, a representation was made by

       respondent Nos. 1 and 2, inter alia, for being absorbed in the

       regular service in terms of Rule 7 of the 2006 Rules. While this

       representation was pending, the State Government issued the
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                         Page 4 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       Notification dated December 17, 2007 establishing two Courts of

       the District and Sessions Judges. Thereafter, on February 25,

       2008, the State Government made a proposal to the High Court,

       under proviso to Rule 7, for consideration of absorption of the writ

       petitioners as FTC judges against the two newly created posts of

       District & Sessions Judge, Grade-I.      On March 28, 2008, the

       Registrar General of the High Court put up a note to the

       Committee comprising three High Court Judges for consideration

       of the proposal of the State Government. The Committee, after

       consideration of the entire material, rejected the proposal for

       absorption on May 09, 2008. Respondent No.1 made another

       representation dated June 12, 2008 for reconsideration of his

       absorption in the regular service, as a special case, in terms of

       Rule 7 of the 2006 Rules. This representation also came to be

       rejected by the Committee on June 25, 2008 by reiterating its

       earlier resolution dated May 09, 2008.
6.     Thereafter, on July 31, 2008, the High Court issued another

       advertisement for filling up of two posts of District and Sessions

       Judge, Grade-I, that were created vide Notification dated

       December 17, 2007. Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 appeared in the

       examination but could not qualify in the selection process.

       Respondent No.1, though applied, did not appear in the
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                    Page 5 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       examination. Instead, vide Notification dated March 30, 2010,

       two other candidates were selected and appointed to the notified

       posts.
7.     Respondent No.1 approached this Court by filing Writ Petition

       (Civil) No. 401 of 2008 under
Article 32
of the Constitution of

       India, seeking absorption in terms of the proviso to Rule 7 of the

       2006 Rules. On September 15, 2008, this Court issued notice in

       the said writ petition. After completion of pleadings, the matter

       was directed to be listed for final hearing. At that stage, on March

       24, 2011, the Registrar General of the High Court filed an

       additional affidavit, inter alia, stating that the cases for absorption

       of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were considered twice (on May 09,

       2008 and June 25, 2008 respectively) under the aforesaid proviso

       to Rule 7, and a decision was taken not to absorb them. Despite

       this, the State Government has, on April 07, 2011, recommended

       the names of the writ petitioners for appointment to the High

       Court. Be that as it may, on May 09, 2011, this Court dismissed

       the Writ Petition (Civil) No. 401 of 2008, as withdrawn. No liberty

       was sought for and/or granted to agitate the same issue by filing

       a fresh writ petition in the High Court.
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                      Page 6 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
8.     When the things rested at that, the State Government approved

       extension of term of the FTC judges in the State for a period of

       five years with effect from April 01, 2011 to March 31, 2015, vide

       orders dated May 19, 2011.            Few months thereafter, i.e. on

       November 03, 2011, the Governor of the State of Arunachal

       Pradesh, in consultation with the High Court, converted the three

       FTCs into Regular Courts of Additional District and Sessions

       Judges, Grade-I.
9.     The Union of India had framed a policy, which was termed as the

       FTC Scheme. The purpose of this FTC Scheme primarily was to

       reduce the pendency of criminal cases pending in the respective

       courts.       The anticipated benefits of the FTC Scheme, as

       projected, were – speedy trial, elimination of pendency in the

       District Courts, enormous saving of expenses incurred on under

       trials, etc. Though the FTC Scheme was contemplated to be for

       a definite period of five years, it came to be extended and

       remained in force under the judgment of this Court in
Brij Mohan

       Lal (1) v. Union of India and Others1
and directions passed in
Madhumita Das and Others v. State of Orissa and Others2
.

       Many judicial officers were appointed to do the work of FTCs for

       speedy disposal of certain kinds of matters, including CBI
1 (2002) 5 SCC 1
2 (2008) 6 SCC 731
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                     Page 7 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       matters, and this was done on the directions given by this Court

       in Brij Mohan Lal (1). On the recommendations made by the

       Chief Justices and the Chief Ministers Conference, the Cabinet

       Committee on Economic Affairs, vide its decision dated April 07,

       2005, extended the FTC Scheme for a period of another five

       years with 100% Central funding. Again, the FTC Scheme was

       extended by the decision of the Central Government till March 31,

       2011 but thereafter the Union of India had taken a conscious

       decision not to extend the financing of the FTC Scheme beyond

       March 31, 2011. Despite discontinuation of the FTC Scheme by

       the Union of India, some of States decided to continue with the

       said Scheme. Be that as it may, on abandoning the FTC Scheme

       by the Union and other States, the judicial officers who were

       appointed under the FTC Scheme felt aggrieved and it resulted in

       filing of various petitions in this Court seeking regularisation of

       their services and absorption against the vacancies appearing in

       the regular cadre.
The controversy was ultimately set to rest by

       this Court vide judgment dated April 18, 2012 rendered in
Brij

       Mohan Lal (2) v. Union of India and Others3
.
10.    This Court in Brij Mohan Lal (2), inter alia, directed that all direct

       recruits to FTCs, who opt for regularisation, shall take written

3 (2012) 6 SCC 502
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                     Page 8 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       examination to be conducted by the High Courts, followed by

       interview, and those who are successful in the said selection

       process would be entitled for appointment to the regular cadre of

       higher judicial service. As the decision rendered in this case has

       some bearing on the issue that confronts this Court in the instant

       appeal, we reproduce some relevant portions of
the said

       judgment
hereunder:
“160. These petitioners have also raised a challenge to
               Rules 4 and 6 of the Gujarat Rules under which they were
               appointed, on the ground that the same are arbitrary and
               discriminatory. Firstly, the Rules under which the petitioners
               were appointed after 2001 themselves were to be in force
               only till 31-12-2005. Till 2005, none of the appointees
               challenged these Rules. For these four years, they in fact
               took full advantage of their appointment under these Rules
               and received different service benefits thereunder. We are
               unable to appreciate the contention that these Rules were
               arbitrary or discriminatory.
161. The Rules themselves were temporary and were
               enacted to meet an emergency situation. The
               appointments were made purely on ad hoc and urgent
               temporary basis for a period of two years, terminable
               without any prior notice. A temporary appointment, which
               itself was made for a period of two years, can hardly be
               equated to a tenure appointment and must be construed
               on such terms. These appointments were to come to an
               end by lapse of time. Such an appointment obviously
               cannot vest or confer any right upon the appointees to be
               absorbed in the permanent cadre, as they were not
               appointed in accordance with the provisions of the Gujarat
               Judicial Service Recruitment Rules, 1961.
162. The expression “liable to be terminated at any time
               without any notice” could be susceptible to objections if it
               was used in the case of a quasi-permanent or permanent
               employee of a government servant (sic). However, we have
               already noticed that there were no permanent posts
               contemplated under the FTC Scheme. The entire FTC
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                          Page 9 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
               Scheme was ad hoc and formulated to operate only until
               the year 2005. It was continued beyond that period in
               accordance with the directions of this Court but now a
               decision has been taken not to continue the FTC Scheme
               beyond 31-3-2011.
163. Even if for the sake of argument, we accept the
               contention that the expression “liable to be terminated at
               any time without any notice” is arbitrary and opposed to the
               basic rule of law, it still has to satisfy the twin tests
laid
               down in
Parshotam Lal Dhingra i.e. firstly, whether the
               government servant being terminated or reduced in rank
               thereby had a right to the post or to the rank, as the case
               may be and, secondly, whether he had been visited with
               evil consequences. Both of these tests have to be
               answered in the negative, in the facts and circumstances of
               the present case.
164. We have already held above that these officers had
               no right to their posts and consequently, discontinuation of
               their services in the facts of the present case cannot be
               construed as punitive or one visiting the petitioners with
               civil consequences. This holds true even though in some
               cases, it has been recorded that the performance of these
               appointees was found to be unsatisfactory but that is not
               the lone reason given by the High Court for dispensing with
               their services. It is the discontinuation of the FTC Scheme
               itself that is the principal reason for terminating the services
               of all these officers.
xx        xx            xx
176. We have already noticed that the FTC Judges were
               appointed under a separate set of Rules than the Rules
               governing the regular appointment to the State Higher
               Judicial Services. It has been clearly stipulated that such
               appointments would be ad hoc and temporary and that the
               appointees shall not derive any benefit from such
               appointments.
177. In the case of State of Rajasthan, it is the judicial
               officers from the cadre of Civil Judge, Senior Division, who
               were promoted as FTC Judges. They have continued to
               hold those posts for a considerable period. According to
               these petitioners, they were promoted to the Higher
               Judicial Services as per the Rules and, therefore, keeping
               in view the order of this Court in Madhumita Das as well as
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                           Page 10 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
               the very essence of the FTC Scheme, they should be
               absorbed as members of the regular cadre of Higher
               Judicial Services of the State of Rajasthan. The State
               Government had issued a directive that they should
               undertake the limited competitive examination for their
               regular promotion/absorption in the higher cadre. These
               officers questioned the correctness of this directive on the
               ground that they were promoted as Additional Sessions
               Judges (FTC) under the Rules and, therefore, there was no
               question of any further requirement for them to take any
               written examination after the long years of service that they
               have already put in in the Higher Judicial Services.
178. The Rajasthan Judicial Service Rules, 2010 are in
               force for appointment to the Higher Judicial Services of the
               State. The judgment of this Court in All India Judges' Assn.
               (3) case as well as the relevant Rules contemplate that a
               person who is to be directly appointed to the Higher
               Judicial Services has to undergo a written examination and
               appear in an interview before he can be appointed to the
               said cadre. As far as appointment by promotion is
               concerned, the promotion can be made by two different
               modes i.e. on the basis of seniority-cum-merit or through
               out-of-turn promotion wherein any Civil Judge, Senior
               Division who has put in five years of service is required to
               take a competitive examination and then to the extent of
               25% of the vacancies available, such Judges would be
               promoted to the Higher Judicial Services.
179. It was admitted before us by the learned counsel
               appearing for the petitioners that these officers who were
               promoted as ad hoc FTC Judges had not taken any written
               competitive examination before their promotion to this post
               under the Higher Judicial Services. In other words, they
               were promoted on ad hoc basis depending on the
               availability of vacancy in FTCs. Once the Rules required a
               particular procedure to be adopted for promotion to the
               regular posts of the Higher Judicial Services, then the
               competent authority can effect the promotion only by that
               process and none other. In view of the admitted fact that
               these officers have not taken any written examination, we
               see no reason as to how the challenge made by these
               judicial officers to the directive issued by the State
               Government for undertaking of written examination may be
               sustained. Thus, the relief prayed for cannot be granted in
               its entirety.
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                         Page 11 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
180. In the case of the States of Punjab and Haryana, the
               appointees were directly appointed as FTC Judges by way
               of direct recruitment from the Bar and they prayed for
               regularisation of their services and absorption in the
               regular cadre as well as for continuation of the FTC
               Scheme till their absorption. For the reasons already
               recorded by us in relation to other States mentioned above,
               we do not think that the relief of regularisation/absorption
               can be granted to these petitioners also in the manner in
               which they have prayed. They too have no right to the post.
               Admittedly, these candidates also did not pass any written
               competitive examination and were appointed solely on the
               basis of an interview and must now undergo the requisite
               examination.
xx         xx           xx
207. Without any intent to interfere with the policy decision
               taken by the Governments, but unmistakably, to protect the
               guarantees of
Article 21
of the Constitution, to improve the
               justice delivery system and fortify the independence of
               judiciary, while ensuring attainment of constitutional goals
               as well as to do complete justice to the lis before us, in
               terms of
Article 142
of the Constitution, we pass the
               following orders and directions:
xx         xx           xx

               207.9 All the persons who have been appointed by way of
               direct recruitment from the Bar as Judges to preside over
               FTCs under the FTC Scheme shall be entitled to be
               appointed to the regular cadre of the Higher Judicial
               Services of the respective States only in the following
               manner:
(a) The direct recruits to FTCs who opt for
                  regularisation shall take a written examination to be
                  conducted by the High Courts of the respective
                  States for determining their suitability for absorption in
                  the regular cadre of Additional District Judges.
(b) Thereafter, they shall be subjected to an interview
                  by a Selection Committee consisting of the Chief
                  Justice and four seniormost Judges of that High
                  Court.
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                           Page 12 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
(c) There shall be 150 marks for the written
                  examination and 100 marks for the interview. The
                  qualifying marks shall be 40% aggregate for general
                  candidates and 35% for SC/ST/OBC candidates. The
                  examination and interview shall be held in
                  accordance with the relevant Rules enacted by the
                  States for direct appointment to Higher Judicial
                  Services.
(d) Each of the appointees shall be entitled to one
                  mark per year of service in the FTCs, which shall
                  form part of the interview marks.
(e) Needless to point out that this examination and
                  interview should be conducted by the respective High
                  Courts keeping in mind that all these applicants have
                  put in a number of years as FTC Judges and have
                  served the country by administering justice in
                  accordance with law. The written examination and
                  interview module, should, thus, be framed keeping in
                  mind the peculiar facts and circumstances of these
                  cases.
(f) The candidates who qualify the written examination
                  and obtain consolidated percentage as aforeindicated
                  shall be appointed to the post of Additional District
                  Judge in the regular cadre of the State.
(g) If, for any reason, vacancies are not available in
                  the regular cadre, we hereby direct the State
                  Governments to create such additional vacancies as
                  may be necessary keeping in view the number of
                  candidates selected.
(h) All sitting and/or former FTC Judges who were
                  directly appointed from the Bar and are desirous of
                  taking the examination and interview for regular
                  appointment shall be given age relaxation. No
                  application shall be rejected on the ground of age of
                  the applicant being in excess of the prescribed age.
xx         xx         xx”
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                        Page 13 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
11.    Reverting to the developments in the present case, it may be

       stated that though the representations of writ petitioners for

       absorption on regular basis were earlier rejected twice, the High

       Court still took a decision on July 31, 2012 to undertake selection

       process of FTC Judges in terms of the aforesaid judgment of this

       Court in Brij Mohan Lal (2). Accordingly, written examination was

       held in which the writ petitioners appeared. These writ petitioners

       could secure only 22.33%, 33.66% and 25% marks respectively

       as against the qualifying marks of 35% required in the said

       examination.        In this way, none of these writ petitioners could

       qualify this examination.             On their failure to quality, the High

       Court, vide orders dated January 07, 2013, dispensed with their

       services. Within three days thereafter, i.e. on January 10, 2013,

       the High Court issued an advertisement inviting applications from

       eligible candidates for appointment to three vacant posts in the

       Grade-I cadre of the Arunachal Pradesh Judicial Service created

       on November 03, 2011.
12.    The writ petitioners filed Writ Petition (Civil) No. 776 of 2013 in

       the High Court on February 05, 2013, challenging the order dated

       January 07, 2013 dispensing their services. Challenge was also

       laid to the legality of the advertisement issued on January 10,

       2013 and claimed absorption on the basis of proviso to Rule 7 of
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                          Page 14 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       the 2006 Rules. In the meantime, written examination was held

       on March 23, 2013 pursuant to the aforesaid advertisement, in

       which seven candidates were found eligible having secured more

       than the cut-off marks of 60% for the General Category

       candidates and 50% for the ST Candidates. None of the writ

       petitioners appeared in the said examination. Oral interview of

       the qualified candidates was held on April 09, 2013 by the four

       sitting High Court Judges (including the Chief Justice) and the

       names of respondent Nos. 6 to 8 were recommended consequent

       upon their qualification.
13.    The writ petition along with the stay application was listed before

       the Court on April 11, 2013 when the Division Bench of the High

       Court was pleased to admit the same. However, since no interim

       relief was sought, no such order came to be passed. On that

       date, the High Court recommended for appointment the names of

       respondent Nos. 6 to 8 having been selected both in written and

       viva voce examination. Exactly one month thereafter, i.e. on May

       11, 2013, the State Government created further three posts in

       Grade-I of the Arunachal Pradesh Judicial Service. Pursuant to

       the recommendation dated April 11, 2013 of the High Court,

       respondent Nos. 6 to 8 were appointed as Grade-I officers by the

       State Government under the 2006 Rules. The writ petitioners
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                  Page 15 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       sought amendment of the writ petition by challenging appointment

       of respondent Nos. 6 to 8. On August 13, 2013, the High Court

       allowed the writ petitioners to amend the writ petition by inserting

       challenge to the appointment order dated April 11, 2013 in favour

       of respondent Nos. 6 to 8.
14.    After hearing the said writ petition, vide the impugned judgment

       dated January 19, 2016, the High Court has allowed the relief

       claimed therein and set aside the order dated January 07, 2013

       dispensing the ad hoc services of the writ petitioners as Additional

       District and Sessions Judge of FTCs in the State of Arunachal

       Pradesh. It has further directed the State Government to start

       consultation process for absorption of the writ petitioners in

       Grade-I of the Arunachal Pradesh Judicial Service with effect

       form January 07, 2013 and directed the High Court to consider

       their absorption in the light of the observations made in the

       impugned judgment.
15.    A perusal of the impugned judgment of the High Court would

       reveal that it posed the following question for determination which

       arose in the said writ petition:
“Whether the ad hoc services of the petitioners can be
               regularised in accordance with the proviso to Rule 7 of
               Arunachal Pradesh Judicial Service Rules, 2006 (“the
               Rules” for short)?”
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                   Page 16 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
16.    The High Court noted that initial appointment of the writ

       petitioners as Additional Deputy Commissioners on contract basis

       with the powers of ad hoc Additional Sessions Judge in the year

       2001 at a fixed pay of Rs.19,000/- was pursuant to an

       advertisement by the Government.        The writ petitioners had

       applied for the said post, had appeared in the written test and

       were interviewed by the High Court. The Full Court had approved

       the appointment of the writ petitioners and pursuant to the said

       recommendation the Government issued orders of appointment

       appointing them as the Presiding officers of the FTCs.        Their

       services were extended for a period of five years with effect from

       April 01, 2005. Before the expiry of the terms of the FTC, the

       High Court, vide its letter dated February 19, 2010, recommended

       to the State Government for extension of the terms of the FTC

       with effect from April 01, 2010 for a further period of ten years

       and the same was approved by the State Government vide its

       communication dated May 19, 2011 for a period of five years, i.e.

       up to March 31, 2015. In the meantime, the 2006 Rules came

       into force, which, among others, contained the proviso to Rule 7

       for consideration of the writ petitioners for absorption to Grade-I

       service. The State Government, vide letter dated February 25,
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                  Page 17 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       2008, proposed to absorb the writ petitioners against the newly

       created posts of Grade-I in the State Judicial Service by invoking

       the aforesaid proviso to Rule 7 of the 2006 Rules by pointing out

       that they were appointed after due selection in consultation with

       the High Court and had been working under the control and

       supervision of the High Court. This proposal was not accepted by

       the High Court. The Chief Secretary of the State Government

       thereafter sent another letter dated August 25, 2008 requesting

       the High Court to absorb the writ petitioners in terms of proviso to

       Rule 7 of the 2006 Rules based on their performance, integrity,

       etc. However, this proposal was once again rejected by the High

       Court.      Thereafter, the writ petitioners approached the State

       Government for conversion of the post of ad hoc FTCs into

       regular courts of Additional District and Sessions Judge. This

       request was acceded to by the State Government and it was

       decided to convert the FTCs into regular courts of Additional

       District and Sessions Judge along with their incumbents, i.e. the

       writ petitioners, and the same was forwarded to the High Court.
Even Notification dated November 03, 2011 was issued in this

       behalf.
17.    After taking note of the aforesaid chronology of events, the

       Division Bench of the High Court has observed that in view of
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                   Page 18 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       these developments, the writ petitioners should have been

       regularised. However, instead of considering the cases of the writ

       petitioners for absorption, the High Court decided to hold the

       written and viva voce tests in terms of the decision in Brij Mohan

       Lal (2). The writ petitioners appeared, but failed. According to

       the Division Bench of the High Court, there was no reason for

       conducting such a test as the matter had to be examined in terms

       of proviso to Rule 7 of the 2006 Rules, which provision was

       perfectly tailor-made for the writ petitioners. The Division Bench

       has further opined that the case of the writ petitioners could not

       be dealt with on the basis of the directions given by this Court in

       Brij Mohan Lal (2) having regard to the specific rule in the form

       of Rule 7, as can be seen from the following discussion:
“13. There is no dispute that dispensing with the services
               of the petitioners is the immediate fall out of the failure on
               their part to secure the minimum qualifying marks in the
               examination for their absorption into the service.
               Undoubtedly, judicial service of the State of Arunachal
               Pradesh is now under the control and supervision of the
               Gauhati High Court; the High Court has the undoubted
               authority to decide as to whether the services of the
               petitioners should be continued or not irrespective of the
               terms of extension of the ad-hoc services of the petitioners
               by the State Government. However, in this case, what is of
               significance is the question of absorption of the services of
               the petitioners in the posts of Grade-I in the Arunachal
               Pradesh Judicial Service Rules in terms of the proviso to
               Rule 7 of the Rules. The question is whether the decision
               of the Apex Court in
Brij Mohan Lal
case (supra) read as a
               whole can be construed to mean that any form of
               absorption irrespective of the nature of the appointment of
               ad hoc Judges of Fast Track Court is prohibited. The law is
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                         Page 19 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
               well-settled. A judgment of court cannot be read like
               Euclid’s theorem and shall have to be read in the context in
               which it was decided. In the case at hand, it cannot be
               disputed that the petitioners were given the appointments
               on contract basis after the posts were advertised, and they
               underwent selection process conducted by the High Court.
In
Brij Mohan Lal
case (supra), the Apex Court apparently
               distinguished appointment by back door and appointment
               made after written competitive examination.”
18.    Thereafter, the High Court discussed the nature of appointments

       to FTCs made by various States, including the States of Punjab

       and Haryana, and found that in those cases persons were not

       appointed as judicial officers through any written examination but

       were appointed solely on the basis of an interview. In contrast,

       insofar as these persons are concerned, the Division Bench of

       the High Court has held that in the instant case, the writ

       petitioners had admittedly appeared and got selected in the

       recruitment examination and the interview conducted by the High

       Court on the basis of the advertisement made by the State

       Government.           Their appointments were also made after the

       approval of the High Court. Therefore, the writ petitioners were

       needlessly required to undergo written and oral test some 10

       years or more after service as ad hoc Judges, against whom

       there were nothing on record to show that they were incompetent

       or corrupt in the discharge of their judicial works.
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                        Page 20 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
19.    Giving the aforesaid reasons, the Division Bench of the High

       Court has allowed the writ petition in the following terms:
“16. For what has been stated in the foregoing, this writ
               petition is allowed in the following terms:
(a)    The State-respondents are directed to start forthwith
               the consultation process for absorption of the petitioners in
               Grade-I of the Arunachal Pradesh Judicial Service with
               effect from 7-1-2013.
(b)   On receipt of the proposal for the absorption from the
               State Government, the High Court shall consider for the
               approval of the absorption of the petitioners in the light of
               the observations made by us in the foregoing.
(c)   If and when the absorption of the petitioners in
               Grade-I of the Arunachal Pradesh Judicial Service is done,
               they will not disturb the seniority of the private respondents.
(d)   The past services rendered by the petitioners during
               the period of their ad-hoc services shall be counted for all
               purposes except for seniority and monetary benefits.
(e)   The entire exercise shall be completed by both the
               State respondents and the High court within a period of
               three months form the date of receipt of this judgment.
(f)   The parties are directed to bear their respective
               costs.”
20.    Mr. Vijay Hansaria, learned senior counsel appearing for the High

       Court, questioned the correctness of the aforesaid reasoning and

       submitted that some glaring aspects have been glossed over and

       due weightage is not given to these aspects which are sufficient

       to turn the scales in favour of the High Court and against the writ

       petitioners. He highlighted the following aspects of the case:
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                          Page 21 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
(a)    All these writ petitioners were appointed on ad hoc and

       contractual basis for a specific term, that too in FTCs, which

       scheme itself was temporary in nature.           Such a kind of

       appointment, in normal course, would not confer any legal right

       upon the writ petitioners to seek regular appointment.
(b) At the time of contractual engagement of the writ petitioners

       there was no division between the executive and the judicial

       branch of the State. This separation came into effect in the year

       2006 with the promulgation of the Arunachal Pradesh Service

       Rules, 2006.           Rule 7 of these Rules provided method of

       recruitment, etc. Proviso thereto was only an enabling provision

       which gave discretion to the High Court to consider writ

       petitioners for absorption in Grade-I of the service. It was argued

       that the words ‘may be considered’ clearly suggest that if at all

       these three writ petitioners only had a right to be considered but

       there was no right to get absorption automatically.
(c) Their cases were duly considered by the Committee of three

       High Court Judges, which Committee, after consideration of the

       entire material, rejected the proposal twice for absorption of the

       writ petitioners in the regular cadre.
(d)     Even when advertisement for two posts of District and

       Sessions Judge (Grade-I) were created vide Notification dated
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                   Page 22 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       December 17, 2009 and two of the writ petitioners (respondent

       Nos. 2 and 3 herein) appeared in the examination, they did not

       qualify in the selection process. Respondent No.1 did not even

       appear in the examination. This, according to the learned senior

       counsel, shows that they did not have sufficient competence and,

       therefore, failed to qualify the examination.
(e)    Brij Mohan Lal (2) lays down the law and specifies the

       procedure which has to be followed for regularisation of those

       appointed to FTCs. As per this, regularisation can take place only

       after the written examination is conducted by the High Court

       followed by the interview and the incumbents/candidates are

       successful in the said selection process. After this judgment, this

       process was undertaken in which all the three writ petitioners

       appeared, but again failed to get the qualifying marks of 35%.
21.    By highlighting the aforesaid facts, it was submitted that the

       cases of the writ petitioners were considered under Rule 7 of the

       2006 Rules as well as in terms of the judgment in Brij Mohan Lal

       (2) and on both the occasions the writ petitioners were found

       unsuccessful for regularisation. The learned senior counsel also

       submitted that the Division Bench of the High Court in the

       impugned judgment has proceeded on the basis as if the proviso
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                  Page 23 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       to Rule 7 mandatorily required the High Court to absorb these writ

       petitioners in the regular cadre whether they are fit for the same

       or not. That was not the intention of the proviso to Rule 7 of the

       2006 Rules.
22.    Mr. Hansaria even questioned the maintainability of the writ

       petition insofar as respondent No.1 is concerned with the

       submission that he had earlier filed the petition in this Court which

       was withdrawn by him after full scale hearing and no liberty was

       given to the said writ petitioner to file another writ petition. The

       writ petition filed by this writ petitioners in the High Court was,

       therefore, barred by principles of res judicata, as held in
Sarguja

       Transport Service v. State Transport Appellate Tribunal, M.P.,

       Gwalior and Others4
.
He also
placed reliance upon
the

       judgment of this Court in
Mahesh Chandra Verma and Others v.

       State of Jharkhand and Others
5, which case again pertained to

       regularisation of those appointed as Additional District Judges in

       FTCs directly from the Bar. The Court
in that case
had draw

       distinction between irregular and illegal appointments and further,

       going by the nature of these appointments, laid down the manner

       of regularisation of such persons, if permissible. He also pointed

       out that Brij Mohal Lal (2) was specifically taken note of and it
4 (1987) 1 SCC 5
5 (2012) 11 SCC 656
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                       Page 24 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       was clarified that the directions given in
the said judgment
were in

       exercise of powers of the Supreme Court under
Article 142
of the

       Constitution of India, as can be see from the following discussion:
“53. In Brij Mohan Lal (2), this Court has, after considering
               the entire matter in its proper perspective, held that the
               Judges of FTCs were holding ex-cadre post. We cannot
               reopen the settled position now. Certain judgments cited in
               this regard need not, therefore, be discussed. Besides,
               they have no application to this case. It was argued that
               certain Assistant Public Prosecutors were appointed as
               FTC Judges. It was also urged that the age criteria was not
               abided by. We do not propose to go into those submissions
               because in the peculiar circumstances of that case, in Brij
               Mohan Lal (2), this Court has given certain directions in
               terms of
Article 142
of the Constitution to improve justice
               delivery system, to attain the constitutional goals and to do
               complete justice. One of the directions pertains to the
               regularisation of the appellants in the manner laid down
               therein. It is impossible to hold that the appellants' case is
               not governed by
the said judgment
.
54. Indeed, the appellants have referred to their long-
standing services as FTC Judges. They have left their
               practice at the Bar. Some of them have become age-
               barred. Certain judgments have been cited before us in
               support of the submission that these facts need to be
               considered and they must be absorbed in the regular
               services. Brij Mohan Lal (2) considers this grievance.
               Hence, it is not necessary to refer to the cases cited on this
               point.
55. We have repeatedly referred to Brij Mohan Lal (1) and
               Brij Mohan Lal (2). It is now necessary to see what they lay
               down. The Eleventh Finance Commission allocated funds
               for the purpose of setting up of 1734 courts in various
               States to deal with the long-pending cases. The Finance
               Commission suggested that States may consider re-
               employment of retired Judges for a limited period since
               these courts were to be ad hoc courts in the sense that
               they would not be a permanent addition to the existing
               courts. The Fast Track Courts Scheme was challenged on
               various grounds. The said challenge was dealt with by this
               Court in Brij Mohan Lal (1). This Court issued a number of
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                         Page 25 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
               directions in relation to establishment and functioning of
               FTCs. It was made clear that while making appointments,
               third preference should be given to direct recruits from the
               Bar. The following direction is material in this behalf: (Brij
               Mohan Lal (1) case, SCC p. 8, para 10)

                  “10. … (4) The third preference shall be given to
                  members of the Bar for direct appointment in these
                  courts. They should be preferably in the age group of
                  35-45 years, so that they could aspire to continue
                  against the regular posts if the Fast Track Courts
                  cease to function. The question of their continuance
                  in service shall be reviewed periodically by the High
                  Court based on their performance. They may be
                  absorbed in regular vacancies, if subsequent
                  recruitment takes place and their performance in the
                  Fast Track Courts is found satisfactory. For the initial
                  selection, the High Court shall adopt such methods of
                  selection as are normally followed for selection of
                  members of the Bar as direct recruits to the
                  Superior/Higher Judicial Services.”
56. The Fast Track Courts Scheme was in operation till 31-
               3-2011. But thereafter the Union of India took a decision
               not to continue the financing of the Fast Track Courts
               Scheme beyond 31-3-2011. Some States decided to
               continue the Fast Track Courts Scheme and some States
               decided not to continue it. Several writ petitions were filed
               thereafter inter alia praying that necessary directions be
               given to the respondents to extend the Fast Track Courts
               Scheme and release necessary funds for that purpose.
               Some of the petitioners who were direct recruits claimed
               absorption in the regular cadre.
57. While dealing with the points raised in the petitions,
               this Court in Brij Mohan Lal (2) traced the history of the
               Fast Track Courts Scheme. This Court considered the
               notifications issued by various States appointing direct
               recruits, relevant rules of different States and methodology
               adopted for appointment to the FTCs and came to the
               conclusion that the said posts were temporary and the
               appointees cannot be said to have any legal right to the
               posts. It was observed that the appointments were
               governed under the separate set of rules than the rules
               governing the regular appointments to the State Higher
               Judicial Services. This Court observed that the cumulative
               effect of the notifications appointing the petitioners therein
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                          Page 26 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
               to the said posts under the Fast Track Court Scheme and
               the relevant rules governing them clearly demonstrate that
               those were temporary and, in some cases, even time-
               bound appointments terminable without prior notice and,
               therefore, it is difficult to accept the contention that the
               appointees were entitled to be absorbed regularly in those
               posts. It was observed that where neither the post is
               sanctioned nor it is permanent and, in fact, the entire
               arrangement is ad hoc or is for an uncertain duration, it
               cannot create any rights and obligations in favour of the
               appointees, akin to those of permanent employees.”
23.    Insofar as the case at hand is concerned, after noticing that the

       appointments were of irregular nature, the Court passed the

       following directions:
“62. Indisputably, the appellants were not appointed on
               any permanent post. The notification of their appointment
               dated 12-8-2002 clearly states they were appointed against
               temporary and ex-cadre posts on ad hoc basis. They were
               not appointed under the Rules of 2001. Their appointment
               was made for a temporary purpose in a temporary scheme
               created for speedy disposal of cases. Their case is,
               therefore, clearly covered by Brij Mohan Lal (2). The
               directions given therein, particularly those contained in
               para 207.9 which we have quoted above, will clearly apply
               to them. In Brij Mohan Lal (2), this Court even considered
               the contention that the direct recruits had taken all the tests
               and, therefore, they should not be made to undergo them
               again. After considering this argument, this Court directed
               that they will have to take written examination and they
               must also be interviewed. It must be noted at this stage
               that on behalf of the High Court of Jharkhand a statement
               is made that subject to the creation of necessary
               posts/FTCs by the State of Jharkhand, the High Court will
               consider the appellants' case afresh in terms of the
               decision of this Court in Brij Mohan Lal (2). The High Court
               has also taken up the matter with the State Government.
               Relevant portion from the affidavit of Shri Ambuj Nath,
               Registrar (Administration), High Court of Jharkhand, needs
               to be quoted:
“19. That as per the recommendation of the 13th
                  Finance Commission the Jharkhand High Court has
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                          Page 27 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
                  requested the State Government to constitute 31
                  alternative courts in the cadre of Superior Judicial
                  Service coterminous with the Holiday Courts/Shift
                  Court Scheme of the 13th Finance Commission as
                  the terrain and deteriorating the law and order
                  situation    was    not    congruent    for   holding
                  morning/evening/shift courts. However, after the
                  direction of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Brij Mohan Lal
                  (2) case, the Jharkhand High Court has taken up the
                  matter with the State Government for creation of 31
                  permanent Fast Track Courts instead of 31 alternative
                  courts coterminous with the morning and evening
                  shift courts and an expansion of 10% of cadre
                  strength as per the direction of the Hon'ble Apex
                  Court in Brij Mohan Lal (2) case in response to the
                  direction dated 19-4-2012.”
63. The State of Jharkhand will now have to take steps to
               comply with directions issued in Brij Mohan Lal (2), if it has
               not complied with them so far. The State of Jharkhand and
               the High Court will have to work in sync to ensure that the
               directions to appoint the appellants in the regular cadre in
               Higher Judicial Service are complied with strictly in the
               manner
laid down in
Brij Mohan Lal (2).”


               On that basis, it was argued that passing of the examination

       in terms of Brij Mohan Lal (2) was incumbent.
24.    Mr. Vikas Singh, learned senior counsel appearing for these writ

       petitioners, on the other hand, submitted that the High Court is

       right in observing that proviso to Rule 7 of the 2006 Rules was

       tailor-made for these writ petitioners and also keeping in view the

       spirit of the decision in Brij Mohan Lal (2).              He laid great

       emphasis on the fact that the State Government had considered

       the case of the writ petitioners and recommended the High Court
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                         Page 28 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       two times to absorb the writ petitioners, but the High Court

       adopted adamant attitude in ignoring those recommendations.

       He also submitted that the case of the writ petitioners was

       different from the cases which were dealt with by this Court in

       Brij Mohan Lal (2), whereas in Brij Mohan Lal (2) this Court was

       confronted with the situation where the appointments to FTCs

       were made without following proper procedure and those cases

       were in the nature of back-door entries, it was not so insofar as

       the writ petitioners are concerned. He, thus, argued that the High

       Court had rightly distinguished Brij Mohan Lal (2) by specifically

       noticing the aforesaid difference inasmuch as the writ petitioners

       are appointed after proper written test as well as interview,

       whereas no written test was taken in respect of those persons

       who were appointed by the State of Haryana, etc. and their

       appointments were made only on the basis of interview.
25.    After taking note of the facts of this case, we may observe at the

       outset that if the matter of regularisation of the writ petitioners

       was to be considered in terms of Brij Mohan Lal (2), the writ

       petitioners have remained unsuccessful. This is because of the

       reason that in terms of Brij Mohan Lal (2), written examination

       was undertaken by the High Court in which all the three writ
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                  Page 29 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       petitioners appeared, but they failed to achieve the qualifying

       marks.       Therefore, if that standard is to be applied, the writ

       petitioners have not been able to qualify the examination and

       cannot claim absorption in the regular service. However, whether

       Brij Mohan Lal (2) would apply or not is a moot question. The

       High Court has distinguished the judgment of Brij Mohal Lal (2)

       and has held that that is not applicable. However, since the High

       Court Bench has examined the matter in terms of the proviso to

       Rule 7 of the 2006 Rules, we may first consider as to whether its

       approach relating to this facet is correct in law.
26.    Rule 7 has already been reproduced above, which lays down the

       procedure and method of recruitment to the post of Additional

       Sessions Judges. The case of the writ petitioners is not covered

       by the main provision. As noticed above, when two posts of

       Grade-I District and Sessions Judges, after their creation vide

       Notification dated December 17, 2007 were advertised, two of the

       writ petitioners appeared but failed to qualify in the said selection

       process while the third writ petitioner did not appear at all.

       Adverting to the proviso of Rule 7, no doubt, it was tailor-made for

       the writ petitioners.         However, this proviso only suggests that

       cases of three ad hoc Additional Sessions Judges, who were

       none else but the three writ petitioners, ‘may be considered’ for
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                      Page 30 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       absorption in Grade-I of the service. It is not necessary to go into

       the question as to whether the word ‘may’ would mean that it was

       entirely within the discretion of the High Court to even consider or

       not to consider the cases of the writ petitioners for absorption or

       whether this word has to be read as ‘shall’ thereby holding that it

       was mandatory on the part of the High Court to at least consider

       the cases of the writ petitioners for absorption. This is because of

       the reason that as matter of fact the cases of the writ petitioners

       were considered by the High Court and, in fact, that appears to

       be the intention behind the proviso.              However, the provision

       provided only to ‘consider’ the cases of the writ petitioner for

       absorption. The proviso never gave any mandate that the writ

       petitioners had to be necessarily absorbed. Thus, only right of

       consideration was there.              There was no automatic absorption.

       Had that been the intention, the proviso would have been worded

       differently.
27.    Insofar as consideration is concerned, the position prevalent on

       record of this case is somewhat curious. A Committee of three

       High Court Judges had considered twice the cases of the writ

       petitioners. As per the High Court this consideration was done by

       looking into the entire material, but the proposal for absorption

       was rejected on both occasions. On the other hand, insofar as
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                        Page 31 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       the Government is concerned, it had recommended the case of

       the writ petitioners for absorption.       It is this factor which has

       weighed with the Division Bench of the High Court. However, we

       are of the opinion that this approach is unsustainable in law,

       having regard to the mandate of
Articles 233
to 235 of the

       Constitution of India.
These provisions are aimed at securing the

       independence of the Judiciary from the Executive. These Articles

       provide a complete code for regulating recruitment and

       appointment to the District Judiciary and the Subordinate

       Judiciary. It has been held in Rajendra Singh Verma (Dead)

       through Lrs. and
Others v. Lieutenant Governor (NCT of

       Delhi) and Othes6
that the scheme envisaged in the aforesaid

       provisions of the Constitution does not permit the State to

       encroach upon the area covered by these Articles.
We may also

       reproduce, with benefit, following discussion from
Ajit Kumar v.

       State of Jharkhand and Others7
:
“17. It cannot be disputed that the power under the
               aforesaid articles is to be exercised by the Governor in
               consultation with the High Court. Under the scheme of the
               Indian Constitution the High Court is vested with the power
               to take decision for appointment of the subordinate
               judiciary under
Articles 234
to 236 of the Constitution. The
               High Court is also vested with the power to see that the
               high traditions and standards of the judiciary are
               maintained by the selection of proper persons to run the
               District Judiciary. If a person is found not worthy to be a

6 (2011) 10 SCC 1
7 (2011) 11 SCC 458
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                        Page 32 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
               member of the judicial service or it is found that he has
               committed a misconduct he could be removed from the
               service by following the procedure laid down. Power could
               also be exercised for such dismissal or removal by
               following the preconditions as laid down under
Article
               311(2)(b)
of the Constitution of India. Even for imposing a
               punishment of dismissal or removal or reduction in rank,
               the High Court can hold disciplinary proceedings and
               recommend such punishments. The Governor alone is
               competent to impose such punishment upon persons
               coming under Articles 233-235 read with
Article 311(2)
of
               the Constitution of India. Similarly, such a power could be
               exercised by the High Court to dispense with an enquiry for
               a reason to be recorded in writing and such dispensation of
               an enquiry for valid reasons when recommended to the
               Governor, it is within the competence of the Governor to
               issue such orders in terms of the recommendation of the
               High Court in exercise of power under
Article 311(2)(b)
of
               the Constitution of India.”
28.    It has also been authoritatively held in
Chandramouleshwar

       Prasad v. Patna High
Court and Others, which is now a settled

       position of law, that the Governor cannot appoint a nominee of his

       without obtaining the views of the High Court, even where he is

       not prepared to accept the nominee of the High Court 8.               The

       reason is, whether in the case of promotion from the Subordinate

       Judiciary or of direct recruitment from the Bar, the performance of

       the candidate would be best known to the High Court.
This is so

       succinctly brought out in High Court of
Punjab and Haryana

       and Others v. State of Haryana and Others9
in the following

       words:
8 (1969) 3 SCC 56
9 (1975) 1 SCC 843
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                       Page 33 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
               “49. The confirmation of persons appointed to be or
               promoted to be District Judges is clearly within the control
               of the High Court for these reasons. When persons are
               appointed to be District Judges or persons are promoted to
               be District Judges the act of appointment as well as the act
               of promotion is complete and nothing more remains to be
               done. Confirmation of an officer on successful completion
               of his period of probation is neither a fresh appointment nor
               completion of appointment. Such a meaning of
               confirmation would make appointment a continuing process
               till confirmation. Confirmation of District Judges is vested in
               the control of the High Court for the reason that if after the
               appointment of District Judges the Governor will retain
               control over District Judges until confirmation there will be
               dual control of District Judges. The High Court
in that case
would have control over confirmed District Judges and the
               Governor would have control over unconfirmed District
               Judges. That is not
Article 235.
50.
In the recent decision in
Samsher Singh v. State of
               Punjab
this Court held that the High Court under
Article 235
is vested with the control over subordinate Judiciary. This
               Court said that before a probationer is confirmed the
               authority concerned is under an obligation to consider
               whether the work of the probationer is satisfactory or he is
               suitable for the post. In the absence of any rules governing
               the probationer in this respect the authority may come to
               the conclusion that on account of inadequacy for the job or
               for any temperamental or other object not involving moral
               turpitude the probationer is unsuitable for the job and
               hence must be discharged. No punishment is involved in
               this. The suitability of a person to a post is of paramount
               importance in considering the question of confirmation.”

               Thus, the control vests with the High Court.
29.    We are also of the opinion that the Division Bench in the

       impugned judgment has given undue credence to the initial

       recruitment process wherein the writ petitioners were selected

       inasmuch as it has held that at the time of their recruitment

       written examination and interview were held pursuant to which
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                          Page 34 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
       the writ petitioners were selected. What is to be borne in mind is

       that the said process was for appointment for a limited purpose

       and that too on contract basis and if that was so, proviso to Rule

       7 of the 2006 Rules would have specifically made provision to this

       effect, which was not done.           Such a kind of appointment,

       normally, would not confer any right of regularisation.
30.    The impugned judgment also does not look the matter in proper

       perspective by observing that since the writ petitioners had

       worked for ten years approximately, as ad hoc Judges, and since

       there was nothing on record to show that they were incompetent

       or corrupt in discharge of their judicial work, they should have

       been absorbed in the regular cadre. It is stated at the cost of

       repetition that their service records were examined by the

       Committee consisting of three High Court Judges and on the said

       examination the Committee was of the opinion that the writ

       petitioners were not entitled for appointment to the regular cadre

       of Higher Judicial Service. No challenge was laid by the writ

       petitioners to the manner in which their cases were considered

       and rejected by the High Court or that such a consideration

       suffered from any kind of blemish.         Even otherwise, such a

       decision of the Committee stands vindicated inasmuch as:
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                    Page 35 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
(i)     the two writ petitioners who appeared in the examination

       pursuant to an advertisement for the post of Grade-I District and

       Sessions Judge failed to qualify in the selection process and the

       third writ petitioner did not appear at all; and
(ii)    the petitioners even failed to qualify the test which was

       conducted pursuant to Brij Mohan Lal (2) in which the writ

       petitioners had appeared. This fact is noted just to point out the

       incompetence of the writ petitioners. Otherwise, our decision is

       based on the analysis of proviso to Rule 7.
31.    Having regard to the above, it is not even necessary to discuss as

       to whether ratio of Brij Mohan Lal (2) applies or not. However,

       suffice is to state that ratio of Brij Mohan Lal (2) is discussed by

       this Court in detail in the case of Mahesh Chandra Verma and

       there also the Court was of the opinion that appointment on

       regular cadre should be made only on the basis of written

       examination etc. as
laid down in
Brij Mohan Lal (2). We again

       clarify that, in any case, we have come to the conclusion that

       even in terms of proviso to Rule 7 of 2006 Rules the cases of the

       writ petitioners were considered, but they were not found fit for

       absorption in the regular cadre.
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                   Page 36 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)
32.    As a result, this appeal succeeds and is allowed thereby setting

       aside the impugned judgment.
No costs.
.............................................J.
                                                                         (A.K. SIKRI)



                                             .............................................J.
                                                           (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 23, 2018.
Civil Appeal No. 4298 of 2018                                              Page 37 of 37
(arising out of SLP (C) No. 23780 of 2016)