[Cites
6
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Dr. M. Dakshayani vs The State Of Karnataka on 20 April, 2018
Author:
L. Nageswara Rao
Bench:
L. Nageswara Rao
,
S.A. Bobde
Non-Reportable


                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

       Civil Appeal No.   4236             of 2018
(Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 1775 of
                          2012)

Dr. M. Dakshayani                             .... Appellant

                             Versus

The State of Karnataka & Anr.               ….Respondents

                              WITH

        Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 716 of 2018
   (In Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 1775 of 2012)


Dr. M. Dakshayani                             .... Petitioner

                             Versus

Dr. Sacchidanand & Anr.                 ….Respondents


                          JUDGMENT
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
Leave granted.
1. The promotion of Respondent No.2 to the post of Assistant

  Professor (Ophthalmology) and further promotion to the post

  of    Professor   (Ophthalmology)   was   challenged   by     the

  Appellant before the Karnataka Administrative Tribunal (for

  short “the Tribunal).    The Tribunal set aside the orders of

  promotion of Respondent No.2 to the post of Assistant
1
Professor and Professor (Ophthalmology). The Writ Petition

  filed by the Respondent No.2 against the judgment of the

  Tribunal was allowed, the legality of which is assailed in this

  Appeal.
2. The relevant facts for adjudication of the dispute are as

  follows:
The Appellant was appointed as Assistant Surgeon after

being selected by the Karnataka Public Services Commission on

11th December, 1987 whereas Respondent No.2 was appointed

as Assistant Surgeon on 10th September, 1991.                   Respondent

No.2, along with 125 other Medical Officers and Assistant

Surgeons, was posted in Health & Family Welfare Department

as Lecturer on deputation basis by an Order dated 20 th May,

1992. The conditions attached to the deputation made in public

interest were that the appointment will not confer any right to

change over as lecturing staff and that the deputation duty will

not   be   counted   for   seniority       in   the   Medical    Education

Department. The Appellant was permitted to change the cadre

and was appointed as a Lecturer (Ophthalmology) on 10 th

November, 1999. By an Order dated 15 th November, 1999 the

Respondent No.2 was also permitted a change in the cadre to

the post of Lecturer. It was mentioned in the said Order that

the Respondent No.2 could not be absorbed as a Lecturer in the
2
Department of Medical Education along with 115 other Doctors

due to lack of a Post-Graduate Degree. It was further stated

therein    that    Respondent     No.2       was   permitted    by    the

Government to pursue a Post-Graduate Degree.                  The Order

dated     15th   November,     1999   will    come   into    force   after

Respondent No.2 acquires a Post-Graduate Degree.                      The

Respondent No.2 completed Post-Graduation after which she

was appointed as a Lecturer on 18th May, 2001.                 She was

promoted as Assistant Professor on 6th June, 2001.                    The

Appellant challenged the said Order of promotion dated 6 th

June, 2001 before the Karnataka Administrative Tribunal.

During the pendency of the matter before the Tribunal,

Respondent        No.2   was    further      promoted   as     Professor

(Ophthalmology) on 1st September, 2006. The Appellant was

successful in her challenge before the Tribunal. The High Court

reversed the Order of the Tribunal by allowing the Writ Petition

filed by Respondent No.2.
3. The Tribunal held that Respondent No.2 was a beneficiary of

  undue benefits. The Tribunal found fault with the deputation

  of Respondent No.2 as a Lecturer on 14 th September, 1991 in

  spite of the fact that Respondent No.2 did not possess a

  Post-Graduate Degree.         The Government was criticized by

  the Tribunal for permitting a change in cadre to Respondent
3
No.2   though       she   was   ineligible.   The   promotion   of

    Respondent No.2 as Assistant Professor on 6 th June, 2001

    was held to be illegal.         On the basis of the above said

    findings, the Tribunal set aside the promotion of Respondent

    No.2 as Assistant Professor and Professor. The Government

    was directed by the Tribunal to consider the Appellant for

    promotion with effect from the date she became eligible.
4. The High Court reversed the judgment of the Tribunal by

    holding that Respondent No.2 rendered service as Lecturer

    for more than nine years whereas the requisite teaching

    experience for promotion to the post of Assistant Professor is

    only three years. The High Court held that Respondent No.2

    was entitled to be considered for promotion after acquiring a

    Post-Graduate Degree.           The High Court relied upon a

    judgment of this Court in
A.K. Raghumani Singh & Ors. v.

    Gopal Chandra Nath & Ors.1
to hold that the service

    rendered by Respondent No.2 prior to her acquiring the

    Post-Graduate Degree can be counted towards requisite

    experience for the purpose of promotion to the post of

    Assistant Professor.
5. The point that arises for our consideration in this case is

    whether the service rendered by Respondent No.2 as


1           (2000) 4 SCC 30
4
Lecturer before she acquired a Post-Graduate Degree can be

    counted as qualifying service for promotion as Assistant

    Professor. It is relevant to refer to the judgment of this Court

    in
Shailendra Dania & Ors. v. S.P. Dubey & Ors.2
.
After

    a detailed consideration it was held therein that the earlier

    decisions of this Court on the above issue in
N. Suresh

    Nathan v. Union of India3
,
M.B. Joshi v. Satish Kumar

    Pandey4
,
D. Stephen Joseph v. Union of India5
, Anil

    Kumar     Gupta        v.       Municipal   Corp.   of    Delhi6,   A.K.

    Raghumani Singh & Ors. (
supra) and Indian Airlines

    Limited    v.    S.     Gopalakrishnan7
were      based on    the

    interpretation of the respective rules called in question, the

    context of the entire scheme governing service conditions

    and the facts of each case.            It is relevant to examine the

    legal regime in this case.           The Karnataka Health & Family

    Planning services (Collegiate Branch) Recruitment Rules,

    1967 govern the posts of Lecturer, Assistant Professor and

    Associate Professor in the Department of Ophthalmology.

    The qualifications for promotion to the post of Assistant

    Professor from the cadre of Lecturer are as follows:
“ QUALIFICATIONS
2           (2007) 5 SCC 535
3           1992 Supp (1) SCC 584
4           1993 Supp (2) SCC 419
5           (1997) 4 SCC 753
6           (2000) 1 SCC 128
7           (2001) 2 SCC 362
5
1.    Should be the holder of a degree in Medicine of
           any University established by law in India, &
2.    Should have any of the Post graduate
           qualifications in Ophthalmology specified in
           Annexure A or B and,
3.    Should      have   teaching     experience    in
           Ophthalmology of not less than three years in a
           post of Lecturer or Lecturer-cum-Registrar of
           higher post.”
6. Promotions to the post of Associate Professor and Reader

  can be made from the post of Assistant Professors, Assistant

  Associate Professors and Lecturers in Ophthalmology.        The

  qualifications prescribed for promotion to the post of

  Associate Professor and Readers are as follows:
“ QUALIFICATIONS

     (1)   Should be the holder of a degree in recognize of
           any University established by law in India, &
     (2)   Should have any of the Post graduate
           qualifications in Ophthalmology specified in
           Annexure A or B and,
     (3)   Should      have   teaching     experience    in
           Ophthalmology of not less than three years
           after acquiring post graduate qualification of
           which not less than two years shall be in post
           not lower in rank that of an Assistant Associate
           Professors. “
7. The teaching experience of three years as a Lecturer for the

  promotion to the post of Assistant Professor is in addition to

  the Post-Graduate qualification. It does not appear from the

  scheme of the Rules that the experience of three years

  should be after acquisition of Post-Graduate Degree. In Anil

  Kumar Gupta (supra), this Court considered a similar rule
6
where the essential qualification was a degree and two years

  professional experience. It was held that the experience of

  two years after obtaining the degree was not required.          The

  Rules pertaining to promotion as Superintending Engineer

  fell for interpretation before this Court in A.K. Raghumani’s

  case (supra).    The requirement of the Rule was that the

  Executive Engineer and Surveyor of Works should possess a

  Degree in Civil/ Mechanical Engineering or its equivalent

  from a recognized institution with      6 years regular service

  in the grade. The word “with” was interpreted by this Court

  as follows:
“ 7. The word “with” has been defined in the New
     Shorter Oxford Dictionary (1993), diversely the
     meaning depending on the context in which it is
     used. But when it is used to connect two nouns it
     means: “Accompanied by; having as an addition or
     accompaniment. Frequently used to connect two
     nouns, in the sense ‘and’ — ‘as well’.”
8. Applying the definition to the eligibility criteria
     it is clear that it requires the prescribed educational
     qualification and 6 years’ experience as well. Given
     the plain meaning of the phrase, the Court would not
     be justified in reading a qualification into the
     conjunctive word and imply the word “subsequent”
     after the word “with”. ”
8. The High Court was right in relying upon the judgment in

  A.K. Raghumani’s case (supra) to hold that the rule in the

  instant   case   does   not   require   three   years   teaching

  experience after acquisition of Post-Graduate Degree.           The
7
eligibility criteria for promotion as Assistant Professor are

  Degree      in     Medicine,    Post-Graduation            qualification    in

  Ophthalmology and three years teaching experience as

  Lecturer. A plain reading of the qualification prescribed for

  promotion as Assistant Professor would make it clear that

  three years teaching experience as Lecturer along with a

  Post-Graduation        Degree        is    sufficient.       There    is   no

  requirement of three years experience after a person

  acquires Post-Graduation Degree.
9. There is yet another reason for our conclusion that three

  years experience as Lecturer for promotion to the post of

  Assistant Professor need not be after completion of the

  Post-Graduate Degree.            The Recruitment Rules prescribe

  qualifications for appointment to the posts of Lecturer,

  Assistant        Professor     and        Associate      Professor.        The

  qualifications for appointment to the posts of Assistant

  Professor and Associate Professor are different. The teaching

  experience that is required for promotion to the post of

  Associate Professor and Reader is three years after acquiring

  Post-Graduate qualification.              Whereas, the qualification for

  promotion to the post of Assistant Professor is teaching

  experience of not less than three years as a Lecturer.                      A

  comparison of the qualifications prescribed for promotion to
8
the posts of Associate Professor and Assistant Professor

  would make it clear that the prescription of experience after

  acquisition    of    Post-Graduate         qualification   required   for

  promotion to the post of Associate Professor is not part of

  the   qualifications      required   for     promotion     as   Assistant

  Professor.     A conscious omission of the condition of

  experience after acquiring Post-Graduate Degree in the

  qualifications for Assistant Professor supports our view that

  three years experience as a Lecturer is sufficient.              It need

  not be after completion of Post-Graduation.
10.It is necessary to refer to the other submissions that are

  made on behalf of the parties. It has been brought to our

  notice by the Respondents that no appointment was made to

  the posts of Lecturers in Government Medical Colleges in the

  State of Karnataka for a long period of time between the

  years 1984 to 1999.         As there were a number of posts of

  Lectures vacant, the Government took a decision to post

  Assistant Surgeons on other duty to work as Lecturers. In

  the above circumstances. Respondent No.2 was posted as

  Lecturer along with 125 other Assistant Surgeons on other

  duty and she worked as such for more than nine years.

  According     to    the   Appellant,       the   service   rendered   by

  Respondent No.2 as Lecturer prior to her change of the cadre
9
cannot be taken into account towards the requisite teaching

experience.   Taking into account the fact that Respondent

No.2 has worked for more than nine years as a Lecturer, we

do not agree with the contention of the Appellant.            The

Tribunal erroneously held that Respondent No.2 was not

eligible for being appointed as a Lecturer as she did not have

a Post-Graduation qualification in Ophthalmology.             The

qualification for appointment as a Lecturer by direct

recruitment is a Degree in Medicine, preference being given

to   a   candidate   with   Post-Graduation   qualification    in

Ophthalmology. The qualification prescribed for appointment

by transfer to the post of Lecturer is a Degree in Medicine

and Post-Graduation qualification in Ophthalmology.       It is

clear that a Post-Graduation qualification is required for

appointment by transfer as a Lecturer. Respondent No.2 was

appointed by transfer as a Lecturer in 2001 after acquiring a

Post-Graduate qualification.     It was not necessary that

Respondent No.2 should have possessed a Post-Graduation

qualification for working as a Lecturer on other duty as the

qualification for appointment as a Lecturer by direct

recruitment was only Graduation. In any event, a number of

Assistant   Surgeons   along   with   Respondent   No.2   were

directed to work as Lecturers in view of an administrative
10
exigency that arose due to the existence of several

  vacancies in the post of Lecturers. There were other

  graduate Assistant Surgeons who were appointed on other

  duty as Lecturers and appointed by transfer as Lecturers

  after acquiring a Post-Graduate Degree.       We do not agree

  with the Appellant that Respondent No.2 was not qualified

  for being sent on other duty as a Lecturer.
11.For the aforementioned reasons, the Appeal is dismissed.


Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 716 of 2018 in Civil
Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil)
No. 1775 of 2012
12.The Contempt Petition has been filed for willful violation of

  the Orders passed by this Court on 27th January, 2017 and

  8th February, 2016 in the above Appeal. While issuing notice

  on 27th January, 2012 an Order of status quo was passed.

  The Order dated 27th January, 2012 was clarified on 8th

  February, 2016 wherein it was made clear that the Order of

  status quo was restricted to the post of Professor and above

  and not with reference to other posts.
13.Respondent No.2 was appointed as Head of the Department

  of Ophthalmology subject to the final decision in the above

  Appeal.   It was mentioned in the Order dated 5 th January,

  2018 that the arrangement was temporary in nature and
11
Respondent No.2 was placed In-Charge of the post of the

  Head of the Department.
14.Respondent No.2 was only placed In-Charge of the post of

  Head of Department of Ophthalmology temporarily in the

  interest of administration.    We do not agree with the

  Appellant/ Applicant that there has been any willful violation

  of the Interim Orders passed by this Court on 27 th January,

  2012 and 8th February, 2016.        Accordingly, the Contempt

  Petition is dismissed.
........................................J.
                                                      [S.A. BOBDE]


                                ........................................J.
                                          [L. NAGESWARA RAO]
New Delhi,
April 20, 2018.
12