[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Subhash Chandra Sen(D) Thr.Lrs And Ors vs Nabin Sain(D)Thr.Lrs. on 19 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1233
Author:
S. Abdul Nazeer
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
N.V. Ramana
1


                                                              NON-REPORTABLE

                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3120 of 2009


SUBHASH CHANDRA SEN (D) THR. LRS. AND ORS.                      … APPELLANTS

      VERSUS

NABIN SAIN (D) THR. LRS.                                        … RESPONDENTS


                               J U D G M E N T
S. ABDUL NAZEER, J.
1.    Nabin Sain alias Nabin Chandra Sen filed a suit against Subhash Chandra

Sen and others for partition of his 3/5 th share in the suit schedule property. On

06.08.2001, trial court passed a decree granting the plaintiff 3/5 th share in the suit

schedule property on the following terms:
“This suit coming on this day for final disposal
                    before Sri R.D. Kundu, Ld. Judge, Bench VIII in
                    the presence of Sri J.M. Saha, Advocate for the
                    plaintiff, and of Sri Debrata Sen, Advocate for the
                    Defendant. It is ordered and decreed that the suit
                    be and the same is decreed on contest but without
                    any costs. It is decreed that the plaintiff do get a
                    decree for partition holding that he has got 3/5th
                    share in the suit property and the defendants have
2
got 2/5th share therein. It is further ordered that lot
                   ‘A’ property as shown in the sketch map filed by
                   the plaintiff be allotted to the plaintiff and the lot
                   ‘B’ property be allotted to the defendants. 4 ft.
                   common passage to the east of the Lot ‘A’ property
                   would be kept open and the parties be permitted to
                   raise boundary wall, the costs of which would be
                   borne by the parties in equal share. Both the
                   plaintiff and the defendants be allotted one tamp
                   each for getting supply of Municipal Water. The
                   sewage system and water supply system of the lot
                   B property do pass through 4’ ft. common passage
                   and both the parties shall bear their respective
                   costs for making arrangement of sewage system,
                   pipe line system for supply of Municipal water. It
                   is further ordered that if a door is fixed on the
                   southern end of the common passage both parties
                   would be at liberty to have keys for the said lock
                   that may be used for closing the door and keeping
                   the same in safe position.”
2.    The appeal filed by the plaintiff challenging this decree was dismissed by

the High Court on 05.11.2003. The defendant filed an application before the trial

court in the said case for amendment of the decree directing the sketch map

submitted by the plaintiff on 06.02.2001 to be marked as an exhibit and part of the

judgment and decree by effecting necessary corrections, in order to make the

decree executable. The trial court by order dated 06.09.2006 allowed the said

application as under:
“Ordered that the petition dated 18.08.2006 filed
                   by the defendants is hereby allowed on consent
                   but without cost. Let the sketch map submitted by
                   the plaintiff alongwith his petition dated
                   06.02.2001 be made part of the judgment and
3
decree.    Judgment and decree be amended
                   accordingly.”
3.    The plaintiff challenged the said order before the High Court of Calcutta.
The High Court by its order dated 05.02.2008 has allowed the revision and set

aside the order dated 06.09.2006 of the trial court. During the pendency of these

proceedings, both the plaintiff and the 1st defendant died and their LRs have been

brought on record at different stages. The LRs of the 1 st defendant and other

defendants have filed this appeal challenging the order of the High Court.
4.    Learned counsel for the appellants submits that the appellants/defendants

filed an application on 06.02.2001 praying that the suit may be partitioned in terms

of the plan annexed to the application. However, by oversight the said plan was

not exhibited. The plan demarcates the common area. The court had passed a

decree by consent. Since the plan was not exhibited, difficulties arose for execution

of the partition decree. Therefore, the court below has rightly allowed the

application. The High Court on certain assumptions has set aside the said order.

Learned senior counsel appearing for the respondents submits that three sketch

maps have been produced at different stages in the suit. Therefore, the High Court

has rightly directed the parties to file a joint petition indicating their intention

regarding allotment of their property as per their shares by producing a sketch duly

drawn by competent person. This order of the High Court does not call for

interference.
4
5.    We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned counsel

appearing for the parties. There is no dispute as to the share allotted by the trial

court in favour of the parties.     The plaintiff was allotted 3/5 th share and the

defendant was allotted 2/5th share in the suit schedule property. It is clear that the

sketch map relied on by the trial court was produced by the plaintiff showing the

frontal ‘A’ lot property containing his 3/5th share delineated with yellow border and

‘B’ lot property showing defendants’ 2/5th share delineated with red border. The

application filed by the plaintiff producing the aforesaid map reads as under:-
“Most Respectfully Sheweth:
1.     That the plaintiff, as per direction of the Court is
             submitting a settlement Plan alongwith copy in Court this
             day marking annexure ‘A’ to the petition and 2/5 th share
             with red border with a statement.
In the circumstances, it is prayed that on the basis
             of the said settlement plan, partition of the suit property
             may be made by the Learned Court for ends of justice.
And for this, your petitioner as in duty bound shall
             ever pray.
Dated: 06.02.2001
                                                                   Sd/-
Plaintiff”
6.    It is clear that the plaintiff had also produced two other maps on 20.2.2001

and 12.6.2001. The plaintiff had sought partition of the suit property in terms of

the plan produced on 6.2.2001 which is evident from the application referred to

above. As such, the plaintiff cannot be permitted to say that the map produced

with the application dated 6.2.2001 was not the map filed by him. It is not possible
5
to give effect to the partition decree without a sketch map of the suit schedule

property. At the time of passing the judgment and decree, the trial court should

have made the said map as a part of the decree so that the partition could have been

effected as per the said sketch. No party should be allowed to suffer for the error

of the court. In the circumstances, the trial court has rightly made the plan a part

of the decree for effecting partition. We are of the view that the High Court was

not justified in setting aside the said order.
7.    Hence, this appeal is allowed. The order of the High Court impugned herein

is set aside and the order of the trial court dated 06.09.2006 is restored. There will

be no order as to costs.
……………………………J.
                                                    (N.V. RAMANA)




                                                 ……………………………J.
New Delhi;                                        (S. ABDUL NAZEER)
April 19, 2018.