[Cites
14
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Add. Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Bharat V. Patel on 24 April, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2681, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2182, (2018) 6 SCALE 430, 2018 (15) SCC 670
Author:
R.K.Agrawal
Bench:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
,
R.K. Agrawal
REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      CIVIL APPEAL No.4380 OF 2018 
                           (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 24888 OF
                                                    2015) 

                      Addl. Commissioner of Income Tax                    .... Appellant(s)

                                  Versus

                      Bharat V. Patel                                     .... Respondent(s)
WITH

                                      CIVIL APPEAL No. 4381 OF 2018 
                                     (Arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No.
                                                    25001 OF 2015

                                              J U D G M E N T

                      R.K.Agrawal, J
1)     Leave granted.
2)     These appeals have been preferred against the impugned

                      judgment   and   order   dated   23.12.2014   passed   by   the   High

                      Court of Gujarat at Ahmedabad in Tax Appeal Nos. 6 and 14 of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SWETA DHYANI
Date: 2018.04.24
17:14:43 IST
2004 whereby the Division Bench of the High Court dismissed
Reason:
the appeals filed by the Revenue while upholding the decision
1
of   the   Income   Tax   Appellant   Tribunal   (for   brevity   ‘the

Tribunal’) dated 27.06.2003.
3)    Brief facts:­
(a)   On   10.09.1998,   the   Respondent,   who   is   the   Chairman

and   Managing   Director   of   Procter   and   Gamble   (P&G),   India,

filed his income tax return for the Assessment Year 1998­99

and declaring the total income at Rs 40,13,820/­.
(b)   The   Assessing   Officer,   vide   order   dated   12.02.2001,

concluded the assessment proceeding under
Section 143(3)
of

the Income Tax Act, 1961 (in short ‘the
IT Act
’) and determined

the   total   income   of   the   Respondent   at   Rs   7,23,11,013/­

against the declared income.
(c)   Being   aggrieved,   the   Respondent   preferred   an   appeal

before   the   Commissioner   of   Income   Tax   (Appeals)   being   No.

CAB/I­643/2000­2001.   After   considering   the   case,   learned

CIT   (Appeals),   vide   order   dated   28.03.2002,   dismissed   the

appeal of the Respondent after comprehensively discussing the

taxability   of   the   alleged   amount   and   upholding   the

Assessment Order passed by the Assessing Officer.
2
(d)   Being   dissatisfied,   the   Respondent   carried   the   matter

before   the   Tribunal.   The   Tribunal,   vide   order   dated

27.06.2003,   in   ITA   No.   2241/Ahd/2002   partly   allowed   the

appeal filed by the Respondent.
(e)   At this juncture, the Respondent as well as the Revenue

both preferred cross appeals before the High Court of Gujarat

at Ahmedabad.
(f)   At   the   same   time,   consequent   to   the   decision   of   the

Tribunal dated 27.06.2003, the Assessing Officer   started the

proceeding   side   by   side   to   give   effect   to   the   order   dated

27.06.2003.   Vide   order   dated   15.09.2003,   the   Assessing

Officer held that the difference being sum of Rs 6,80,40,649/­

paid   to   the   Respondent   by   P&G,   USA   shall   be   treated   as

capital gains on transfer/redemption of shares, and hence, the

Respondent   is   liable   to   pay   tax   on   capital   gains.   Being

aggrieved   with   the   order   dated   15.09.2003,   the   Respondent

filed   an   appeal   before   the   CIT   (Appeals)   being   No.   CAB/V­

37/04­05 which was upheld by learned CIT (Appeals) in favour
3
of   Assessing   Officer   while   dismissing   the   appeal   of   the

Respondent.
(g)   Being   dissatisfied,   the   Respondent   further   preferred   an

appeal   before   the   Tribunal.   The   Tribunal,   vide   order   dated

24.09.2010,   dismissed   the   appeal.     The   decision   of   the

Tribunal dated 24.09.2010 was not challenged further.
(h)   The Division Bench of the High Court, vide judgment and

order   dated   23.12.2004,   allowed   the   appeal   filed   by   the

Respondent while dismissing the appeal of the Revenue.
(i)   Hence,   the   present   appeals   have   been   filed   by   the

Revenue before this Court.
4)    We   have   given   our   thoughtful   consideration   to   the

submissions   of   leaned   senior   counsel   for   the   parties   and

perused the factual matrix of the case.
Point(s) for consideration:­
5)    Whether   in   the   present   facts   and   circumstances  of   the

case,   any   interference   by   this   Court   is   required   with   the

impugned decision of the High Court?
Rival contentions:­
4
6)    At the outset, learned counsel for the Revenue contended

that   the   High   Court   erred   in   law   while   upholding   that   the

amount received on redemption of Stock Appreciation Rights

(SARs)   is   to   be   treated   as   capital   gains   and   not   perquisite

under
section 17(2)(iii)
of the IT Act.  However, the same is not

taxable   under   the   category   of   capital   gains   since   no

consideration had passed from the Respondent.
7)    In   support   of   his   argument,   learned   counsel   placed

reliance   on
Sumit   Bhattacharya  vs.  ACIT   Circle
16(1),

Mumbai  ­  [2008] 112 ITD 1 (MUM.) (SB) and contended that

the Respondent, having received an amount on redemption of

Stock   Appreciation   Rights   (SARs)   as   an   employee   of   the

company   and   there   was   an   employer­employee   relationship

subsisting at the relevant point of time, therefore, the amount

received on redemption of Share Appreciation Rights must be

treated   as   taxable   income   under   the   head   income   from

“Salaries”.     Learned   counsel   finally   contended   that   the

impugned decision of the High Court deserves to be set aside.
5
8)  Per   contra,   learned   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the

Respondent   submitted   that   the   amount   received   by   the

Respondent   from   redemption   of   Stock   Appreciation   Rights

(SARs)   can   be   treated   only   as   capital   gains   and   cannot   be

treated as perquisite under
Section 17(2) (iii)
of the IT Act or

under
Section 28 (iv)
of the IT Act. However, it was pointed out

that   the   said   capital   gains   cannot   be   said   to   arose   to   the

Respondent since there was no consideration paid as the cost

of acquisition by the Respondent. It was also submitted that

such   amount   received   on   account   of   redemption   of   Stock

Appreciation Rights could have been taxed if at all under the

provisions   of   Clause   (iiia)   of
Section   17(2)
of   the   IT   Act.

Finally, it was also submitted that the question of law sought

to be raised by the Revenue is no more  res integra  as settled

by this Court in the case of
Commissioner of Income Tax vs.

Infosys Technologies Ltd.
,  [2008] 297 ITR 167 (SC). Hence,

these appeals deserve to be dismissed at the threshold.

Discussion:­
6
9)    Before examining the case at hand, it is pertinent to have

an   understanding   of   the   words   “Perquisite”   and   “Capital

Gains”.   The   word   “Perquisite”   in   common   parlance   may   be

defined   as   any   perk   or   benefit   attached   to   an   employee   or

position   besides   salary   or   remuneration.   Broadly   speaking,

these are usually non­cash benefits given by an employer to

an employee in addition to entitled salary or remuneration. It

may be said that these benefits are generally provided by the

employers   in   order   to   retain   the   talented   employees   in   the

organization. There are various instances of perquisite such as

concessional   rent   accommodation   provided   by   the   employer,

any sum paid by an employer in respect of an obligation which

was actually payable by the employee etc.
Section 17(2)
of the

IT Act was enacted by the legislature to give the broad view of

term perquisite. On the other hand, the word ‘Capital Gains’

means a profit from the sale of property or an investment. It

may be short term or long term depending upon the facts and

circumstances of each case. This gain or profit is charged to

tax in the  year in which transfer of the capital assets takes
7
place.   In   the   instant   case,   the   fundamental   question   which

arises for consideration before this Court is with regard to the

taxability   of   the   amount   received   by   the   Respondent   on

redemption of Stock Appreciation Rights (SARs.)
10)   It   is   a   matter   of   record   that   the   Respondent   was

employed   as   the   Chairman­cum­Managing   Director   of   the

(P&G) India Ltd. at the relevant time and the said company is

the   subsidiary   of   (P&G)   USA   through   Richardson   Vicks   Inc.

USA   and   that   (P&G)   USA   owned   controlling   equity.   It   is   an

undisputed   fact   that   the   Respondent   was   working   as   a

salaried employee. The (P&G) USA was the company who had

issued   the   Stock   Appreciation   Rights   (SARs.)   to   the

Respondent without any consideration from 1991 to 1996. The

said SARs were redeemed on 15.10.1997 and in lieu of that

the Respondent received an amount of Rs 6,80,40,724/­ from

(P&G) USA. However, when the Respondent filed his return, he

claimed   this   amount   as   an   exemption   from   the   ambit   of

Income Tax. The issue involved in this appeal is in respect of
8
Rs   6,80,40,724/­   made   on   account   of   amount   received   on

redemption of Stock Appreciation Rights.
11)   The Tribunal was of the view that the stock options are

capital assets and such assets in the instant case acquired for

consideration, hence, gain arising therefrom is liable to capital

gain   tax.   However,   the   stand   of   the   Revenue   before   the

Tribunal   was   that   the   amount   in   question   is   taxable   as

perquisite   under
Section   17(2)(iii)
of   the   IT   Act   or   in

alternatively   under
Section   28(iv)
of   the   IT   Act   instead   of

capital   gains.   The   High   Court   also   upheld   the   view   of   the

Tribunal but the High Court disagreed that such capital gains

arose to the Respondent on redemption of Stock Appreciation

Rights since there was no cost of acquisition involved from the

side of the Respondent. The meaning of the word perquisite for

the instant case is given under
Section 17(2)
of the IT Act. The

Revenue   alternatively   contended   that   the   case   of   the

Respondent should come under the ambit of
Section 28(iv)
of

the IT Act.
9
12)   It is apposite to note here that, particularly, in order to

bring   the   perquisite   transferred   by   the   employer   to   the

employees   within   the   ambit   of   tax,   legislature   brought   an

amendment under
Section 17
of the IT Act by inserting Clause

(iiia) in
Section 17(2)
of the IT Act through the
Finance Act,

1999
(27 of 1999) with effect from 01.04.2000, which was later

on omitted by the
Finance Act, 2000
. The said Clause (iiia) as

it was then is reproduced herein below:
“(iiia)   the   value   of   any   specified   security   allotted   or
      transferred, directly or indirectly, by any person free of
      cost or at concessional rate, to an individual who is or
      has been in employment of that person:
Provided that in a case where allotment or transfer of
      specified securities is made in pursuance of an option
      exercised   by   an   individual,   the   value   of   the   specified
      securities shall be taxable in the previous year in which
      such option is exercised by such individual.

      Explanation­ For the purposes of this clause,­
(a) “cost’ means the amount actually paid for acquiring
      specified securities and where no money has been paid,
      the cost shall be taken as nil;
(b) “specified securities” means the securities as defined
      in   clause(h)   of
section   2
of   the   Securities   Contracts
      (Regulation)   Act,   1956   (42   of   1956)   and   includes
      employees’ stock option and sweet equity shares;
(c) “sweat equity shares” means equity shares issued by
      a company to its employees or directors at a discount or
      for  consideration   other   than   cash   for   providing   know­
      how   or   making   available   rights   in   the   nature   of
10
intellectual   property   rights   or   value   additions,   by
      whatever name called; and
(d) “value” means the difference between the fair market
      value and the cost for acquiring specified securities;”
13)   The intention behind the said amendment brought by the

legislature   was   to   bring   the   benefits   transferred   by   the

employer to the employees as in the instant case, within the

ambit of the
Income Tax Act, 1961
. It was the first time when

the legislature specified the meaning of the cost for acquiring

specific   securities.   Only   by   this   amendment,   legislature

determined   what  would constitute the specific securities. By

this   amendment,   legislature   clearly   covered   the   direct   or

indirect  transfer   of   specified  securities  from  the  employer   to

the employees during or after the employment. On a perusal of

the said clause, it is evident that the case of the Respondent

falls under such clause. However, since the transaction in the

instant   case   pertains   to   prior   to   01.04.2000,   hence,   such

transaction   cannot   be   covered   under   the   said   clause   in   the

absence of an express provision of retrospective effect. We also

do not find any force in the argument of the Revenue that the
11
case of the Respondent would fall under the ambit of
Section

17(2) (iii)
of the IT Act instead of
Section 17(2) (iiia)
of the IT

Act. It is a fundamental principle of law that a receipt under

the
IT Act
must be made taxable before it can be treated as

income. Courts cannot construe the law in such a way that

brings an individual within the ambit of
Income Tax Act
to pay

tax who otherwise is not liable to pay. In the absence of any

such specific provision, if an individual is subjected to pay tax,

it would amount to the violation of his Constitutional Right.
14)   It is pertinent to note that on the point of applicability of

clause (iiia) of
Section 17(2)
of the IT Act, this Court settled the

position in
Infosys Technologies Ltd
(supra),  and has held

as under:­



      “17. Be that as it may, proceeding on the basis that there
      was “benefit” the question is whether every benefit received
      by the person is taxable as income?
In our view, it is not so.
Unless the benefit is made taxable, it cannot be regarded as
      income. During the relevant assessment years, there was no
      provision in law which made such benefit taxable as income.
      Further,   as   stated,   the   benefit   was   prospective.   Unless   a
      benefit is in the nature of income or specifically included by
      the legislature as part of income, the same is not taxable. In
      this case, the shares could not be obtained by the employees
      till the lock­in period was over. On facts, we hold that in the
12
absence of legislative mandate a potential benefit could not
      be   considered   as   “income”   of   the   employee(s)   chargeable
      under the head “salaries”…..”
15)   The Revenue also contended before the High Court that

the amendment brought in by
Section 17(2)
of the IT Act was

clarificatory, hence, retrospective in nature. However, the High

Court rejected the stand of the Revenue. The High Court, in its

impugned judgment, on the point of the applicability of clause

has held as under:­



      “15.
In the case of
Commissioner of Income­Tax, Bangalore
      vs B.C. Srinivasa Setty
[(1981) 128 ITR 294 (SC)] this Court
      held   that   the   charging   section   and   computation   provision
      under   the   1961   Act   constituted   an   integrated   code.   The
      mechanism introduced for the first time under the
Finance
      Act, 1999
by which cost was explained in the manner stated
      above was not there prior to 1.4.2000. The new mechanism
      stood   introduced   w.e.f.   1.4.2000   only.   With   the   above
      definition of the word cost introduced vide clause (iiia), the
      value of option became ascertainable. There is nothing in the
Memorandum to the Finance Act, 1999
to say that this new
      mechanism   would   operate   retrospectively.   Further,   a
      mechanism   which   explains   cost   in   the   manner   indicated
      above cannot be read retrospectively unless the Legislature
      expressly says so. It was not capable of being implemented
      retrospectively. Till 1.4.2000, in the absence of the definition
      of the word cost value of the option was not ascertainable. In
      our   view,   clause   (iiia)   is   not   clarificatory.   Moreover,   the
      meaning of the words specified securities in section (iiia) was
      defined or explained for the first time vide
Finance Act
, 1999
      w.e.f. 1.4.2000.Morevover, the words allotted or transferred
      in clause (iiia) made things clear only after 1.4.2000. Lastly,
      it   may   be   pointed   out   that   even   clause   (iiia)   has   been
13
subsequently   deleted   w.e.f.   1.4.2001.   For   the   afore   stated
       reasons, we are of the view the clause (iiia) cannot be read as
       retrospective.”
16)    Circular No. 710 dated 24.07.1995 which was issued by

the   CBDT   deals   with   the   taxability   of   shares   issued   at   less

than the market price. For ready reference, Circular No. 710

issued by the CBDT is reproduced hereinbelow:­


       “202. Taxability of the perequisite on shares issued to 
       employees at less than market price:
1.    Chief   Commissioners   and   corporate   assessees   have
       been seeking clarification regarding  taxability   of   the
       perquisite   on   shares   issued   to   the   employees   at   less   than
       market price.
2.    The   matter   has   been   considered   by   the   Board.   The
       benefit does amount to a perquisite within the   meaning   of
       clause (iii) of sub­section (2) of
Section 17
of the Income­
Tax
       Act, 1961
.   The various situations in this regard have to be
       dealt with as under:
(i)     where the shares held by the Government have
             been   transferred   to   the   employee,   there   will   be   no
             perquisite because the employer­employee relationship
             does not exist between Government and the employee
             (transferor and the transferee);
(ii)    where   the   company   offers   shares   to   the
             employees at the same price as have been  offered   to
             the other shareholders or the general public, there will
             be no perquisite;
(iii)   where the employer has offered the shares to its
             employees at a price lower than the one at which the
             shares   have   been   offered   to   the   other
             shareholders/public,   the   difference   between   the   two
             prices will be taxed as perquisite;
(iv)    where the shares have been offered only to the
             employees, the value of perqusite will be the difference
             between the market price of the shares on the date of
14
acceptance of the offer by the employee and the price
            at which the shares have been offered.”
             
On a perusal of the above,  prima facie,  it appears that such

Circular   dealt   with   the   cases   where   the   employer   issued

shares to the employees at less than the market price. In the

instant case, the Respondent was allotted Stock Appreciation

Rights (SARs.) by the (P&G) USA which is different from the

allotment of shares. Hence, in our opinion such Circular has

no   applicability   on   the   instant   case.   Moreover,   a   Circular

cannot be used to introduce a new tax provision in a Statute

which was otherwise absent.
17)     Alternatively, the Revenue also contended that the case

of the Respondent shall come within the ambit of the
Section

28(iv)
of the IT Act. At this juncture, we deem it appropriate,

for the sake of convenience, to refer
Section 28(iv)
of the IT Act

which is reproduced herein below:­



      “28. Profits and gains of business or profession.­The
      following   income   shall   be   chargeable   to   income­tax
      under   the   head   “Profits   and   gains   of   business   or
      profession”­
15
(iv)   the   value   of   any   benefit   or   perquisite,   whether
      convertible into money or not, arising from business or
      the exercise of a profession.”

On a first look of the said provision, it is apparent that such

benefit   or   perquisite   shall   have   arisen   from   the   business

activities   or   profession   whereas   in   the   instant   case   there   is

nothing as such. The applicability of
Section 28(iv)
is confined

only   to   the   case   where   there   is   any   business   or   profession

related transaction involved. Hence, the instant case cannot be

covered under
Section 28(iv)
of the IT Act for the purpose of

tax liability.
18)     To sum up, the Respondent got the Stock Appreciation

Rights (SARs) and, eventually received an amount on account

of   its   redemption   prior   to   01.04.2000   on   which   the

amendment of
Finance Act, 1999
(27 of 1999) came into force.
In   the   absence   of   any   express   statutory   provision   regarding

the applicability of such amendment from retrospective effect,

we do not find any force in the argument of the Revenue that

such   amendment   came   into   force   retrospectively.   It   is   well

established rule of interpretation that taxing provisions shall
16
be construed strictly so that no person who is otherwise not

liable to pay tax, be made liable to pay tax.
19)   In view of above discussion, we are of the considered view

that these instant appeals are devoid of merits and deserve to

be dismissed. Accordingly, these are hereby dismissed leaving

parties to bear their own cost.
…….....…………………………………J. 
                                (R.K. AGRAWAL)


                            …….…………….………………………J.
                             (ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 24, 2018.
17