[Cites
26
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Raj Kumar Gandhi vs Chandigarh Administration on 11 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1114
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
Uday Umesh Lalit
,
Arun Mishra
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS.4265­4266 OF 2008

          RAJ KUMAR GANDHI                                         … APPELLANT

                                                VERSUS

          CHANDIGARH ADMINISTRATION & ORS.                         … RESPONDENTS
                                  WITH

                                 CIVIL  APPEAL NOS.4267­4268 OF 2008 

          AVTAR SINGH (D) THR. LRS.                                … APPELLANT

                                                VERSUS

          UNION TERRITORY OF CHANDIGARH & ANR.                     … RESPONDENTS
                                  AND

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.6002­6003 OF 2009

          KAILASH WATI & ORS.                                      … APPELLANTS

                                                VERSUS

          UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                    … RESPONDENTS


                                            J U D G M E N T

          ARUN MISHRA, J.
1.             The appeals have been filed aggrieved by the judgment and order

          passed by the High Court, dismissing the writ petitions filed to question
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEELAM GULATI
the land acquisition made with respect to Scheme No.3, Pocket No.8.
Date: 2018.05.12
11:11:19 IST
Reason:
1
2.    A notification under
section 4
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894

(for   short,   “the   Act”)   was   issued   on   31.1.1992.   Public   purpose

mentioned   was   for   the   development   of   residential   cum   commercial

complex in scheme No.3. Declaration under
section 6
of the Act was

issued on 29.1.1993. The petitioners filed a writ petition on 28.7.2004

questioning   the   acquisition   as   well   as   the   award   dated   5.3.2003.

According to the petitioners it was passed after the lapse of three years

of the notification issued under
section 6
of the Act after excluding the

period   of   interim   stay   granted   by   the   court.   The   acquisition   had

lapsed. The second ground raised to assail the award was that it was

not approved by the appropriate Government but by the Advisor to the

Administrator of Union Territory.
3.    In   the   reply   filed   by   the   Chandigarh   Administration,   it   was

contended that as many as 31 writ petitions were filed challenging the

said notifications issued under
sections 4
and
6
respectively. In the

writ   petitions   including   C.W.P   No.2126   of   1993,   further   land

acquisition   proceedings   were   stayed   by   an   interim   order   dated

24.2.1993.   Ultimately   these   writ   petitions   were   dismissed   by   the

Division   Bench   on   22.9.1995.   Thereafter,   yet   another   writ   petition

C.W.P. No.4433 of 1996 was filed in which further proceedings stayed

till  further  orders.  It  was  allowed   by  a  short  order dated   11.8.1997
2
without   noticing  the   earlier  stay   of  proceedings   and   the   notification

under
section   4
and   declaration   under
section   6
were   quashed.

Chandigarh   Administration   then   filed   review   application   which   was

allowed   by   a   detailed   order   dated   31.1.2003   and   order   dated

11.8.1997, allowing writ petition, was recalled. A number of other writ

petitions   were   also   filed   being   C.W.P.   No.14804   of   1993,   C.W.P.

No.14892 of 1998, and C.W.P. No.14903 of 1998. There was a stay of

further proceedings but ultimately these were dismissed on 30.9.1998.

Another batch of writ petitions being C.W.P. No.10287 of 1997, C.W.P.

No.10668   of   1997,   C.W.P.   No.10676   of   1997,   C.W.P.   No.10589   of

1997,   C.W.P.   No.10960   of   1997,   C.W.P.   No.10661   of   1997,   C.W.P.

No.12043 of 1997 and C.W.P. No.16715 of 1997 were also filed. There

was a stay of further proceedings but ultimately these writ petitions

were also dismissed by the Division Bench on 4.8.1998. Thus, there

were 43 different writ petitions. Further proceedings remained under

stay   from   24.2.1993   to   31.1.2003.   Thereafter,   public   notice   under
section   9
was   issued   on   6.2.2003   for   filing   the   objections   up   to

28.2.2003.   Public   notice   to   this   effect   was   published   in   leading

newspapers   on   8.2.2003   and   9.2.2003.   Individual   intimations   were

also   sent   to   all   the   landowners   to   file   their   objections.   Thereafter,

award was pronounced on 5.3.2003 and again  ex parte interim stay

had been obtained on 1.3.2005 by mentioning the wrong facts. After
3
excluding the period of stay the award had been pronounced within

the period of two years from the date of declaration published under
section 6
of the Act. The construction raised was unauthorised and

against   the   provisions   of   the   Periphery   Control   Act.   Therefore,   the

exemption was not granted. Notifications under
section 4
were issued

after sanctioning by the Administrator. Thus, there was no illegality in

the acquisition.
4.    The High Court by the impugned judgment and order has opined

that considering the various periods of stay mentioned in the order,

the award has been passed within a period of 701 days from the date

of the declaration issued under
section 6
and the decision in Kailash

Wati   &   Ors.   v.   Union   of   India,   C.W.P.   No.11352   of   2004   had   been

followed in a large number of cases. They were related to the same

notification of the very same Pocket or in respect of the other Pockets

of the same scheme No.3. Notifications under
section 4
with respect to

scheme No.3 were issued on the same day so also declaration under
section 6
of the Act as there was one common purpose and scheme

No.3  was  formed  for the development of residential­cum­commercial

complex,   college   building,   and   sports   stadium.
The   decision   in
Devinder   Kumar   v.   UT   Chandigarh
–   C.W.P.   No.14804   of   1998   was

rendered  on   30.9.1998   and  Kailash   Wati  (supra)   was   decided   on
4
14.12.2006. File of the award was sent for approval to the Government

and was approved by the Advisor.
5.     This Court has also affirmed the judgment of the High Court in

C.W.P.  No.10297  of  1997  and   C.W.P.   No.10580   of   1997   decided   on

4.8.1998 in S.L.P. [C] Nos.974­975 of 1999 ­­­
Puran Chand Gupta &

Ors.   v.   Union   of   India   &   Ors.
which   was   dismissed   on   1.2.1999.
In
Devinder Kumar
(supra) it was held that the moment the court grants

stay,   it   becomes   impracticable,   if   not   impossible,   to   execute   the

scheme   for   the   land   stands   notified   for   acquisition   and   everything

comes   to   a   standstill.   It   is   wholly   immaterial   whether   or   not   a

particular individual had obtained stay qua acquisition of his land or

not.   The   concerned   authorities   could   not   have   proceeded   further   to

execute the same. The purpose of the scheme could not be achieved if

the stay was granted. With respect to land in Pocket Nos.6 and 8, in

view   of   stay   granted   in   any   of   the   notifications/declarations   under
sections 4
and
6
either pertaining to Pocket No.8 or Pocket No.6. As

the writ petitions have been dismissed by the High Court, hence the

appeals have been preferred.
6.     It was strenuously urged by learned counsel appearing on behalf

of the appellants that the award passed is violative of the proviso to

section 11A and the interpretation put on the explanation by the High
5
Court is erroneous. Therefore, award having been passed beyond two

years   of   the   declaration   under
section   6
of   the   Act,   the   acquisition

stood   lapsed.   Learned   counsel   has   submitted   that   the   land   is   in

Pocket   No.8.   In   the   case   of  Partap   Chand   v.   Union   Territory,

Chandigarh, CWP No.2126 of 1993, the interim stay granted could not

have   been   applied   to   the   declaration   under
section   6
issued   in   the

instant   case   with   respect   to   Pocket   No.8   which   was   issued   on

29.1.1993 as the land of Partap Chand was in Pocket No.7 for which a

different   notification   was   issued   under
section   4
so   also   the

declaration   under
section   6
.
The   High   Court   has   also   counted   the

period of stay in
Puran Chand & Ors. v. U.T. Chandigarh
which was

with respect to Pocket No.7.
The aforesaid decisions were followed in

the cases of
Puran Chand Gupta
(supra), Kailash Wati (supra), Avatar

Singh and Raj Kumar Gandhi while dismissing the writ petitions.
7.     It was further urged by the learned counsel that the decision of

this Court in
Government of Tamil Nadu & Anr. v. Vasantha Bai
(1995)

Supp 2 SCC 423 and  Abhey Ram (Dead) by LRs. & Ors. v. Union of

India & Ors. (1997) 5 SCC 421 had been misinterpreted to the extent

that   the   stay   orders   granted   in   different   notifications   were   also

extended to other notifications. The law laid down by this Court is that

the stay granted in one case filed by the landowner can be extended to
6
the land of other landowners. The abovesaid logic could not have been

applied to different notifications with respect to different Pockets of the

land.  There is a distance of about 100 ft. There is a road in­between.

There was no need to describe them in Pocket Nos.7 and 8 if they were

not different.
8.    It was also urged on behalf of the appellant that the award under
section 11
is violative of the proviso to
section 11
as the approval of

the appropriate Government has not been taken. Award was approved

by the Advisor on 28.2.2003. Chandigarh being Union Territory, the

Administrator ought to have approved the award as per
Article 239
of

the Constitution of India. Therefore, the award suffers from the vice of

not being previously approved by the appropriate Government.
9.    The   first   question   for   consideration   is   whether   the   award   was

passed within the period stipulated under section 11A from the date of

publication of declaration under
section 6
excluding the period of stay.

It   is   apparent   from   the   notification   issued   under
section   4
and

declaration under
section 6
that notification under
section 4
had been

issued   for   the   development   of   residential­cum­commercial   complex

and for construction of college building and sports stadium etc. by the

Notified Area Committee, Manimajra, Union Territory Chandigarh and

declarations under
section 6
had also been  issued for the aforesaid
7
purpose i.e. Scheme No.3. Though different notification under
section

21
and declaration under
section 6
had been issued, they are related

to scheme No.3 only. Scheme No.3 is one and this aspect has been

considered by the High Court in the decisions of
Puran Chand Gupta

&   Ors.
(supra)   and
Devinder   Kumar
(supra)   and   the   matters   have

travelled to this Court with respect to same notification and a 3­Judge

Bench of this Court in the case of Puran Chand Gupta & Ors. v. Union

of India & Ors., C.A. Nos.663­664 of 2000 decided on 8.8.2001 has

observed:
“The point at issue is covered by the judgment of a Bench of
            three learned Judges delivered in
Yusufbhai Noormohmed
            Nendoliya vs. State of Gujarat & Anr.
(1991 (4) S.C.C. 531).
            That Judgment has been subsequently followed by several
            Benches of this court. It has been urged by Mr. R.K. Jain,
            learned counsel for the appellants, that the view taken therein
            can be contrary to the interest of the landholder and that,
            therefore, the Section should be so construed that it refers only
            to an order of stay obtained by a particular landholder in
            whose case alone the Explanation would apply. Having regard
            to the view that has consistently been taken by this court over
            several years, we are not disposed to take a contrary view and
            refer the matter to a larger Bench.
Accordingly, the civil appeals are dismissed.
            No order as to costs.”
10.
In
Devinder Kumar
(supra) also the question about Pocket Nos.8

and 6 was considered and the High Court has held that it would not

make any difference in the matter as the scheme was one.
Thus, it is

apparent that in view of the decision in
Puran Chand Gupta
(supra)

rendered by a 3­Judge Bench of this Court, no case for interference is
8
made out on merits of the case.
As the question raised is similar as

urged in the aforesaid matter, a large number of matters were decided

along with
Puran Chand
(supra) by the High Court. When the scheme

was   same  i.e.  No.3,   obviously   authorities   could   not   have   proceeded

further pocket­wise and they were justified not to proceed further in

view of the various stay orders granted by the High Court from time to

time with respect to different pockets of the scheme No.3.
In view of

the decision in
Puran Chand Gupta
(supra) which has dealt with the

case by a reasoned order, we do not find it appropriate to interfere on

the aforesaid ground urged by learned counsel appearing on behalf of

the appellants.
11.   In  Abhey Ram  (supra) this  Court has  considered the  extended

meaning of the words “stay of the action or proceedings” and referring

to various decisions, observed that any type of the orders passed by

the Court would be an inhibitive action on the part of the authorities

to proceed further. This Court has observed thus:
“9. Therefore, the reason given in
B.R. Gupta v. U.O.I. and
            Ors.
37 (1989) DLT 150 (Del) (DB) are obvious with
            reference to the quashing of the publication of the declaration
            under
Section 6
vis-a-vis the writ petitioners therein. The
            question thus arise for consideration is: whether the stay
            obtained by some of the persons who prohibited the
            respondents from publication of the declaration under
Section
            6
would equally be extendible to the cases relating to the
            appellants.
We proceed on the premise that the appellants had
            not obtained any stay of the publication of the declaration but
            since the High Court in some of the cases has, in fact,
9
prohibited them as extracted hereinbefore, from publication of
           the declaration, necessarily, when the Court has not restricted
           the declaration in the impugned orders in support of the
           petitioners therein, the officers had to hold back their hands
           till the matters are disposed of. In fact, this Court has given
           extended meaning to the orders of stay or proceeding in
           various cases, namely, Yusufbhai Noormohmed Nendoliya v.
State of Gujarat and Anr. AIR 1991 SC 2153; Hansraj Jain v.
           State of Maharashtra and Ors. JT (1993) 4 SC 360;
Sangappa
           Gurulingappa Sajjan v. State of Kamataka and Ors.
(1994) 4
           SCC 145; Gandhi Grah Nirman Sahkari Samiti Ltd. Etc. Etc.
           v. State of Rajasthan and Ors. JT (1993) 3 SC 194; G.
           Narayanaswamy Reddy (dead) by Lrs.
and
Anr. v. Govt. of
           Karnataka and Anr. JT
(1991) 3 SC 12 and Roshanara Begum
           Etc. v. U.O.I. and Ors. (1986) 1 Apex Dec 6. The words "stay
           of the action or proceeding" have been widely interpreted by
           this Court and mean that any type of the orders passed by this
           Court would be an inhibitive action on the part of the
           authorities to proceed further. When the action of conducting
           an enquiry under Section 5-A was put in issue and the
           declaration under
Section 6
was questioned, necessarily unless
           the Court holds that enquiry under Section 5-A was properly
           conducted and the declaration published under
Section 6
to be
           valid, it would not be open to the officers to proceed further
           into the matter. As a consequence, the stay granted in respect
           of some would be applicable to others also who had not
           obtained stay in that behalf. We are not concerned with the
           correctness of the earlier direction with regard to Section 5-A
           enquiry and consideration of objections as it was not
           challenged by the respondent union. We express no opinion on
           its correctness, though it is open to doubt.”
12.
In
Om Parkash v. Union of India & Ors.
(2010) 4 SCC 17, this

Court as to the effect of interim stay has observed thus:
“72. Thus, in other words, the interim order of stay granted in
           one of the matters of the landowners would put complete
           restraint on the respondents to have proceeded further to issue
           notification under
Section 6
of the Act. Had they issued the
           said notification during the period when the stay was
           operative, then obviously they may have been hauled up for
           committing contempt of court. The language employed in the
           interim orders of stay is also such that it had completely
           restrained the respondents from proceeding further in the
10
matter by issuing declaration/notification under
Section 6
of
             the Act.”


      Thus, it is apparent that when the stay has been granted in one

matter and when the scheme was one, authorities were justified in the

facts   and   circumstances   of   the   instant   case   to   stay   their   hands.
Moreover, a large number of writ petitions have been dismissed by the

High Court and orders have attained finality and this Court has also

dismissed   the   appeals/S.L.P.s.   Thus,   we   are   not   inclined   to   take   a

different view in the instant case.
13.   Learned counsel has also referred to the decision of
Government

of T.N. & Anr. v. Vasantha Bai
(1995) Supp. 2 SCC 423, in which this

Court has considered the object of section 11A as delay in passing the

award would cause untold hardship and in case the award was not

passed within the time limit, the acquisition would lapse.
Yusufbhai’s

decision (supra) has been relied upon so also the decision of Singappa

v. State of Karnataka (supra). There is no dispute with the proposition

laid down in the aforesaid decisions. However, facts of each and every

case have to be seen and whether time can be excluded or not, it has

also been laid down that the time spent during which there was stay,

has   to   be   excluded.
Thus,   no  sustenance   can   be   derived   from   the

aforesaid decision of
Vasantha Bai
(supra) by the appellants in which

it was observed:
11
“5. Parliament enacted Section 11A with a view to prevent
             inordinate delay being made by the Land Acquisition Officer
             in making the award. The price to be paid for the land
             acquired under compulsory acquisition is the prevailing price
             as on the date of publication of
Section 4(1)
notification. The
             delay in making the award deprives the owner of the
             enjoyment of his property or to deal with the land whose
             possession has already been taken, and delay in making the
             award would subject the owner of the land to untold hardship.
             With a view to relieve hardship to the owner or person
             interested in the land and to remedy the lapses on the part of
             the Land Acquisition Officer in making the award, Section
             11A was enacted which enjoins making of award
             expeditiously. So, the outer limit of two years from the last of
             the dates of publications, envisaged in
Section 6
of the Act
             was fixed. If he fails to do so, all the acquisition proceedings
             under the Act would stand lapsed and the owner of the land or
             person interested in the land is made free to deal with the land
             as an unencumbered land. Cognizant to the fact that the
             acquisition proceedings are questioned in a court of law, the
             Parliament enacted Explanation to Section 11-A declaring that
             the period during which action or proceedings were taken in
             pursuance of the declaration under
Section 6
is stayed by an
             order of the court, the same "shall be excluded".
14.   Learned   counsel   has   also   relied   upon
Yusufbhai   Noormohmed

Nendoliya v. State of Gujarat & Anr.
(1991) 4 SCC 531 in which this

Court has opined that the Explanation to section 11A is in the widest

possible   terms   and   there   is   no   warrant   for   limiting   the   action   or

proceedings referred to in the Explanation to actions or proceedings

preceding the making of the award under
section 11
. Therefore, the

period   of   an   injunction   obtained   by   the   landholder   from   the   High

Court   restraining   the   land   acquisition   authorities   from   taking

possession of the land has to be excluded in computing the period of

two years. The decision is of no help to the submission espoused on
12
behalf   of   the   appellant.
This   Court   in
Yusufbhai   Noormohmed

Nendoliya
(supra) observed:
"7. The said Explanation is in the widest possible terms and,
             in our opinion, there is no warrant for limiting the action or
             proceeding referred to in the Explanation to actions or
             proceedings preceding the making of the award under
Section
             11
of the said Act. In the first place, as held by the learned
             Single Judge himself where the case is covered by
Section 17
,
             the possession can be taken before an award is made and we
             see no reason why the aforesaid expression in the Explanation
             should be given a different meaning depending upon whether
             the case is covered by
Section 17
or otherwise. On the other
             hand, it appears to us that Section 11-A is intended to limit the
             benefit conferred on a landholder whose land is acquired after
             the declaration under
Section 6
is made to in cases covered by
             the Explanation. The benefit is that the award must be made
             within a period of two years of the declaration, failing which
             the acquisition proceedings would lapse and the land would
             revert to the land-holder. In order to get the benefit of the said
             provision what is required, is that the land-holder who seeks
             the benefit must not have obtained any order from a court
             restraining any action or proceeding in pursuance of the
             declaration under
Section 6
of the said Act so that the
             Explanation covers only the cases of those land-holders who
             do not obtain any order from a court which would delay or
             prevent the making of the award or taking possession of the
             land acquired. In our opinion, the Gujarat High Court was
             right in taking a similar view in the impugned judgment."
15.   Reliance has also been placed on
Sangappa Gurulingappa Sajjan

v. State of Karnataka & Ors.
(1994) 4 SCC 145, in which this Court

has laid down that in case there was a stay of dispossession, no useful

purpose   would   be   served   by   issuing   a   declaration   under
section   6
.

Therefore, the period during which the order of dispossession granted

by   the   High   Court   operated,   should   be   excluded   in   the   computing

period.
In
Sangappa Gurulingappa Sajjan
(supra) this Court observed:
13
"2. The petitioner contends that the declaration under
Section
6
was not published within three years from the date of the
Notification dated May 17, 1984, and, therefore, the
Notification under
Section 4(1)
shall stand lapsed. We find no
substance in the contention. Firstly the case would be
dismissed on a short ground that though this plea was
available to the petitioner, he did not raise the same in the first
instance and that, therefore, by operation of
Section 11
C.P.C.
it operates as constructive res judicata. Under first proviso to
Section 6(1)
, as amended in the
Land Acquisition
(Amendment) Act
68 of 1984 through
Section 6
thereof that
(i) no declaration in respect of any particular land covered by
a notification under
Section 4
, Sub-section (1) shall be
published after the commencement of the Land Acquisition
(Amendment and Validation) Ordinance. 1967. but before the
commencement of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act,
1984, after the expiry of three years from the date of the
publication of the notification or (ii) after the commencement
of the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1984 shall be
made after the expiry of one year from the date of the
publication of the notification. In other words, under the pre-
Amendment Act the declaration under
Section 6(1)
shall not
be published after the expiry of three years from the date of
Section 4(1)
publication and after the commencement of the
Amendment Act, the State has no power to proceed with the
mater and publish the declaration under
Section 6(1)
after the
expiry of one year from the date of the publication of the
notification. Explanation 1 thereto provides the method or
mode of computation of the period referred to in the first
proviso, namely, the period during which "any action or
proceeding" be taken in pursuance of the notification issued
under Sub-section (1) of
Section 4
being "stayed by an order
of a Court shall be excluded", In other words, the period
occupied by the order of stay made by a Court shall be
excluded. Admittedly, pending writ petition on both the
occasions the High Court granted "stay of dispossession".
Admittedly, the validity of tenability of the notification issued
and published under
Section 4(1)
is subject of adjudication
before the High Court. Till the writ petitions are disposed of
or the appeals following its heels, the stay of dispossession
was in operation. Though there is no specific direction
prohibiting the publication of the declaration under
Section 6
,
no useful purpose would be served by publishing
Section 6(1)
declaration pending adjudication of the legality of
Section
4(1)
notification. If any action is taken to pre-empt the
14
proceedings, it would be stigmatised either as "undue haste"
or action to "over-reach the Court's judicial process".
Therefore, the period during which the order of dispossession
             granted by the High Court operated, should be excluded in
             computation" of the period of three years covered by Clause
             (1) of the first proviso to the
Land Acquisition Act
. When it is
             so computed, the declaration published on the second
             occasion is perfectly valid. Under these circumstances, we do
             not find any justification to quash the notification published
             under
Section 6
dated May 17, 1984. The review petitions are
             accordingly dismissed. No costs.”
16.    In the instant case, various notifications and declarations under
sections 4
and
6
were issued on the same date with respect to the

same scheme. Thus, they were part and parcel of the same scheme.

Thus,   the   submission   raised   by   learned   counsel   for   the   appellant

stands rejected.
17.   The second and the last submission raised by learned counsel

for the appellant is that the award had been approved by the Advisor

to the Administrator whereas it was required to be approved by the

Administrator. In this connection, reliance has been placed upon the
Chandigarh   (Delegation   of   Powers)   Act,   1987
(Act   No.2   of   1988).
Section 3
thereof provides that any power, authority or jurisdiction or

any   duty   which   the   Administrator   may   exercise   or   discharge   under

any law in force in the Union Territory of Chandigarh may be exercised

or   discharged   also   by   such   officer   or   other   authority   as   may   be

specified   in   this   behalf   by   the   Central   Government   or   the
15
Administrator by notification in the Official Gazette, and any appeal or

application for revision can be transferred for disposal to an officer or

other   authority   competent   under   sub­section   (1)   to   dispose   of   the

same.   Ex   post   facto   authorisation   dated   7.12.2015   has   also   been

placed on record given by the Administrator authorising the Advisor

and  validating/approving awards.  As the award was approved by the

Advisor   to   the   Administrator   under   his   delegated   authority,  ex­post

facto  sanction   had   been   granted   by   the   Administrator   to   all   the

awards.
18.    Apart from that the question of an award having been approved

by the advisor to the Administrator was raised in C.W.P. No.17935 of

2014 –
Gagandeep Kang & Ors. v. Union Territory of Chandigarh
. The

writ petition was dismissed by the High Court and the S.L.P. filed in

this Court has also been dismissed by this Court. S.L.P. [C] No.355 of

2015 has also been dismissed along with two other matters by this

Court.
19.    In   view   of   the   various   decisions   rendered   in   the   same   matter

which   have   attained   finality,   it   would   not   be   appropriate   to   take   a

different   view.   Reliance   has   been   placed   by   learned   counsel   for   the

appellant on the decisions of this Court in
Surinder Singh Brar & Ors.

v. Union of India & Ors.
(
2013) 1 SCC 403 and Gurbinder Kaur Brar &
16
Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.
(2013) 11 SCC 228. In both the cases, the

matter was with respect to sanction for land acquisition which was not

granted by the appropriate Government i.e., the Administrator. In the

instant case, the Advisor had approved the award. Since there is  ex­

post facto approval and a large number of other matters have already

been dismissed, it is not considered appropriate to make interference

in this matter on the aforesaid ground, particularly when sanction for

acquisition had been granted by the appropriate authority, is not in

dispute in the instant matter.
20.   Resultantly, the appeals being devoid of merits deserve dismissal

and the same are hereby dismissed. Parties to bear their own costs, as

incurred.
……..…………………..J.
                                                    (ARUN MISHRA)




                                               …….……………………J.
                                              UDAY UMESH LALIT)    
NEW DELHI;
MAY 11, 2018.
17