[Cites
7
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Mahesh Chandra Verma vs The State Of Jharkhand State Of ... on 11 May, 2018
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
J. Chelameswar
REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.4782 OF 2018
                                       [Arising out of SLP(C) No.31167 of 2015]

                         MAHESH CHANDRA VERMA                            ….APPELLANT

                                                          Versus

                         THE STATE OF JHARKHAND
                         Through: ITS CHIEF SECRETARY & ORS. ….RESPONDENTS

                         WITH

                         Civil Appeal No.4784 of 2018
                         [Arising out of SLP(C) No.32438/2015]

                         Civil Appeal No.4783 of 2018
                         [Arising out of SLP(C) No.31857/2015]

                         Civil Appeal Nos.4786-4790 of 2018
                         [Arising out of SLP(C) Nos.34869-34873/2015]

                         Civil Appeal No.4785 of 2018
                         [Arising out of SLP(C) No.34695/2015]

                         Civil Appeal No.4791 of 2018
                         [Arising out of SLP(C) No.10555/2016]

                         Civil Appeal No.4792 of 2018
                         [Arising out of SLP(C) No.19639/2016]

                         Civil Appeal Nos.4794-4795 of 2018
                         [Arising out of SLP(C) Nos.23978-23979/2016]

                         Civil Appeal No.4793 of 2018
                         [Arising out of SLP(C) No.23977/2016]
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
DEEPAK MANSUKHANI
Date: 2018.05.11
16:11:25 IST
Reason:




                                                                                       1
                               JUDGMENT


SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1.    The sole question, which arises for consideration in these

appeals is whether the services rendered by the appellants/Judicial

Officers as Fast Track court Judges is liable to be counted for their

pensionary and other benefits, the appellants having joined the regular

judicial service thereafter.
2.    The question of law arising as aforesaid, it is not necessary to

delve into the facts of each case. Thus, only the facts which are

relevant for the determination of this question are being set out. The

Jharkhand State was carved out from the State of Bihar under the
Bihar

Reorganisation Act, 2000
on 25.11.2000.          Soon thereafter the

Jharkhand High Court, respondent No.2, issued an advertisement on

23.5.2001 to fill up the vacancies for the post of Additional District

Judges in the Jharkhand Superior Judicial Service. The appellants also

took part in the recruitment process and post conduct of examination

and interview, a select list was prepared of 27 candidates, who were

eligible for appointment to the Superior Judicial Service. None of the

appellants, however, figured in the final select list.      A parallel
2
development was the allocation by the 11th Finance Commission of

Rs.502.90 crores under
Article 275
of the Constitution of India, for the

establishment of courts described as the Fast Track courts.1,734 courts

in various States were envisaged to deal with long-pending cases,

specifically, Sessions cases.   The funds allocated by the Finance

Commission were to be utilized in a time bound schedule of five years,

and the State Governments were required to take necessary steps to

establish such courts.
3.    A challenge was laid to this Scheme, known as the Fast Track

Courts Scheme, in various High Courts primarily on the ground that

there was no constitutional sanction for employment of retired Judges,

nor were there effective guidelines in operation. These matters were

transferred to the Supreme Court and all these matters were dealt with
1
in the judgment in
Brij Mohan Lal v. Union of India & Ors.
- [1].

The Scheme was analysed by the Supreme Court and keeping in mind

the laudable objects with which the Fast Track Courts Scheme was set

up, the constitution of these courts was upheld but with certain

directions.   In terms of these directions, the first preference for

appointment to these courts was to be given by ad hoc promotions

1 (2002) 5 SCC 1
3
from amongst eligible Judicial Officers, while the second preference

was to be given to retired Judges who had good service records. The

third preference envisaged was to the members of the Bar for direct

appointment to these courts. The fourth direction in this behalf is as

under:
“4. The third preference shall be given to members of the Bar
         for direct appointment in these Courts. They should be
         preferably in the age group of 35-45 years, so that they could
         aspire to continue against the regular posts if the Fast Track
         Courts cease to function. The question of their continuance in
         service shall be reviewed periodically by the High Court based
         on their performance. They may be absorbed in regular
         vacancies, if subsequent recruitment takes place and their
         performance in the Fast Track Courts is found satisfactory. For
         the initial selection, the High Court shall adopt such methods of
         selection as are normally followed for selection of members of
         the Bar as direct recruits to the Superior/Higher Judicial
         Services.”
4.       It is in furtherance of the aforesaid Fast Track Courts Scheme

that the State of Jharkhand/respondent No.1 is stated to have

constituted more than 80 such Fast Track courts at the level of

Additional District Judges vide Notification dated 29.11.2001. In order

to fill these posts expeditiously, the process of examination having

been conducted immediately before this Notification, a decision was

taken to accommodate the persons from the select list, who could not
4
be accommodated in the regular cadre of Superior Judicial Service, to

the Fast Track courts. The first 17 candidates out of the 27 candidates

in the select list were appointed to the regular cadre on 15.12.2001,

while the remaining 10 candidates were appointed to the Fast Track

courts on 2.2.2002. Since the Fast Track court’s vacancies could not be

filed in by this process, 15 more candidates, under the category of

direct recruitment from the Bar, were appointed from amongst the

candidates who participated in the selection process pursuant to the

advertisement dated 23.5.2001, but were not on the select list. This

process was followed strictly in accordance with the merit of the

candidates beyond the select list. These 15 candidates were appointed

on 23.9.2002.
5.    We may also notice that the existing system of pension and

General Provident Fund ceased to exist for Government servants who

joined in service on or after 1.12.2004 and in lieu of the same a new

Contributory Pension Scheme was introduced for Government

officials, who joined service on or after 1.12.2004. These Government

officials joining on or after 1.12.2004 were mandatorily required to

procure a new Permanent Retirement Account Number (‘PRAN’).
5
6.    In the year 2008, the High Court issued a new selection process

for 34 posts of Additional District Judges through a limited competitive

examination to be held on 31.8.2008. Thereafter began a legal battle

between the persons who were working in the Fast Track courts and

those who would be beneficiaries under the limited competitive

examination. The challenge laid before the Jharkhand High Court

impugning the aforesaid selection process succeeded on 29.8.2008 but

in the Special Leave Petition (‘SLP’) filed, the judgment of the

Jharkhand High Court was set aside in
Srikant Roy v. State of

Jharkhand2
.
The Judicial Officers assailed the appointment of persons

to the post of Fast Track courts and suffice to say that the contest was

carried right till this Court, decided in Mahesh Chandra Verma v.
State of Jharkhand3.
7.    Prior to the judgment in Mahesh Chandra Verma4 the issue of

what is to be done with the Judges appointed to the Fast Track court

after the funding was stopped by the Central Government, and when

2(2017) 1 SCC 457
3(2012) 11 SCC 656
4(supra)
6
the State Government also had a problem of funding, formed subject

matter of directions in
Brij Mohan Lal v. Union of India
5 - [II]. The

relevant paragraphs are as under:
“207.9. All the persons who have been appointed by way of
      direct recruitment from the Bar as Judges to preside over FTCs
      under the FTC Scheme shall be entitled to be appointed to the
      regular cadre of the Higher Judicial Services of the respective
      States only in the following manner:
(a) The direct recruits to FTCs who opt for regularisation shall
      take a written examination to be conducted by the High Courts
      of the respective States for determining their suitability for
      absorption in the regular cadre of Additional District Judges.
(b) Thereafter, they shall be subjected to an interview by a
      Selection Committee consisting of the Chief Justice and four
      senior most Judges of that High Court.
(c) There shall be 150 marks for the written examination and 100
      marks for the interview. The qualifying marks shall be 40%
      aggregate for general candidates and 35% for SC/ST/OBC
      candidates. The examination and interview shall be held in
      accordance with the relevant Rules enacted by the States for
      direct appointment to Higher Judicial Services.
(d) Each of the appointees shall be entitled to one mark per year
      of service in the FTCs, which shall form part of the interview
      marks.
(e) Needless to point out that this examination and interview
      should be conducted by the respective High Courts keeping in
      mind that all these applicants have put in a number of years as
      FTC Judges and have served the country by administering
5(2012) 6 SCC 502
7
justice in accordance with law. The written examination and
      interview module, should, thus, be framed keeping in mind the
      peculiar facts and circumstances of these cases.
(f) The candidates who qualify the written examination and
      obtain consolidated percentage as afore indicated shall be
      appointed to the post of Additional District Judge in the regular
      cadre of the State.
(g) If, for any reason, vacancies are not available in the regular
      cadre, we hereby direct the State Governments to create such
      additional vacancies as may be necessary keeping in view the
      number of candidates selected.
(h) All sitting and/or former FTC Judges who were directly
      appointed from the Bar and are desirous of taking the
      examination and interview for regular appointment shall be
      given age relaxation. No application shall be rejected on the
      ground of age of the applicant being in excess of the prescribed
      age.
207.10. The members of the Bar who have directly been
      appointed but whose services were either dispensed with or
      terminated on the ground of doubtful integrity, unsatisfactory
      work or against whom, on any other ground, disciplinary action
      had been taken, shall not be eligible to the benefits stated in para
      207.9 of the judgment.”
8.    The aforesaid judgment was taken note of in Mahesh Chandra

Verma6 and it was, thus, observed in para 63 as under:
“63. The State of Jharkhand will now have to take steps to
     comply with directions issued in Brij Mohan Lal7-[II], if it has
     not complied with them so far. The State of Jharkhand and the
     High Court will have to work in sync to ensure that the
     directions to appoint the appellants in the regular cadre in Higher
6(supra)
7(supra)
8
Judicial Service are complied with strictly in the manner laid
       down in Brij Mohan Lal8-[II].”
9.     The effect of the aforesaid judgment was that an examination for

regularization and absorption was conducted and the appellants before

this Court were successful and were thus, appointed to the Jharkhand

Superior Judicial Service.     However, they were treated as fresh

recruits.
10.    The appellants were aggrieved on account of them being treated

as fresh recruits and requested for benefits of pay protection and other

benefits of continuance of service. This request was, however, rejected

by the State Government. This resulted in the writ petitions being filed

in the High Court where some interim protection was granted but

ultimately, the writ petitions have been dismissed by the common

impugned order dated 14.10.2015.
11.    A perusal of the impugned order shows that other than the

reference to the judgments referred to aforesaid, the only aspect

examined is that the initial appointment was temporary on the ex-cadre

post, the appointment being so made for the temporary scheme for

speedy disposal of cases. However, in view of the judgment in
Brij
8(supra)
9
Mohan Lal9-[II] and Mahesh Chandra Verma10 they were appointed

through a process to the regular post. The High Court reasoned that

since these two judgments have not dealt with the post appointment

situation of the appellants, the High Court would not be able to give

anything which has not been granted by the Supreme Court under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India. The Supreme Court had taken

recourse to
Article 142
of the Constitution of India to deal with the

issue of the methodology for recruitment of the Fast Track court Judges

to the regular posts.
12.   In the course of arguments, learned counsel appearing for the

State Government sought to emphasise that by its very nature, the Fast

Track courts were constituted for a limited period of time and, thus, the

persons so appointed were conscious of the fact that they would have a

limited tenure.    Since the funding from the Central Government

stopped, the State Governments did continue these courts for some

years, but that again would not give any right to the appellants to claim

the benefit of the service rendered as Fast Track court Judges for the

purposes of computation of pensionary and retiral benefits. He also
9(supra)
10(supra)
10
sought to emphasise that this Court has taken recourse to
Article 142
of

the Constitution of India to issue directions and the High Court had

rightly observed that what was not done by the Supreme Court under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India could not be done by the High

Court.
13.      We put a specific query to the learned counsel as to whether this

Court had, in the two judgments in question, prohibited any such

grant? Learned counsel after some initial hesitation could not dispute

the position that there was no such prohibition. We also put to the

learned counsel whether the existing cadre strength was sufficient to

sub-serve the justice delivery process, i.e., could it be said that there

were enough courts in existence to try the relevant cases? The only

answer, which came forth was that the State had been carved out

recently and had taken immediate steps to fill the vacancies. However,

to our mind, the important aspect is that the State was no exception to

the general position prevalent of inadequate judicial posts to deal with

the existing inflow of cases. It is only through subsequent directions

that a periodic increase in judicial strength has been envisaged. In Brij
11
Mohan Lal11-[II], it was observed as under:
“207.11. Keeping in view the need of the hour and the
      constitutional mandate to provide fair and expeditious trial to all
      litigants and the citizens of the country, we direct the respective
      States and the Central Government to create 10% of the total
      regular cadre of the State as additional posts within three months
      from today and take up the process for filling such additional
      vacancies as per the Higher Judicial Service and Judicial
      Services Rules of that State, immediately thereafter.”
14.   The need to set up Fast Track courts arose on account of delays

in the judicial process, targeting certain priority areas for quicker

adjudication. In fact, had there been adequate cadre strength, there

would have been no need to set up these Fast Track courts.
15.   The appellants were not appointed to the Fast Track courts just

at the whim and fancy of any person, but were the next in line on the

merit list of a judicial recruitment process. They were either part of the

select list, who could not find a place given the cadre strength, or those

next in line in the select list. Had there been adequate cadre strength,

the recruitment process would have resulted in their appointment. We

do believe that these Judges have rendered services over a period of

nine years and have performed their role as Judges to the satisfaction,

otherwise there would have been no occasion for their appointment to

11(supra)
12
the regular cadre strength. Not only that, they also went through a

second process for such recruitment. We believe that it is a matter of

great regret that these appellants who have performed the functions of

a Judge to the satisfaction of the competent authorities should be

deprived of their pension and retiral benefits for this period of service.

The appellants were not pressing before us any case of seniority over

any person who may have been recruited subsequently, nor for any

other benefit. In fact, we had made it clear to the appellants that we are

only examining the issue of giving the benefits of their service in the

capacity of Fast Track court Judges to be counted towards their length

of service for pensionary and retiral benefits. To deny the same would

be unjust and unfair to the appellants. In any case, keeping in mind the

spirit of the directions made under
Article 142
of the Constitution of

India in Brij Mohan Lal12-[II] and in Mahesh Chandra Verma13, the

necessary corollary must also follow, of giving benefit of the period of

service in Fast Track courts for their pension and retiral benefits. The

methodology of non-creation of adequate regular cadre posts and the

consequent establishment of Fast Track courts manned by the

appellants cannot be used as a ruse to deny the dues of the appellants.
12(supra)
13(supra)
13
16.
In a different factual context but on the principle laid down, we

take note of the judgment in
Nihal Singh & Ors. v. State of Punjab &

Ors.14
of a Bench of this court to which one of us was a member. The

State of Punjab in the 1980s was faced with large scale disturbance and

was not in a position to handle the prevailing law and order situation

with the available police personnel and, hence, resorted to recruitment

under
Section 17
of the Police Act, 1861 (hereinafter referred to as the

‘Act’) for appointing Special Police Officers (‘SPOs’). The SPOs were

assigned the duty of providing security to banks, for which the

financial burden was to be borne by the banks, with the clear

understanding that, as per the provisions of the Act, such police

officers were to be under the discipline and control of the Senior

Superintendent of Police of the District concerned.           Such SPOs

provided yeoman service in difficult times but when their case was

considered for regularization subsequently, it met with an unfavourable

response by an order passed in the year 2002.          This Court while

recognizing that the creation of a cadre or sanctioning of posts was

exclusively within the authority of the State, opined that if the State did


14(2013) 14 SCC 65
14
not choose to create a cadre but chose to make appointments of persons

creating contractual relationship only, such action would be

categorized as arbitrary nature of exercise of power. In this context, it

was observed by the Bench, thus: “Sanctioned posts do not fall from

heaven. The State has to create them by a conscious choice on the basis

of some rational assessment of the need.”        Thus, the facts found

showed that there was the existence of a need for creation of posts and

the failure to create such posts or having a stop gap arrangement,

which lasted for years cannot be used to deny in an arbitrary manner,

the absorption benefit to people who had worked for long years. A

direction was issued to regularise the services of such SPOs and they

were held entitled to the benefits of service similar in nature to the

existing cadre of police service of the State.
17.   The position in respect of the appellants is really no different on

the principle enunciated, as there was need for a regular cadre strength

keeping in mind the inflow and pendency of cases. The Fast Track

Court Scheme was brought in to deal with the exigency and the

appellants were appointed to the Fast Track courts and continued to

work for almost a decade. They were part of the initial select list/merit
15
list for recruitment to the regular cadre strength but were not high

enough to be recruited in the existing strength. Even at the stage of

absorption in the regular cadre strength, they had to go through a

defined process in pursuance of the judgment of this court and have

continued to work thereafter.
18.   We are, thus, unhesitatingly and unequivocally of the view that

all the appellants and Judicial Officers identically situated are entitled

to the benefit of the period of service rendered as Fast Track court

Judges to be counted for their length of service in determination of

their pension and retiral benefits.
19.   The appeals are accordingly allowed leaving the parties to bear

their own costs.
..….….…………………….J.
                                                   [J. Chelameswar]




                                         ...……………………………J.
                                              [Sanjay Kishan Kaul]
New Delhi.
May 11, 2018.
16