[Cites
26
, Cited by
8
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Geomysore Services(I) Pvt. ... vs M/S Hutti Goldmines Co. Ltd. . on 8 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2305, 2018 (3) AKR 229, AIR 2018 SC 2305, 2018 (3) AKR 229 2018 (2) KLT SN 78 (SC), 2018 (2) KLT SN 78 (SC)
Author:
Deepak Gupta
Bench:
Deepak Gupta
,
Madan B. Lokur
1


                                                 REPORTABLE


              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2537 OF 2017



M/s. Geomysore Services (I) Pvt. Ltd.
& Anr.                                         …. Appellant(s)

                             Versus

M/s. Hutti Goldmines Co. Ltd. & Ors.           … Respondent(s)

                              With

              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2538 OF 2017


                       JUDGMENT
Deepak Gupta J.
1.   What is the role and power of the Central Government

while dealing with the request of a State Government for

reservation    of   lands   for   government    companies    or

corporations owned and controlled by the State Government

under section 17A (2) of the Mines and Minerals (Development
2
and
Regulations) Act, 1957
(hereinafter referred to as “the

Act”), is the main issue involved in this case.




THE FACTUAL BACKGROUND
2.   This case has a long and chequered history. There are

gold mines in the State of Karnataka and parties are litigating

in respect of their rights to exploit those mines. We have two

appellants before us, M/s. Geomysore Services (India) Pvt.

Ltd., Appellant No.1 (hereinafter referred to as “Geomysore”)

and Deccan Gold Exploration Services Pvt. Ltd., Appellant No.

2 (hereinafter referred to as “Deccan”).
3.   On    01.04.2000    Geomysore     applied    for   grant   of

Reconnaissance Permit (for short ‘RP’) for 315 sq. kms. of

land in Hutti South Belt Gold Mines area. After approval by

the Central Government, the State Government granted RP on

03.11.2000 for a period of 3 years.        Similarly, Deccan was

granted RP in Northern part of Hutti Gold Mines for an area

measuring 501.48 sq. kms. for a period of 3 years on

09.01.2003 after completing all formalities. The respondent
3
no. 1 i.e. M/s Hutti Gold Mines Co. Ltd. (hereinafter referred

to as “HGML”) did not file any application for grant of RP for

either of the two areas.
4.       Geomysore     conducted        the   reconnaissance    and

submitted a consolidated report on 30.11.2003.              Deccan

submitted its consolidated report on 21.04.2006.           Both the

Companies found evidence to suggest the existence of gold

deposits and need to carry out further prospecting in certain

areas.   On the basis of the results of the reconnaissance,

Geomysore filed 4 applications for grant of Prospecting

Licence (for short ‘PL’) under
Section 11(1)
of the Act. Deccan

filed 7 applications for grant of PL with regard to the area

where it had conducted reconnaissance.
5.   On 28.11.2006, HGML sent a letter to the Commissioner,

Geological Resources Development and Director, Department

of Mines and Geology, Bangalore praying for reservation of

area for the purpose of conservation exclusively for public

sector undertakings under
Section 17A(2)
of the Act. It was

stated   that   HGML       was   keen    to   continue   prospecting
4
investigations in the area in question. It was submitted that

grant of Mining Lease (for short ‘ML’) to different organizations

would create severe problems including safety hazards and as

such it was prayed that the entire area, including the area for

which RP had been granted to Geomysore and Deccan, be

reserved under
Section 17A(2)
of the Act.       It appears that

Geomysore came to know about this proposal and it sent a

letter on 28.11.2006 itself to the Government of India and

opposed the contemplated action of the State of Karnataka to

forward a proposal to the Ministry of Mines for reservation of

the mining area.
6.   In the meantime, two other developments took place.

The Ministry of Mines published the National Mineral Policy,

2008 (for short ‘the NMP 2008’) and the Government of

Karnataka released the Karnataka Mineral Policy, 2008 (for

short ‘the KMP, 2008) in consonance with NMP, 2008 to

which we shall advert later.
7.   On 27.12.2008, the Government of Karnataka wrote to

Government of India for reservation of area in favour of HGML
5
and recommended that 161 sq. kms. of land be allocated to

HGML for mining. This covered the areas for which RPs had

been granted to Geomysore and Deccan and, therefore,

Geomysore and Deccan filed revision petitions before the

Central Government. The main challenge to the decision of

the State Government was that the appellants were entitled to

preference while considering their application for grant of PL

and also their PL applications have been filed earlier in time.

It was also urged that in terms of the NMP, 2008 and the

KMP, 2008 reservation could not be made.          The Central

Government allowed the revision petitions and directed the

State of Karnataka to consider the PL applications filed by

Geomysore as well as Deccan.
8.   Thereafter, HGML filed a writ petition in the Karnataka

High Court. The High Court held that the reservation of the

area had not yet taken place and since the Central

Government was still to take a decision on the request of the

State Government, it was not necessary to determine whether

the preferential right claimed by Geomysore and Deccan
6
under
Section 11
of the Act could defeat the right of the State

Government to seek reservation of the area under
Section

17A(2)
of the Act.       The High Court, after considering the

judgment of this Court in the case of
Indian Charge Chrome

Ltd. & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.1
held as follows:
“10. Having held so, the Hon’ble Court has further
        held that the power under Section 17A(2) is the
        statutory power and normally there could be no
        estoppel against the exercise of statutory power and
        upheld the recommendation of the State Government
        seeking for approval of the Central Government. It is
        clear that, in the instant case, the undisputed fact is
        that the contesting respondents in any event have
        not been granted the prospecting licence or mining
        lease and as such the area in question is not the one
        which is already held under a prospecting licence or
        mining lease. Therefore, if
the above decision
is kept
        in view, the State Government was well within its
        powers to seek approval of the Central Government to
        reserve the area in question. In any event, the
        Central Government before granting its approval
        would have to consider all these aspects of the matter
        and any such consideration by the Central
        Government could not have been stifled by the
        contesting respondents in the form of revision
        application and the revision authority was also not
        justified in interfering. The preferential right claimed
        by the contesting respondents cannot be accepted at
        this stage and a direction could not have been issued
        to consider the applications of the contesting
        respondents by setting aside the communication
        dated 27.12.2008. The appropriate procedure would
        be to allow the Central Government to take a decision
        on the approval sought by the State Government by
        its communication dated 27.12.2008. Thereafter, the
        consideration or otherwise of the applications for
        prospecting licence by any other person including the
        contesting respondents would arise depending on the
1
(2006) 12 SCC 331
7
result of such consideration by the Central
        Government.       If for any reason, the Central
        Government does not accede to the proposal of the
        State Government and in such situation if the
        applications remain open for consideration, then and
        only then the question of preferential right would
        arise for consideration.”
9.    Consequently,    the    orders     passed    by    the   Central

Government were set aside and the matter was remanded to

the   Central   Government          to   take     decision     on   the

recommendation made by the State Government with a

direction to dispose of the same in accordance with law. The

Central Government examined the matter and rejected the

proposal of the State Government for reservation of land

under
Section 17A(2)
of the Act for Government undertakings.

The order notes that Geomysore and Deccan had already filed

PL applications after completing reconnaissance pursuant to

the RPs granted to them. Instead of dealing with the PL

applications of Geomysore and Deccan, the State Government

suddenly   decided    to     make    a   request    to   the   Central

Government to reserve the land.          The Central Government

held that the action of the State Government is against the
8
stated purpose of Para 3.3 of the NMP, 2008 which provides

that there should a regulatory environment conducive to

private investment; that the procedure for grant of concession

should be transparent and seamless transition shall be

guaranteed to the concessionaires; that the action of the State

Government was not transparent or fair; that land could only

be reserved where private players are not holding the land or

have not applied for exploration or mining unless security

considerations or specific public interests are involved; that

since Geomysore and Deccan had completed their RPs and

applied for seamless transition to PL, the proposal of the State

Government     to reserve the land in favour of HGML was

neither in public interest nor in terms of the NMP, 2008 and,

therefore, proposal of the State Government to reserve land

was rejected and again a direction was issued that the

request of Geomysore and Deccan for grant of PL be

considered expeditiously.
10.   HGML then filed another writ petition challenging the

order   of   the   Central   Government    dated   31.05.2011.
9
Geomysore and Deccan filed a joint reply in the writ petition

and the High Court allowed the writ petition vide the

impugned judgment, which is under challenge before us.
11.   The main factor which weighed with the High Court in

allowing the writ petition was that whereas under
Section 11
of the Act, a party which had carried out reconnaissance

pursuant to RP, was entitled to preference at the time of

granting PL, under
Section 17A(2)
of the Act, the words

“reconnaissance permit” do not find mention.       The
Court

further held
that in its earlier judgment dated 18.02.2011, it

had been held that while taking a decision under
section

17A(2)
of the Act, the preferential right under
Section 11
of

the Act had no role to play and, therefore, the claim of the

State Government could not be defeated on this ground.

Since the judgment had attained finality, the matter should

not be reopened. It further held that the NMP, 2008 cannot

overrule the provisions of
Section 17A
of the Act. The
Court

further held
that the policy has to give way to the statutory

provisions. It was held that the second order passed by the
10
Central Government contains the same flaws which were

there in the earlier order and hence the writ petition was

allowed and the order of the Central Government refusing to

reserve the land was quashed.
THE LEGAL PROVISIONS
12.   At the outset, we may point out that as far as this case

is concerned, we are dealing with the Act prior to its

amendment in the year 2015. Sub-sections (ha) and (hb) of
Section 3
of the Act were introduced w.e.f. 18.12.1999 and

define   ‘reconnaissance      operations’     and    ‘reconnaissance

permit’ respectively. The same read as follows:
“(ha)     “reconnaissance operations” means any
         operations undertaken for preliminary prospecting of
         a mineral through regional, aerial, geophysical or
         geochemical surveys and geological mapping, but
         does not include pitting, trenching, drilling (except
         drilling of boreholes on a grid specified from time to
         time by the Central Government) or sub-surface
         excavation;
(hb)    “reconnaissance permit” means a permit
         granted    for  the    purpose  of  undertaking
         reconnaissance operations;”
11
13.   A reconnaissance permit allows the permit holder to

carry out reconnaissance operations.             A reconnaissance

permit holder carries out operations to determine whether the

area is fit for mining only by way of non-invasive techniques,

except for some minimal drilling. Normally, reconnaissance

permits are granted for huge areas of land.
14.   Sub-sections (g) and (h) of
Section 3
of the Act define

‘prospecting licence’ and ‘prospecting operations’ respectively.
The same read as follows:
“(g) “prospecting licence” means a licence granted for
        the purpose of undertaking prospecting operations;
(h) “prospecting operations” means any operations
        undertaken for the purpose of exploring, locating or
        proving mineral deposits;”
15.   Normally, after reconnaissance is done, a party would

determine which is the best part of the huge area fit for

prospecting to determine with greater exactitude the location

of mineral deposits. Thus, PL is granted for an area which is

much less than that of the RP area.            During prospecting,

invasive methods can be used to the extent allowed under law

for determining the extant mineral deposits and whether they

can be exploited commercially.
12
16.   After prospecting is done, comes the stage of grant of

mining    lease. ‘Mining lease’ and ‘mining operations’            are

defined in sub-sections (c) and (d) of
Section 3
of the Act

respectively. The same read as under:
“(c) “mining lease” means a lease granted for the
         purpose of undertaking mining operations, and
         includes a sub-lease granted for such purpose;
(d) “mining operations” means any operations
         undertaken for the purpose of winning any mineral;”
17.   Investments during reconnaissance or prospecting are

very large.   These are not small investments.            Therefore, a

person who had conducted reconnaissance is given preference

for grant of PL and a person who had conducted prospecting

is given preference while being considered for grant of ML. In

this behalf we may refer to
Section 11 (1)
of the Act which

reads as follows:
“11.     Preferential right of certain persons.- (1)
         Where a reconnaissance permit or prospecting
         licence has been granted in respect of any land, the
         permit holder or the licensee shall have a preferential
         right for obtaining a prospecting licence or mining
         lease, as the case may be, in respect of that land over
         any other person:
Provided that the State Government is satisfied
         that the permit holder or the licensee, as the case
         may be,-
13
(a) has undertaken reconnaissance operations or
          prospecting operations, as the case may be, to
          establish mineral resources in such land;
(b)has not committed any breach of the terms and
         conditions of the reconnaissance permit or the
         prospecting licence;
(c)             has not become ineligible under the provisions
            of this      Act; and
(d)has not failed to apply for grant of prospecting licence
         or mining lease, as the case may be, within three
         months after the expiry of reconnaissance permit or
         prospecting licence, as the case may be, or within
         such further period as may be extended by the said
         Government.”
18.   The purpose of the aforesaid Section is that in view of

the   money,            effort   and    time    spent    in    undertaking

reconnaissance or prospecting operations and preparation of

detailed reports of the mineral discoverable or likely to be

discovered pursuant to such operations, such RP or PL holder

would get a preferential right for undertaking the next stage of

operations.
19.
Section17A
of the Act reads as follows:
“17A. Reservation of area for purposes of
            conservation.- (1) The Central Government, with a
            view to conserving any mineral and after consultation
            with the State Government, may reserve any area not
            already held under any prospecting licence or mining
            lease and, where it proposes to do so, it shall, by
            notification in the Official Gazette, specify the
            boundaries of such area and the mineral or minerals
            in respect of which such area will be reserved.
14
(1A)      The    Central     Government     may    in
        consultation with the State Government, reserve any
        area not already held under any prospecting licence
        or mining lease, for undertaking prospecting or
        mining operations through a Government company
        or corporation owned or controlled by it, and where it
        proposes to do so, it shall, by notification in the
        Official Gazette, specify the boundaries of such area
        and the mineral or minerals in respect of which such
        area will be reserved.]

        (2)      The State Government may, with the
        approval of the Central Government, reserve any area
        not already held under any prospecting licence or
        mining lease, for undertaking prospecting or mining
        operations through a Government company or
        corporation owned or controlled by it and where it
        proposes to do so, it shall, by notification in the
        Official Gazette, specify the boundaries of such area
        and the mineral or minerals in respect of which such
        areas will be reserved.
(3)      Where in exercise of the powers conferred by
        sub-section (1A) or sub-section (2) the Central
        Government or the State Government, as the case
        may be, undertakes prospecting or mining operations
        in any area in which the minerals vest in a private
        person, it shall be liable, to pay prospecting fee,
        royalty, surface rent or dead rent, as the case may
        be, from time to time at the same rate at which it
        would have been payable under this Act if such
        prospecting or mining operations had been
        undertaken by a private person under prospecting
        licence or mining lease.”
20.   Though, in this case we are dealing mainly with Section

17A(2), we feel that it would be appropriate to analyze the

provisions of the various parts of
Section 17A
of the Act.
Under Section 17A(1), the Central Government has the power
15
to reserve any area to conserve any mineral. The Central

Government has to exercise this power after consultation with

the State Government. There is, however, one caveat, which

is, that if a PL or ML for the said area is held by any person

then the Central Government cannot reserve the area. Under

sub-section (1A) of Section 17A, the Central Government has

similar power to reserve areas for undertaking prospecting or

mining operations through Government companies, but

again, such areas should not have been held under any PL or

ML. As far as
Section 17(2)
is concerned, this provision gives

power to the State Government to reserve an area not held

under a PL or ML for prospecting or mining by State

Government owned companies.        However, this can be done

only with the approval of the Central Government and the

area so reserved should be notified in the official gazette along

with the mineral and minerals for which the area has been

reserved.    Though we are not directly concerned with

sub-section (3) of
Section 17A
of the Act in this case, the said

sub-section provides that where the Central Government or

the State Government, as the case may be, undertakes
16
prospecting or mining operations in any area in which

mineral vests in the private person, then the Central

Government or the State Government concerned shall be

liable to pay prospecting fee, royalty, surface rent, dead rent

etc..
21.     We may also, at this stage, refer to
Section 2
of the Act,

which reads as follows:
“2. Declaration as to the expediency of Union
           control. – It is hereby declared that it is expedient in
           the public interest that the Union should take under
           its control the regulation of mines and the
           development of minerals to the extent hereinafter
           provided.”



CONTENTIONS
22. Mr. Maninder Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General

appearing for the Union of India, submitted that
Section

17A(2)
of the Act empowers the State Government to reserve

any area not held under PL or ML for any State Government

undertaking. However, this is subject to the prior approval of

the Central Government. It is his contention that the State

Government cannot reserve an area (not held under a PL or
17
ML) without obtaining the prior approval of the Central

Government.    He   further   submits    that   the   Central

Government, while considering the request of the State

Government, has to apply its mind independently and while

dealing with the request, it can take into consideration the

mineral policy. Therefore, according to him, the High Court

erred in holding that the Union could not take into

consideration the parameters set out in the mineral policy.

According to him, the absence of the words ‘reconnaissance

permit’ from
Section 17A(2)
of the Act only indicates that

whereas for those areas for which PL or ML has been granted,

there is an absolute bar, but where only RP is granted, there

is no bar and the State Government can, with the approval of

the Central Government, reserve that area.
23. Ms. Meenakshi Arora, learned senior counsel appearing

for the appellants adopted the arguments of Mr. Maninder

Singh, but she also urged that in view of the huge

investments required to be made by the RP holder, it is his

legitimate expectation under
Section 11
of the Act that he
18
would get the PL. She further submits that HGML had not

submitted any application for grant of RP or PL. Therefore,

the applications of Geomysore and Deccan being prior in

time, should have been considered.       She has referred to

various provisions of the Act both prior to and after its

amendment in the year 2015 to emphasize that the intention

of the Government is to encourage private investment in the

industry and to ensure that such private investors are not left

in lurch after investing huge amount and there is seamless

transition from the stage of reconnaissance to prospecting

and then to mining.
24.   Mr. Basava Prabhu S. Patil, learned senior counsel

appearing for the State of Karnataka, submitted that it is the

State which is the owner of the minerals and keeping in view

the federal structure of our country, the Union cannot

override the power of the State. According to him,
Section 2
of the Act does not empower the Union to reject the claim of

the State Government on grounds which are not provided for

in the statute itself.   He also submits that the judgment
19
rendered by the Karnataka High Court in the first Writ

Petition No.39969/39970 of 2010 decided the issues between

the parties and that will operate as res-judicata. He submits

that in the earlier judgment the High Court had clearly held

that the preferential right claimed by Geomysore and Deccan

cannot override the power of the State Government under
Section 17A(2)
of the Act. He submits that the grounds taken

in both the orders passed by the Central Government are

virtually identical.   According to him, since the words

‘reconnaissance permit’ have been omitted from
Section

17A(2)
of the Act, the Central Government could not have

rejected the claim of the State Government on grounds which

are directly related to the fact that Geomysore and Deccan

had carried out reconnaissance in furtherance of such

reconnaissance permit.   He further submits that the NMP,

2008 was not binding and has made reference to clause 3.2 of

the NMP, 2008, which indicates that what is set out in the

policy are the goals      and that the Act, the Mineral

Concessions Rules and the Mineral Concessions Development

Rules will be amended in line with the policy.   He submits
20
that these amendments took place in the year 2015 and,

therefore, the policy could not have been resorted to by the

Central Government to reject the claim of the State.
25.   Mr. C.U. Singh and Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned senior

counsel, appearing on behalf of HGML, submit that before

Geomysore and Deccan were granted RP, HGML had already

done a lot of work in the area. According to them, after the

amendment of the Act, now these mines can only be

auctioned. Reliance has been placed on
Para 160 of Monnet

Ispat & Energy Ltd. v. Union of India & Ors2
. case. It was

urged that the factors taken into consideration by the Central

Government      while   rejecting   the   proposal   of   the   State

Government were not relevant factors. According to them, the

right of the State to reserve area under Section 17A(2) flows

from the paramount right of the State as owner of the land

and minerals.
THE ISSUES
2
(2012) 11 SCC 1
21
26.    There are four main questions which need to be

answered:
(i)    Whether the State Government being the owner of land

and minerals can claim that its proposal to reserve such land

for exploitation of minerals by its undertakings is virtually

binding on the Central Government?
(ii)   What are the considerations which can weigh with the

Central Government while dealing with a request of the State

Government for reservation of land under
Section 17A(2)
of

the Act?
(iii) Whether
Section 11(1)
and
Section 17A(2)
of the Act

operate in totally separate spheres and what is the effect of

the right of preference granted to RP holder in terms of
Section 11(1)
of the Act while dealing with a matter under
Section 17A(2)
of the Act?
(iv) Whether, in the present case, the Central Government is

justified in rejecting the proposal of the State of Karnataka?
22
27.
The Act
was initially enacted as the
Mines and Minerals

(Regulation and Development) Act
(for short ‘the
MMRD Act
’).

At that time, there was no
Section 17A
in the
MMRD Act
,

which was later introduced w.e.f. 10.02.1987.
Section 17
of

the MMRD Act dealt with those lands in which minerals

vested with the State Government. Under sub-section (2), the

Central Government was empowered to carry out prospecting

or mining operations in any area not already held under any

PL or ML.       This could, however, be done only after

consultation   with   the   State   Government     concerned.

Therefore,
Section 17
of the MMRD Act empowered the

Central Government to undertake prospecting operations.

Vide Act 38 of 1999 the name of the
MMRD Act
was changed

from ‘
The Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development)

Act
’ to ‘
The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)

Act
’ w.e.f. 18.12.1999. By the same Act, in
Section 17
of the

Act, the words ‘reconnaissance’ and ‘reconnaissance permit’

were introduced w.e.f. 18.12.1999. Prior to that, there was no

concept of reconnaissance. Under the provisions of the Act,

prior to the introduction of
Section 17A
, there was no
23
statutory provision which empowered the State Government

to reserve any land. However, under the Mineral Concession

Rules, 1960, (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Rules’) there was

a provision in Rule 58, empowering the State Government to

reserve such lands.        After
Section 17A
was introduced on

10.02.1987, Rule 58 was omitted on 13.04.1988.         We are

pointing out these facts because some of the judgments cited,

being prior to introduction of
Section 17A
, have to be read in

the context of Rule 58 of the Rules.
28.
In
Amritlal Nathubhai Shah and Others v. Union

Government of India and Another
3, this Court held that

the State being the owner of the land, was entitled to reserve

the land and, therefore, was justified in rejecting the

applications of the private parties.       This judgment was

delivered in the context of Rule 58 of the Rules, as it existed

at that time.
29. In State of T.N. v. M/s Hind Stone and Others        4
                                                          ,   the

State of Tamil Nadu formulated the Tamil Nadu Minor Mineral
3
(1976) 4 SCC 108
4
(1981) 2 SCC 205
24
Concession Rules. Under Rule 8-C, the right to quarry black

granite, a minor mineral, was reserved in favour of the State

Government and its Corporations etc..           The validity of this

Rule was challenged on various grounds including the ground

that the
MMRD Act, 1957
did not empower the State

Government to make such a reservation. This Court rejected

this submission on the ground that the State was the owner

of the land and minerals and also that minor minerals vest in

the State Government. The Court held as follows:
“6.        Rivers, Forests, Minerals and such other
       resources constitute a nation’s natural wealth. These
       resources are not to be frittered away and exhausted
       by any one generation. Every generation owes a duty
       to all succeeding generations to develop and conserve
       the natural resources of the nation in the best possible
       way. It is in the interest of mankind. It is in the
       interest of the nation……………… In the case of minor
       minerals, the State Government is similarly
       empowered, after consultation with the Central
       Government.      The public interest which induced
       Parliament to make the declaration contained in
Section 2
of the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and
       Development) Act, 1957, has naturally to be the
       paramount consideration in all matters concerning the
       regulation of mines and the development of minerals.
       Parliament’s policy is clearly discernible from the
       provisions of the Act. It is the conservation and the
       prudent and discriminating exploitation of minerals,
       with a view to secure maximum benefit to the
       community. There are clear signposts to lead and
       guide the subordinate legislating authority in the
       matter of the making of rules. Viewed in the light shed
       by the other provisions of the Act, particularly
Sections
25
4-A
,
17
and
18
, it cannot be said that the rule making
         authority under
Section 15
has exceeded its powers in
         banning leases for quarrying black granite in favour of
         private parties and in stipulating that the State
         Government themselves may engage in quarrying
         black granite or grant leases for quarrying black
         granite in favour of any corporation wholly owned by
         the State Government…….”



It would be pertinent to point out that in this very case this

Court, in the opening para, held as follows:
“……..It is now common ground between the parties
         that as a result of the declaration made by Parliament,
         by
Section 2
of the Act, the State legislatures are
         denuded of the whole of their legislative power with
         respect to regulation of mines and mineral
         development and that the entire legislative field has
         been taken over by Parliament……”
30.    It would also be pertinent to point out that both
Amritlal Nathubai Shah
(supra) and Hind Stone (supra)

were decided before the introduction of
Section 17A
in the

Act.
31.
In
Indian Metals and Ferro Alloys Ltd. v. Union of

India & Ors.5
, this Court was dealing with
Section 17A
of the

Act. Following observations are pertinent:
5
1992 Supp.(1 ) SCC 91
26
“46. Before leaving this point, we may only refer to the
        position after 1986. Central Act 37 of 1986 inserted
        sub-section (2) which empowers the State Government
        to reserve areas for exploitation in the public sector.
        This provision differs from that in Rule 58 in some
        important respects—
(i) the reservation requires the approval of the
               C.G.;
(ii) the reservation can only be of areas not
               actually held under a PL or ML;
(iii) the reservation can only be for exploitation
               by a government company or a public sector
               corporation (owned or controlled by the S.G. or
               C.G.) but not for exploitation by the government
               as such.
Obviously,
Section 17-A (2)
and Rule 58 could not
        stand together as
Section 17-A
empowers the S.G. to
        reserve only with the approval of the C.G. while Rule
        58 contained no such restriction. There was also a
        slight difference in their wording…..”
32.
In
State of T.N. v. M.P.P. Kavery Chetty6
, dealing with
Section 17A(2)
of the Act, this Court held as follows:
“15………
Section 17-A(2)
applies when an area is
        sought to be reserved by the State Government for
        undertaking mining operations exclusively through a
        Government company or corporation. When such area
        is notified the mineral or minerals in respect of which
        it is notified must also be stated. Such reservation
        cannot be made without the approval of the Central
        Government…….”
33.   The High Court has placed reliance on a judgment of

this Court delivered by a three-Judge Bench in
Indian
6
(1995) 2 SCC 402
27
Charge Chrome
(supra). Dealing with the interplay between
Section 11
and
Section 17A
of the Act, this Court held as

follows:
“16. As we see it, the power under
Section 17-A
is
           an independent power. It is not related to the power
           available under
Section 11
of the Act. It is open to the
           Central Government to reserve an area in terms of
Section 17-A(1)
if it is thought expedient and it is in
           the interests of the nation or that it is necessary to
           conserve a particular metal or ore or the area
           producing it. It is also open to the Central Government
           to decide that such area should be exploited by a
           company or corporation owned or controlled by it. Of
           course, that situation has not arisen in this case.
           Under sub-section (2) of
Section 17-A
, with the
           approval of the Central Government, the State
           Government may reserve any area not already held
           under any prospecting licence or mining lease for
           undertaking the exploitation through a government
           company or corporation owned or controlled by it and
           on fulfilling the conditions referred to in sub-section
           (2) and in an appropriate case, also the conditions of
           sub-section (3). Again, the exercise of power by the
           State Government under sub-section (2) of
Section
           17-A
has no reference to the entertaining of
           applications under
Section 11
or the preferences
           available thereunder…..”
34.
In
Indian Charge Chrome
(supra), an area of 1812.993

hectares of land was granted to Tata Iron and Steel Company

Ltd. (TISCO) for mining of chromite ore. Initially, lease was

granted in 1952, which was renewed in 1972. However, at

the time of renewal, the area was reduced to 1261.476
28
hectares. In 1991, TISCO again applied for renewal of lease

but the renewal was granted only in respect of 650 hectares.

TISCO challenged the said reduction in its area.        In the

meantime, various private companies challenged renewal of

lease in favour of TISCO.   The High Court allowed the writ

petition and directed reconsideration of the matter.    Appeal

filed by TISCO in this Court was dismissed. The Union

Government, on reconsideration, renewed lease in favour of

TISCO for 406 hectares and directed that the balance area of

855.476 hectares be distributed by way of lease amongst

other claimants. Subsequently, the State Government made a

recommendation to the Union Government that half of the

area of 855.476 hectares be reserved under
Section 17A(2)
of

the Act and the remaining half could be allotted to the 4

applicants who had filed writ petitions in the Court.

Thereafter, some other parties filed writ petitions in the High

Court claiming that they should also be given mining rights.

The Orissa Government then decided to grant the balance

land to the extent to 436.295 hectares on lease to the State

public sector undertaking i.e.,Orissa Mining Corporation Ltd.
29
(hereinafter referred to as “OMC”).      This action of the State

Government was set aside by the High Court.
This Court in
Indian Charge Chrome
(supra) was dealing with the appeals

filed by those applicants other than the 4 who had been

granted mining leases and also the appeal filed by OMC and

the State Government.      This Court came to the conclusion

that the Central Government had not taken a decision on the

request of the State Government to reserve the area under
Section 17A(2)
and finally directed the Central Government to

first consider the request of the State Government for

reservation of land and held that this contingency of the

private applicants being granted mining leases would only

arise in case the Central Government does not grant approval

to the request of the State Government under
Section 17A(2)
of the Act. This Court held as follows :-
“32. ………This contingency may arise only if the
        Central Government does not grant approval to the
        request of the State Government under
Section 17-A(2)
of the Act……”
35.   This clearly envisages that this Court held that the State

Government could not make a reservation without approval of
30
the Central Government.         It would be pertinent to mention

here that this Court directed the State Government to make a

fresh request to the Central Government and further directed

that prior directions of this Court or the High Court cannot

and do not stand in the way of the Central Government in

applying its mind to exercise its power under
Section 17A(2)
of the Act and in taking an independent decision.
36.   In the case of Sandur Manganese and Iron Ores Ltd.
v. State of Karnataka & Ors.7, dealing with the powers of

the State, this Court held that in view of
Section 2
of the Act,

the State is denuded of its accepted power with regard to the

matters which           fall within the domain   of   the Central

Government. It further held that the State Government has

to act and justify its actions only in accordance with the Act

and the Rules, and the State Government cannot be permitted

to justify its actions on criteria de hors the Act and the Rules.

Dealing with
Section 11
of the Act, the Court held that an RP

holder or PL holder will have a preferential right to get a PL or
7
(2010) 13 SCC 1
31
ML as the case may be.         The following observations of the

Court are relevant:
“80. It is clear that the State Government is purely a
        delegate of Parliament and a statutory functionary, for
        the purposes of
Section 11(3)
of the Act, hence it
        cannot act in a manner that is inconsistent with the
        provisions of
Section 11(1)
of the MMDR Act in the
        grant of mining leases. Furthermore,
Section 2
of the
        Act clearly states that the regulation of mines and
        mineral development comes within the purview of the
        Union Government and not the State Government. As
        a matter of fact, the respondents have not been able to
        point out any other provision in the
MMDR Act
or the
        MC Rules permitting grant of mining lease based on
        past commitments. As rightly pointed out, the State
        Government has no authority under the
MMDR Act
to
        make commitments to any person that it will, in
        future, grant a mining lease in the event that the
        person makes investment in any project. Assuming
        that the State Government had made any such
        commitment, it could not be possible for it to take an
        inconsistent position and proceed to notify a particular
        area. Further, having notified the area, the State
        Government certainly could not thereafter honour an
        alleged commitment by ousting other applicants even
        if they are more deserving on the merit criteria as
        provided in
Section 11(3)
.”
37.
In
Monnet Ispat
(supra), Justice Lodha, in his leading

judgment held that
Section 2
of the Act does not affect the

State’s ownership of mines and minerals within its territory

although the regulation of mines and development of minerals

have been taken under the control of the Union.
It was held
32
that the Central Government may have taken over the power

to regulate the mines and development of minerals but the

State could not be denuded of its rights and followed the

decision of this Court in the case of
Amritlal Nathubhai

Shah
(supra) wherein it was held that “the authority to order

reservation flows from the fact that the State is the owner of

the mines and minerals within its territory”.          Dealing with
Section 17A
of the Act, it was held that this section would

have prospective operation only and, therefore, it could not

affect the earlier notifications. Thereafter, this Court in Para

160 of the judgment held as follows:
“160. The types of reservation under
Section 17-A
and
        their scope have been considered by this Court in
        Indian Metals and Ferro Alloys Ltd. in paras 45 and 46
        (pp. 136-39) of the Report. I am in respectful
        agreement with that view. However, it was argued that
Section 17-A(2)
requires prior approval of the Central
        Government before reservation of any area by the
        State Government for the public sector undertaking.
        The argument is founded on an incorrect reading of
Section 17-A(2)
. This provision does not use the
        expression, “prior approval” which has been used in
Section 11
. On the other hand,
Section 17-A(2)
uses
        the words, “with the approval of the Central
        Government”. These words in
Section 17-A(2)
cannot
        be equated with prior approval of the Central
        Government. According to me, the approval
        contemplated in
Section 17-A
may be obtained by the
        State Government before the exercise of power of
        reservation or after exercise of such power. The
33
approval by the Central Government contemplated in
Section 17-A(2)
may be express or implied. In a case
        such as the present one where the Central
        Government has relied upon the 2006 Notification
        while rejecting the appellants’ application for grant of
        mining lease, it necessarily implies that the Central
        Government has approved reservation made by the
        State Government in the 2006 Notification otherwise it
        would not have acted on the same. In any case, the
        Central Government has not disapproved reservation
        made by the State Government in the 2006
        Notification.”
38.
In
State of Kerala and Ors. v. Kerala Rare Earth &

Minerals Ltd. & Ors.8
, a three-Judge Bench of this Court

again dealt with the scope of
Section 17A
of the Act and per

majority held as follows:
“15. There is no gainsaying that the State Government
        can reserve any area not already held under any
        prospecting licence or mining lease for undertaking
        prospecting or mining operations through a
        government company or corporation owned or
        controlled by it, but, in terms of sub-section (2) of
Section 17-A (supra)
where the Government proposes
        to do so, it shall by notification in the Official Gazette
        specify the boundaries of such area and the mineral or
        minerals in respect of which such areas will be
        reserved. Three distinct requirements emerge from
Section 17-A(2)
for a valid reservation viz.:
(i) the reservation can only be with the approval
             of the Central Government and must confine to
             areas not already held under any prospecting
             licence or mining lease;
(ii) the reservation must be made by a notification
             in the Official Gazette; and
8
(2016) 6 SCC 323
34
(iii) the notification must specify the boundaries
     of such areas and the mineral or minerals in
     respect of which such areas will be reserved.
xxx                    xxx                     xxx

      xxx                    xxx                     xxx
“19. The upshot of the above discussion then is that
while the State Government is the owner of the
mineral deposits in the lands which vest in the
Government as is the position in the case at hand,
Parliament has by reason of the declaration made in
Section 2
of the 1957 Act acquired complete dominion
over the legislative field covered by the said legislation.
The Act
does not denude the State of the ownership of
the minerals situate within its territories but there is
no manner of doubt that it regulates to the extent set
out in the provisions of the Act the development of
mines and minerals in the country. It follows that if
the State Government proposes to reserve any area for
exploitation by the State-owned corporation or
company, it must resort to making of such reservation
in terms of
Section 17-A
with the approval of the
Central Government and by a notification specifying
boundaries of the area and mineral or minerals in
respect of which such areas will be reserved.
Inasmuch as the State Government has not so far
issued any notification in terms of
Section 17-A
, the
Industrial Policy, 2007 of the Kerala State Government
does not have the effect of making a valid reservation
within the comprehension of
Section 17-A
. The High
Court was, therefore, justified in holding that there is
no valid reservation as at present no matter the
Government can make such a reservation if so advised
in the manner prescribed by law. In other words, the
dismissal of this appeal shall not prevent the State
from invoking its right under
Section 17-A(2)
of the Act
by issuing notification in respect of the mineral
deposits in question…..”
35
39.    On a careful perusal of the judgments aforesaid, it would

be more than apparent that this Court has consistently held

that the State is the owner of the land and minerals.

However,      the   control   and      regulation   of    mines    and

development of minerals are in the domain of the Union

Government.         The State Government is denuded of its

legislative power to make any law in respect of regulation of

mines and mineral development in so far as that field is

covered by the provisions of the Act. It is only if the field is

vacant that the State can exercise its legislative powers.

Otherwise, it has to exercise its power strictly in accordance

with    the   powers    specifically    conferred    on    the    State

Government by the Act and the Rules. It is also a well settled

position of law that while exercising the powers of reservation

vested in
Section 17A(2)
of the Act, the State Government has

to take approval of the Central Government. In this case, we

are not required to deal with the question of prior approval as

there is no approval and, in fact, the request of the State has

been rejected by the Central Government.
36
40.   In the light of what has been said in the aforesaid

judgments, we have examined the facts of the instant case.

The State Government made a request to the Central

Government for reservation. In the first round of litigation,

the High Court directed the Central Government to first

consider the request before considering the applications of

Geomysore and Deccan.      The Central Government rejected

the proposal of the State Government on various grounds

including the grounds enumerated earlier, which flow from

the NMP, 2008. Arguments have been addressed to suggest

that the Central Government can only take into consideration

issues of national interest and security and cannot look into

the other aspects.     We are not in agreement with this

submission.
Section 17A(2)
of the Act clearly provides that the

State Government can reserve any area for undertaking

prospecting or mining operations through a Government

company or corporation with the approval of the Central

Government.
The Act
does not lay down the parameters

which the Central Government is required to follow. In our

view, the Central Government can take all factors which are
37
relevant for the purpose of deciding whether reservation

should be made or not. The NMP, 2008 being a policy of the

country, can definitely be taken into consideration while

considering such a request.
41.   We may note that the policy of the Government can

sometimes be binding on the Government if the principles of

promissory estoppel or legitimate expectation come into play.

We may make it clear that in this case neither the principle of

promissory estoppel nor the principle of legitimate expectation

is attracted. We are only making reference to these principles

to emphasize that a policy of a Government is an important

document.        It cannot be brushed aside.      The Central

Government, while considering the request of the State

Government, can take into consideration various factors

which may include economic factors, the factors reflecting the

image of the country internationally to the global world

community and also other factors of national security etc..

These are just illustrative and each case has to be decided on

its own facts.    Therefore, we are not in agreement with the
38
Karnataka High Court that only those factors can be taken

into consideration, which flow from the Act or the Rules.
42.   Another important aspect of the matter is that under
Section 11(1)
of the Act, an RP holder, who has carried out

reconnaissance, is entitled for preference when his case is

being considered for grant of PL. However, in
Section 17A(2)
of the Act, the bar to reservation is only in those cases where

the land is held under a PL or ML. When any land is held

under PL or ML, then the said land cannot even be considered

for reservation. If the land sought to be reserved is not under

PL or ML, then the State can make a proposal to reserve the

land. If the land sought to be reserved is covered by an RP

there is no bar to reserve the land for exploitation by State

Government undertakings.      This, however, does not mean

that while dealing with the proposal of the State, the Central

Government must make the reservation.            The Central

Government while granting approval, has to independently

apply its mind and while doing so, there is nothing which

debars    the   Central   Government      from   taking     into
39
consideration the fact that some entity was granted RP and

the effect thereof. No doubt, the Central Government cannot

reject the proposal only on the ground that RP was issued

since that would run counter to the provisions of
Section

17A(2)
of the Act. However, this is a fact which along with

other facts can be taken into consideration while deciding the

issue of reservation of land.
43.   As far as the present case is concerned, the Central

Government took into consideration various factors and notes

that PL applications had already been filed by Geomysore and

Deccan pursuant to RPs. It virtually held that the request of

the State Government was at a belated stage and was against

the provisions of the NMP, 2008, the emphasis in which was

to provide a regulatory environment which is conducive to

private investment.      It may be true that the Central

Government was influenced by the fact that Geomysore and

Deccan,    pursuant    to   the   RPs,   had   completed   the

reconnaissance and submitted their consolidated reports, but

there were other relevant factors also which were taken into
40
consideration such as that Geomysore and Deccan had

already applied for grant of PL and no security consideration

or public interest was involved in making reservation for

HGML. In our view, the factors taken into consideration by

the Central Government are relevant and germane to the

issues and cannot be said to be such factors which are

extraneous or could not have been taken into consideration.
44.   We may also add that as far as the present case is

concerned,    when   on   27.12.2008,   the   Government      of

Karnataka recommended that 161 sq. kms. land be allotted to

HGML, no reservation had taken place because approval of

the Central Government had not come. In fact, the State of

Karnataka had not even notified the area, which was sought

to be reserved nor it identified the minerals for which

reservation was sought.
45.
Section 17A(2)
of the Act envisages following four

conditions:
(a)   The land is not held under prospecting licence or mining

lease;
41
(b)   there is approval by the Central Government;
(c)   a notification is issued in the Official Gazette specifying

the boundaries of such area; and
(d)   such notification should identify the mineral or minerals

in respect of which such areas are sought to be reserved.
Only the first condition was fulfilled. None of the other

conditions were satisfied. Therefore, the State of Karnataka

could not have issued recommendation in favour of HGML on

27.12.2008.    The cart could not have been put before the

horse.   Unless reservation takes place, a private company

stands on the same footing as a Government company and in

that eventuality,
Section 11
of the Act would be applicable

and Geomysore and Deccan being the RP holders and also

being earlier PL applicants, had to be given preference.



CONCLUSION
46.   In view of the above discussion, our answers to the four

questions are as follows:
42
(i)     The State Government being the owner of the land and

minerals, has a right to make a proposal to the Central

Government to reserve lands not held under a prospecting

licence    or     mining   lease     for   exploitation    by    the   State

Government companies or undertakings but approval of the

Central Government is necessary;
(ii)    The Central Government cannot be bound by any

specific parameters. Each case has to be decided on its own

merits.     However, as indicated by us above, the Central

Government can not only take into consideration factors of

national security or public interest but also economic factors,

the policy of the Government and all such other factors which

are relevant to decide the issue whether the land should be

reserved        for   exploitation    only    by   State        Government

Undertakings;
(iii)
Section 11(1)
and
Section 17A(2)
of the Act have no

connection with each other.
Section 11(1)
of the Act deals

with preference to be given to RP holder and PL holder while

considering their case for grant of PL and ML respectively.
43
This has nothing to do with reservation of land under
Section

17A(2)
of the Act. The only connection, if it can be called that,

is that if a land is held under a PL or ML, then action under
Section 17A(2)
of the Act cannot even be initiated;
(iv)   In view of the discussion held above, we feel that the

Central Government was justified in rejecting the request of

the State of Karnataka in reserving the land in question.
47.    Before parting with the case, we may note that

arguments were addressed before us on the effect of the

amendments made in 2015 to the
MMDR Act
especially with

regard to
Section 10A
and
Section 10B
. We are not dealing

with these issues, as decision on them is not necessary to

decide the present case.
48.    In view of the above discussion, we are clearly of the

view that the Karnataka High Court erred in allowing the writ

petition. Accordingly, the judgment of the High Court passed

in W.P. No.25899 of 2011 on 03.04.2012 is set aside and the

decision of the Central Government dated 31.05.2011 is

upheld and the State of Karnataka is directed to consider the
44
case of Geomysore and Deccan for grant of PL in accordance

with the provisions of the Act as they now stand amended in

the year 2015.
49.   The appeals are allowed in the aforesaid terms with no

order as to costs.   Pending application(s), if any, stand(s)

disposed of.
………………………..J.
                                         (Madan B. Lokur)



                                       …………………………J.
                                          (Deepak Gupta)
New Delhi
May 08, 2018