[Cites
4
, Cited by
20
]
Supreme Court of India
Meenakshi Saxena vs Ecgc Ltd(Formerly Known As Export ... on 18 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2831, 2018 (7) SCC 479, (2018) 7 SCALE 639, (2018) 4 CIVLJ 393, (2018) 5 ANDHLD 120, (2018) 3 CURCC 55, (2018) 188 ALLINDCAS 11 (SC), (2018) 3 CAL LJ 65, 2018 (130) ALR SOC 64 (ALL)
Author:
N.V. Ramana
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
N. V. Ramana
REPORTABLE
                                    THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                       Civil Appeal No.5681/2018
                                 (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 6286 of 2017)


          Meenakshi Saxena & Anr.                                      …Appellant (s)

                                                    Versus

          ECGC Ltd. (Formerly known as Export                          …Respondent (s)
Credit Guarantee Corporation of India Ltd.) 
          and Anr.
JUDGMENT 

           N.V. RAMANA, J.
1.             Leave granted.
2.             This   case   arises   out   of   the   impugned   order   dated

                         20.10.2016, in Revision Petition No. 614 of 2015, passed by

                         the   National   Consumer   Disputes   Redressal   Commission

                         [hereinafter   referred   as  ‘NCDRC’  for  brevity]   wherein   the
Signature Not Verified
NCDRC has allowed the Revision and set aside the order of
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2018.05.18
16:07:44 IST
Reason:
the   District   Forum   which   was   confirmed   by   the   State

                         Commission.
1
3.   A brief reference to the facts of the case necessary for the

     disposal of this case are that, the appellant had purchased

     an   insurance   policy   No.   SCR0000093,   dated   27.07.2000,

     from respondent no. 1 against any loss suffered due to the

     reason of risks involved in the export of goods from India.

     Under Clause 13 of the contract, the respondent had agreed

     to pay 90% of the accrued loss, in the following manner­


          Clause   13­   Percentage   of   loss   payable:  The
          portion   of   the   amount   of   loss   which   the
          Corporation hereby agrees to pay shall be 90%.
4.   It would be necessary to note that the parties had explicitly

     included a clause concerning the rate of currency exchange

     in the following manner­


          Clause   17   ­   Rate   of   Exchange:   All   payments
          under this policy shall be in Indian Rupee at the
          head   office   of   the   Corporation   and,   for   the
          purpose of payment of premiums and losses, the
          gross invoice value of the shipments invoiced in a
          foreign   currency   shall   be   converted   into   Indian
          Rupee   at   the   Bank   buying   rate   of   exchange   at
          Mumbai   on   the   date   of   the   relative   shipment
          PROVIDED THAT, devaluation of the currency in
          which the buyer has to pay takes place before the
          claim   is   paid,   the   amount   claimed   in   Indian
          currency shall be based on the devalued rate.
2
5.   Coming   back   to   the   narration   of   the   facts,   appellant   had

     sent   a   consignment   of   the   goods   by   invoice   no.   1,   dated

     01.04.2002,   to   M/s.   Parveena   Enterprises   (NF)   France   for

     value   of   11875.75   Euro   vide   bill   of   Lading   No.   PONLDEL

     27008966 dated 24.04.2002. Even though the purchaser of

     the goods accepted the delivery, but failed to make payments

     to  the   appellant  [seller]. After  considering  the claim  of the

     appellant, respondent no. 1 offered to pay a compensation

     amounting to 79.5% of the loss, instead of 90% of the loss.
6.   Aggrieved by the same, appellant filed a complaint before the

     District forum against the respondents, alleging deficiency in

     service on the part of the respondent.
7.   The District Forum by order dated 12.10.2006, allowed the

     complaint   and   directed   the   respondent   herein   (Insurer)   to

     pay as under­


           We   accept   the   present   complaint   and   direct
           the   Ops   to   pay   the   90%   of   the   value   of
           11875.75 Euro (goods exported by the petitioner
           vide   Lading   No.   PONLDEL   27008966   dated
           24.04.2002) together with interest at rate of 12%
           per   annum   from   24.7.2002   (because   three
           months time was sufficient for the OPs to settle
           the   claim)   till   the   realization   together   with   Rs.
           3300/­ as litigation expenses within a period of
3
30 days from the date of receipt of copy of this
           order.
(emphasis provided)
8.   Even the appeal before the State Commission and a further

     revision   before   the   NCDRC   were   ended   up   in   dismissal,

     therefore,   the   order   passed   by   the   District   Forum   with

     regard to the liability of the respondent/insurance company

     has attained finality.
9.   Despite the order dated 12.10.2006, passed by Ld. District

     Forum,   when   the   respondent   no.   1   failed   to   make   the

     payment to the petitioner­complainant as per the terms set­

     out   therein,   the   appellant   preferred   an   Execution   Petition

     No. 34 of 2013 before the District Forum, Panipat. During

     the pendency of the execution petition, the respondent paid

     a   sum   of   Rs.   11,23,906/­   to   the   appellant/decree   holders

     calculated   on   the   basis   of   conversion   rate   of   11,875.75

     Euros as on 24.04.2002 and the interest calculated thereon.

     The   appellant/decree   holders   while   accepting   the   said

     payment   disputed   that   the   payment   satisfied   the   decree,

     mainly on the plea that value of the Euros payable should
4
have   been  calculated on the conversion rate applicable on

    the date of payment.
10. The   District   Forum   taking   into   consideration   all   these

     aspects,   has   allowed   the   Execution   Petition   with   the

     following observations:
“After   hearing   counsel   for   both   the   parties   and
            after perusal of the order of this forum it is very
            clear that this forum has passed an order to pay
            90% of value of 11,875.75 Euro. As such, the OP
            was   to   pay   the   amount   in   Indian   currency
            whichever   was   the   value   of   Euro.   Specifically,
            when   court   is   passing   an   order   for   payment   of
            amount as value of Euro the OP is bound to pay
            the   value   of   Euro   when   he   is   making   the
            payment. Order of this forum was passed in 2006
            but till 2013 ECGC has not paid the amount to
            the complainant in compliance of the order. Now
            at   this   stage   it   is   well   settled   law   that
            executing court cannot go behind the decree
            under execution. In view of the order of this
            Forum, the ECGC has to pay the value of Euro
            when he is paying the amount.  Amount is to
            be   paid   in   value   of   Euro   whichever   value
            exists at the time of payment, in compliance
            with the order of this Forum. In view of the
            above discussion, certainly ECGC has not paid
            the complete amount as per order passed by
            this Forum. Hence ECGC is further directed to
            pay the amount  (sic)
                                               (emphasis supplied)
11. Respondent/insurance   company   being   aggrieved   by   the

     aforesaid order of the Executing Court approached the State
5
Commission of Haryana in Revision Petition No. 66 of 2014.

    The State Commission of Haryana did not find any merit in

    the petition and dismissed the same. Again, the respondent

    approached   the  NCDRC in revision being Revision Petition

    No. 614 of 2015. Interestingly, the NCDRC, by order dated

    24.03.2015,   dismissed   the   revision   petition   as   withdrawn

    with   a   liberty   to   the   Respondents   to   approach   the

    appropriate forum.
12. However, thereafter, respondents approached this court by

    filing   a   special   leave   petition   being   SLP   (C)   No.   21085­

    86/2015 (later converted into Civil Appeal No. 6108­6109 of

    2016). This Court by order dated 11.07.2016, while allowing

    the   appeal,   remanded   the   matter   back   to   the   NCDRC   for

    consideration on merits under the revisional jurisdiction in

    the following manner­
          We have heard learned counsel for the parties at
          some   length.   Our   attention   has   been   drawn   by
          learned counsel for two parties to an order dated
          9th January, 2015 passed by a Full Bench of the
          National   Commission   in   Revision   Petition   No.
          1792 of 2012 whereby the National Commission
          has   taken   the   view   that   although   no   appeal   is
          maintainable   against   the   order   passed   by   the
          State   Commission   in   exercise   of   its   appellate
          jurisdiction,   any   order   passed   by   the   State
          Commission   in   exercise   of   its   appellate   or
          revisional   jurisdiction   can   be   challenged   before
6
the   National   Commission   by   way   of   revision
           under   21(b)   of   the
Consumer   Protection   Act
.
           Learned   counsel   for   the   appellant   submits   that
           the   appellant   is   ready   to   take   resort   to   the
           revisional   jurisdiction   of   the   National
           Commission   in   the   light   of   the   Full   Bench
           decision of the National Commission, mentioned
           above, and that the matter could for that purpose
           be remitted back to the National Commission.

            We accordingly allow these appeals but only
            to   the   extent   that   order   dated   24    
                                                          th
                                                              march,
            2015   passed   by   the   National   Commission
            dismissing the revision petition filed by the
            appellant   shall   stand   set   aside,   Revision
            Petition   No.   614   of   2015   restored   and
            remitted   back   to   the   National   Commission
            for the disposal  in accordance with the law
            in the light of the Full Bench decision of the
            National Commission, referred to earlier.
(emphasis supplied)
13. On   remand   NCDRC,   by   order   dated   20.10.2016,   which   is

     impugned   before   us   has   allowed   the   revision   of   the

     respondent on the ground that the Clause 17 of the Contract

     had explicitly provided for the rule for calculating the rate of

     conversion in the following manner­
11.  On bare reading of the above, it is clear that
           as per the insurance contract, the opposite party
           insurer was required to pay the insurance claim
           as per the conversion rate of the invoiced foreign
           currency in Indian rupee as per the bank buying
           rate of interest at Mumbai on the date of subject
7
shipment   for   which   the   invoice   was   issued.
Undisputedly, sum of Rs. 11,23,906 paid by the
            judgment debtor was calculated on the basis of
            conversion   rate   applicable   at   the   time   of
            shipment   of   invoiced   value   and   the   interest
            awarded   by   the   consumer   forum.   Therefore,   it
            cannot   be   said   that  any   further   amount   is  due
            from   the   opposite party  under  the  decree. Both
            the fora below have passed the impugned order
            in utter disregard of the expressed term no. 17 of
            the   insurance   contract.   The   order   thus   suffers
            from   material   irregularity   and   cannot   be
            sustained.
14. Aggrieved   by   the   order   of   the   NCDRC,   the   petitioner   is   in

      appeal before this Court by a special leave petition.
15. Heard   counsel   appearing   on   behalf   of   both   parties   and

      perused the material available on record.
16. Before we dwell on to the merits of this case, we would like

      to note certain aspects of execution of a decree.
Section 25
and
27
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, provides for

      execution of  awards. It would be relevant to note that the

      ‘execution’ means­

            The word ‘execution’ in its widest sense signifies
            the   enforcement   of   or   giving   effect   to   the
            judgments or orders of the court of justice. In a
            narrower   sense,   it   means   the   enforcement   of
            those   judgments   or   orders   by   a   public   officer
            under the writs of fierifacias, possession, delivery,
8
sequestration,   fierifacias   de   bonisecclesiaticis,
           etc.
17. The   amended
Section   25
of   the   Consumer   protection   Act,

     which   is   effective   from   15.3.2003   may   be   relevant   to   be

     noted ­ 

           "25. Enforcement of orders of the District Forum,
           the   State   Commission   or   the   National
           Commission­ 
           (1) Where   an   interim   order   made   under   this
           Act, is not complied with, the District Forum or
           the   State   Commission   or   the   National
           Commission, as the case may be, may order the
           property of the person, not complying with such
           order to be attached.
(2) No attachment made under sub­section (1)
           shall remain in force for more than three months
           at   the   end   of   which,   if   the   non­compliance
           continues, the property attached maybe sold and
           out of the proceeds thereof, the District Forum or
           the   State   Commission   or   the   National
           Commission   may   award   such   damages   as   it
           thinks   fit  to  the complainant and  shall  pay  the
           balance, if any, to the party entitled thereto. 
           (3) Where   any   amount   is   due   from   any
           person   under   an   order   made   by   a   District
           Forum,   State   Commission   or   the   National
           Commission, as the case may be, the person
           entitled   to   the   amount   may   make   an
           application   to   the   District   Forum,   the   State
           Commission   or   the   National   Commission,   as
           the case may be, and such district Forum or the
           State   Commission   or   the   National   Commission
           may issue a certificate for the said amount to the
9
Collector of the district (by whatever name called)
            and   the   Collector   shall   proceed   to   recover   the
            amount  in the  same manner as arrears of land
            revenue."
(emphasis supplied)
18. The   whole   purpose   of   Execution   proceedings   is   to   enforce

      the verdict of the court. Executing court while executing the

      decree   is   only   concerned with the  execution  part of it but

      nothing else. The court has to take the judgment in its face

      value. It is settled law that executing court cannot go beyond

      the decree. But the difficulty arises when there is ambiguity

      in   the   decree   with   regard  to   the   material  aspects.  Then   it

      becomes   the   bounden   duty   of   the   court   to   interpret   the

      decree in the process of giving a true effect to the decree. At

      that juncture the executing court has to be very cautious in

      supplementing   its   interpretation   and   conscious   of   the   fact

      that it cannot draw a new decree. The executing court shall

      strike a fine balance between the two while exercising this

      jurisdiction in the process of giving effect to the decree.
19. In   the   facts   and   circumstances   of   the   case   there   is   no

      dispute   about   the   fact   that   the   liability   of   the   respondent

      company   to   a   tune   of   90%   value   of   11875.75   Euros   with

      interest   at   the   rate   of   12%   from   24.7.2002   has   attained
10
finality.     As   per   the   calculation   memo   filed   by   the

     appellant in execution proceedings she claimed total amount

     of Rs. 25,76,883.00 i.e  principal amount of Rs. 7,61,105.00

     calculated @ Rs 71.21 per Euro as on 17.4.2013 being 90%

     value   of   11,875.75   Euros.  Further   interest   granted   by   the

     court   from   24.7.2002   to   24.4.2013   to   a   tune   of   Rs.

     18,12,478.00.
20. Admittedly,   during   the   pendency   of   the   execution

     proceedings   an   amount   of   Rs.   4,86,953   as   90%   value   of

     11,875.75 Euros as on 24.4.2002 and interest thereon of Rs.

     6,33,653   as   directed   by   the   court   were   paid   by   the

     respondent herein. Both the State Commission and District

     Commission interpreted the order dt 12.10.2006 observing

     that   Euro   conversion   rate   has   to   be   calculated   as   on   the

     date of payment and hence the respondent company has to

     pay the remaining amount. However the NCDRC has taken a

     different view while interpreting clause 17 of the agreement

     and concluded that conversion rate has to be as on the date

     of subject shipment for which the invoice was issued and as

     the   full   amount   with   the   same   calculation   is   paid   by   the

     respondent, NCDRC has dismissed the revision petition.
11
21. In the light of the above findings of the forums, in the light of

      the arguments advanced, we have to examine whether the

      interpretation adopted is in the process of giving a true effect

      to   the   decree   or   they   have   gone   beyond   the   decree   by

      drawing a new decree. We are compelled to observe that an

      order   which   is   passed   in   the   year   2006   is   still   subject   to

      litigation till date for the simple reason minimum care is not

      taken   by   the   forum   to   clarify   the   reckoning   date   for

      conversion rate of currency.
22. In   a   contractual   matter,   when   the   decree   is   silent   with

      regard   to   the   reckoning   date   of   conversion   of   foreign

      currency   in   to   Indian   rupees,   what   would   be   the

      methodology   to   be   followed   by   the   executing   court     is   no

      more res integra, as this court has an occasion to deal with

      elaborately in the   case of  Forasol v. ONGC, 1984 (Supp.)

      SCC 263, the facts of that case revolved around a contract

      entered   into   between   ONGC   and   Forasol   for   carrying   out

      structural drilling in relation to the exploration of oil in the

      Jaisalmer   area.   The  contract mandated a part payment in

      the  foreign currency i.e., French francs. Due to belligerent
12
situation prevalent between India and Pakistan in 1965, the

     contract   was   suspended.   In   the   meanwhile   the   Indian

     currency was devalued resulting in Forasol claiming higher

     conversion rate. As the dispute was not settled, the matter

     was referred to an arbitration. For the present, it is sufficient

     to   note   that   by   the   award   of   the   arbitrator/Umpire

     mandated   conversion   at   the   rate   of   FF   1000   equal   to

     1517.80 instead of exchange rate of FF 1.033 equal to Re.

     1.000. The aforesaid award was filed before the Delhi High

     Court, which accordingly passed the decree on 07.05.1975

     without any objections from the parties as to the form.
23. Thereafter, the Forasol filed an application for execution of

     the award being Execution No. 77 of 1976. ONGC objected

     to   the   aforesaid   execution   by   contending   that   the   rate

     specified   in   the   award   was   to   be   limited   to   the   interest

     granted   thereon   and   the   same   does   not   affect   the   main

     contractual amount. The learned single Judge negatived all

     the   contentions   of   ONGC.   On   appeal   before   the   Division

     Bench, the High Court accepted the contention of ONGC and

     therefore, Forasol appealed before this court. The question
13
before the court was concerning choosing the best date for

     the rate of conversion was expressed as under­
23.  The   question   which   now   remains   to   be
             considered  in Forasol’s  appeal  is  the date  to
             be   selected   by   the   Court   for   converting   into
             Indian   Rupees   the   French   Franc   part   of   the
             said   award   in   respect   of   which   no   rate   of
             exchange   has   been   fixed   either   by   the   said
             contract or the said award.
(emphasis supplied)
24. This Court recognized the principle that a determination of

     relevant   date   for   conversion   of   currency   would   first   take

     place   in   accordance   with   the   contractual   provision   and

     thereafter,   if   such   explicit   determination   is   not   available,

     then   the   court   would   have   to   determine   the   best   possible

     date.
25. Further this court recognized the discretion of the Court to

     select the relevant dates and pointed out some of them in

     the following manner­
24.  In   an   action   to   recover   an   amount
             payable   in   a   foreign   currency,   five   dates
             compete   for   selection   by   the   Court   as   the
             proper date for fixing the rate of exchange at
             which the foreign currency amount has to be
             converted into the currency of the country in
14
which   the   action   has   been   commenced   and
            decided. These dates are:
(1) the date when the amount became due
                       and payable;
(2)  the   date   of   the   commencement   of   the
                       action;
(3)  the date of the decree;
(4) the   date   when   the   Court   orders
                      execution to issue; and

                  (5)   the   date   when   the   decretal   amount   is
                        paid or realised.
25.  In a case where a decree has been passed
            by   the   Court   in   terms   of   an   award   made   in   a
            foreign   currency   a   sixth   date   also   enters,   the
            competition, namely, the date of the award. The
            case before us is one in which a decree in terms
            of such an award has been passed by the Court.
(emphasis supplied)
26. Ultimately   this   Court   on   an   extensive   analysis   came   to   a

      conclusion in the following manner­
70.  It would be convenient if we now set out the
            practice,   which   according   to   us,   ought   to   be
            followed   in   suits   in   which   a   sum   of   money
            expressed in a foreign currency can legitimately
            be   claimed   by   the   plaintiff   and   decreed   by   the
            court. It is unnecessary for us to categorize the
            cases   in   which   such   a   claim   can   be   made   and
            decreed. They have been sufficiently indicated in
15
the   English   decisions   referred   to   by   us   above.
Such   instances   can,   however,   never,   be
exhausted   because   the   law   cannot   afford   to   be
static but must constantly develop and progress
as   the   society   to   which   it   applies,   changes   its
complexion and old ideologies and concepts are
discarded and replaced by new. Suffice it to say
that the case with which we are concerned was
one which fell in this category. In such a suit, the
plaintiff, who has not received the amount due to
him in a foreign currency, and, therefore, desires
to seek the assistance of the court to recover that
amount,   has   two   courses   open   to   him.   He   can
either   claim   the   amount   due   to   him   in   Indian
currency   or   in   the   foreign   currency   in   which   it
was payable. If he chooses the first alternative, he
can only sue for that amount as converted into
Indian   rupees   and   his   prayer   in   the   plaint   can
only   be   for   a   sum   in   Indian   currency.   For   this
purpose, the plaintiff would have to convert the
foreign currency amount due to him into Indian
rupees.   He   can   do   so   either   at   the   rate   of
exchange   prevailing   on   the   date   when   the
amount   became   payable   for   he   was   entitled   to
receive the amount on that date or, at his option,
at the rate of exchange prevailing on the date of
the filing of the suit because that is the date on
which he   is  seeking the assistance of the court
for recovering the amount due to him. In either
event, the valuation of the suit for the purposes
of   court   fees   and   the   pecuniary   limit   of   the
jurisdiction   of   the   court   will   be   the   amount   in
Indian currency claimed in the suit. The plaintiff
may, however, choose the second course open to
him   and   claim   in   foreign   currency   the   amount
due to him. In such a suit, the proper prayer for
the plaintiff to make in his plaint would be for a
decree   that   the   defendant   do   pay   to   him   the
16
foreign   currency   sum   claimed   in   the   plaint
subject   to   the   permission   of   the   concerned
authorities   under   the
Foreign   Exchange
Regulation Act, 1973
, being granted and that in
the event of the foreign exchange authorities not
granting   the   requisite   permission   or   the
defendant   not   wanting   to   make   payment   in
foreign   currency   even   though   such   permission
has   been   granted   or   the   defendant   not   making
payment in foreign currency or in Indian rupees,
whether   such   permission   has   been   granted   or
not,   the   defendant   do   pay   to   the   plaintiff   the
rupee   equivalent   of   the   foreign   currency   sum
claimed at the rate of exchange prevailing on the
date of the judgment. For the purposes of court
fees   and   jurisdiction   the   plaintiff   should,
however, value his claim in the suit by converting
the   foreign   currency   sum   claimed   by   him   into
Indian rupees at the rate of exchange prevailing
on the  date   of  the filing of the suit or the date
nearest   or   most   nearly   preceding   such   date,
stating in his plaint what such rate of exchange
is. He should further give an undertaking in the
plaint that he would make good the deficiency in
the   court­fees,   if   any,   if   at   the   date   of   the
judgment, at the rate of exchange then prevailing,
the rupee equivalent of the foreign currency sum
decreed   is   higher   than   that   mentioned   in   the
plaint   for   the   purposes   of   court­fees   and
jurisdiction. At the hearing of such a suit, before
passing   the   decree,   the   court   should   call   upon
the   plaintiff   to   prove   the   rate   of   exchange
prevailing on the date of the judgment or on the
date nearest or most nearly preceding the date of
the   judgment.   If   necessary,   after   delivering
judgment   on   all   other   issues,   the   court   may
stand   over   the   rest   of   the   judgment   and   the
passing of the decree and adjourn the matter to
17
enable   the   plaintiff   to   prove   such   rate   of
exchange. The decree to be passed by the court
should be one which orders the defendant to pay
to the plaintiff the foreign currency sum adjudged
by the court subject to the requisite permission of
the   concerned   authorities   under   the
Foreign
Exchange   Regulation   Act,   1973
,   being   granted,
and   in   the   event   of   the   foreign   exchange
authorities not granting the requisite permission
or the defendant not wanting to make payment in
foreign   currency   even   though   such   permission
has   been   granted   or   the   defendant   not   making
payment in foreign currency or in Indian rupees,
whether   such   permission   has   been   granted   or
not, the equivalent of such foreign currency sum
converted   into   Indian   rupees   at   the   rate   of
exchange proved before the court as aforesaid. In
the event of the decree being challenged in appeal
or   other   proceedings   and   such   appeal   or   other
proceedings being decided in whole or in part in
favour of the plaintiff, the appellate court or the
court   hearing   the   application   in   the   other
proceedings challenging the decree should follow
the   same   procedure   as   the   trial   court   for   the
purpose   of   ascertaining   the   rate   of   exchange
prevailing on the date of its appellate decree or of
its   order   on   such   application   or   on   the   date
nearest or most nearly preceding the date of such
decree   or   order.   If   such   rate   of   exchange   is
different   from   the  rate   in  the   decree  which   has
been   challenged,   the   court   should   make   the
necessary modification with respect to the rate of
exchange by its appellate decree or final order. In
all such cases, execution can only issue for the
rupee equivalent specified in the decree, appellate
decree or final order, as the case may be. These
questions, of course, would not arise if pending
appeal   or   other   proceedings   adopted   by   the
18
defendant   the   decree   has   been   executed   or   the
            money thereunder received by the plaintiff.
27. In   the   light   of   the   ratio   laid   down   by   this   court   in

      determining the relevant date for conversion of currency, the

      first procedure to be adopted by the court is to decide the

      same   in   accordance   with   terms   of   the   contract,   if   such   a

      clause is not available in the agreement then the courts have

      to   determine   the   best   possible   date,   then   this   court   went

      ahead and dealt with the procedure to be adopted. But in

      the present facts that exercise is not relevant as there is a

      specific clause in the agreement i.e clause 17 which deals

      with rate of interest. The clause clearly says that currency

      should be converted into rupees at the bank buying rate of

      exchange   at   Mumbai   on   the   date   of   relevant   shipment.   A

      close look at the relevant order dt. 12.10.2006 also discloses

      that the district forum has granted interest on the amount

      from   24.7.2002   which   can   be   construed   that   the   District

      Forum   though   has   not   mentioned   about   clause   17   of   the

      agreement   but   taking   in   to   consideration   the   very   same

      clause has given interest from that day. The interpretation

      given by District Forum as well as the State Commission to
19
the   order   dt.   12.10.2006   is   contrary   to   the   terms   of   the

     agreement and amounts to drawing a new decree which is

     not permissible.
28. We are unable to agree with the contentions of the learned

     counsel for the appellant that the NCDRC has gone beyond

     the   decree   and   the   NCDRC   ought   not   to   have   gone   into

     clause   17   are   meritless   hence   rejected.   In   a   case   of   this

     nature   the   only   remedy   available   to   the   court   is   either   to

     look at the  terms of the contract or in the absence of the

     same to follow the procedure laid down by this court in the

     above   stated   judgment.   The   order   passed   by   NCDRC   is

     strictly in accordance with the settled legal position and we

     do not find any infirmity with the order.
29. In   conclusion,   reading   the   judgment   as   a   whole,   without

     undertaking   a   piece   meal   approach   as   suggested   by   the

     appellant herein, interpreting the decree in a manner which

     may   amount   to   substitution   of   a   new   decree   is   not

     countenanced  under law. Therefore, it is clear  that as per

     the insurance contract, the respondent insurer was required

     to   pay   the   insurance   claim   in   accordance   with   the

     conversion   rate   of   the   invoiced   foreign   currency   in   Indian
20
rupee as per the bank buying rate of interest at Mumbai on

      the   date   of   subject   shipment   for   which   the   invoice   was

      issued.   We   are   apprised   of   the   fact   that   the   respondent­

      judgment debtor has paid an amount of Rs. 11,23,906/­ to

      the petitioner during the pendency of execution proceedings.

      The   aforesaid   payment   was   calculated   on   the   basis   of

      conversion   rate   applicable   at   the   time   of   shipment   of

      invoiced   value   and   the   interest   awarded   by   the   consumer

      forum.   In   view   of   the   same   the   respondent   has   complied

      with the order of the forum by paying full and final amount

      in terms of the order.
30. Hence, we find no grounds to interfere with the order of the

      NCDRC   which   is   based   on   sound   principles   of   law.

      Accordingly, this appeal is dismissed.
……………………………..J.
                                                    (N. V. RAMANA)



                                                      ………………………………J.
                                                            (S. ABDUL NAZEER)
NEW DELHI,
MAY  18, 2018.
21