[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Writers And Publisher Pvt Ltd vs A.K. Mishra Official on 17 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1274
Author:
D Y Chandrachud
Bench:
D Y Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
REPORTABLE


                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                          CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NOS. 1665-1666 OF 2017

                                                  IN

                                       I.A. NOS. 102-103 OF 2017

                                                  IN

                         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C)NOS.8398-8399 OF 2005


         M/S WRITERS AND PUBLISHER PVT LTD                               PETITIONER



                                             Versus


         A K MISHRA, OFFICIAL LIQUIDATOR
         THE COOPERATIVE STORES LTD. SUPER BAZAR                      .....RESPONDENT


                                                 With

                                      MA Nos. 1394-1395 of 2017
                                                 In

                                       I.A. Nos. 102-103 of 2017
                                                   In

                                    SLP (C) Nos. 8398-8399 of 2005


                                                 With
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
                                       MA Nos. 677-678 of 2018
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.05.17
15:43:56 IST
                                                 In
Reason:



                         SLP (C) Nos. 8398-8399 of 2005 & I.A. No. 3664 of 2018
                                       2


                                     With
                  Contempt Petition (C) Nos. 866-867 of 2018

                                      In

                       SLP (C) Nos. 8398-8399 of 2005


                                   And with
    M.A. Nos. ….D.Nos. 64493 of 2018; 64494 of 2018 & 64495 of 2018



                                 ORDER
Dr D Y CHANDRACHUD, J



1     The revival of Super Bazar was being monitored by this Court over

several years. By an order dated 7 May 2008, this Court noted that three bidders

were identified by the Evaluation Committee; among them being M/s Writers

and Publisher Pvt Ltd (WPL). This Court recorded that all the Unions

representing the workmen had agreed that the dues of the workers as on 31

December 2007 were Rs. 54.31 crores.
2     By an order dated 26 February 2009, this Court accepted the report of

the Evaluation Committee which had recommended acceptance of the offer

made by WPL. Accordingly, the Official Liquidator (OL) and the Central

Registrar, Multi State Cooperative Societies were directed to take steps to

revive Super Bazar. In a further order dated 13 August 2010, this Court

observed thus :
3
“(ii) In terms of our order dated 7th May, 2008, an amount of
                 Rs.54.31 crores, being arrears of wages upto 31st
                 December, 2007, was directed to be disbursed by the
                 highest bidder. Rs.55 crores stands deposited by the
                 highest bidder. The sum of Rs.20 crores out of Rs.55 crores
                 which lies with the Registry of the Supreme Court, will be
                 disbursed by the Official Liquidator and the nominee of the
                 Central Registrar Co-operative Societies in the presence of
                 one Union representative of each Union within four weeks
                 from today. The representative of the highest bidder will also
                 remain present in the said meeting. It is made clear that the
                 workers will sign the receipt of payment, which will be
                 adjusted towards the arrears of Rs.54.31 crores.
(iii) As far as the balance amount is concerned, we are directing
                 the highest bidder to file an affidavit containing an
                 Undertaking that within a period of eight weeks, from the
                 date of constitution of the Board of Directors after the
                 elections, the balance amount will be disbursed to the
                 workers. This will cover arrears of wages up to 31st
                 December, 2007.”
3     Subsequently, in September 2015, an IA was filed on behalf of the Union

of India stating that neither WPL nor the management of Super Bazar had

submitted a revival plan before the Central Registrar of Cooperative Societies.

As a result, the Super Bazar could not be revived in accordance with the

provisions of the
Multi-State Cooperative Societies Act
2000.




4     Faced with this situation, on 29 March 2016, a two Judge Bench of this

Court observed that despite earnest efforts made by the Court since the

acceptance of the bid of WPL, it was not possible to give effect to the terms of

revival. It appears from the order of this Court that the Union of India was

associated in the preparation of the modalities by which WPL could be released

from the arrangement. Accordingly, this Court observed as follows :
4
“Despite earnest efforts made by this Court ever since the
             acceptance of the bid of M/s Writers and Publishers Ltd., and
             despite a series of hearings in the matter ever since 2009, it
             came to be realised, that it would not be possible to give effect
             to the terms of revival. It is in the above view of the matter, that
             this Court sought suggestions from the rival parties, how the
             arrangement could be terminated. It is in the above
             background, 4 that the following motion bench order came to
             be passed on 23.02.2016:
“The bidder has suggested two alternative
                     courses of action in a written note handed
                     over to us in Court today. The above note is
                     taken on record and marked as Annexure-
A. Mr. P.S. Narsimha, learned Additional
                     Solicitor General representing the Union of
                     India seeks a short adjournment so as to
                     enable him to obtain instructions in the
                     matter. All other parties may likewise obtain
                     instructions in the matter before the next
                     date of hearing. Post for hearing on
                     01.03.2016.”

             On the issue, as to how and under what terms and conditions
             M/s Writers and Publishers Ltd., could be released from the
             arrangement, the parties (consequent upon mutual
             negotiations), submitted a joint statement of the Government
             of India and the bidder – M/s Writers and Publishers Ltd., dated
             03.03.2016. It seems that on re-consideration, there was a
             change of heart, at the hands of Government of India, which
             then submitted a revised joint statement dated 05.03.2016.
Learned counsel for the rival parties have assisted this Court,
             on the manner in which M/s Writers and Publishers Ltd., should
             be released from the obligation of the instant arrangement.
             Having heard learned counsel, we are satisfied in recording,
             that M/s Writers and Publishers Ltd. should be refunded the
             entire investment made by them, along with interest at the rate
             of 6% per annum (though it was suggested, that the rate of
             interest could be at 9% per annum), subject to deduction of
             profits made during the period when the arrangement
             subsisted.”



5     The above order of this Court dated 29 March 2016 envisages that WPL

would be refunded its “entire investment” together with interest at 6 per cent per

annum. However, the amount invested was to be subject to a deduction of the
5
profits made by WPL during the period when the arrangement subsisted. Since

WPL was to be refunded the entire investment made by it with interest, it was

evident that the profits realised by it during the subsistence of the arrangement

would have to be deducted.
6     In order to give effect to the above directions, the order of this Court

envisaged a process of verification by Controller and Auditor General of India

(CAG). The CAG was directed to nominate an auditor to verify the income and

expenditure incurred by WPL and the profits earned from the Super Bazar

establishment. The determination by the auditor was required to be verified by

CAG, upon which it would be binding upon by the parties concerned. WPL was

directed to handover all the movable and immovable properties of Super Bazar

to the OL.
7     The role which was ascribed to CAG emerges from the following extract,

from the order of this Court dated 29 March 2016 :
“In order to effectuate the refund referred to hereinabove 5 (to
             M/s Writers and Publishers Ltd.), we consider it just and
             appropriate to direct the Comptroller and Auditor General of
             India, to nominate an Auditor, to verify the income and
             expenditure incurred by M/s Writers and Publishers Ltd., and
             also, the profits earned by it from the Super Bazar
             establishment, during the period under consideration. The
             determination so made by the Auditor, will be verified by the
             office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India,
             whereupon, the same shall be binding on all the parties
             including M/s Writers and Publishers Ltd. Needless to mention,
             that all interested parties shall have the liberty to appear before
             the nominated Auditor, and canvass their respective claims.”
6
8       WPL was held to be entitled to the withdrawal of an amount of Rs. 14.84

crores deposited by it in the Registry of this Court and to a further sum of Rs.

8.07 crores which was deposited with the Regional Commissioner, Employees’

Provident Fund Organization (EPFO), Delhi together with interest. The above

amounts were to be deducted from the principal amount payable to WPL, while

refunding the payments due.
9       In pursuance of the directions issued in the order of this Court, CAG

submitted its report dated 1 September 2017. WPL has filed its objections to

the report.
10      Certain aspects of the CAG report form the subject matter of some

dispute. They are:
(i) Interest at the rate of 6 per cent per annum on the share capital infused by

     WPL has been disallowed. WPL contends that this is expressly contrary to

     the order dated 29 March 2016 by which its entire investment was to be

     returned together with interest at 6 per cent. According to WPL, the entire

     investment would include the amount invested towards share capital.
According to WPL, subscription towards share capital was only a

     methodology by which the bid amount was to be brought in and utilized to

     discharge various dues in satisfaction of the orders of this Court. On the

     other hand. The affidavit filed by CAG contains a defence of its view that

     interest should not be allowed on share capital. CAG has stated thus :
7
“The investment by M/s WPL was primarily in the nature of
              Share Capital, wherein share holders bear the profits and
              losses of a business. Share Holders do not get interest on their
              investment made in the form of share capital. Further, if such
              a practice is to be followed then it should be made applicable
              for other shareholders of Super Bazar too.”
(ii) The CAG report provides that the amount payable to WPL should be

     determined after adjustment of losses incurred by Super Bazar. WPL asserts

     that this would be expressly contrary to the order of this Court dated 29

     March 2016 under which CAG was not required to adjust losses but to only

     deduct the profits which accrued in favour of WPL, while determining the

     amount refundable. There was, according to WPL, no direction for the

     adjustment of losses. Moreover, CAG, in the view of WPL, has failed to

     notice that the so called losses in Super Bazar were not due to business but

     due to : (i) an amount of Rs. 54.31 crores being paid to the workers as their

     past dues in compliance of the orders dated 7 May 2008 and 13 August 2010

     of this Court; (ii) an amount of Rs. 31 crores being paid to the workmen

     towards three years’ salaries; and (iii) an amount of Rs. 15 crores paid

     towards arrears of property taxes, education cess and dues which had

     accrued even before possession was taken over by WPL;
11      While dealing with these objections, we must in fairness, advert to the

fact that in the order dated 29 March 2016, CAG was required to nominate an

auditor to verify the income and expenditure incurred by WPL as well as the

profits earned by it from the Super Bazar establishment during the period under
8
consideration. This determination of the auditor was to be verified by the office

of the CAG upon which it would be binding on all parties including WPL. In other

words, the actual exercise required to be carried out by the auditor was to verify

the income, expenditure and the profits earned by WPL and it was this

determination which would, subject to verification by the CAG, be final and

binding. CAG has, however, proceeded on the basis that WPL is not entitled to

interest at 6 per cent per annum on share capital on the ground that a

shareholder who participates in the profits and losses of a business is not

entitled to interest on share capital.
12    Now the order dated 29 March 2016 indicates that :
“…in the bid which was submitted by M/s Writers and
             Publishers Ltd, the infusion of funds stipulated, was to the tune
             of Rs.504 crores. The break up thereof, for the revival of Super
             Bazar, was roughly as under:
Share Capital - Rs.102 crore

             Working Capital - Rs 276 crore

             Revival and Revamping - Rs 126 crore”




All the above elements including share capital and working capital were part of

the infusion of funds contemplated for the revival of Super Bazar. Eventually,

when the process of revival could not take place, this Court formulated

directions for the exit of WPL. After due deliberation by all the parties, including

the Union government, this Court observed that WPL “should be refunded the

entire investment made by them along with interest at the rate of 6 per cent per
9
annum..subject to deduction of profits made during the period when the

arrangement subsisted”. WPL in terms of the aforesaid direction is entitled to

interest at 6 per cent on the entire investment made by it. Investment brought

in by way of share capital, did fall within the above mandate. It is part of the

overall investment by WPL. The order of this Court envisages an exit for WPL.
The order directs that there be a deduction of profits made, since WPL was

being compensated by way of interest on its investment. Consequently, it would

be impermissible to deny WPL the benefit of interest on its entire investment

inclusive of share capital.
13    We are also of the view that the adjustment of losses incurred in Super

Bazar and their deduction from the amount to be refunded to WPL is contrary

to the mandate of the order dated 29 March 2016. CAG was only required to

deduct the profits which had accrued in favour of WPL while determining the

amount refundable to it. In its affidavit, CAG has proceeded on the general

consideration that the term ‘profit’ represents a revenue earned from business

activity exceeding the expenses/costs and that a loss is “vice versa”. What this

ignores however are the specific terms of the directions issued by this Court

which envisage that it was the profits earned by WPL from the Super Bazar

establishment which were to be deducted. Once WPL was allowed a return on

its investment, the profits which it earned were required to be deducted. This

part of the direction does not contemplate that losses which accrued over the

period were to be adjusted. We have also noted the submission of WPL that the
10
loss accrued not as a result of the business as such but due to payments which

were required to be made to the workmen in pursuance of the directions issued

by this Court.
14     We are accordingly of the view that the report submitted by CAG needs

to be corrected on the above counts namely;
(i)    Denial of interest at 6 per cent on the entire investment of WPL including

       by way of share capital; and
(ii)   Adjustment of losses;
as explained earlier.
15     WPL has instituted Contempt proceedings against the OL. In the reply

filed by the OL, it has been stated that the determination of the income and

expenditure of WPL and the profits earned form the Super Bazar establishment

was to be carried out by the auditor nominated by CAG which was to be

thereafter verified by CAG. The OL has submitted that in these circumstances,

it would be inappropriate to contend that he has violated any part of the

directions of this Court. In pursuance of the order of this Court, the Director

General of Audit nominated M/s SPMG for conducting an audit of the accounts

of Super Bazar. Time for the completion of the audit was extended by this Court

on 21 November 2016 and 27 April 2017. The OL has also set out the steps

which have been taken in pursuance of the order of this Court for valuation and

sale of the properties of Super Bazar. Having regard to the contents of the said
11
affidavit, we are not inclined to entertain the Petition for Contempt as against

the OL.
16    However, we direct that all concerned shall now act in pursuance of the

observations contained in this order and the interpretation placed on the earlier

directions dated 29 March 2016.
17    The Contempt Petition (Civil) Nos 1665-1666 of 2017 in I.A. Nos. 102-

103 of 2017 in Special Leave Petition (Civil) 8398-8399 of 2005 are accordingly

disposed of.
……….......................................CJI
                                               [DIPAK MISRA]




                                             ……..…..........................................J
                                               [A.M. KHANWILKAR]




                                            …..….…..........................................J
                                               [Dr D Y CHANDRACHUD]

New Delhi;
May 17, 2018.