[Cites
6
, Cited by
11
]
Supreme Court of India
Kiran Pal Singh vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 17 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 3000, 2018 (6) ALJ 185
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1


                                                                       REPORTABLE 

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2622 OF 2018
                           (Arising out of S.L.P. (CIVIL) NO. 1724 of 2018)

         Kiran Pal Singh                                                 Appellant(s)


                                                VERSUS


         The State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.                               Respondent(s)
J U D G M E N T

         Dipak Misra, CJI.
India, a vast country, lives in villages.  The Gram Sabhas in

         the ancient era were conferred certain powers so that there could

         be a feeling of participation in the societal and local issues and

         also  to  establish a  socio­cultural amity  among the members of

         the collective.   History records with satisfaction that panchayats

         were able to settle disputes amongst the villagers and they had

         many a tool to focus on unity. Mahatma Gandhi, the father of the

         nation, emphasized on many an occasion that people should go

         to the villages to realize the true character of real India.  He had
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.05.17
15:43:59 IST
Reason:
said   with   emphasis   that   “”India   lives   in   her   seven   hundred
2
thousand villages” and “the soul of India lives in its villages”. The

Constituent Assembly debates reflected on the importance of the

villages but it thought appropriate to incorporate the concept of

village panchayats in
Article 40
of the Constitution which occurs

in   Chapter   IV   dealing   with   Directive   Principles   of   State   Policy.

The   said   article   provides   that   the   State   shall   take   steps   to

organize village panchayats and endow them with such powers

and authorities as may be necessary to enable them to function

as units of self­government.  The said article, as is evincible, only

requires the State to take steps to confer such powers.
2.    With the passage of time, it was realized that there had been

no   real   decentralization   of   powers.   In   the   absence   of   basic

decentralization of powers travelling to the mores in one of the

largest democracies like India, it was felt that the real purpose of

social transformation could not be achieved. It was acknowledged

and accepted that the people at the grass root level deserved to

be   politically,   economically   and   socially   empowered   and   the

Seventy Third Amendment was brought into the framework of our

organic   Constitution   with   the   clear   intent   of   having   local   self­

government. The vision, it can be said with certitude, is sacred

and   the   same   is   explicit   from   the   Statement   of   Objects   and
3
Reasons of the Seventy Third Amendment to the Constitution. It

reads as follows:­


          “Though the Panchayati Raj Institutions have
          been in existence for a long time, it has been
          observed that these institutions have not been
          able to acquire the status and dignity of viable
          and   responsive   people's   bodies   due   to   a
          number   of   reasons   including   absence   of
          regular   elections,   prolonged   supersessions,
          insufficient   representation   of   weaker   sections
          like   Scheduled   Castes,   Scheduled   Tribes   and
          women,   inadequate   devolution  of   powers  and
          lack of financial resources.
2.
Article   40
of   the   Constitution   which
          enshrines   one   of   the   Directive   Principles   of
          State Policy lays down that the State shall take
          steps   to   organise   village   panchayats   and
          endow   them   with  such  powers  and  authority
          as   may   be   necessary   to   enable   them   to
          function   as   units   of   self­government.   In   the
          light  of   the   experience  in  the last  forty   years
          and  in view of  the short­comings which have
          been observed, it is considered that there is an
          imperative   need   to   enshrine   in   the
          Constitution   certain   basic   and   essential
          features   of   Panchayati   Raj   Institutions   to
          impart   certainty,   continuity   and   strength   to
          them.
3. Accordingly, it is proposed to add a new Part
          relating   to   Panchayats   in   the   Constitution   to
          provide   for   among   other  things, Gram   Sabha
          in a village or group of villages; constitution of
          Panchayats at village and other level or levels;
          direct   elections   to   all   seats   in   Panchayats   at
          the village and intermediate level, if any, and
          to the offices of Chairpersons of Panchayats at
4
such   levels;   reservation   of   seats   for   the
Scheduled   Castes   and   Scheduled   Tribes   in
proportion to their population for membership
of   Panchayats   and   office   of   Chairpersons   in
Panchayats   at   each   level;   reservation   of   not
less   than   one­third   of   the   seats   for   women;
fixing   tenure   of   5   years   for   Panchayats   and
holding elections within a period of 6 months
in the event of supersession of any Panchayat;
disqualifications   for   membership   of
Panchayats;   devolution   by   the   State
Legislature of powers and responsibilities upon
the Panchayats with respect to the preparation
of plans for economic developments and social
justice   and   for   the   implementation   of
development   schemes;   sound   finance   of   the
Panchayats   by   securing   authorisation   from
State   Legislatures   for   grants­in­aid   to   the
Panchayats from the Consolidated Fund of the
State, as also assignment to, or appropriation
by,   the   Panchayats   of   the   revenues   of
designated taxes, duties, tolls and fees; setting
up of a Finance Commission within one year of
the proposed amendment and thereafter every
5   years   to   review   the   financial   position   of
Panchayats;   auditing   of   accounts   of   the
Panchayats;   powers   of   State   Legislatures   to
make   provisions   with   respect   to   elections   to
Panchayats   under   the   superintendence,
direction   and   control   of   the   chief   electoral
officer   of   the   State;   application   of   the
provisions of the said Part to Union territories;
excluding   certain   States   and   areas   from   the
application of the provisions of the said Part;
continuance   of   existing   laws   and   Panchayats
until one year from the commencement of the
proposed amendment and barring interference
by   courts   in   electoral   matters   relating   to
Panchayats.”
5
3.    The   amendment   saw   the   introduction   of
Articles   243
to

243­O which are meant for the panchayats at different levels that

include
Article   243(d)
which   defines   ‘Panchayat’   to   mean   an

institution   (by   whatever   name   called)   of   self­government

(constituted   under
Article   243B
)   for   the   rural   areas.     The   said

articles   ignited   the   spirit   of   self­governance   in   the   pyramidical

structure of local self government. The democratically organized

units have been conferred powers of governance and the purpose

as envisioned is to instill a sense of satisfaction in the people at

the grass root level. It has been so recognized in Bhanumati etc.

etc. v. State of U.P. and others 1. The two­Judge Bench in the

said case has expressed thus with lucidity:­

             “32. What   was   in  a  nebulous   state  as one  of
             Directive Principles under
Article 40
, through
             73rd            Constitutional          Amendment
             metamorphosed   to   a   distinct   part   of
             Constitutional   dispensation   with   detailed
             provision   for   functioning   of   Panchayat.   The
             main   purpose   behind   this   is   to   ensure
             democratic   decentralization   on   the   Gandhian
             principle   of   participatory   democracy   so   that
             the   Panchayat   may   become   viable   and
             responsive people's bodies as an institution of
             governance   and   thus   it   may   acquire   the
             necessary status and function with dignity by
             inspiring respect of common man.”


1 AIR 2010 SC 3796 : (2010) 12 SCC 1
6
4.    The   singular   purpose   of   so   stating   is   that   the   source   of

power has been incorporated in the Constitution which requires

the States to make law to carry out the constitutional command.

The structure of the panchayats, the concept of Gram Sabha, the

composition   of   panchayats,   reservation   of   seats,   duration   of

panchayats,   disqualification   for   membership,   powers,   authority

and responsibility of panchayats and conferment of power on the

panchayats to impose taxes, duties, tolls and fees, election to the

panchayats, and creation of bar for courts to interfere in electoral

matters   clearly   show   the   distinct   identity   carved   out   for   the

panchayats.  The legislations made by the State legislatures, inter

alia,   have   fixed   the   tenure   of   the   panchayats   and   also   grant

protection for continuance of the elected members subject to the

disqualifications   and   further   the   method   for   vote   of   no

confidence.  We shall dwell upon the said aspect after delineation

of the facts of the case.
5.    In the instant case, the appellant was elected as Pramukh,

Kshettra   Panchayat   Vikash   Khand   Gulawati,   District,

Bulandshahr in the election held in the year 2015. Some of the

members   of   the   said   panchayat   moved   an   application   under

Section 15(2) of the Uttar Pradesh Kshettra Panchayats and Zila
7
Panchayats   Adhiniyam,   1961   (for   brevity,   “the   Act”)   before   the

District   Magistrate/Collector,   District   Bulandshahr   for   carrying

out a no confidence motion against the Pramukh. As no action

was taken by the District Magistrate/Collector, one of the movers

of   the   motion   preferred   Civil   Misc.   Writ   Petition   No.   49013   of

2017   in   the   High   Court   of   Judicature   at   Allahabad   seeking

direction to the competent authority to accept the notice dated

09.10.2017   under   Section   15(2)   of   the   Act   and   to   take

appropriate   steps   for   bringing   logical   end   to   the   no   confidence

motion.
6.    The Division Bench of the High Court on 24.10.2017 asked

the   learned   Additional   Chief   Standing   Counsel   to   obtain

instructions and posted the matter on 01.11.2017. On the date

fixed, the Writ Petition was dismissed as not pressed. It is not

necessary   to   advert   under   what   circumstances   the   said   writ

petition was dismissed as not pressed.
7.    As   the   facts   would   further   uncurtain,   on   31.10.2017

another   written   notice   of   intention   to   make   the   motion   of   no

confidence   was   delivered   to   the   District   Magistrate/Collector,

Bulandshahr   with   signature   of   35   members.   The   District

Magistrate/Collector   issued notice on 07.11.2017 to convene a
8
meeting of Kshettra Panchayat for consideration of the motion of

no   confidence   at   10.30   a.m.   on   27.11.2017   in   the   office   of

Kshettra   Panchayat.   On   the   said   date,   in   the   presence   of   the

authorized   officer,   the   vote   of   no   confidence   motion   was

considered   and,   eventually,   after   casting   of   votes,   the   no

confidence motion was passed by 32 votes against the appellant.
8.    In pursuance of the said proceedings, the post of Pramukh

fell   vacant   and   a   public   notice   was   issued   on   21.02.2018   for

holding   the   election   on   09.03.2018   and   the   respondent   No.11

was   elected.   We   may   hasten   to   add   that   we   are   really   not

concerned with the passing of vote of no confidence motion or the

election of the respondent No.11 in the subsequent election.
9.    Suffice it to state that the appellant knocked at the doors of

the High Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution assailing the

second   notice   for   want   of   confidence   on   the   foundation   of

statutory   impermissibility.   It   was   contended   before   the   High

Court   that   under   Section   15(2)   of   the   Act,   the   District

Magistrate/Collector had completely erred in accepting the notice

of   intention   to   convene   a   meeting   and,   therefore,   the   ultimate

result of the said meeting is sans effect. The High Court, by the

impugned order dated 22.11.2017, negatived the said contention
9
and   dismissed   the   writ   petition.   Hence,   the   present   appeal   by

way of special leave.
10.   Presently, we shall scrutinize the relevant statutory scheme.

Section 8 of the Act provides for the term of Kshettra Panchayat

and its members. Section 9 deals with the term of Pramukh. It

lays the postulate that save as otherwise provided in the Act the

term   of   office   of   a   Pramukh   of   a   Kshettra   Panchayat   shall

commence upon his election and shall extend up to the term of

the   Kshettra   Panchayat.     Section   11   deals   with   resignation   of

Pramukh or a member.  Section 13 deals with disqualification for

membership of Kshettra Panchayat. Section 15 deals with motion

of   non­confidence   in   Pramukh.   Sub­section   (1)   of   Section   15

stipulates   that   a   motion   expressing   want   of   confidence   in   the

Pramukh of a Kshettra Panchayat may be made and proceeded

with   in   accordance   with   the   procedure   laid   down   in   the

subsequent sub­sections.  Sub­section (2) of Section 15 requires

the written notice of intention to make the motion in such form

as may be prescribed, signed by at least half of the total number

of   elected   members   of   Kshettra   Panchayat   for   the   time   being

together with a copy of the proposed motion, to be delivered in

person,   by   any   one   of   the   members   signing   the   notice,   to   the
10
Collector having jurisdiction over the Kshettra Panchayat.   Sub­

section (3) of Section 15, by employing the word ‘shall’, makes it

obligatory   for   the   Collector,   upon   receiving   a   written   notice   as

aforesaid,   to   convene   a   meeting   at   the   office   of   Kshettra

Panchayat for consideration of the motion within 30 days from

the date on which the notice under Section 15(2) is delivered to

the Collector.   Further, the Collector is also obligated to give to

the elected members of the Kshettra Panchayat a notice, in such

a   manner   as   may   be   prescribed,   at   least   15   days   prior   to   the

meeting   which   he   is   required   to   convene.   That   apart,   the

explanation appended to sub­section (3) to Section 15 stipulates

that for the purposes of calculating 30 days specified in this sub­

section,   the   period   during   which   any   stay   order   issued   by   a

competent court on a petition filed against the motion is in force

plus such further time as may be required for issuing of fresh

notices of the meeting to the members, shall be excluded.
11.   Sub­section   (4)   of   Section   15   postulates   that   the   sub­

divisional   officer   of   the   sub­division   in   which   the   Kshettra

Panchayat   exercises   jurisdiction   shall   preside   over   the  meeting

convened   for   consideration   of   the   motion   at   the   office   of   the

Kshettra Panchayat.  The subsequent sub­sections of Section 15
11
stipulate that no debate on the motion under Section 15 shall be

adjourned and the Presiding Officer shall not speak on the merits

of the motion.  Also, he is not entitled to vote in the motion.
12.   Sub­section (11)(a) of Section 15 provides that if the motion

is carried with the support of more than half of the total number

of   elected   members   of   the   Kshettra   Panchayat,   the   Presiding

Officer shall cause this fact to be published by affixing a notice

on the notice board of the office of the Kshettra Panchayat and

also by notifying the same in the Gazette.  Sub­section (11)(b) of

Section   15   stipulates   the   consequences   of   a   successful   motion

being carried out to the effect that the Pramukh of the Kshettra

Panchayat   ceases   to   hold   office   and   is   required   to   vacate   the

same on and from the date next following that on which the said

notice is fixed on the notice board of the office of the Kshettra

Panchayat.
13.   Sub­section (12) of Section 15 deals with the situation when

a   motion   is   not   carried   as  contemplated   by   the   aforesaid  sub­

sections   of   Section   15.   For   our   purposes,   sub­section   (12)   of

Section 15, being pertinent, is reproduced below:­

            “(12)   If   the   motion   is   not   carried   as
            aforesaid   or   if   the  meeting  could  not  be
12
held for want of quorum, no notice of any
             subsequent   motion   expressing   want   of
             confidence in the same Pramukh shall be
             received until after the expiration of one
             year from the date of such meeting.”
14.   The   aforesaid   provision   is   absolutely   clear   and

unambiguous.   The   conditions   precedent   for   stipulation   of   the

period   of   one   year   after   the   expiration   from   the   date   of   such

meeting   are   dependent   on   three   situations,   namely,   (i)   if   the

motion is not carried out as contemplated under sub­section (11),
(ii) if the meeting would not be held for want of the quorum and,
(iii) the notice of no confidence motion should be in respect of the

same Pramukh.
15.     To appreciate the controversy, we have to understand the

scheme engrafted under Section 15 of the Act. Sub­section (2) of

Section 15 provides that a written notice of intention to make the

motion in such form as may be prescribed, signed by at least half

of the total number of elected members of the Kshettra Panchayat

for the time being together with a copy of the proposed motion,

shall be delivered in person, by any one of the members signing

the notice, to the Collector having jurisdiction over the Kshettra

Panchayat.   Sub­section   (3)   requires   the   Collector   to   convene   a

meeting. At this stage, the jurisdiction that the Collector has is
13
only to scan the notice to find out whether it fulfills the essential

requirements of a valid notice. The exercise of the said discretion,

as we perceive, has to be summary in nature.  There cannot be a

detailed inquiry with regard to the validity of the notice. We are

obliged to think so as sub­section (3) mandates that a meeting

has   to   be   convened   not   later   than   30   days   from   the   date   of

delivery   of   the   notice   and   further   there   should   be   at   least   15

days’ notice to be given to all the elected members of the Kshettra

Panchayat. The Collector, therefore, should not assume power to

enter   into   an   arena   or   record   a   finding   on   seriously   disputed

questions of facts relating to fraud, undue influence or coercion.

His   only   duty   is   to   determine   whether   there   has   been   a   valid

notice as contemplated under Sub­section (2) of Section 15. His

delving   deep   to   conduct   a   regular   inquiry   would   frustrate   the

provision.  He must function within his own limits and leave the

rest to be determined in the meeting.
16.   We may now note the stand that was put forth before the

High Court. It was contended that during the pendency of the 1 st

notice, the 2nd  notice could not have been issued. There was no

assertion   that   the   meeting   was   convened   pursuant   to   the   1 st

notice in the manner in which the statute provides for the same.
14
The   words   “not   carried   out”   as   aforesaid   are   of   immense

significance.   The   meeting   has   to   be   convened   as   per   the

provisions of the said Section. The second part relates to want of

the quorum.
Though the quorum has not been defined under the

Act, yet in the context, it would mean the quorum that requires

the number of members to be present for the purpose of voting.

For example, if the notice of intention is given to the Collector by

more than half of the total members in Kshettra of 40 members

but   on   the   date   of   the   meeting,   there   are   only   10   members,

indubitably   there   is   a   lack   of   quorum.   Similarly,   when   the

quorum is there and voting takes place, but eventually the vote of

no confidence fails then the motion is not carried out as per the

provisions contained in Section 15. To understand  the concept of

quorum, we may refer with profit to the authority in
The Punjab

University,   Chandigarh   v.   Vijay   Singh   Lamba
and   othres2,

wherein while discussing about quorum, the Court had held:­

              “7. …‘Quorum’ denotes the minimum number
              of   members   of   any   body   of   persons   whose
              presence is necessary in order to enable that
              body   to   transact  its  business  validly  so  that
              its acts may be lawful. …”



2 (1976) 3 SCC 344
15
17.   In Corpus Juris Secundum, Volume 74, the word ‘quorum’

has been defined as follows:­



           “The   word   ‘quorum’,   now   in   common   use,   is
           from the Latin and has come to signify such a
           number of officers or members of any body, as
           is competent by law or constitution to transact
           business;… Quorum of a body is an absolute
           majority of it unless the authority by which the
           body   was   created   fixes   it   at   a   different
           number.”
18.   In  Black’s   Law   Dictionary   (Second   Edition),   the   word

‘quorum’ is defined as under:­

           “When   a   committee,   board   of   directors.
meeting   of   shareholders,   legislative   or   other
           body   of   persons   cannot   act   unless   a   certain
           number   at   least   of   them   are   present,   that
           number   is   called   a   “quorum.”   Sweet.   In   the
           absence of any law or rule fixing the quorum,
           it consists of a majority of those entitled to act.
           See Ex parte Willcocks, 7 Cow. (N.Y.) 409, 17
           Am. Dec. 525; State v. Wilkesville Tp.. 20 Ohio
           St. 293; Heiskell v. Baltimore, 65 Md. 125, 4
           Atl. 136, 57 Am. Rep. 308; Snider v. Rinehart,
           18 Colo. 18, 31 Pac. 716.”
19.   In this context, reference to sub­section (6) of Section 15 is

fruitful. It reads thus:­ 

           “(6) As soon as the meeting  convened under
           this section commences, the Presiding Officer
           shall   read   to   the   Kshettra   Panchayat   the
           motion   for   the   consideration   of   which   the
16
meeting  has   been convened and declare it to
            be open for debate.”

      It is quite clear that only when the number of persons are

present   and   the   meeting   takes   place,   the   debate   under   sub­

section (6) comes into play. Thus, in the absence of quorum, the

said provision will not come into play.
20.   In the case at hand, there is no allegation that the meeting

was convened to consider the previous notice dated 9 th  October,

2017,   as   provided   in   Section   15   and   the   motion   was   not

challenged on any other ground or the lack of quorum.  What is

singularly contended is that once a notice is given under Section

15(2), another notice of no confidence shall not be received until

after expiration of one year. The said submission is without any

substance   inasmuch   as   the   prohibition   under   Section   15(12)

would only come into play when there is meeting and the motion

is “not carried out” as per the provisions of Section 15 or meeting

could not be held for want of quorum.  As the facts of the instant

case would reveal that no meeting was convened to consider the

previous notice dated 9th October, 2017, as per the provisions of

the Act. Mere receipt of a notice by the Collector will not allow the

prohibition under Section 15(12) to come into play. That is not
17
the purpose of the provision. That being the position, the ground

urged by the learned counsel for the appellant that sub­section

15(12) would come into play is sans substratum.  Neither of the

conditions   precedent   is   satisfied   to   attract   the   prohibition

engrafted under Section 15(12) of the Act.
21.   As we have stated earlier, the legislature being empowered

by   the   Constitution   has   legislated   to   provide   for   the

establishment of Kshettra Panchayats and Zila Panchayats in the

Districts   of   Uttar   Pradesh   to   undertake   certain   Governmental

functions   at   Kshettra   and   District   levels   respectively   in

furtherance   of   the   principles   of   democratic   decentralisation   of

Governmental functions. It intends to empower the Panchayats

and that is why, Section 9 clearly provides that the term of the

office of Pramukh is for five years from the date appointed for its

first  meeting.   That  brings  stability  to the  administration of the

Gram   Panchayat.   Simultaneously,   it   also   provides   that   the

democracy   at   the   rural   level   must   cherish   the   values   of

democracy   and,   therefore,   a  Pramukh   can   be   removed  when   a

vote   of   no   confidence   is   passed   against   him.   Once   the   no

confidence motion fails, it cannot be brought again for one year.

It   is   worthy   to   note   here   that   sub­section   (13)   of   Section   15
18
provides   that   no   notice   of   a  motion   under   Section   15  shall   be

received   within   two   years   of   the   assumption   of   office   by   a

Pramukh.  This is in consonance with the principle of stability of

rural   governance.   There   are   provisions   for   removal   in   case   of

misconduct and certain other situations with which we are not

concerned. We have referred to this aspect to highlight how the

legislature has visualized the democracy at the grass root level.
22.   In view of the premised reasons, the appeal, being devoid of

merit, stands dismissed.  There shall be no order as to costs.
……………………….....CJI.
(Dipak Misra)



                                                   ………………………….….J.
                                                   (A.M. Khanwilkar)



                                                 ……………………………..J.
                                                 (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud) 
New Delhi;
May 17, 2018