[Cites
2
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Selvi vs Gopalakrishnan Nair (D) Thr. Lrs. on 15 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1089
Author:
R. Banumathi
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
R. Banumathi
REPORTABLE
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.21834 OF 2017

                         SELVI                                                     …Appellant
                                                          Versus
                         GOPALAKRISHNAN NAIR (D) THR. LRS.
                         AND ORS.                                               ...Respondents

                                                      JUDGMENT
R. BANUMATHI, J.
This appeal arises out of the judgment dated 13.04.2006 passed

                         by the High Court of Madras at Madurai Bench in Second Appeal

                         No.255 of 2005 in and by which the High Court set aside the final

                         decree passed by the trial court and affirmed by the First Appellate

                         Court by holding that the appellant/plaintiff cannot lay a claim in

                         respect of Survey No.988 which the first respondent/second defendant

                         claims entitled to.
2.    Brief facts as seen from the Plaint averments are as follows:-
The suit properties that is plaint A Schedule property and Plaint B

                         Schedule property belonged to Kali Pillai, Krishna Pillai and others of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VINOD LAKHINA
Date: 2018.05.15
13:35:00 IST
Varukkapilavila Veedu, which was outstanding on a mortgage. On
Reason:
27.12.1088 M.E.(11.08.1913) Kali Pillai, Krishna Pillai, Champakakutty
1
Pillai alias Bhagvathi Pillai and Kalyani Pillai and Lakshmi Pillai

mortgaged the said properties to Kutti Bhagvathi for Rs.785/-
(Rs.109.04).   The mortgage was an usufructuary with Kuzhikkanam

for a period of twelve years. While Kutti Bhagvathi was enjoying it, she

assigned her mortgage right to Eravi Pillai Parvathi Pillai from whom

Parameswaran Pillai of Kavavilai got an assignment under deed

No.1231 of 1107 and came into possession. Parameswaran Pillai

sub-mortgaged portion of Plaint B Schedule property to Kesava Pillai

Narayana Pillai which right has become vested in the second

Defendant. The fourth Defendant has also right in the suit mortgage.

The third Defendant has also right in the suit mortgage. The third

Defendant has leasehold right over some portion of B Schedule

property under Parameswaran Pillai. The first Defendant is in

possession of A Schedule property as the heir of the deceased

assignee mortgagor Parameswaran Pillai. The mortgagors 1 and 2

died and their right devolved on the legal heirs of mortgagors - Kalyani

Pillai and her mother Lakshmi Pillai. The first Plaintiff - Kalyani Pillai

inherited the equity of redemption of the plaint property on the death of

her mother Lakshmi Pillai. The first Plaintiff is thus the mortgagor by

derivative title who is entitled to redeem the mortgage from Defendant
2
Nos.1 to 4.   In so far as her mortgage rights, the first plaintiff-Kalyani

Pillai executed an agreement of sale on 27.12.1968 in favour of the

second Plaintiff - Vasudevan Pillai with respect to the mortgage

property and as such he has joined as the second Plaintiff.           Suit

Properties within the stated boundaries are said to be situated in

respect of A Schedule property in Survey numbers 990 - extent of 85

cents and Survey No.983/12A - 1 acre and 35 cents; Survey

No.983/13A - 5 acres 96 cents and Survey No.983/14A – 0.64 acres in

respect of B schedule property.
3.   The respondent-second defendant who is the main contesting

defendant resisted the suit inter-alia contending that he is in

possession of Survey No.983/14A for which the appellants/plaintiffs

have no right of possession. The second defendant-Gopalakrishnan

Nair inter-alia further pleaded that the property in old Survey No.988

belongs to him and the third defendant is residing in a building situated

in Survey No.988 on rental basis.
4.   The parties went for trial. Upon consideration of evidence, the

trial court passed the preliminary decree for partition on 07.08.1976

holding that the plaintiffs-Kalyani Pillai and Vasudevan Pillai are

entitled to redeem and recover possession of 7.40 acres from
3
defendant Nos.1 to 4 by depositing of mortgage money of

Rs.109.81Paise. The trial court passed the preliminary decree for

partition to the said extent of 7.40 acres in the suit property to which

the plaintiffs are entitled for partition and separate possession.
5.    First plaintiff - Kalyani Pillai executed an agreement for sale on

27.12.1968 in favour of the second plaintiff-Vasudevan Pillai. The

second plaintiff-Vasudevan Pillai assigned the above said agreement

in favour of one Rajayyan on 05.08.1978 and the said Rajayyan

assigned that agreement in favour of third plaintiff-Selvi, wife of

Devaraj on 10.03.1983. In the final decree proceedings, third plaintiff-

Selvi got herself impleaded in the suit by filing a separate petition. All

the three plaintiffs filed final decree application in I.A. No.120 of 1985

in OS No.1516 of 1969.         The trial court by its judgment dated

19.09.2001 passed the final decree for partition holding that Survey

No.988 which the second defendant claims cannot be exempted from

the suit property. In the final decree, the trial court held that the

appellant/plaintiff    is     entitled     to      the      portion    as

“ABCDEFXVUTSRQKLMNOP” marked in Exhibit C.2, entitled to the

possession and that the plaintiffs are entitled to redeem the suit

property. The Court further directed that the legal heirs of third
4
defendant-Krishna Pillai are entitled to get a sum of Rs.2,64,607.50 as

development charges of the suit property.
6.    Being aggrieved by the final decree, the second defendant

Gopalakrishnan Nair preferred an appeal in AS No.6 of 2002 on the file

of Sub-court, Kuzhithurai. The First Appellate Court dismissed the

appeal vide its judgment dated 20.08.2004 holding that no appeal had

been preferred from the preliminary decree dated 07.08.1976 by the

second defendant and that he cannot challenge the correctness of the

preliminary decree in the final decree proceedings. The First Appellate

Court confirmed the final decree passed by the trial court and

dismissed the appeal observing that Gopalakrishnan Nair cannot have

any valid objection for the final decree in favour of the plaintiffs.
7.    Being dissatisfied with the concurrent findings, the first

respondent preferred appeal in SA No.255 of 2005 before Madras

High Court at Madurai Bench. The High Court proceeded to hold that

the first respondent/second defendant in his written statement raised a

plea of ownership in respect of Survey No.988 and that by its order

dated 27.04.1998, the trial court also directed exclusion of the property

in Survey No.988. After referring to the order of the trial court dated

27.04.1998 and the Commissioner's Report, the High Court held that
5
the suit property in the preliminary decree does not cover Survey

No.988 and was removed from the ambit of the suit property by the

trial court and on those findings, the High Court allowed the second

appeal. The High Court held that the final decree will stand as it is,

excluding Survey No.988. Being aggrieved, the appellant/plaintiff is

before this Court.
8.    We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and

perused the impugned judgment and carefully considered the

evidence and materials placed on record.
9.    Right from the beginning, while filing the written statement and

also the objections filed to the Commissioner’s Report, the second

defendant-Gopalakrishnan Nair has been contending that old Survey

No.988 (R.S. No.123/9) belongs to him. In his objections filed in I.A.

No.120 of 1985, the second defendant-Gopalakrishnan Nair raised the

following objections:-
“……R.S. No.123/9 which is old survey No.988 belongs to the
      second defendant. The title of the second defendant to R.S.
      No.123/9 was declared and the defendants 9 to 11 who are the LRs
      of the third defendant are restrained by injunction from disturbing
      the quiet and peaceful possession of the land and trees excluding
      the building and courtyard…….”
10.   Mr. Raveendran Nair, Advocate-Commissioner was appointed to

measure the suit properties according to the boundaries contained in
6
the documents filed in the suit namely Exts. A.1, A.2, B.1, B.2 and to

locate the properties contained in the Survey numbers 990, 983-A and
988.    In the said order dated 27.04.1998, the trial court directed

exclusion of Survey No.988 as seen from the following:-
“…..Further, he is directed that after measuring and locating the suit
       properties viz., in Survey No.990 and 983-A and the second
       defendant’s property which is situated in Survey No.988, the
       Commissioner may allot the plaintiff’s share of 7 Acres 40 cents
       both in Survey No.990 and 983 or in any of the above two survey
       numbers….”
11.    The Commissioner filed its Preliminary Report on 17.02.1999, for

which the second defendant-Gopalakrishnan Nair filed detailed

objections stating that the Commissioner, while locating Survey

No.988, did not follow the boundary descriptions contained in the

documents. Relevant portion of the objections filed by the second

defendant-Gopalakrishnan Nair inter alia reads as under:-
“…….
4.   The Commissioner did not locate the Plaint Schedule survey
       numbers i.e., Survey Nos.990 and 983 and the other Survey
       Number 988 as directed by this Hon’ble Court.
5.    The Commissioner failed to understand that a partition is
       impossible in this suit without locating the plaint schedule survey
       numbers 990 and 983.
6.      It is seen from the report of the Commissioner that he is
       more particular and interested in locating Survey No.988 alone just
       to confuse matters. The various documents filed by this Defendant
       relating to his title to Survey No.988 and ignored by the
       Commissioner. While locating Survey No.988, the Commissioner
       did not follow the descriptions contained in the ancient documents
       filed by this defendant before this Hon’ble Court. But he simply
7
followed documents for bits of land brought into existence after the
      suit and registered in Kerala at the instance of the Plaintiff.
8.     …..This Thottampara Nilam lies west of the road and
      comprised in Survey No.1025. The portion lies west of the road
      also forms part of Survey No.988. The portions shown as
      Thottampara Nilam and Muriyaravilakam are also portions of
      Survey No.988. The Commissioner did not locate the southern limit
      of Survey No.988……
      …..”
12.   Based on the objections filed by the second defendant,

Mr. Raveendran Nair, Advocate-Commissioner revisited the property

and filed his Report noticing Survey No.988 falls within the description

of the suit properties.      The relevant portion of the Report of the

Commissioner dated 26.04.1999 reads as under:-
“….While the Hon’ble Court appointing me as Commissioner, it is
      specifically ordered to exclude old Survey No.988. Since it belongs
      to second defendant, when this plot is excluded from partition the
      share of the plaintiff will come in file No.123/5, 6, 535/1, 2, 535/4
      and the Plot B, B1, B2 and B3.
The old survey number of the properties are 983/12, 13, 14
      and 988 of Mancode Village. Out of the above survey numbers, the
      plaintiff is entitled on the basis of boundaries the plot shown
      A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H,I,J,K,L,M,N,O,P,A, is the plot having an area of 7
      Acres 40 Cents.
……”
13.   Appellant-Selvi filed detailed objections to the Commissioner’s

Report stating that Survey No.988 cannot be excluded from the

properties to be partitioned. Second defendant-Gopalakrishnan Nair

also filed detailed objections to the Commissioner’s Report on

04.11.1999, as under:-
8
“…..
4.      The Commissioner has wrongly shown ‘B’ Schedule
        Property inclusive of the whole by Survey Nos.988 without
        identifying the suit properties i.e. Survey Nos.983A and 990. Old
        Survey No.988 correlates to R. Survey No.123/9 having an extent
        of 3 Acres 39 Cents in the exclusive property of this defendant
        which is not available to a partition.         In this aspect, the
        Commissioner has not even taken note of the various documents
        filed by this defendant.
5.      The Commissioner exceeded his authority in allotting the
        share of the plaintiff inclusive of the whole Survey No.988 while this
        Hon’ble Court specifically directed him to allot the share of the
        plaintiff in Survey Nos.983A and 990 or in any of the both.
6.      Paragraphs 5 and 6 of the report of the Commissioner are
        mutually conflicting. Paragraph 6 of the report is totally in conflict
        with the plan showing the allotment. Plots B1 and B2 shown by the
        Commissioner in his plan explicitly come within Survey No.988.
So, the allotment of the share of the plaintiff inclusive of Survey
        No.988 is totally against the spirit of the order of this Hon’ble Court
        dated 27.04.1999. Such an allotment totally deprives the exclusive
        right of this defendant over Survey No.988.
….”
14.     Considering the objections repeatedly filed by the second

defendant reiterating that Survey No.988 falls within the description of

the suit properties and that should be excluded from the properties to

be partitioned, the trial court ought to have held an enquiry and

directed the parties to adduce evidence as to the right claimed by the

second defendant in old Survey No.988 (R.S. No.123/9) and what was

the basis on which the possession of the second defendant was upheld

in the proceedings under
Section 145
Cr.P.C. and in CRP No.45 of

1992.
9
15.          Both the trial court and the First Appellate Court appear to have

rejected the objections raised by the second defendant mainly on the

following grounds:-
i.      No appeal was preferred by the second defendant
               against the preliminary decree and therefore, second
               defendant cannot challenge the correctness of the
               preliminary decree in the final decree proceedings;
      ii.      Second defendant has not raised the plea regarding
               his claim of ownership in Survey No.988; and
      iii.     Application for passing final decree is pending for more
               than sixteen years
16.          As per
Section 97
CPC, where any party aggrieved by a

preliminary decree passed after the commencement of this Code does

not appeal from such decree, he shall be precluded from disputing its

correctness in any appeal which may be preferred from the final

decree.         Of course, the second defendant has not filed the appeal

against the preliminary decree challenging its correctness.               But as

pointed out by the learned counsel for the second defendant, in the

description of the suit properties, Survey No.988 has not been shown.

As pointed out by the High Court, in para No. (13) of the written

statement, second defendant has clearly averred that he is the owner

of the adjoining property in Survey No.988 in which the plaintiffs and
10
the other defendants have no right and that the third defendant is

residing in a building belonging to the second defendant in the said

Survey No.988 on rental basis. In spite of the objections raised by the

second defendant as to the boundaries and description of the suit

properties and also claiming right in Survey No.988 stated to be falling

within those boundaries, the plaintiffs have not amended the

description of the suit properties by bringing in Survey No.988 in the

suit property.   It is in this context, in their written statement, the

defendants have stated that “the defendants have no objections to

surrender the mortgage right in respect of Plaint B Schedule items…..”.
17.   Be it noted that two Commissioners namely Mr. K. Ponniah and

Mr. Ambrose earlier appointed have inspected the suit properties and

filed their Reports stating that the suit properties are not identifiable.

Only when Mr. Raveendran Nair, Advocate-Commissioner inspected

the suit property, he has noticed that Survey No.988 is falling within the

description of the boundaries stated in the Plaint. Since the description

of the suit property did not contain Survey No.988, the fact that the

second defendant did not prefer appeal against the preliminary decree,

cannot be put against the second defendant. Though the High Court

referred to the averments in the written statement as to the claim of
11
second defendant in Survey No.988, the High Court did not go into the

question as to the entitlement of second defendant and the confusion

regarding the boundaries of the properties.
18.   In view of the stand taken by the second defendant that he is

entitled to the adjoining property in Survey No.988 by virtue of the sale

deed of the year 1951 and the consistent objections raised by him to

the Commissioner’s Report, in our view, in the final decree

proceedings, the trial court ought to have directed the parties to

adduce evidence to enable the court to ascertain the truth as to the

correct description of the suit property and also the right claimed by the

second defendant in Survey No.988.          We are conscious that the

parties are fighting litigation for more than five decades; but in order to

meet the ends of justice, in our view, the impugned judgment of the

High Court and the courts below are liable to be set aside and the

matter be remitted to the trial court for deciding the matter afresh.
19.   Before we close the matter, we feel it necessary to set at rest two

issues. As pointed out earlier, Kalyani executed an agreement for sale

on 27.12.1968 in favour of second plaintiff-Vasudevan Pillai. Second

plaintiff assigned the aforesaid agreement on 05.08.1978 in favour of

one Rajayyan and the said Rajayyan assigned the agreement in
12
favour of third plaintiff-Selvi on 10.03.1983. As pointed out earlier, all

the three plaintiffs filed final decree application in I.A. No.120 of 1985.

After the disposal of the matter by the first appellate court and when

the second appeal was pending before the High Court, second plaintiff

Vasudevan Pillai filed an affidavit on 07.01.2013 before the trial court –

District Munsiff Court, Kuzhithurai alleging that a fraud has been

played on him and denying the right of third plaintiff-Selvi to pursue the

final decree application. The said Vasudevan Pillai alleged that he has

never filed final decree application and that his signature was forged

and he has not assigned his right either in favour of Rajayyan or in

favour of third plaintiff-Selvi.     Though the parties have advanced

lengthy arguments on the said averments in the affidavit filed by

Vasudevan Pillai; it is to be pointed out that the affidavit of Vasudevan

Pillai is clearly an afterthought.    In the final decree application I.A.

No.120 of 1985, all the three plaintiffs have signed. In the final decree

stage, the third plaintiff-Selvi got herself impleaded based on the

assignment of right in her favour by Rajayyan who in turn got the

assignment from the second plaintiff-Vasudevan Pillai.          The third

plaintiff-Selvi was pursuing the final decree application. Though the

final decree application was pending before the trial court for more
13
than sixteen years and thereafter in the First Appellate Court,

Vasudevan Pillai has not raised any objection nor made any grievance

against the third plaintiff-Selvi.   Only when the second appeal was

pending before the High Court, the second plaintiff-Vasudevan Pillai

has chosen to file an affidavit before the court denying assignment of

the right and raising plea of forgery.        In our view, the stand of

Vasudevan Pillai is clearly an afterthought and no weight could be

attached to the averments in the affidavit. We make it clear that after

the matter is remitted to the trial court based on his affidavit,

Vasudevan Pillai is not entitled to put forth any claim. We also make it

clear that the locus of third plaintiff-Selvi to pursue the matter also shall

not be called for question nor be challenged.
20.   For the foregoing reasons, the impugned judgment of the High

Court and the courts below are set aside and the appeal is allowed.

The matter is remitted to the trial court for consideration of the

application for final decree I.A. No.120 of 1985 in OS No. 1516 of 1969

afresh with the following directions:-
(i)   The plaintiffs and the second defendant are at
            liberty to adduce oral and documentary evidence to
            substantiate     their   objections     filed   to    the
            Commissioner’s Report;
14
(ii)    The trial court to decide upon the correct survey
             numbers falling within the description of the suit
             properties and whether the said suit property within
             the stated boundaries tally with the properties
             mortgaged;
(iii)   Tallying of boundaries of the properties with
             reference to documents, if necessary, by reference
             to revenue records.
(iv)    Entitlement        of     the   second      defendant-
             Gopalakrishnan Nair as to Survey No.988 with
             reference     to    his   documents   and   also   the
proceedings before the Executive Magistrate and
             further revision thereon; and

Since parties are litigating the matter for more than five decades, we

direct the trial court to expedite the hearing in the final decree

proceedings and dispose the same in accordance with law. No cost.
.…….…………...………J.
                                                      [R. BANUMATHI]


                                                    ..…………….……………
                                                                    J.
                                                   [L. NAGESWARA RAO]
New Delhi;
May 15, 2018
15