[Cites
24
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
Kerala State Road Transport ... vs Baby P.P. on 16 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2909, (2018) 1 PUN LR 31, (2018) 4 ACJ 2233, (2018) 191 ALLINDCAS 180, (2018) 2 KER LJ 888, (2018) 2 KER LT 974, (2018) 3 ACC 1, (2018) 3 CURCC 232, (2018) 3 RECCIVR 12, (2018) 3 TAC 41, (2018) 72 OCR 372, (2018) 7 SCALE 531, 2018 (7) SCC 501, (2019) 132 ALL LR 244, (2019) 2 MAH LJ 552, (2019) 2 MPLJ 97, (2019) 3 CIVLJ 232, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2593
Author:
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
Bench:
Navin Sinha
,
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
Kurian Joseph
1


                                                          REPORTABLE
                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5257 OF 2018
                           (@ SLP (C) NO.26954 OF 2017)


         KERALA STATE ROAD TRANSPORT
         CORPORATION                                ...APPELLANT

                                      VERSUS

         BABY P.P. & ORS.                           ...RESPONDENTS


                                     WITH
                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.5258 OF 2018
                           (@SLP (C) NO.32804 OF 2017)

         KERALA STATE ROAD TRANSPORT
         CORPORATION                                ...APPELLANT

                                      VERSUS


         JOY C.A. & ORS.                            ...RESPONDENTS


                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.5259 OF 2018
                            (@SLP (C) NO.101 OF 2018)

         THE DISTRICT TRANSPORT OFFICER,
         KERALA STATE ROAD TRANSPORT
         CORPORATION                             ...APPELLANT

                                      VERSUS
Signature Not Verified


         JIJO & ORS.
Digitally signed by
ASHA SUNDRIYAL
Date: 2018.05.16
                                               ...RESPONDENTS
17:28:52 IST
Reason:
                                2




                          JUDGMENT
MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.
Leave granted.
2.   These appeals arise out of the judgment dated 02.08.2017

passed by the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in O.P.(C) No.

1827 of 2017, O.P.(C) No. 1784 of 2017 and O.P.(C) No. 581 of

2017 dismissing the writ petitions and consequently confirming

the order dated 11.01.2017 passed by respondent no.5 herein,

the State Transport Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as

‘STAT’) in M.V.A.R.P No. 53 of 2016. Therein, the STAT had held

that the Regional Transport Authority under the facts of the case,

may exercise power conferred on it by the proviso to
Section 104
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the

Act’) to grant temporary permits.
3.   The State of Kerala vide G.O. (P) No.42/2009/Tran. dated

14.07.2009 notified a new scheme in exercise of its powers

conferred by
Section 100
of the Act for the purpose of providing

convenient, adequate, economical, and properly coordinated

passenger road transport services. As per the said Scheme, the

route of Kottayam-Kozhikode was made a notified route. Clause 4
3
of the said Scheme interalia provides that the services to be

operated by the State Transport Undertaking (hereinafter referred

to as ‘STU’) along the notified route were to the exclusion of

private stage carriages operating in the said route. Clause 4 of

the said Scheme reads thus:
“4.   Whether the services    Yes, the permits issued
         are to be operated by   in the private sector on
         the State Transport     or before 9.5.2006 will
         Undertaking to the      be allowed to continue
         exclusion of other      till the dates of expiry
         persons or              of      the     respective
         otherwise.              permits.        Thereafter
                                 regular permits will be
                                 granted to them. When
                                 the State Transport
                                 Undertaking applies for
                                 introducing           new
                                 services in the above
                                 routes, corresponding
                                 number       of   existing
                                 private stage carriage
                                 permits in the said
                                 routes whose permits
                                 expire first after filing
                                 application by the State
                                 Transport Undertaking
                                 shall not be renewed.
As     regards    permits
                                 issued after 09.05.2006
                                 temporary         permits
                                 alone shall be issued
                                 afresh on expiry in
                                 these routes or any
                                 portion thereof till such
                                 time        the      State
                                 Transport Undertaking
4
replaces    with   new
                                  services. The decision
                                  of the State Transport
                                  Undertaking to apply
                                  for permits to replace
                                  the    existing   Stage
                                  Carriages    as   above
                                  shall be taken by the
                                  Chief Executive of the
                                  State         Transport
                                  Undertaking.”
4.   From the aforementioned clause, it is clear that the permits

which were already issued to the private sector prior to

09.05.2006 will be allowed to continue until the date of expiry of

the respective permits. Thereafter, regular permits will be granted

to them. However, as and when the STU applies for introducing a

new service on the route, the corresponding number of existing

private stage carriage permits in the said route, whose permits

expire first after the filing of the application by the STU, shall not

be renewed. Meaning thereby, the services to be operated by the

STU along the notified route were to the exclusion of private stage

carriages if the STU operates on the same route. If the STU has

not applied for a permit, then the permits issued in the private

sector prior to 09.05.2006 will continue until the date of expiry,

following which regular permits will be granted. The temporary

permits issued after 09.05.2006, on the notified route would be
5
in operation, only until the STU operates on the same route with

new services. Clauses 5(c) and 6 of the Scheme read thus:
“5       Whether it is proposed   Yes, on the portion of
(c)      to allow other services  the route permitted to
              to pick up or set down   operate as in clause 4
              passengers between any   above. Permits will
              two places on the route  also be granted to
              covered by the scheme.   private stage carriages
                                       of     other     routes
                                       permitting them to
                                       overlap 5 kilometre or
                                       5 percent of the length
                                       of their own routes,
                                       whichever is less on
                                       the notified routes, for
                                       purposes              of
                                       intersection.
6.       The     maximum     and As per traffic demand”
              minimum number or
              trips to be provided in
              relation to each area or
              route by the State
              Transport Undertaking
              in the case of stage
              carriage.
5.         Clauses 5(c) and 6 of the aforementioned Scheme provide

that private services would be allowed to pick up and drop

passengers between any two places on the route covered by the

Scheme, if and only if the route of the private stage carriage

overlaps the notified route maximum to an extent of 5 kms or 5%

of the length of its own route (whichever is less) for purposes of

intersection.
6
6.   The appellant is a STU under
Section 3
of the Road

Transport Corporations Act, 1950. The respondent no.1 in SLP(C)

No.26954 of 2017 (namely Baby P.P contesting respondent in all

these appeals), a private stage carriage operator, submitted an

application seeking a temporary permit under the proviso to
Section 104
of the Act before respondent no. 2 herein, the

Regional Transport Authority (hereinafter referred to as ‘RTA’) to

run services for the route Pallissery-Angamaly-Perumbavoor. The

total length of this route applied for by respondent no. 1 is 28

kms. The RTA rejected the application filed by the respondent

no.1 on 22.12.2015 stating, interalia, that part of the route

applied   for    by     the   respondent   no.1   from    Angamaly   to

Perumbavoor is 13 kms in length and it objectionably overlaps

with the notified route of Kottayam-Kozhikode beyond the

permissible     limit    as   contemplated   by   the    Scheme   dated

14.07.2009. As against the order of the RTA, the respondent no.1

approached the STAT by filing M.V.A.R.P. No.53 of 2016 which

came to be allowed in part on 11.01.2017, remanding the matter

to the RTA to consider the matter afresh and to exercise its power

conferred under the proviso to
Section 104
of the Act.
7
7.      Questioning the order passed by the STAT, the appellant

herein approached the High Court by filing O.P.(C) No. 1827 of

2017. Respondent no. 1 in SLP(C) No. 32804 of 2017, a private

stage    carriage   operator,   filed   O.P.(C)   No.   1784   of   2017.

Respondent no. 1 in SLP (C) No. 101 of 2018, another private

stage carriage operator, also filed O.P.(C) No. 581 of 2017. All

these O.Ps. were heard together and came to be dismissed on

02.08.2017 with the following observations:
“35.     Reckoning the legal principles
          mentioned above and the factual situation
          revealed in this case, especially Ext. P8
          scheme, I find that the petitioners failed to
          establish a case that the 1st respondent or any
          other private operator is not entitled to get a
          temporary permit, overlapping on a notified
          route, by invoking proviso to
Section 104
of the
          Act. State Transport Authority or Regional
          Transport Authority, as the case may be, as a
          temporary measure and until STU puts
          vehicles on the route, can grant temporary
          permits to cater the need of travelling public.
          It is the bounden duty of the STU to cater the
          needs of the commuting public and if it fails to
          fulfil obligations, the Government should
          intervene       and       pass      appropriate
          modifications/changes in the scheme so as to
          provide amenities to the passengers. It is for
          the Government and the authorities to take
          stock of the situation periodically and
          reconsider the notification, if STU could not
          discharge their obligations in the expected
          lines. Till then, the authorities may invoke
8
power conferred on them by proviso to
Section
          104
of the Act.
In the result, original petitions are dismissed
          confirming Ext.P5 order.”
8.     Aggrieved by the judgment passed by the STAT, as well as

the judgment of the High Court, these appeals are presented. The

issue before this court in these appeals is as under:
 Can a temporary permit be granted to a private stage

       carriage operator on a notified route (which is already being

       served by the STU) for a distance that exceeds the

       permissible limit provided under the scheme, that too not

       for intersecting but for merely traversing and consequently

       overlapping its service on the notified route?
In other words,

      Under the facts of this case, is it open for a private stage

       carriage operator (Respondent No.1) to operate the services

       overlapping more than 5 kms or 5% of the route of the

       private stage carriage operator (as specified under the

       Scheme) for the purpose of traversing by overlapping on the

       notified route which is being served by the STU, but not for

       purposes of intersection?
9
9.    Mr. V. Giri, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of

the appellant contended that no person other than the STU can

operate on the notified route except as provided in the Scheme;

the proviso to
Section 104
of the Act is also subject to the

Scheme; Clause 5(c) of the Scheme makes it clear that

respondent no.1’s route objectionably overlaps with the notified

route far beyond the permissible limit; the appellant is plying a

sufficient number of buses on the notified route in question as on

this day.
10.   Mr. R. Basant, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf

of the respondent no.1 submitted that the Scheme does not

render the proviso of
Section 104
of the Act otiose; temporary

permits can be granted when the route is unserved or

underserved by STU; the appellant has failed to prove that it was

plying      sufficient   number   of   buses    on    the   route

Palliserry-Angamaly-Perumbavoor for which the respondent no.1

has a claim for temporary permit; three temporary permits were

issued even after the scheme came into force in 2009. He further

drew the attention of this Court to the fact that pursuant to the

remand order of the STAT, the RTA on 23.02.2017 has granted a

temporary permit on the route in question in favour of the
10
respondent no. 1. But, the appellant without questioning such

order passed by the RTA, has merely questioned the order of

remand passed by the STAT before the High Court. Even before

this   Court,   the   order   granting   temporary   permit   is   not

questioned.
11.    The law governing the formulation of schemes is found in
Sections 99
and
100
of the Motor Vehicles Act.
In this context, it

is relevant to note the observations of a Constitution Bench of

this Court in the case of
Adarsh Travels Bus Service and

Anr. vs. State of U.P. and Ors.
reported in (1985) 4 SCC 557,

where it highlighted the power of the State to make laws on the

passage of motor vehicles:
“3. The right of the members of the public to
         pass and repass over a highway including the
         right to use motor vehicles on the public road
         existed prior to the enactment of the
Motor
         Vehicles Act
and was not its creation. The
         State could control and regulate the right for
         the purpose of ensuring the safety, peace and
         good health of the public. As an incident of his
         right of passage over a highway, a member of
         the public was entitled to ply motor vehicles for
         pleasure or pastime or for the purpose of trade
         and business, subject, of course, to permissible
         control and regulation by the State. Under
Article 19(6)(ii)
of the Constitution, the State
         can make a law relating to the carrying on by
11
the State or by a corporation, owned or
        controlled by the State of any particular
        business, industry or service whether to the
        exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or
        otherwise. The law could provide for carrying
        on of a service to the total exclusion of all the
        citizens; it may exclude some of the citizens
        only; it may do business in the entire State or a
        portion of the State, in a specified route or part
        thereof. The word “service” has been construed
        to be wide enough to take in not only the
        general motor service, but also the species of
        motor service. There are no limitations on the
        State's power to make laws, conferring
        monopoly on it in respect of an area, and
        person or persons to be excluded. All this is
        now well established by the various decisions
        of this Court.”

                                (emphasis supplied)
12.
Chapter V of the Act
deals with the control of transport

vehicles whereas
Chapter VI of the Act
deals with special

provisions relating to STUs. As per
Section 98
of the Act, the

provisions of Chapter VI and the rules and orders made

thereunder shall have overriding effect, notwithstanding any

inconsistency contained in Chapter V or any other law for the

time being in force. Preparation and publication of proposals

regarding road transport services of the STU has been dealt with

under
Section 99
of the Act. If the State Government is of the

opinion that for the purpose of providing efficient, adequate,
12
economical, and properly guaranteed road transport services in

relation to any area or route or operation thereto, these road

transport services should be run and operated by the STU to the

exclusion (complete or partial) of private stage carriage operators,

a proposal in the Official Gazette shall be published as provided

under
Section 99
of the Act. Objections to the proposal will be

invited before the State Government under
Section 100(1)
of the

Act. After considering the objections, if any, and after giving an

opportunity to the objectors or their representatives and the

representatives of the STU, the State Government may approve or

modify such proposals. The approved or modified scheme will be

published in the Official Gazette of the State Government, apart

from newspapers, under
Section 100(3)
of the Act. After

publication, the scheme shall be final and the same is called “the

approved scheme”. The area or the route, to which the scheme

relates, shall be called “Notified Area” or “Notified Route”.
Section

103
of the Act deals with the issue of permits by the STU

pursuant to the scheme, if approved.
Section 104
of the Act

relates to the restrictions on grant of permits in respect of the

notified area or notified route.
13
13.   It is relevant to note that
Chapter IV of the Motor Vehicles

Act, 1939
is analogous to
Chapter V of the Motor Vehicles Act,

1988
. Chapter IV-A of the 1939 Act corresponds to Chapter VI of

the 1988 Act. The sections contained in Chapter IV-A of the1939

Act are in pari materia with the sections contained in Chapter VI

of the 1988 Act. To be more precise,
Sections 99
and
100
of the

1988 Act are in pari materia with Sections 68-C and 68-D

respectively of the 1939 Act.
14.   Before proceeding further, it would be relevant to note
Section 104
of the Act along with its proviso, which reads thus:
“104. Restriction on grant of permits in
        respect of a notified area or notified route –
        Where a scheme has been published under
        sub-section (3) of
section 100
in respect of any
        notified area or notified route, the State
        Transport Authority or the Regional Transport
        Authority, as the case may be, shall not grant
        any permit except in accordance with the
        provisions of the scheme:
Provided that where no application for a permit
        has been made by the State Transport
        Undertaking in respect of any notified area or
        notified route in pursuance of an approved
        scheme, the State Transport Authority or the
        Regional Transport Authority, as the case may
        be, may grant temporary permits to any person
        in respect of such notified area or notified
        route subject to the condition that such permit
        shall cease to be effective on the issue of a
14
permit to the State transport undertaking in
        respect of that area or route.”
15.   A plain reading of
Section 104
makes it amply clear that

where a scheme has been published under
Section 100(3)
of the

Act in respect of any notified area or notified route, grant of any

permit on the notified route or area is impermissible, except in

accordance with the provisions of the scheme. However, the

proviso clarifies that wherever the STU has not sought any permit

in respect of any notified route or notified area in pursuance to

the scheme, the RTA (or STA, as the case may be) may grant a

temporary permit to any private stage carriage operator in respect

of such notified area or notified route, on the condition that such

permit shall cease to be effective on the issue of a permit to the

STU in respect of that area or route. It is needless to observe that

respondent no.1 claims such a temporary permit based on the

proviso to
Section 104
of the Act, contending that the STU is not

operating its services on the notified route.
16.   It is by now well settled that the scheme formulated and

published by the State Government under
Section 100 (3)
of the

Act holds the fort in all matters involving permits.The scheme is a

law by itself, as observed by this Court in various judgments

including the case of
Gajraj Singh and Others vs. State Transport
15
Appellate Tribunal and others
reported in (1997) 1 SCC 650,

wherein it is observed as hereunder:
“51. After giving careful and anxious
        consideration to the respective contentions, we
        find that there is some force in the contention
        of the respective counsel for the appellants. It
        bears repetition to state that the approved
        scheme under the
Repealed Act
or in the Act is
        a self-contained and self-operative scheme. It is
        a law by itself. The schemes published under
        the
Repealed Act
, as held earlier, are saved by
Section 217(2)(a)
of the Act. Therefore, until
        they are modified or cancelled under
Section
        102
, the scheme should continue to be in
        operation in the notified area, route or part
        thereof. The right to apply for and obtain
        permit in the notified scheme was totally frozen
        to the private operators giving exclusive right to
        the STU to apply for and obtain permits to run
        the stage carriages or additional service under
Section 101
of the Act on the notified area,
        route or a part thereof and none else. With a
        non obstante clause in
Section 101
, the right
        to apply for and obtain temporary permits
        under
Section 87
by private operators was
        taken away. There is no need for STU to obtain
        such permits as an intimation to RTA
        concerned of its providing such additional
        service on special occasions like fair or
        religious    gatherings   for    conveyance     of
        passengers, is sufficient. Yet the scheme itself
        saved and preserved the rights of the named
        existing operators in respect of overlapping
        routes in the specified permits, subject to the
        corridor restrictions of picking up and setting
        down the passengers en route the prescribed
        prohibited route. They became entitled to run
        their stage carriages subject to the law.
        Though, their permits are saved, the named
16
operators being private operators, Parliament
         appears to have thought that there was no
         necessity to expressly retain in Chapter VI
         itself their right of renewal as the same was
         already provided in
Section 81
of the Act
         corresponding to Section 68-F(1-
D) of Chapter
         IV-A of the Repealed Act
. The reason appears
         to be obvious. Every private operator falls
         within the field covered by
Chapter V of the
         Act
. It would seem that Parliament is of the
         view that the named operators, being saved
         under the schemes, are entitled to apply for
         and obtain necessary permit or renewal thereof
         to ply their stage carriages only on overlapped
         routes subject to the corridor restrictions
         mentioned in the scheme itself. It may be
         stated that we do not find any express
         indication of their rights being taken away
         under the Act; nor do we find it by necessary
         implication in that behalf and to that effect.
         This view does justice also to all concerned.”
                                  (emphasis supplied)
17.   In light of this, it is to be noted that the proviso to
Section

104
of the Act cannot be read aloof from the main section. A

plain reading of the proviso to
Section 104
makes it clear that

temporary permits can be granted to the private sector, wherever

the STU does not operate its service. However, the proviso is also

subject to the stipulations of the scheme, akin to the main

section. A Four-Judge Bench of this Court in
Dwarka Prasad vs.

Dwarka Das Saraf
, reported in (1976) 1 SCC 128, observed that

the proviso cannot be read separately from the main section, in

the following manner:
17
“18.…A proviso must be limited to the subject-matter
      of the enacting clause. It is a settled rule of
      construction that a proviso must prima facie be read
      and considered in relation to the principal matter to
      which it is a proviso. It is not a separate or
      independent enactment. “Words are dependent on the
      principal enacting words, to which they are tacked as a
      proviso. They cannot be read as divorced from their
      context” (1912 AC 544). If the rule of construction is
      that prima facie a proviso should be limited in its
      operation to the subject-matter of the enacting clause,
      the stand we have taken is sound. To expand the
      enacting clause, inflated by the proviso, sins against
      the fundamental rule of construction that a proviso
      must be considered in relation to the principal matter
      to which it stands as a proviso. A proviso ordinarily is
      but a proviso, although the golden rule is to read the
      whole section, inclusive of the proviso, in such manner
      that they mutually throw light on each other and
      result in a harmonious construction.”
                                        (emphasis supplied)
18.   Since the Scheme on hand partially excludes private stage

carriage operators on the notified route, the same is to be

adhered to. It is necessary in the public interest that road

transport services on notified routes should be run and operated

by the STU to the complete or partial exclusions of private stage

carriage operators. In a State where the scheme has been

published, subject to such scheme formulated by the State, no

private   stage   carriage   operator    can   operate   beyond   the
18
stipulations of the scheme. This also applies to applications for

temporary permits under the proviso to
Section 104
of the Act.
19.   In the matter on hand, it is the case of the STU that it has

been running 452 buses (covering 770 trips) every day on part of

the notified route, i.e. from Angamaly to Perumbavoor, wherein

overlapping of 13 kms is claimed. So far as the route from

Angamaly     to   Perumbavoor      is   concerned,    the   same     is

undisputedly a notified route. The STU thus has the exclusive

right or monopoly to ply its stage carriages and obtain the

required permit as per the Scheme to the exclusion of private

stage carriage operators. The proviso gives only a limited breath

of life to the private sector, viz., only if the vehicles of the STU do

not operate on the notified route as per the scheme, in which

event temporary permits may be granted to the private stage

carriage operators. In the matter on hand, undisputedly, more

than 450 buses of the STU ply everyday on the notified route

which pass from Angamaly to Perumbavoor. It is not open for the

respondent no.1 to claim that the STU is not running sufficient

buses from Palliserry to Perumbavoor via Angamaly. Admittedly,

Palliserry to Angamaly is not a notified route. The dispute

between the parties, thus, virtually relates to the route between
19
Angamaly to Perumbavoor and not the route between Palliserry to

Angamaly.
20.   Even otherwise it is not disputed that the STU is plying 8

trips from Palliserry to Perumbavoor via Angamaly. Apart from

the same, the private sector is operating sufficient number of

services from Palliserry to Angamaly. It is brought to the notice of

this Court by the STU that the STU may provide more buses if

required between Palliserry to Angamaly. Moreover, it is open for

the respondent no.1 to seek permission as per law before the

concerned authority and ply its buses on the non-notified route.
However, when it comes to operating on the notified route, that

is, in between Angamaly and Perumbavoor, the respondent no.1

cannot operate its services for more than 5 kms or 5% of its route

(whichever is less). Admittedly, part of the respondent no.1’s

route measuring 13 kms is between Angamaly and Perumbavoor,

and that entire patch of 13 kms overlaps the notified route. The

total route length applied for by the respondent no.1 is only 28

kms. The overlap thus, permitted on the notified route (in the

case on hand) as per the Scheme could only be 1.4 kms whereas

the   respondent   no.1   wants    to   overlap   by   13   kms,   i.e.

approximately 50% of his route, which is totally impermissible
20
and the same is rightly objected to by the STU, particularly when

the STU is operating 452 buses (amounting to 770 trips) in a day

on the said route.
21.   The contention of the respondent no.1 is that the travelling

public could be inconvenienced if the passengers travelling in the

buses of the respondent no.1 from Palliserry to Perumbavoor are

asked to get down at Angamaly. Such factors relating to

inconvenience    etc.   necessarily   have   to   be   taken   into

consideration by the concerned authorities before publication of

the proposal regarding road transport services of the STU under
Section 99
of the Act, by the State Government under
Section

100(1)
of the Act when considering the objections to the scheme,

and thereafter either by the STU or by the Government when

inconvenience is experienced by the travelling public and brought

to its notice. As held by the Constitution Bench of this Court in

case of
Adarsh
(supra), the question is one of weighing the

balance between the advantages conferred on the public by the

nationalisation of the route Kottayam-Kozhikode against the

inconvenience suffered by the public by wanting to travel straight

from Palliserry to Perumbavoor via Angamaly.
21
22.   It is quite well known that under the guise of permits over

longer routes covering shorter notified routes, or overlapping

parts of notified routes, such permits are more often than not

mis-utilized, since it is well nigh impossible to keep a proper

check at every point of the route. If indeed there is any need for

protecting the travelling public from inconvenience, as was

submitted by Mr. Giri, the STU and the Government will make

sufficient provisions in the Scheme itself to avoid inconvenience

being caused to the travelling public.
In
Adarsh
(supra) under

similar circumstances, it was observed thus,

      “7.…The question is one of weighing in the balance the
      advantages conferred on the public by the
      nationalisation of the route C-D against the
      inconveniences suffered by the public wanting to travel
      straight from A to B. On the other hand it is quite well
      known that under the guise of the so-called “corridor
      restrictions” permits over longer routes which cover
      shorter notified routes or “overlapping” parts of notified
      routes are more often than not misutilised since it is
      well nigh impossible to keep a proper check at every
      point of the route. It is also well known that often
      times permits for plying stage carriages from a point a
      short distance beyond one terminus to a point a short
      distance beyond another terminus of a notified route
      have been applied for and granted subject to the
      so-called “corridor restrictions” which are but mere
      ruses or traps to obtain permits and to frustrate the
      scheme. If indeed there is any need for protecting the
      travelling public from inconvenience as suggested by
      the learned counsel we have no doubt that the State
      Transport Undertaking and the Government will make
22
a sufficient provision in the scheme itself to avoid
      inconvenience being caused to the travelling public. ”
      “14.…We however wish to introduce a note of caution.
      When preparing and publishing the scheme under
      Section 68-C and approving or modifying the scheme
      under Section 68-D care must be taken to protect, as
      far as possible, the interest of the travelling public who
      could in the past travel from one point to another
      without having to change from one service to another
      en route. This can always be done by appropriate
      clauses exempting operators already having permits
      over common sector from the scheme and by
      incorporating appropriate conditional clauses in the
      scheme to enable them to ply their vehicles over
      common sectors without picking up or setting down
      passengers on the common sectors. If such a course is
      not feasible the State Legislature may intervene and
      provide some other alternative as was done by the
      Uttar Pradesh Legislature by the enactment of the
      Uttar Pradesh Act 27 of 1976 by
Section 5
of which the
      competent authority could authorise the holder of a
      permit of a stage carriage to ply his stage carriage on a
      portion of a notified route subject to terms and
      conditions including payment of licence fee. There may
      be other methods of not inconveniencing through
      passengers but that is entirely a matter for the State
      Legislature, the State Government and the State
      Transport Undertaking. But we do wish to emphasise
      that good and sufficient care must be taken to see that
      the travelling public is not to be needlessly
      inconvenienced.”
                                       (emphasis supplied)
23.
In the case of
U.P. State Roadways Transport Corporation vs.
Anwar Ahmed and Others
reported in (1997) 3 SCC 191, this
Court observed thus:
“6. In view of the settled legal position that
         once the scheme has been approved and
         notified, right to ply stage carriages by private
23
operators on the notified area, routes or
portions thereof is totally frozen. Therefore,
they have no right to claim any grant of stage
carriage, temporary or contract carriage
permits thereunder on the said notified area,
routes or portions thereof except to the extent
saved by the scheme with restrictions imposed
thereunder…”


“7. It would, therefore, be seen that where the
scheme has been published under sub-section
(3) of
Section 100
in respect of any notified
area or notified route, the State Transport
Authority or the Regional Transport Authority,
as the case may be, shall not grant any permit
except in accordance with the provisions of the
scheme. Thus, the appellant-Corporation has
the exclusive right or monopoly to ply their
stage carriages and obtain the required permit
as per the scheme. The proviso gives only a
limited breath of life, namely, until the
Corporation puts the vehicles on the notified
routes as per the scheme, temporary permits
may be granted to private operators. Thereby,
it would be clear that temporary inconvenience
to travelling public is sought to be averted till
the permits are taken and vehicles are put on
the route by the appellant. Therefore, the
temporary permits will have only limited breath
of life. Private operators are attempting to wear
the mask of inconvenience to travelling public
to infiltrate into forbidden notified area, route
or portion thereof to sabotage the scheme. The
permits were taken by the appellant and the
vehicles are put on the route in terms of the
scheme. Therefore, the direction given by the
High Court at the pain of contempt is obviously
illegal. It is stated by Shri V.R. Reddy,
Additional Solicitor General, on instruction
that the appellant is prepared to take all the
permits required on the routes.
24
8. But the crucial question is whether a new
        route can be introduced by fusing two notified
        routes and temporary permits sought to be
        obtained on carved-out route? This device is
        obviously impermissible to enter into frozen
        area or route or portion thereof through
        backdoor. The scheme is law by itself and until
        it is varied according to law, no private
        operator has any right to camouflage any
        device to obtain temporary permits. Under
        these circumstances, action taken by the
        respondents to obtain temporary permits is
        obviously ultra vires and authorities have no
        jurisdiction to grant such permits. The altered
        or modified routes are contrary to the approved
        scheme, since they have been occupied by two
        notified routes and to be operated as per the
        scheme.”
                                 (emphasis supplied)
24.   From the aforementioned, it is clear that the temporary

inconvenience, if any, to the travelling public was to be avoided

till the permits were taken by the appellant and vehicles were

made to ply on the route by it. Since the appellant is running

sufficient number of buses/trips on the notified route, no

inconvenience to the public is made out. Private stage carriage

operators generally would be attempting to wear a mask to

infiltrate into forbidden routes or areas or portions thereof, under

the pretext of inconvenience to the travelling public, to sabotage

the scheme.
25
25.   The STAT impliedly interpreted the proviso to
Section 104
of

the Act to mean that the competent authority would have the

power to grant a temporary permit de hors the scheme. Such

interpretation deserves to be rejected, i.e., the interpretation that

until the STU puts vehicles on the newly carved out route fusing

non-notified and notified route, temporary permits may be

granted to private stage carriage operators. A new route cannot

be introduced by fusing a non-notified route with the notified

route to seek a temporary permit on a carved out route. This

device is obviously impermissible to enter into a frozen area or

route or portion thereof, in excess of the limited permit under the

scheme, through a back door. The Scheme is a law by itself and

until it is varied according to law, no private stage carriage

operator has any right to camouflage any device to obtain the

permits. The new route introduced by the respondent no.1 fuses

a non-notified route (to an extent of 15 kms) and a notified route

(to an extent of 13 kms), totally measuring 28 kms. This is

contrary to the approved Scheme, since such newly introduced

route by the respondent No.1 overlaps with 13 kms of the notified

route, which is prohibited as per the Scheme. There cannot be

any dispute that there will not be any scope for grant of any
26
permit in that area or route covered by the Scheme, except what

is specifically permitted or provided under the Scheme itself.
26.   In the matter on hand, the Scheme does not permit private

stage carriage operators to overlap more than 5 kms or 5 %

(whichever is less) of the route proposed by the private stage

carriage operator, and as the respondent no. 1 wants to run

services overlapping by 13 kms, the prayer is liable to be rejected.
27.   Thus, the RTA was justified in rejecting the claim of the

respondent no.1 seeking temporary permit on the notified route,

since the respondent no.1 has sought a temporary permit for the

route which overlaps by 13 kms on the notified route; such

overlap is clearly prohibited under the Scheme. Since the STU is

running hundreds of bus trips on the part of the notified route

i.e. from Angamaly to Perumbavoor, it is not open for the

respondent no.1 to seek a temporary permit covering that

distance.
28.   Moreover, overlapping to the extent of 5 kms or 5% of the

route of respondent no.1 (whichever is less), is only for purposes

of intersection under the Scheme. As the proviso to
Section 104
of the Act is also subject to the Scheme, it is not open for any
27
private stage carriage operator including the respondent no.1 to

claim a temporary permit for traversing and overlapping with the

notified route to the extent of 13 kms. The intersection of the

notified route may not, in our view, be the same as traversing

and overlapping with the route, because the prohibition under

the Scheme must apply to the whole or a part of the notified

route, and private stage carriage operators cannot be allowed to

traverse the same line in the guise of intersection. In this case, as

the stage carriage services of the respondent no.1 are to operate

on a notified route to an extent of 13 kms, it cannot be

considered an intersection. Intersection means “to cut across”. It

is permissible for any private stage carriage operator, under the

Scheme in question, to traverse on a notified route up to the

permissible limit as contemplated under the Scheme only for the

purpose of cutting across the notified route, and to proceed

further on a non-notified route. Only in such a case can the

temporary permit be granted.
29.   There is a clear distinction between overlapping and

intersection. The expression “intersection” is not defined in the

Act. Hence, in order to understand this distinction, the dictionary

meaning of the expression “intersection” deserves close scrutiny.
28
In Black's    Dictionary     of        Law,     5th   edn.,      the     word

“intersection” means: as applied to a street or highway means the

space occupied by two streets at the point where they cross each

other. Space common to both streets or highways, formed by

continuing the curb lines.
In the Law Lexicon, Reprint edn., 1987 “intersect” means as

“to cross; literally, to cut into or between; a word which imports

the intersection of one line with another”.
In Chambers English Dictionary, “intersection” means to cut

across: to cut or cross mutually; to divide into parts, v.i. to cross

each     other; intersect appoint             of    intersection;       intersection

intersecting: the point or line in which lines or surfaces cut each

other (geom.): the set of elements which two or more sets have in

common (math.): a crossroad.
In Webster’s Dictionary, Vol. I, the word “intersection” is: as

the act of intersecting the point at which lines cut across each

other (or the line at which planes do so), a place where two roads

cross each other intersectional.
The Shorter    Oxford      English          Dictionary,   Vol.    I    defines

“intersection” as the action or fact of intersection; the place where
29
two things intersect; chiefly geom.; the point (or line) common to

two lines or surfaces which intersect.
The Concise Oxford dictionary defines: Intersect means,

Divide by passing or lying across it; cross or cut each other.
A reading of the dictionary meanings thus, shows more than

one meaning for the word “intersection”. But, it can be said that,

meaning of the word “intersection” as provided generally in

various   dictionaries   mentioned    supra,   is   “cutting   across”.

However, in such a situation it would be appropriate to keep in

mind that the word has to be construed in the context of the

provision of the Act and scheme of the Act. As we find that the

“Scheme” intends total exclusion of private stage carriage

operators for a notified route except for “intersecting” it is not

open for the authorities to grant permits to private stage carriage

operators to operate on the notified route but may be permitted

merely to intersect within permissible limits. The “intersection”

thus, is not traversing the same line of travel beyond permitted

limits, but to cut across a notified route for its onward journey.

This exception is carved out only to avoid hardships to travellers.

Any other view contrary to the above view would amount to

violating integrity of an approved Scheme.
30
An intersection is permissible, while an overlap is not.
In
Mysore State Road Transport Corporation vs. Mysore State

Transport Appellate Tribunal
, reported in (1974) 2 SCC 750, this

Court held as follows:
“10. ... It is, therefore, apparent that where a private
      transport owner makes an application to operate on a
      route which overlaps even a portion of the notified
      route i.e. where the part of the highway to be used by
      the private transport owner traverses on a line on the
      same highway on the notified route, then that
      application has to be considered only in the light of the
      scheme as notified. If any conditions are placed then
      those conditions have to be fulfilled and if there is a
      total prohibition then the application must be
      rejected.”
      ***
      “12. This Court has consistently taken the view that if
      there is a prohibition to operate on a notified route or
      routes no licences can be granted to any private
      operator whole route traversed or overlapped any part
      or whole of that notified route. The intersection of the
      notified route may not, in our view, amount to
      traversing or overlapping the route because the
      prohibition imposed applies to a whole or a part of the
      route on the highway on the same line of the route. An
      intersection cannot be said to be traversing the same
      line, as it cuts across it.”
                                        (emphasis supplied)
30.   The expression “intersection”as observed by this Court in

the case
Karnataka SRTC vs. Ashrafulla Khan
reported in (2002)

2 SCC 560, has been employed only to provide a facility to private
31
stage carriage operators operating on a non-notified route to

continue their onward journey on a non-notified route by cutting

across the notified route to the extent permitted under the

scheme. This exception is carried out only with the avowed object

of avoiding hardship to the travelling public. Except for such

exceptional circumstance of cutting across the notified route, the

scheme totally excludes private stage carriage operators on the

notified route. In case of overlapping, such carrier would ply on

the same line to travel on a portion of the notified route, whereas

in case of intersection,the private stage carriage operator’s route

only cuts across the notified route for its onward journey. Since

the scheme is a law, the same has to be preserved and protected

in public interest.
31.   Since it is not a case of intersection as contemplated under

Clause 5(c) of the Scheme, and as the overlapping sought by the

respondent no.1 is more than both 5 kms or 5% of his total

route, the prayer of respondent no.1 must be rejected. However,

we hasten to add that (as mentioned supra) Clauses 5(c) and 6 of

the Scheme provide that the private stage carriages would be

allowed to pick up and drop passengers in between any two

places on the route covered by the Scheme, provided that the
32
route of the private stage carriage overlaps the notified route

maximum to an extent of 5 kms or 5% of the length of its own

route (whichever is less).
32.   At the cost of repetition, we must observe that the

respondent no. 1 does not fall within the proviso to
Section 104
of the Act. The appellant has been plying sufficient number of

buses/trips on the notified route as a STU. Both parties admit

that the appellant is running sufficient number of buses on the

notified route. It was held by this Court in
U.P. SRTC and another

vs. Sanjida Bano and others
, reported in (2005) 10 SCC 280, that

irrespective of the number of buses and trips undertaken by the

STU, the fact that it is plying its vehicles on the notified route

precludes others from taking the benefit of the proviso to
Section

104
of the Act. The Court held thus:
“5.…Whether or not the number of buses and the trips
      operated by the State transport undertaking were
      enough to cater to the volume of need of the
      commuting public, is not germane to the applicability
      of the proviso. The scheme provides for as many
      permits as needed being lifted by the State transport
      undertaking. The State transport undertaking was
      operating 36 trips on the date of the order of the High
      Court and is now operating 40 trips, as stated by the
      learned counsel for the appellants at the Bar. However,
      the learned Senior Counsel for the respondents has
      disputed the correctness of this statement and
      submitted that the Secretary, Regional Transport
33
Authority had found only 25 trips being in operation.
      Be that as it may, we are not inclined to hold that in
      spite of the appellant Corporation operating on the
      route resort can be had to the proviso to
Section 104
of
      the Act for granting temporary permits.”
                                      (emphasis supplied)
33.   Strangely, the Respondent No.1 sought to produce certain

documents before the Court, just about two days prior to the

final arguments. Such documents contained so called three

temporary permits granted in favour of three private stage

carriage operators on the notified route subsequent to the

scheme. Relying upon such documents, Mr. Basant argued that

same concession as has been given to three private stage carriage

operators should be given in favour of the respondent no.1 also.
These submissions are rightly objected by Mr. Giri taking an

exception to the manner in which these documents were sought

to be produced two days prior to the final arguments; these

documents were not available on the record before the High

Court or before the STAT. Since opportunity was not available to

the appellant to have its say on the documents, he submitted

that the said documents need to be ignored.
It is not clear from any of the record that such temporary

permits were granted and even if granted whether they have
34
expired or not. Even otherwise there was no opportunity for the

appellant to have its say on alleged permits. Hence, we do not

propose to consider and comment upon such documents

produced by the contesting respondent.
34.   Mr. R. Basant relied heavily on
Punjab Roadways vs. Punjab

Sahib Bus & Transport Co.
, reported in (2010) 5 SCC 235, to

make a claim that temporary permits may be granted even when

the STU has applied for a permit. In that case, this Court held as

under:
“34. The abovementioned provision states where a
      scheme has been published under sub-section (3) of
Section 100
in respect of any notified area or notified
      route, the STA or the RTA as the case may be, shall
      not grant any permit except in accordance with the
      provisions of the scheme. An exception has been
      carved out in the proviso to
Section 104
stating, where
      no application for permit has been made by the STU in
      respect of any notified area or notified route in
      pursuance of an approved scheme, the STA or the
      RTA, as the case may be, may grant temporary permits
      to any person in respect of any such notified area or
      notified route subject to the condition that such permit
      shall cease to be effective on the issue of permit to the
      STU in respect of that area or route. In our view same
      is the situation in respect of a case where an STU in
      spite of grant of permit does not operate the service or
      surrenders the permit granted or is not utilising the
      permit. In such a situation it should be deemed that
      no application for permit has been made by the STU
      and it is open to the RTA to grant temporary permit if
      there is a temporary need. By granting regular permits
      to the private operators the RTA will be upsetting the
35
ratio fixed under     the   scheme   which   is   legally
      impermissible.”
                                       (emphasis supplied)
35.   Despite the strong submissions made on behalf of the

respondent no. 1, it remains that
Punjab Roadways
(supra) is

distinguishable from the present case on facts. In that case, the

scheme of the Punjab Government shared all routes on the

national and State highways in a specified ratio between STUs

and private stage carriage operators. The relevant authorities as

well as the High Court held that regular permits may be granted

to private stage carriage operators where the STU is not using its

permit. However, this Court took exception to the grant of

“regular” permits as relief, as doing so would upset the ratio

contained in the scheme. Temporary permits would not upset the

balance and were hence preferable in a situation where the

scheme mandated that the routes be divided and utilized in a

specific ratio. In the case on hand, there is no requirement of

division into specific ratios. We see no reason to apply the

findings
in that case
to the present scenario.
36.   The contention that the subsequent order of the RTA has

remained unquestioned, and the respondent no. 1 is therefore
36
entitled to operate his services on the notified route, cannot be

accepted. Since the order of the STAT remanding the matter to

the RTA with a direction to the RTA to exercise its power under

the proviso to
Section 104
of the Act, which was confirmed by the

High Court, is held to be bad by us in this appeal, the

consequent order of the RTA dated 23.02.2017 also needs to be

held illegal. Moreover, we have heard the matter in its entirety

and the said contention of respondent no.1, in our view, is too

technical. Be that as it may, since we find that the Respondent

no.1 is not entitled to ply stage carriage buses on the notified

routes, the temporary permit granted by the RTA on 23.02.2017

in favour of respondent no.1 is set aside.
37.   In view of this discussion, the following answer emerges:
 A temporary permit cannot be issued to a private stage

  carriage operator to traverse on the notified route which is

  being served by the STU, in excess of the permissible distance

  provided under the scheme.
 To rephrase, under the facts of this case, it is not open for a

  private stage carriage operator (the respondent no. 1) to

  operate its services by overlapping on a notified route for more

  than 5 kms or 5% (whichever is less) of the route of the private
37
stage carriage operator (as specified under the Scheme) which

  is being served by the STU.
38.   Accordingly, the judgment of STAT, the consequent order of

the RTA granting temporary permit to the respondent no. 1, as

well as the judgment of the High Court, are set aside. The

appeals before us are hereby allowed. Consequently, O.P.(C) No.

1827 of 2017, as preferred by the appellant KSRTC, stands

allowed. As regards the O.P.(C) No. 1784 of 2017 and O.P.(C) No.

581 of 2017, the same order shall govern their outcome.
..................................J
                                                       Kurian Joseph


                                        .................................J
                                     Mohan M. Shantanagoudar


                                           .................................J
                                                           Navin Sinha
New Delhi
May 16, 2018