[Cites
45
, Cited by
530
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Rina Devi on 9 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2362, 2019 (3) SCC 572, 2018 AAC 991 (SC), 2018 (4) ABR 217, (2018) 2 ACC 591, (2018) 2 PAT LJR 447, (2018) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 70, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 409, (2018) 3 RECCIVR 40, (2018) 71 OCR 10, (2018) 7 SCALE 274, (2018) 3 CIVLJ 740, (2018) 2 KER LT 1060, (2018) 3 ACJ 1441, (2018) 3 BOM CR 729, (2018) 3 CAL HN 238, (2018) 4 ALL WC 3776, (2018) 190 ALLINDCAS 142 (SC), (2018) 130 ALL LR 789, (2018) 6 ANDHLD 122, (2018) 3 TAC 26, (2018) 3 JCR 241 (SC)
Author:
Adarsh Kumar Goel
Bench:
Rohinton Fali Nariman
,
Adarsh Kumar Goel
REPORTABLE


                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4945 OF 2018
                      (SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL)NO.10223 @ D.NO.6059 OF 2018)



                         UNION OF INDIA                                      …APPELLANT


                                                     VERSUS
                         RINA DEVI                                           ...RESPONDENT


                                                 JUDGMENT
ADARSH KUMAR GOEL, J.
1.   This appeal has been preferred against award of compensation

                         of Rs.4 lakhs under
Section 124A
of the Railways Act, 1989 (1989

                         Act).
2.   The respondent filed claim for compensation for death of her

                         husband Jatan Gope in an ‘untoward incident’ on 20 th August,

                         2002.   Her case is that the deceased had purchased a ticket of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SWETA DHYANI
Date: 2018.05.09
second class for Karauta to Khusrupur by train No.532.    He fell
17:30:17 IST
Reason:
down from the train due to rush of passengers and died on the
1
spot. One Kailash Gope who witnessed the deceased purchasing

          the ticket and boarding the train filed an affidavit stating these

          facts. He was not cross-examined. Case of the respondent is that

          the ticket was not recovered from possession of the deceased as it

          may have been lost somewhere.
3.    The claim was contested by the appellant. It was stated that

          the deceased was not a passenger but was wandering near the

          railway track.    Cousin of the deceased who lodged FIR stated the

          deceased was suffering from mental disorder and was wandering

          in that state of mind. However, he was not examined as a witness.
4.    The Tribunal dismissed the claim on the ground that it was not

          a case of ‘untoward incident’ but a case of ‘run over’.         The

          deceased was not a bona fide passenger.
5.    The High Court set aside the order of the Tribunal by relying

          upon the evidence of Kailash Gope who filed affidavit to the effect

          that the deceased had purchased the ticket and had boarded the

          train. The said witness has not been cross-examined. Reliance was

          placed on a Division Bench judgment of the High Court in
Kaushalaya Devi versus Union of India
through General

          Manager, North Eastern Railway, Gorakhpur, U.P. 1 to the
1 PLJR 2008 (3), page 711
2
effect that if a dead body is found in the precincts of the Railway

         Station, there is a presumption that the deceased was a bona fide

         passenger. Onus to prove that he was a ticketless traveller was on

         the Railway.
Judgment of this Court in Kamrunissa versus Union

         of India2         to the effect that the ‘run over’ was different from

         ‘untoward incident’ was distinguished.         Therein, there was no

         evidence about the deceased purchasing the ticket as in the

         present case.
6.    This appeal has been preferred mainly on the ground that the

         claim of the respondent was not admissible in absence of an

         ‘untoward incident’ as defined under
Section 123(c)
of the 1989

         Act as rightly held by the Tribunal. Mere presence of body in the

         precincts of the Railway was not enough to presume that he was a

         bona fide purchaser particularly when no ticket was found from the

         deceased.
7.    Learned ASG made it clear that the appellant was interested

         only in laying down of law on the subject even if the impugned

         judgment was not disturbed. Accordingly, we requested Shri Mukul

         Rohtagi, learned senior counsel to assist the court as Amicus,

         instead of issuing notice to the respondent. We do not propose to

2 AIR 2017 SC 1436 = 2017 SCC Online SC 304
3
disturb the impugned judgment irrespective of its correctness and

          we propose to consider the legal issue sought to be raised and the

          issues that have been brought to our notice by the Railway Tribunal

          as shown later.
8.    Vide order dated 13th March, 2018, we noted the issue of

          apparent conflict in
Rathi Menon versus Union of India
3 and
Kalandi Charan Sahoo versus General Manager, South-East

          Central Railway, Bilaspur4
as to the relevant date for applying

          the rate of compensation when different rate is applicable at the

          time of filing of claim and on the date of the order. A submission

          has been filed by the Registrar Principal Bench, Railway Claims

          Tribunal seeking clarification on four subjects which repeatedly

          arise before the said Tribunal i.e. :
(i)      Quantum of compensation: It is stated that there is a

                         conflict in the decisions in
Rathi Menon
(supra) and
Kalandi           Charan         Sahoo
(supra)   which   needs

                         clarification. We have already taken note of this issue.
(ii)     Definition of passenger: Whether any person found

                         dead near the track on Railway Precincts can be held to


3 (2001) 3 SCC 714, para 30
4 Civil Appeal No.5608 of 2017 decided on 25.4.2017
4
be a bona fide passenger for maintainability of a claim

                        for compensation in absence of recovery of a ticket from

                        his body.   Conflicting decisions of Andhra Pradesh High

                        Court in
Agam Shanthamma versus Union of India
5;
Kerala   High   Court   in
Union    of   India   versus

                        Leelamma6
; Bombay High Court (Nagpur Bench) in
Union of India versus Surekha7
;
Ramdhan versus

                        Union of India8
; &
Union of India versus Nandabai
9;
Calcutta High Court in
Asharani Das versus Union of

                        India10
; and Madhya Pradesh High Court in
Raj Kumari

                        versus Union of India11
are required to be resolved on

                        this subject.
(iii)   The concept of self inflicted injury: Whether attempt

                        of getting into or getting down a moving train resulting in

                        an accident was a case of ‘self inflicted injury’ so as not

                        to entitle to any compensation or no such concept could

                        not apply under the scheme of law which casts strict

                        liability to pay compensation by the Railway under

5 (2004) ACJ 713
6 2009 (1) KLT 914
7 (2011) ACJ 1845
8 (2009) ACJ 2487
9 (2016) ACJ 411
102009 (2) CalLT 467
11 (1993) ACJ 846
5
Sections 124
and
124A
.
In this regard views of the High

                        Courts of Kerala in
Joseph PT versus Union of India12
,

                        Bombay in
Pushpa versus Union of India13
and Delhi

                        in
Shayam Narayan versus Union of India
14 may

                        appear to be against the decisions of this Court in
Union

                        of India versus Prabhakaran Vijaya Kumar15
and
Jameela versus Union of India16
.
(iv)    Award of interest.
The Act
is silent about the interest.
In
Thazhathe Purayil Sarabi versus Union of India
17,

                        this Court held that
the CPC
could be invoked and

                        interest awarded at the rate of 6% p.a. from the date of

                        application till the date of award and 9% p.a. interest

                        from the date of award till the date of payment.
In

                        Mohamadi versus Union of India18 interest at the rate

                        of 9% was awarded without any difference between the

                        date of application and date of award or for subsequent

                        award.
12 AIR 2014 Kerala (12)
13 (2017) III ACC 799 (Bom)
14 (2018) ACJ 702
15 (2008) 9 SCC 527
16 (2010) 12 SCC 443
17 (2010) TAC 420 SC
18 (2011) ACJ 2356
6
9.    An additional affidavit has been filed on behalf of the appellant

          to the effect that judgment in
Rathi Menon
(supra) did not lay

          down correct law to the effect that rate of compensation should be

          as applicable on the date of order.
It is submitted that
the said

          judgment
did not consider the decision of 4-Judge Bench decision

          in
Pratap Narain Singh Deo versus Srinivas Sabata
19 to the

          effect that liability to pay compensation arises as soon as injury is

          caused.
This was reiterated in
Kerala State Electricity Board

          versus Valsala K.20
.
Kerala High Court took the same view in
United India Insurance Company Ltd. versus Alavi21
.
10. In its written submissions, the appellant has dealt with the

          issues of quantum of compensation, definition of passenger and

          strict liability.        It has been submitted that the view taken in
Kalandi Charan Sahoo
(supra) was a correct view.
Reference

          has also been made to the view taken by the Railway Claims

          Tribunal, Bangalore Bench in its judgment dated 19 th February,

          2018 in Rahamath Ulla and Ors versus Union of India 22. As

          regards the definition of passenger and presumption to be drawn

          from the dead body found on the railway premises without any


19 (1976) 1 SCC 289
20 (1999) 8 SCC 254
21 (1998) 3 LLN 285
22 Claim Application No.OA(II)U/168/2013
7
ticket, it is submitted that if no ticket is found from the body of the

          person, presumption of being a bona fide passenger could not be

          drawn.
Contra view of the Patna High Court in
Kaushalya Devi
(supra) was erroneous and view of Delhi High Court in
Gurcharan

          Singh versus Union of India
23 and Andhra Pradesh High Court in

          Jetty Naga Lakshmi Parvathi versus Union of India 24 was

          correct law.      With regard to strict liability, it is submitted that a

          distinction has to be drawn between an ‘untoward incident’ and a

          ‘run over’.
It is submitted that in view of Kamrunissa (supra)

          claimants should be put to strict proof of liabililty. There are 38000

          cases     pending    in Tribunals.      Railway administration grants

          compensation in all genuine cases. If in spite of non recovery of

          ticket, the claimant is exempted from the burden of proof and the

          Railway is required to meet such claim, the liability of the Railway

          will increase disproportionately.       At present, Railway was paying

          approximately Rs.350 crores as compensation. There are 68,000

          kilometers of railway tracks which are porous/unmanned resulting

          in untoward incidents for which liability ought not to be fastened

          on the Railways without valid proof of its liability.
Andhra Pradesh

          High      Court     in
Union     of    India   versus     Kurukundu
23 (2015) ACJ 171
24 2013 ACJ 1061
8
Balakrishnaiah25 rightly held that norms of evidence cannot be

          completely ignored.
11. Shri Rohtagi, learned Amicus submitted that the view taken in
Rathi Menon
(supra) ought to be preferred and rate of

          compensation as on the date of the order should be applied.
He

          submitted that in common law the amount becomes due on the

          date of assessment as
laid down in
Union of India versus

          Raman Iron Foundry26
and
Kesoram Industries & Cotton

          Mills Ltd. versus CWT Central Calcutta
27.
Moreover, the

          present being case of a beneficial legislation, if two interpretations

          are possible interpretation beneficial to the claimant has to be

          preferred, consistent with the law
laid down in
Prabhakaran

          Vijaya        Kumar
(supra).       He   submitted   that   Workmen’s
Compensation Act
(now named as Employee’s
Compensation Act,

          1923
) was amended in the year 1958 and in clause 5 of notes on

          clauses in the Bill, it was stated:
“Clause 5. – This provision is being made in order
                         to ensure that the workman is able to get
                         whatever amount the employer is prepared to
                         pay immediately pending a decision on the
                         amount of compensation actually due.
25 (2004) ACJ 529
26 (1974) 2 SCC 231, para 11
27 (1966) 2 SCR 688, para 33
9
This clause also provides for payment of interest
              if the compensation is not paid within one month
              from the due date and for a penalty if the
              Commissioner does not consider the delay to be
              justified.”
12. This shows that intention of law is that compensation due is

only after a decision even though amount may be required to be

immediately paid. In case compensation is not immediately paid,
Section 4A
of the 1923 Act provides for interest and penalty. Thus,

the rate applicable should be as on the date of order.
13. We have anxiously considered the rival submissions.             We

consider it necessary to quote the relevant provisions of the 1989

Act :
“
S.123
. Definitions. - In this Chapter, unless the
        context otherwise requires,-
(a) "accident" means an accident of the nature
        described in
section 124
;
(b)     xxxx           xxxx             xxxx       xxxx

        1[(c) "untoward incident" means--

        xxxx            xxxx             xxxx              xxxx
(2) the accidental falling of any passenger from a train
        carrying passengers.]
S.124
. Extent of liabililty - When in the course of
        working a railway, an accident occurs, being either a
        collision between trains of which one is a train carrying
        passengers or the derailment of or other accident to a
        train or any part of a train carrying passengers, then
10
whether or not there has been any wrongful act,
neglect or default on the part of the railway
administration such as would entitle a passenger who
has been injured or has suffered a loss to maintain an
action and recover damages in respect thereof, the
railway administration shall, notwithstanding anything
contained in any other law, be liable to pay
compensation to such extent as may be prescribed and
to that extent only for loss occasioned by the death of a
passenger dying as a result of such accident, and for
personal injury and loss, destruction, damage or
deterioration of goods owned by the passenger and
accompanying him in his compartment or on the train,
sustained as a result of such accident.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this section
"passenger" includes a railway servant on duty.
S.124A
. Compensation on account of untoward
incident - When in the course of working a railway an
untoward incident occurs, then whether or not there has
been any wrongful act, neglect or default on the part of
the railway administration such as would entitle a
passenger who has been injured or the dependant of a
passenger who has been killed to maintain an action
and recover damages in respect thereof, the railway
administration    shall,    notwithstanding     anything
contained in any other law, be liable to pay
compensation to such extent as may be
prescribed and to that extent only for loss occasioned
by the death of, or injury to, a passenger as a result of
such untoward incident:
Provided that no compensation shall be payable under
this section by the railway administration if the
passenger dies or suffers injury due to--
(a) suicide or attempted suicide by him;
(b) self-inflicted injury;
(c) his own criminal act;
(d) any act committed by him in a state of intoxication
or insanity;
(e) any natural cause or disease or medical or surgical
treatment unless such treatment becomes necessary
due to injury caused by the said untoward incident.
11
Explanation. --For the         purposes   of   this   section,
      "passenger" includes--
(i) a railway servant on duty; and
(ii) a person who has purchased a valid ticket for
      travelling by a train carrying passengers, on any date or
      a valid platform ticket and becomes a victim of an
      untoward incident.]”
14. In exercise of power under
Section 129
of the 1989 Act, the

Central Government framed rules called Railway Accidents and

Untoward Incidents (Compensation) Rules, 1990.                   The rules

provided for a schedule prescribing the amount of compensation

payable in respect of death and injuries. The said rules have been

amended w.e.f. 1st January, 2017 by notification dated 22nd

December, 2016 substituting the schedule by higher amount of

compensation.
15. We now proceed to deal with the following issues seriatim:
(i)     Whether the quantum of compensation should be
                 as per the prescribed rate of compensation as on
                 the date of application/incident or on the date of
                 order awarding compensation;
(ii)    Whether principle of strict liability applies;
(iii)   Whether presence of a body near the railway track
                 is enough to maintain a claim.
(iv)    Rate of interest.
12
Re: (i)    Quantum of Compensation


          15.1           In Rathi Menon (supra), this Court considered the
question whether the compensation to be applied would be as per

          rules applicable on the date of the order or as per the rules in force

          at the time of accident or the untoward incident. Reversing the

          view taken by the Kerala High Court that the liability to pay

          compensation arises as soon as accident happens and not when

          the quantum is determined, this Court held that liability is to pay

          compensation ‘as may be prescribed’ which means as on the date

          of the order of the Tribunal.        This Court observed that if

          interpretation placed by the Kerala High Court was to be accepted

          and the claimant was to get compensation in terms of market

          value which prevailed on the date of the accident, the money value

          of the compensation will be reduced value on account of lapse of

          time. The revision of rate by the Central Government may itself

          show that the money value has come down.          The Tribunal must

          apply the rate applicable as per the rules at the time of making of

          the order for payment of compensation 28. This Court distinguished

          judgments of the larger Bench in
Pratap Narain Singh Deo
(supra),
P.A. Narayanan versus Union of India
29 and Maghar

28 Paras 29 and 30
29 (1998) 3 SCC 67
13
Singh versus Jashwant Singh30.
It was observed that
Pratap

          Narain Singh Deo
(supra) and Maghar Singh (supra) were

          judgments under the
Workmen Compensation Act
where the

          scheme was different as in the said Act there was a provision for

          interest and penalty if deposit was not made.
Judgment in
P.A.

          Narayanan
(supra) was relied upon to support the view that

          therein compensation was awarded even though accident was of a

          date much earlier to the rules providing for compensation.
15.2.          Learned ASG for the appellant submitted that view in
Rathi Menon
(supra) stands watered down by subsequent

          decisions especially in
Thazhathe Purayil Sarabi
(supra),

          Mohamadi (supra) and
Kalandi Charan Sahoo
(supra).
Rathi

          Menon
(supra) was premised on the basis that there was no law

          for interest and there will be injustice if compensation was paid at

          money value which had got reduced by the time the compensation

          was paid.
Factually interest was awarded in
Rathi Menon
(Supra).

          It was on that basis that judgments in Workmen Compensation

          cases were held to be distinguishable though the said judgments

          are of larger Benches31.
Subsequently in
Thazhathe Purayil

          Sarabi
(supra) it has been held by this Court, after referring to

30 (1998) 9 SCC 134
31 Para 33 of the judgment
14
Rathi Menon
(supra), that right to claim compensation accrued

             on the date of the incident though compensation is computed on

             the date of the award of the Tribunal. To compensate for loss of

             money value on account of lapse of time and for the denial of right

             to utilize the money when due, interest was required to be paid 32.

             Accordingly, this Court directed payment of interest on the

             awarded sum from the date of application till the date of recovery.
This view was followed in Mohamadi (supra).
In
Kalandi Charan

             Sahoo
(supra), without any specific discussion on the legal issue

             involved, direction was issued for payment of compensation which

             was applicable at the material time and the same was assumed to

             be of Rs.4 lakhs. In that case, the accident took place in the year

             2005 and the award of the Tribunal was in 2009 i.e. prior to 1 st

             January, 2017.
15.3.    Learned amicus has referred to judgments of this Court in
Raman Iron Foundry
(supra) and
Kesoram Industries
(supra)

             to submit that quantum of compensation applicable is to be as on

             the award of the Tribunal as the amount due is only on that day

             and not earlier.
In
Kesoram Industries
(supra), the question was

             when for purposes of calculating ‘net wealth’ under the Wealth Tax


32 Para 26
15
Act, 1957 provision for payment of tax could be treated as ‘debt

owed’ within the meaning of
Section 2(m)
of the said Act.         This

Court held that ‘debt’ was obligation to pay. The sum payable on a

contingency, however, does not become ‘debt’ until the said

contingency happens. The liability to pay tax arises on such tax

being quantified.   But when the rate of tax is ascertainable, the

amount can be treated as debt for the year for which the tax is due

for purposes of valuation during the accounting year in question.
There is no conflict in the ratio of this judgment with the principle

propounded in
Thazhathe Purayil Sarabi
(supra) that in the

present context right to compensation arises on the date of the

accident.
In
Raman Iron Foundry
(supra), the question was

whether a claim for unliquidated damages does not give rise to ‘a

debt’ till the liability is determined. It was held that no debt arises

from a claim for unliquidated damages until the liability is

adjudicated. Even from this judgment it is not possible to hold that

the liability for compensation, in the present context, arises only

on determination thereof and not on the date of accident.
Since it

has been held that interest is required to be paid, the premise on

which
Rathi Menon
(supra) is based has changed. We are of the

view that law in the present context should be taken to be that the
16
liability will accrue on the date of the accident and the amount

          applicable as on that date will be the amount recoverable but the

          claimant will get interest from the date of accident till the payment

          at such rate as may be considered just and fair from time to time.

          In this context, rate of interest applicable in motor accident claim

          cases can be held to be reasonable and fair.
Once concept of

          interest has been introduced, principles of
Workmen Compensation

          Act
can certainly be applied and judgment of 4-Judge Bench in
Pratap Narain Singh Deo
(supra) will fully apply. Wherever it is

          found that the revised amount of applicable compensation as on

          the date of award of the Tribunal is less than the prescribed

          amount of compensation as on the date of accident with interest,

          higher of the two amounts ought to be awarded on the principle of

          beneficial legislation.             Present legislation is certainly a piece of

          beneficent legislation.33


          15.4          Accordingly, we conclude that compensation will be

          payable as applicable on the date of the accident with interest as

          may be considered reasonable from time to time on the same

          pattern as in accident claim cases.
If the amount so calculated is

          less than the amount prescribed as on the date of the award of the

33
Prabhakaran Vijaya Kumar
(supra) Para 12
17
Tribunal, the claimant will be entitled to higher of the two amounts.

This order will not affect the awards which have already become

final and where limitation for challenging such awards has expired,

this order will not by itself be a ground for condonation of delay.
Seeming conflict in
Rathi Menon
(supra) and
Kalandi Charan

Sahoo
(supra) stands explained accordingly.
The 4-Judge Bench

judgment in
Pratap Narain Singh Deo
(supra) holds the field on

the subject and squarely applies to the present situation.

Compensation as applicable on the date of the accident has to be

given with reasonable interest and to give effect to the mandate of

beneficial legislation, if compensation as provided on the date of

award of the Tribunal      is higher than unrevised amount with

interest, the higher of the two amounts has to be given.




Re: (ii)   Application of Principle of          Strict   Liabillity   –
           Concept of Self Inflicted Injury

16.1            From the judgments cited at the Bar we do not see

any conflict on the applicability of the principle of strict liability.

Sections 124 and Section 124A provide that compensation is

payable whether or not there has been wrongful act, neglect or

fault on the part of the railway administration in the case of an

accident or in the case of an ‘untoward incident’. Only exceptions
18
are     those   provided   under    proviso   to   Section    124A.
In
Prabhakaran Vijaya Kumar
(supra) it was held that Section

124A lays down strict liability or no fault liability in case of railway

accidents.      Where principle of strict liability applies, proof of

negligence is not required.
This principle has been reiterated in
Jameela
(supra).
16.2              Coming to the proviso to Section 124A to the effect

that no compensation is payable if passenger dies or suffers injury

due to the situations mentioned therein, there is no difficulty as

regards     suicide   or   attempted    suicide    in   which   case   no

compensation may be payable. Conflict of opinions in High Courts

has arisen on understanding the expression ‘self inflicted injury’ in

the proviso. In some decisions it has been held that injury or death

because of negligence of the victim was at par with self inflicted

injury. We may refer to the decisions of High Courts of Kerala in
Joseph PT
(supra), Bombay in
Pushpa
(supra) and Delhi in
Shayam Narayan
(supra) on this point.
16.3.
In
Joseph PT
(supra), the victim received injuries in the

course of entering a train which started moving.             Question was

whether his claim that he had suffered injuries in an ‘untoward

incident’ as defined under Section 123(c) could be upheld or
19
whether he was covered by proviso to Section 124A clause (b).

The High Court held that while in the case of suicide or attempt to

commit suicide, intentional act is essential. Since the concept of

‘self inflicted injury’ is distinct from an attempted suicide, such

intention is not required and even without such intention if a

person acts negligently, injuries suffered in such an accident will

amount to ‘self inflicted injury’. Relevant observations are :
“Therefore, the two limbs of the Proviso should be
       construed to have two different objectives to be
       achieved. We can understand the meaning of the
       term "self-inflicted injury" not only from the
       sources provided by the dictionaries, but also from
       the context in which it is used in the statute. The
       term "self-inflicted injury" used in the statute
       can be deduced as one which a person
       suffers on account of one's own action, which
       is something more than a rash or negligent
       act But it shall not be an intentional act of
       attempted suicide. While there may be cases
       where there is intention to inflict oneself
       with injury amounting to self-inflicted injury,
       which falls short of an attempt to commit
       suicide, there can also be cases where,
       irrespective of intention, a person may act
       with total recklessness, in that, he may throw
       all norms of caution to the wind and regardless to
       his age, circumstances, etc. act to his detriment.
       Facts of this case show that the appellant
       attempted to board a moving train from the off
       side unmindful of his age and fully aware of the
       positional disadvantageous and dangers of
       boarding a train from a level lower than the
       footboard of the train. It is common knowledge that
       the footboard and handrails at the doors of the
20
compartment are designed to suit the convenience
of the passengers for boarding from and alighting
to the platform. And at the same time, when a
person is trying to board the train from the non-
platform side, he will be standing on the heap of
rubbles kept beneath the track and that too in a
lower level. Further more, he will have to stretch
himself to catch the handrails and struggle to climb
up through the footboard hanging beneath the
bogie. The probability of danger is increased in
arithmetic progression when the train is moving.
Visualising all these things in mind, it can only be
held that the act of the appellant was the height of
carelessness, imprudence and foolhardiness. It is
indisputable that the purpose of
Section 124A
of
the Act is to provide a speedy remedy to an injured
passenger or to the dependants of a deceased
passenger involved in an untoward incident.
Section 124A
of the Act provides for compensation
to a passenger or his dependants who suffers
injury or death, as the case may be, in an untoward
incident even where the untoward incident is not
the consequence of any wrongful act, neglect or
default on the part of the Railway Administration.
To this extent, it can be said to be a no-fault
liability. Even though the provisions relating to
payment of compensation in the Act can be said to
be a piece of beneficial legislation, it cannot be
stretched too much to reward a person who acts
callously, unwisely or imprudently. There is no
provision of law brought to our notice permitting
the passengers to entrain from the non-platform
side of the railway track.
However, the counsel for
the respondent did not show any provision of law
prohibiting the same. The question whether an act
by which a passenger sustains injury while
boarding a train through the off side, is a self-
inflicted injury or not depends on the facts of each
case. Merely because a person suffered injury in
the process of getting into the train through the off
side, it may not be sufficient to term it as a self-
inflicted injury, unless the facts and circumstances
21
show that his act was totally imprudent, irrational,
        callous and unmindful of the consequences. All the
        facts and circumstances established in this case
        would show that the act of the appellant was with
        full knowledge of the imminent possibility of
        dangering his life or limb and therefore, it squarely
        comes within the term "self-inflicted injury" defined
        in Section 124A Proviso (b) of the Act.”




16.4            In
Pushpa
(supra) a hawker died in the course of

boarding a train.       It was held that he was not entitled to

compensation as it was a case of ‘self inflicted injury’.       The

relevant observations are :
“Such an attempt by a hawker has been viewed by
        the trial Court as something amounting to criminal
        negligence on his part and also an effort to inflict
        injuries to himself. The trial Court reasoned that if
        the deceased had to sell his goods by boarding a
        train, he should have ensured to do so only when it
        was quite safe for him to get on to the train or
        otherwise he could have avoided catching the train
        and waited for another train to come. It also hinted
        that there was absolutely no compulsion or hurry
        for the deceased in the present case to make an
        attempt to somehow or the other board the train
        while it was gathering speed.”

16.5            In
Shyam Narayan
(supra), same view was taken

which is as follows :
“6(ii) I cannot agree with the arguments urged on
        behalf of the appellants/applicants in the facts of
        the present case because there is a difference
22
between an untoward incident and an act of
                   criminal negligence. Whereas negligence will not
                   disentitle grant of compensation under the
Railways
                   Act
, however, once the negligence becomes a
                   criminal negligence and self-inflicted injury then
                   compensation cannot be granted. This is specifically
                   provided in the first proviso to
Section 124-A
of the
                   Railways Act which provides that compensation will
                   not be payable in case the death takes place on
                   account of suicide or attempted suicide, self
                   inflicted injury, bona fide passenger's own criminal
                   act or an act committed by the deceased in the
                   state of intoxication or insanity.”




         16.6             We are unable to uphold the above view as the

         concept of ‘self inflicted injury’ would require intention to inflict

         such injury and not mere negligence of any particular degree.
Doing so would amount to invoking the principle of contributory

         negligence which cannot be done in the case of liability based on

         ‘no fault theory’. We may in this connection refer to judgment of

         this Court in
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. versus Sunil

         Kumar34
laying down that plea of negligence of the victim cannot

         be allowed in claim based on ‘no fault theory’ under
Section 163A
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. Accordingly, we hold that death or

         injury in the course of boarding or de-boarding a train will be an

         ‘untoward incident’ entitling a victim to the compensation and will


34 2017 (13) SCALE 652
23
not fall under the proviso to
Section 124A
merely on the plea of

negligence of the victim as a contributing factor.


Re: (iii) Burden of Proof When Body Found on Railway
          Premises – Definition of Passenger :
17.1           Conflict of decisions has been pointed out on the

subject. As noticed from the statutory provision, compensation is

payable for death or injury of a ‘passenger’.
In
Raj Kumari
(supra) referring to the scheme of
Railways Act, 1890
, it was

observed that since travelling without ticket was punishable, the

burden was on the railway administration to prove that passenger

was not a bonafide passenger.      The Railway Administration has

special knowledge whether ticket was issued or not. 1989 Act also

has similar provisions being
Sections 55
and
137
. This view has

led to an inference that any person dead or injured found on the

railway premises has to be presumed to be a bona fide passenger

so as to maintain a claim for compensation.
However, Delhi High

Court in
Gurcharan Singh
(supra) held that initial onus to prove

death or injury to a bona fide passenger is always on the claimant.
However, such onus can shift on Railways if an affidavit of relevant

facts is filed by the claimant. A negative onus cannot be placed on

the Railways. Onus to prove that the deceased or injured was a
24
bona fide passenger can be discharged even in absence of a ticket

if relevant facts are shown that ticket was purchased but it was

lost. The Delhi High Court observed as follows :
“3(ii) In my opinion, the contention of the learned
       counsel for the appellants/claimants is totally
       misconceived. The initial onus in my opinion always
       lies with the appellants/claimants to show that
       there is a death due to untoward incident of a bona
       fide passenger. Of course, by filing of the affidavit
       and depending on the facts of a particular case that
       initial onus can be a light onus which can shift on
       the Railways, however, it is not the law that even
       the initial onus of proof which has to be discharged
       is always on the railways and not on the claimants.
       I cannot agree to this proposition of law that the
       Railways have the onus to prove that a deceased
       was not a bonafide passenger because no such
       negative onus is placed upon the Railways either
       under the
Railways Act
or the
Railway Claims
       Tribunal Act
& Rules or as per any judgment of the
       Supreme Court. No doubt, in the facts of the
       particular case, onus can be easily discharged such
       as in a case where deceased may have died at a
       place where he could not have otherwise been
       unless he was travelling in the train and in such
       circumstances depending on the facts of a
       particular case it may not be necessary to prove
       the factum of the deceased having a ticket because
       ticket as per the type of incident of death can easily
       be lost in an accident. I at this stage take note of a
       judgment of a leaned Single Judge of this Court in
       the case reported as
Pyar Singh Vs. Union of India
2007 (8) AD Del. 262 which holds that it is the
       claimant upon whom the initial onus lies to prove
       his case.
I agree to this view and I am bound by this
       judgment and not by the ratio of the case of
Leelamma
(supra).”
25
17.2     In Jetty Naga Lakshmi Parvathi (supra) same view was

taken by a single Judge of Andhra Pradesh after referring to the

provisions of the
Evidence Act
as follows :
“22. So, from
Section 101
of the Indian Evidence
        Act, 1872, it is clear that the applicants, having
        come to the court asserting some facts, must prove
        that the death of the deceased had taken place in
        an untoward incident and that the death occurred
        while the deceased was travelling in a train
        carrying passengers as a passenger with valid
        ticket. Therefore, having asserted that the
        deceased died in an untoward incident and he was
        having a valid ticket at the time of his death, the
        initial burden lies on the applicants to establish the
        same. The initial burden of the applicants never
        shifts unless the respondent admits the assertions
        made by the applicants. Such evidence is lacking in
        this case. Except the oral assertion of A.W.1, no
        evidence is forthcoming on behalf of the applicants.
        The court may presume that the evidence which
        could be, and is not produced, would, if produced,
        be unfavourable to the person who withholds it. The
        best evidence rule, which governs the production of
        evidence in courts, requires that the best evidence
        of which the case in its nature is susceptible should
        always be produced.
Section 114(g)
of the Indian
        Evidence Act, 1872 enables the court to draw an
        adverse presumption against a person who can
        make available to the court, but obstructs the
        availability of such an evidence. The Claims
        Tribunal, upon considering the material on record,
        rightly dismissed the claim of the applicants and
        there are no grounds in this appeal to interfere with
        the order of the Tribunal.”
26
17.3          In Kamrunnissa (supra), from the circumstances

appearing in that case it was held that there was no evidence that

the deceased had purchased the ticket. In the given fact situation

of that case, this Court inferred that it was not a case of ‘untoward

incident’ but a case of run over. It was observed :
“7. The aforestated report also reveals, that the
        body of the deceased had been cut into two pieces,
        and was lying next to the railway track. The report
        further indicates, that the intestine of the deceased
        had come out of the body. The above factual
        position reveals, that the body was cut into two
        pieces from the stomach. This can be inferred from
        the facts expressed in the inquest report, that the
        intestines of the deceased had come out of the
        body. It is not possible for us to accept, that such an
        accident could have taken place while boarding a
        train.
8. In addition to the factual position emerging out of
        a perusal of paragraphs 7 & 8 extracted
        hereinabove, the report also reveals, that besides a
        pocket diary having been found from the person of
        the deceased a few telephone numbers were also
        found, but importantly, the deceased was not in
        possession of any other article. This further clears
        the position adopted by the railway authorities,
        namely, that the deceased Gafoor Sab, was not in
        possession of a ticket, for boarding the train at the
        Devangere railway station.”




17.4     We thus hold that mere presence of a body on the Railway

premises will not be conclusive to hold that injured or deceased
27
was a bona fide passenger for which claim for compensation could

be maintained. However, mere absence of ticket with such injured

or deceased will not negative the claim that he was a bona fide

passenger.   Initial burden will be on the claimant which can be

discharged by filing an affidavit of the relevant facts and burden will

then shift on the Railways and the issue can be decided on the facts

shown or the attending circumstances. This will have to be dealt

with from case to case on the basis of facts found.         The legal

position in this regard will stand explained accordingly.
Re: (iv) Rate of Interest
18. As already observed, though this Court in
Thazhathe Purayil

Sarabi
(supra) held that rate of interest has to be at the rate of 6%

from the date of application till the date of the award and 9%

thereafter and 9% rate of interest was awarded from the date of

application in Mohamadi (supra), rate of interest has to be

reasonable rate at par with accident claim cases.      We are of the

view that in absence of any specific statutory provision, interest can

be awarded from the date of accident itself when the liability of the

Railways arises upto the date of payment, without any difference in

the stages. Legal position in this regard is at par with the cases of
28
accident claims under the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
.   Conflicting

views stand resolved in this manner.
The appeal will stand disposed of accordingly.
…………………………………..J.
                                         [ ADARSH KUMAR GOEL ]



                                       …………………………………..J.
                                       [ ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN ]

NEW DELHI;
MAY 09, 2018.
29