[Cites
8
, Cited by
18
]
Supreme Court of India
United Air Travel Services Through Its ... vs Union Of India Ministry Of External ... on 7 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2264, 2018 (8) SCC 141, (2019) 3 MAH LJ 26, (2019) 2 MPLJ 280, (2018) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 177, (2018) 7 SCALE 1, (2018) 4 CAL HN 42, 2018 (131) ALR SOC 67 (SC)
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
J. Chelameswar
REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.631 OF 2016


                         UNITED AIR TRAVEL SERVICES
                         Through ITS PROPRIETOR
                         A.D.M. ANWAR KHAN                           ….PETITIONER

                                                   Versus

                         UNION OF INDIA
                         Through SECRETARY
                         (MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS)             ….RESPONDENT


                                                   WITH


                                    Writ Petition (Civil) No.636 of /2016

                                    Writ Petition (Civil) No. 634 of 2016

                                    Writ Petition (Civil) No. 934 of 2016

                                    Writ Petition (Civil) No. 941 of 2016

                                    Writ Petition (Civil) No. 938 of 2016

                                    Writ Petition (Civil) No. 11 of 2017

                                    Writ Petition (Civil) No. 94 of 2017

Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
DEEPAK MANSUKHANI
Date: 2018.05.07
16:03:39 IST
Reason:




                                                                                    1
                              JUDGMENT


SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1.    A batch of writ petitions raises the issue of Private Tour

Operators (for short ‘PTOs’) who are, inter alia conducting the travel

business for Hajj and Umrah being disqualified for grant of

registration for the year 2016 for the Hajj pilgrimage. The prayer is for

quashing the identical communications dated 27.7.2016 issued by the

respondent rejecting the application of the petitioners for registration

and allocation of quota for the Hajj 2016 on the ground that they have

not complied with certain clauses of the policy for the PTOs as laid

down by this Court.
2.    The issue relating to the Hajj policy and the registration of these

PTOs has resulted in two judicial pronouncements by this Court in
Union of India v. Rafique Shaikh Bhikan1
and
Al Ismail Haj Tour v.

Union of India2
.
The policy presented on behalf of the Government

was approved by this Court with slight modifications and was annexed

as Appendix-I to the order in
Union of India v. Rafique Shaikh
1(
2013) 4 SCC 699
2(2016) 15 SCC 246
2
Bhikan3
case referred to aforesaid to be called as ‘Policy for Private

Tour Operators for hajj 2013 – 2017’. The policy was to remain valid

for a period of five years and was not to be questioned in any court or

authority. The petitioners were all eligible to be qualified as PTOs for

the year 2015 for Hajj pilgrimage but in the process of draw of lots

dated 7.8.2015, luck did not favour them and they thus did not get

quota. The relevant extract of the policy is as under:
“Appendix I

                        Ministry of External Affairs

                           (Gulf and Haj Division)

                                      ***

           Registration of Private Tour Operators — Haj 2013

      The Government of Saudi Arabia has notified that Private Tour
      Operators (PTOs) registered with the Government of India and
      involved in the preparation of the Haj Pilgrimage will be eligible
      for grant of Haj group visas subject to fulfilment of other terms
      and conditions as
laid down by
the Saudi Authorities.
2. Applications are invited from eligible PTOs for registration
      for Haj 2013. The eligibility criteria are at Annexures A and B.
      The applications must be submitted in the prescribed format
      (Annexure C) directly to MEA or any other agency appointed by
      it.
3(supra)
3
3. It is to be noted that the Government of Saudi Arabia has
stipulated that effective Haj 2013, a PTO should facilitate at
least 150 pilgrims. Accordingly, the PTO Policy has been
reframed. For registration and allotment of quota of Haj seats for
Haj 2013, interested PTOs may apply under the following two
categories:
Category I     PTOs registered with MEA and facilitated Hajis
               at least for 7 Haj operations or more.
Category II    PTOs registered with MEA and facilitated Hajis
               for at least for 1 to 6 Haj operations and PTOs
               which have facilitated at least 50 umrah pilgrims
               in a year for any five years.
4. 70% of the overall quota of seats will be allocated to eligible
PTOs under Category 3(I) and 30% to eligible PTOs under
Category 3(II). Distribution of seats among qualified PTOs will
be done as follows:
(a) 70% of the Haj 2013 PTO seats (31,500) will be allocated to
eligible PTOs under Category 3(I) at the rate of 150 seats per
PTO. In case the number of PTOs exceeds 210, the allocation of
seats will be done on draw of lots. If the number of qualified
PTOs is less than 210, each PTO will be allocated 150 seats and
surplus seats, if any, will be distributed equally among them.
(b) 30% of Haj 2013 PTO seats (9000) will be allocated to
eligible PTOs under Category 3(II) at the rate of 150 seats per
qualified PTO. If the number of qualified PTOs exceeds 90, the
allocation of seats will be done by draw of lots. In case the
number of PTOs is less than 90, each PTO will be allocated 150
seats. Balance seats, if any, will be transferred to Category I and
distributed equally among them. A qualified PTO which fails to
get selected under the draw of lots in any year will be allocated
150 seats in the ensuing year without qurrah if it remains a
qualified PTO.
4
5. This Policy is expected to remain valid for five years 2013-
      2017 unless there are substantive developments which affect it.
      The allocation of seats to qualified PTOs in each category will
      be done every year on the basis of the overall quota of PTO seats
      specified in the Annual India-Saudi Arabia Haj Agreement and
      the number of qualified PTOs remaining in each category. The
      policy envisages cross-category upward movement of PTOs
      from Category II to Category I. A qualified PTO shall remain
      qualified unless it is otherwise disqualified either by the
      Government of India or by the Government of Saudi Arabia for
      valid reasons. It is to be noted that the PTOs who do not wish to
      take a minimum of 150 Hajis or are unable to do so, need not
      apply.
6. Last date for receipt of applications which should be
      addressed to the MEA or any other agency appointed by it.
(emphasis supplied)
3.    In terms of the aforesaid policy since the qualified PTOs

exceeded 90, a draw of lots was held. Further, since the petitioners

were not successful in the draw of lots, they were entitled, under clause

4(b) of the policy aforesaid, to be allocated 150 seats in the ensuing

year without Qurrah if they remain qualified as PTOs. We may note at

this stage that as per the submissions advanced, in view of certain

changes in the policy of the Saudi Government, the number of seats to

be allocated for 2016 would have been 50.
4.    It is also apparent from the Press Release of 7.8.2015 giving the
5
list of PTOs who have qualified but did not get quota, that the

petitioners figured in the said list.
5.       On 29.4.2016, the Ministry of External Affairs published the

norms for registration of PTOs for Hajj 2016. Para 3 of this reads as

under:
“3. All the terms and conditions
laid down in
Annexure A & B
         will also apply on PTOs that qualify under Category-II by virtue
         of facilitating a minimum of 50 Umrah pilgrims in a year for any
         5 years, but with the exception of the terms and conditions
         contained under Clause (vii), (x), (xi) and (xii) of Annexure A.
         In addition, these PTOs are also required to submit the proof of
         payment made through banking or any other authorised channels
         towards purchase of tickets and hiring of accommodation in
         Makkah and Madinah in respect of Umrah pilgrims facilitated
         by them in support of their claim.”
6.       The aforesaid, thus, provided that persons like the petitioners

who had qualified for the year 2015 but were not successful in the

draw of lots would have the benefit of exemption of terms and

conditions contained in clauses (vii), (x), (xi) and (xii) of Annexure A.
7.       For purposes of completion of record, we enumerate

hereinbelow the said clauses of Annexure A:
“ANNEXURE-A
                  Terms and Conditions for Registration of
                 Private Tour Operators (PTOs) for Haj-2016
6
Each PTO should establish that it is a genuine and established
      Tour Operator having experience in sending tourists/pilgrims
      abroad for which it should produce the following documents:
Sl. No.                      Terms and Conditions
      vii          Proof of payment made through banking (Bank
Statement) or other authorized channels towards
                   purchase of tickets and hiring of accommodation in
                   Makkah/Madinah for the financial year 2013-14
                   (Haj2013) or 2014-15 (Haj 2014). Payments towards
                   purchase of tickets, hiring of accommodation for
                   pilgrims in Makkah/Madinah, by any other means,
                   would not be accepted.
x            Copies of Registration Certificate issued to the PTO
                   in support their aim-wise and PTO-wise.
xi           Contract for hiring of buildings for pilgrims and
                   “Tasreeh” together with English translations PTO
                   category wise. (Please enclose rental receipts and a
                   copy of lease deed, duly signed with the Saudi owners
                   for Haj.
xii          Copy of Munazzim Card and relevant Haj visa pages
                   of the Passport of the Proprietor/Owner.
8.    The petitioners, however, faced identical rejection letters of

26.7.2016 (sent through e-mail dated 27.7.2016), the contents of which

are as under:
“Subject: Intimation regarding non-allocation of quota to Private
       Tour Operators (PTOs) for Haj-2016.
Dear Sirs,

      This has reference to your application regarding registration for
      Haj 2016.
7
2. On scrutiny of your application submitted for Haj-2016, your
      firm has not been found eligible for registration and allocation of
      quota for Haj 2016 on the following grounds:
PTO has not complied with clause vii, x, xi and xii of Annexure
      A of PTO.
Policy as
laid down by
Hon’ble Supreme Court for any one of
      the Haj year.
3. Your ineligibility for registration and allocation of quota for
      Haj 2016, however, does not prejudice your right to debar you
      from applying for registration for Haj 2017 on the basis of the
      required conditions for Haj 2017.”
9.    A bare perusal of the aforesaid letter would show that the reason

cited for disqualification was non-compliance of the very clauses of

which exemption had been granted to the petitioners.
10.   Learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the

respondents could not dispute the aforesaid position but sought to

canvas that the reasons were wrongly communicated in the rejection

letter, and there was actually, some other reason for the rejection. The

aforesaid plea can hardly be countenanced in view of the reasons

referred to and communicated.
11.   Learned counsel for the petitioner has, thus, rightly drawn our

attention to the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in
8
Mohinder Singh Gill v. Anr.
v. The Chief Election Commissioner,

New Delhi & Ors.4 to submit that such a plea cannot be accepted. We

may note that this is a well settled legal position in many judicial

pronouncements of this Court, but it is not necessary to revert to the

same. In para 8 of the aforesaid judgment, V.R. Krishna Iyer, J, in his

inimitable style states as under:
“8. The second equally relevant matter is that when a statutory
      functionary makes an order based on certain grounds, its validity
      must be judged by the reasons so mentioned and cannot be
      supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or
      otherwise. Otherwise, an order bad in the beginning may, by the
      time it comes to Court on account of a challenge, get validated
      by additional grounds later brought out. We may here draw
      attention to the observations of Bose, J. in Gordhandas Bhanji:
“Public orders, publicly made, in exercise of a statutory
             authority cannot be construed in the light of explanations
             subsequently given by the officer making the order of
             what he meant, or of what was in his mind, or what he
             intended to do. Public orders made by public authorities
             are meant to have public effect and are intended to affect
             the actings and conduct of those to whom they are
             addressed and must be construed objectively with
             reference to the language used in the order itself.
             Orders are not like old wine becoming better as they grow
             older.”
12.   The aforesaid legal position, thus, makes the stand of the

4(1978) 1 SCC 405
9
respondent unsustainable, resulting in the quashing of the impugned

letters of rejection.
13.    The question, however, rises what relief can be granted in such a

situation. The passage of time has made certain reliefs infructuous.
The time period for conducting Hajj tours for 2016 as well as 2017 is

over. Thus, even the alternative relief prayed for 2017 has become

infructuous. In three of the writ petitions, i.e., WP (C) Nos.631/2016;

634/2016 & 636/2016, there is a specific alternative plea for

compensation to the petitioners for the loss accrued due to non-grant of

registration for the Hajj of 2016. While there is no such specific plea

in the other writ petitions, given the identical situation, we are of the

view that the same principle ought to be applied in all these cases. The

petitioners cannot be left remediless.     The mindless action of the

respondents in rejecting the eligibility of the petitioners for the year

2016 on the very grounds on which they were exempted necessitates

that the petitioners should be entitled to damages in public law so that

they are compensated, at least, to some extent for not having been able

to carry on with their business on account of illegal action of the

respondents.
10
14.   The principles of damages in public law have to, however,

satisfy certain tests.
In
Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa
5, it was

observed that public law proceedings serve a different purpose than

private law proceedings. In that context, it was observed as under:
“The purpose of public law is not only to civilize public power
      but also to assure the citizen that they live under a legal system
      which aims to protect their interests and preserve their rights.
      Therefore, when the court molds the relief by granting
      ‘compensation’ in proceedings under
Articles 32
or 226 of the
      Constitution seeking enforcement or protection of fundamental
      rights, it does so under the public law by way of penalising the
      wrongdoer and fixing the liability for the public wrong on the
      State which has failed in its public duty to protect the
      fundamental rights of the citizen. The payment of compensation
      in such cases is not to be understood, as it is generally
      understood in a civil action for damages under the private law
      but in the broader sense of providing relief by an order of
      making ‘monetary amends’ under the public law for the wrong
      done due to breach of public duty, of not protecting the
      fundamental rights of the citizen. The compensation is in the
      nature of ‘exemplary damages’ awarded against the wrong doer
      for the breach of its public law duty and is independent of the
      rights available to the aggrieved party to claim compensation
      under the private law in an action based on tort, through a suit
      instituted in a court of competent jurisdiction or/and prosecute
      the offender under the penal law.”


      It was also emphasized that it is a sound policy to punish the

wrongdoer and it is in that spirit that the courts have molded the relief

5 (1993) 2 SCC 746
11
by granting compensation in exercise of writ jurisdiction.            The

objective is to ensure that public bodies or officials do not act

unlawfully. Since the issue is one of enforcement of public duties, the

remedy would be available under public law notwithstanding that

damages are claimed in those proceedings.
15.   The aforesaid aspect was, once again, emphasized in Common

Cause, a
Registered Society v. Union of India
6.
We may also usefully

refer to
N. Nagendra Rao & Co. v. State of A.P.
7 qua the proposition

that the determination of vicarious liability of the State being linked

with the negligence of its officer is nothing new if they can be sued

personally for which there is no dearth of authority.
16.   In the facts of the present case, the arbitrariness and illegality of

the action of the authority is writ large. The petitioners have been

deprived of their right to secure the quota on a patently wrongful order

passed for reasons, which did not apply to them and for conditions,

which had been specifically exempted.         What could be a greater

arbitrariness and illegality? Where there is such patent arbitrariness

and illegality, there is consequent violation of the principles enshrined
6 (1999) 6 SCC 667
7 (1994) 6 SCC 205
12
under
Article 14
of the Constitution of India. The facts of the present

case are, thus, undoubtedly giving rise to the satisfaction of parameters

as a fit case for grant of compensation.
17.   On a conspectus of the aforesaid facts including the number of

pilgrims for whom the petitioners would have been entitled to arrange

the Hajj pilgrimage, an amount of Rs.5 lakh per petitioner would be

adequate compensation for the loss suffered by them and sub-serve the

ends of justice.    We are conscious of the fact that there is no

quantification based on actual loss, but then the award by us is in the

nature of damages in public law.
18.   The amount for each of the petitioners be remitted by the

respondents within two months from the date of this order failing

which the amount would carry interest @ 15 per cent per annum apart

from any other remedy available to the petitioners. It will be open to

the respondents to recover the amount of damages and costs from the

delinquent officers responsible for passing such unsustainable orders.
13
19.   The writ petitions are allowed in the aforesaid terms with costs

quantified at Rs.10,000 per petition.
..….….…………………….J.
                                                 [J. Chelameswar]




                                        ...……………………………J.
                                             [Sanjay Kishan Kaul]
New Delhi.
May 07, 2018.
14