[Cites
4
, Cited by
205
]
Supreme Court of India
Richal vs Rajasthan Public Service Commission on 3 May, 2018
Author:
Ashok Bhushan
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 4695­4699 OF 2018
                         (Arising out of SLP (C) No(s). 14306­14310/2017) 

          RICHAL & ORS. ETC.ETC.                              … APPELLANT(S)

                                              VERSUS

          RAJASTHAN PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION                 … RESPONDENT(S)
          & ORS. ETC. ETC.

                                              WITH 

          Civil   Appeal   Nos.   4722­4725   of   2018   (arising   out   of
          SLP(C) Nos. 19151­19154/2017)
          Civil Appeal No. 4702 of 2018 (arising out of SLP(C) No.
          14481/2017); 
          Civil   Appeal   Nos.   4700­4701   of   2018   (arising   out   of
          SLP(C) Nos. 14356­14357/2017);
          Civil   Appeal   Nos.   4711­4712   of   2018   (arising   out   of
          SLP(C) Nos. 14593­14594/2017); 
          Civil   Appeal   Nos.   4707­4710   of   2018   (arising   out   of
          SLP(C) Nos. 14581­14584/2017); 
          Civil Appeal No. 4703­4706 of 2018 (arising out of SLP(C)
          No. 14522­14525/2017); 
          Civil Appeal No. 4726 of 2018 (arising out of SLP(C) No.
          19157/2017); 
          Civil   Appeal   Nos.   4713­4720   of   2018   (arising   out   of
          SLP(C) Nos. 14947­14954/2017)
          Civil Appeal No. 4721 of 2018 (arising out of SLP(C) No.
          18982/2017) 
          Civil Appeal No. 4727 of 2018 (arising out of  SLP(C) No.
          21506/2017) 
          Civil Appeal No. 4730 of 2018 (arising out of SLP(C) No.
          29556/2017) 
Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
          Civil Appeal No. 4728 of 2018 (arising out of SLP(C) No.
NIDHI AHUJA
Date: 2018.05.03
16:22:48 IST
Reason:
          24264/2017)
                                                                   2

Civil Appeal No. 4729 of 2018 (arising out of SLP(C) No.
28724/2017)
Civil Appeal No. 4731 of 2018 (arising out of SLP(C) No.
32467/2017)
C.A.No.4754   of   2018   (arising   out   of   SLP(C)No.11674/2018
(Diary No(s). 9579)2018 




                         J U D G M E N T


ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
Delay Condoned. Leave granted.
2.   This   batch   of   appeals   questions   the   judgment

delivered by Special Appeal Benches of the Rajasthan High

Court.   The   Special   Appellate   judgment   of   Rajasthan   High

Court dated 08.03.2017 delivered at Jodhpur and Judgment

dated 13.04.2017 delivered at Jaipur Bench, affirming the

judgments   of   learned   Single   Judge   dismissing   the   writ

petitions filed by the appellants are under challenge.
3.   The appellants had appeared in School Lecturer Exam –

2015   conducted   by   Rajasthan   Public   Service   Commission

(hereinafter referred to as “Commission”), in which they
3
could   not   be   declared   successful.     Brief   facts   giving

rise to these appeals are:­
(i) The   Rajasthan   Public   Service   Commission

     vide   its   advertisement   dated   16.10.2015   advertised

     13,000 posts of School Lecturers for various subjects

     under   Secondary   Education   Department,   Government   of

     Rajasthan.  The examination consisted of two papers –

     Paper­I – General Awareness and General Studies, and

     Paper­II of respective subjects.  The examination was

     conducted on 17.07.2016.  On 12.08.2016, answer keys

     were   published   inviting   objections   regarding   the

     answer   key.     Many   candidates   submitted   objections

     with   regard   to   different   subjects,   with   regard   to

     Paper­I   as   well   as   Paper­II.     On   22.09.2016,   the

     Commission declared the result, against which several

     writ petitions were filed questioning various answers

     as   per  final  answer  key.    The  learned  Single  Judge

     vide its judgment and order dated 08.11.2016 in Writ

     Petition No. 15028/2016   ­  Arvind Kumar & Ors. Vs.

     RPSC   &   Ors.  disposed   of   the   writ   petition   with

     various   directions.   One   of   the   directions   was   to
4
upload   the   revised   answer   key   along   with   report   of

Experts on the website within one week.  In pursuance

of   directions   of   learned   Single   Judge   dated

08.11.2016,   final   answer   key   was   published   on

18.11.2016 and 18 questions in Paper­I were deleted.

Second   round   of   litigations   was   started   by   filing

various   Writ   Petitions   by   the   candidates   raising

various   objections   to   the   answer   key.     The   learned

Single   Judge   vide   its   judgment   dated   08.02.2017   at

Jodhpur dismissed the bunch of writ petitions after

considering   the   objections   raised   by   several   writ

petitioners.     Learned   Single   Judge   accepted   the

Expert Committee's report on various answers.
(ii)   Against   the   judgment   dated   08.02.2017,   writ

appeals were filed by various candidates at Jodhpur.

The Division Bench vide its judgment dated 08.03.2017

dismissed the writ appeals confirming the judgment of

learned   Single   Judge.     While   dismissing   the   writ

appeals,   various   directions   were   issued   by   the

Division   Bench   to   the   Commission   with   regard   to

preparation and publication of answer key and action
5
to be taken against those who are entrusted with the

preparation   of   key   answers.     At   Jaipur   also,   writ

petitions were dismissed, against which writ appeals

were   filed   and   vide   judgment   dated   13.04.2017,

following the judgment dated 08.03.2017 delivered at

Jodhpur,   the   Division   Bench   also   dismissed   the

different writ appeals.
(iii)   Following   judgment   dated   08.03.2017,   the

Division Bench both at Jodhpur and Jaipur dismissed

several other writ appeals.   Before us, the appeals

filed   against   the   judgment   dated   08.03.2017   and

judgment dated 13.04.2017 and various other judgments

following   earlier   judgments   have   been   filed.   The

judgment dated 08.03.2017 delivered at Jodhpur Bench

is the main judgment which has been followed by the

High   Court   in   several   judgments   for   deciding   this

batch of appeals.  It shall be sufficient to refer to

and   consider   the   Division   Bench   judgment   dated

08.03.2017   giving   rise   to   the   Civil   Appeal   arising

out of SLP (C) Nos. 14306­14310 of 2017 –  Richal &

ors.   etc.etc.   Vs.   Rajasthan   Public   Service
6
Commission & ors. etc. etc.  for deciding this batch

     of appeals.
4.   In   this   batch   of   appeals,   various   applications   for

impleadment and intervention  have  been  filed.    We  allow

all   the   impleadment   and   intervention   applications.   This

Court  after hearing the matter  on  16.01.2018  passed the

following order:­

           “The   Rajasthan   Public   Service   Commission
     (RPSC) had issued an advertisement for filling
     up   of   more   than   13,000   posts   of   school
     lecturers   in   the   State   of   Rajasthan.   The
     written   test   was   conducted   pursuant   thereto.
     The   key   to   the   answers   was   also   published.
     Some   of   the   candidates   questioned   that   the
     aforesaid key does not give correct answers to
     some of the questions. It was mentioned that
     few questions were not even correctly framed.
     On   that   basis,   a   writ   petition   was   filed   in
     the   High   Court.   Learned   Single   Judge   after
     going   into   the   said   grievances   of   those
     candidates gave a direction 4 for constituting
     the Expert Committee to examine as to whether
     the key to the answers is correct. The Expert
     Committee   gave   its   report   recommending
     deletion   of   18   questions   which   according   to
     the Expert Committee were not correctly framed
     and, therefore, needed to be deleted. It also
     corrected the answers to some other questions.
This led to second round of litigation as
     the   petitioners   herein   (who   were   the   writ
     petitioners in the High Court) submitted that
     even   the   aforesaid   report   of   the   Expert
     Committee   was   not   correct.   It   was   submitted
7
that   13   questions   were   wrongly   deleted.   In
     support of this, the petitioners refer to the
     text   books   of   the   NCRT   as   per   which   those
     questions were rightly framed and there was no
     question to delete them. It was also submitted
     that five questions were still wrongly framed,
     which needed to be deleted or correct answers
     as   suggested   by   the   Expert   Committee   be
     corrected.  The  High Court  has  dismissed this
     writ petition. It has inter alia observed that
     the   matter   be   given   quietus   inasmuch   as   it
     would be in the public interest not to delay
     the   appointment   of   13,000   teachers   in   the
     State of Rajasthan.
We are informed that after declaration of
     the result, successful candidates have already
     been given appointment. It is pointed out by
     the learned counsel for the petitioners that
     many   posts   are   still   lying   vacant.   They
     further submit that they have no objection if
     the   candidates   who   have   already   been
     appointed, their appointment is not disturbed
     and at the same time the grievances as pointed
     out by the petitioners be looked into by the
     Expert   Committee   again   and   if   it   finds
     justification   in   the   claim   of   the   5
     petitioners, fully or partially, only cases of
     other  candidates  who  have  not  been  appointed
     be re­examined on the basis of the report that
     would   be   given   by   the   Expert   Committee's
     recommendations on these aspects. The learned
     counsel   for   RPSC   wants   some   time   to   take
     instructions in this behalf.
List the matters on 06.02.2018.”
5.   In pursuance of our directions dated 16.01.2018, an

Expert   Committee   was   appointed   to   re­examine   the

grievances of writ petitioners/appellants.   An affidavit
8
dated 14.04.2018 sworned by Ramdev Siroya has been filed

by the Commission.  It is stated in the affidavit that on

the   basis   of   reports   of   Experts,   overall   22   answers   in

all   the   nine   subjects   for   which   these   Experts   were

appointed   has   been   re­examined   and   the   answers   were

revised.  It shall be useful to extract Paragraphs 5 and

6 of the affidavit, which is to the following effect:­

           "5. On the basis of reports of Experts,
           overall   22   answers   in   all   the   nine
           subjects   for   which   these   experts   were
           appointed   to   re­examine   claims   of
           petitioners, were reported to be revised.
6.    In the subjects of General Knowledge
           (Paper­I) answers to five questions were
           required   to   be   revised;   in   Paper­II
           (subject)   in   commerce   answers   of   three
           questions   were   required   to   be   revised;
           three questions in subject Geography, Two
           Questions   in   subject   Hindi   (Teaching
           method); in subject History one question;
           in   subject   Political   Science   four
           question; and in subject Rajasthani three
           questions were reported to be revised. A
           chart   showing   question   numbers   subject,
           answer in final key and new Expert Report
           is   being   filed   herewith   and   marked   as
           ANNEXURE   A­1   (Pages   5)  True   and   correct
           copies   of   reports   of   Experts   in   nine
           subjects   is   being   filed   herewith   and
           marked as  ANNEXURE A­2 (Pages 6­46).   It
           is stated that identity of Experts is not
           being   disclosed.     That   on   the   basis   of
           reports   of   the   experts   the   result   of
           candidates   who   have   not   been   appointed
9
was   revised   by   the   Rajasthan   Public
           Service Commission.”
6.   In the affidavit, it has also been stated that out of

total number of posts in all the subjects, 729 candidates

who were offered appointment did not join.   Further, 316

candidates   who   were   although   selected   but   their

candidature   were   rejected.     Thus   in   all   1045   posts

remained  vacant.   A detailed  chart  subject  wise showing

all the details of posts advertised, candidates selected

and   recommended   and   appointments,   number   of   candidates

who did join and such candidates whose candidatures were

rejected   etc.   has   also   been   annexed   alongwith   the

affidavit.   It has been further stated in the affidavit

that   in   the   present   batch   of   appeals,   there   are   in   all

311   candidates.     It   is   stated   in   the   revised   results

prepared after Report by Experts Committee 48 petitioners

from all the Special Leave Petitions are found to be in

merit for selection, which candidates are spread over in

nine subjects.
7.  A   reply   affidavit   to   the   affidavit   filed   by

Commission dated 14.04.2018 has also been filed in Civil
10
Appeal of Richal & Ors.   In the reply affidavit, it has

been   stated   that   the   Commission   has   not   disclosed   the

actual   marks   secured   by   the   last   selected   candidate   in

terms of the first selection in various categories.    It

was stated that the Commission is required to prepare a

Revised   Notional   Select   List   of   candidates   presently

selected  in light  of  the  revision  undertaken  by Experts

based   on   actual   marks   secured   by   the   last   selected

candidates   in   various   categories.     The   appellants   have

also  brought  on record  the  copy of  representation  dated

23.01.2018   submitted   by   them   after   the   order   of   this

Court dated 16.01.2018.
8.   We have heard the learned counsel for the appellants

at   length   as   well   as   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the

Commission,   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the   State   of

Rajasthan   and   learned   counsel   seeking   impleadment   and

intervention.
9.   Learned   counsel   for   the   appellants   submits   that

although substantial grievances raised by the appellants

in these appeals stand satisfied by the Expert Committee
11
Report,   which   was   appointed   in   pursuance   of   direction,

there are still few grievances after revision carried out

by the Experts.   It is submitted that in revision also,

certain   mistakes   have   not   been   corrected.     Learned

counsel for the appellants in support of their submission

has   referred   to   few   questions   of   Paper­I   including

question No. 58 and certain other questions.
10. One of the submissions raised by the learned counsel

for   the   appellants   is   that   the   marks   of   18   questions

which were deleted from paper No.1 were redistributed in

the rest of the questions whereas the marks should have

been   allocated   to   only   those   candidates   who   have

attempted such questions. Those candidates, who even did

not   attempt   those   questions,   were   allocated   the   marks

which   was   not   in   accordance   with   law.   The   marks   should

have   been   allocated   only   to   those   candidates   who

attempted   deleted   questions,   in   alternative,   it   is

submitted   that   full   marks   with   regard   to   18   deleted

questions ought to have been given to all the candidates.
11. Learned   counsel   for   the   Commission   refuting   the

submissions   of   the   appellants   submitted   that   almost   all
12
the   grievances   having   been   taken   care   of   by   the   Expert

Committee   and   the   result   of   non­selected   candidates

having been revised, nothing more needs to be considered

in   these   appeals.   It   is   submitted   that   Experts   having

revised   the   key   answers   and   having   now   submitted   a

Report, which  has  been  accepted by  the  Commission,  this

Court shall not permit the appellants to re­challenge the

decision of Expert Committee.   It is submitted that out

of all the Special Leave Petitioners, only 48 have been

found selected.
12. We   have   considered   the   submissions   of   the   learned

counsel for the parties and perused the records.
13. The   issue   which   has   been   canvassed   in   this   batch   of

appeals relates to correctness of final   key answers as

uploaded   by   the   Commission   after   considering   objections

thereto.   The   appellants'   case   is   that   the   treatment   of

the objections by the Expert Committee was not based on

authoritative   text   books   on   the   subject   and   several

errors crept into the answer key vitiating the merits of

the candidates affecting the entire selection.
13
14. The issue pertaining to scope of judicial review of

correctness   of   key   answer   had   been   considered   by   this

Court   time   and   again.   This   Court   had   entertained   such

challenges   on   very   limited   ground   and   has   always   given

due   weight   to   the   opinions   of   subject   experts.   A   three

Judge Bench of this Court in  Kanpur University, through

Vice­Chancellor   and   others   vs.   Samir   Gupta   and   others,

1983 (4) SCC 309,  had occasion to consider a case where

challenge   was   made   to   the   key   answers   supplied   by   the

paper­setter   with   regard   to   multiple   choice   of   the

objective   type   test   for   admission   in   medical   courses

through   combined   Pre­Medical   Test.   The   High   Court   while

considering   the   challenge   of   the   candidates   to   various

key   answers   accepted   the   challenge   to   different

questions. With regard to some of the questions the High

Court held that the key answer is not the correct answer.

This   Court   repelling   the   challenge   made   the   following

observations in paragraphs 15 and 16:
“15.  The findings of the High Court
           raise   a   question   of   great   importance   to
           the   student   community.   Normally,   one
           would be inclined to the view, especially
           if   one   has   been   a   paper­setter   and   an
           examiner,   that   the   key   answer   furnished
14
by   the   paper­setter   and   accepted   by   the
University   as   correct,   should   not   be
allowed   to   be   challenged.   One   way   of
achieving   it   is   not   to   publish   the   key
answer at all. If the University had not
published   the   key   answer   along   with   the
result        of   the   Test,   no   controversy
would have arisen in this case. But that
is not a correct way of looking at these
matters   which   involve   the   future   of
hundreds   of   students   who   are   aspirants
for admission to professional courses. If
the  key  answer   were  kept  secret  in   this
case,   the   remedy   would   have   been   worse
than   the   disease   because,   so   many
students   would   have   had   to   suffer   the
injustice in silence. The publication of
the key answer has unravelled an unhappy
state of affairs to which the University
and   the   State   Government   must   find   a
solution.   Their   sense   of   fairness   in
publishing the key answer has given them
an   opportunity  to  have  a  closer  look  at
the   system   of   examinations   which   they
conduct.   What   has   failed   is   not   the
computer but the human system.
16.Shri   Kacker,   who   appears   on
behalf of the University, contended that
no challenge should be allowed to be made
to   the   correctness   of   a   key   answer
unless, on the face of it, it is wrong.
We   agree   that   the   key   answer   should   be
assumed to be correct unless it is proved
to   be   wrong   and   that   it   should   not   be
held   to   be   wrong   by   an   inferential
process  of  reasoning  or  by   a  process  of
rationalisation.   It   must   be   clearly
demonstrated to be wrong, that is to say,
it must be such as no reasonable body of
men well­versed in the particular subject
would   regard   as   correct.   The   contention
of   the   University   is   falsified   in   this
15
case   by   a   large   number   of   acknowledged
          textbooks,   which   are   commonly   read   by
          students in U.P. Those textbooks leave no
          room  for   doubt   that  the  answer  given  by
          the   students   is   correct   and   the   key
          answer is incorrect.”
12. Following   the   above   judgment   in  Kanpur   University

(supra)  this   Court   in
Manish   Ujwal   and   others   vs.

Maharishi   Dayanand   Saraswati   University   and   others
,

2005(13)   SCC   744,  reiterated   the   principle   in   following

words in paragraphs 9 and 10:
“9.
In
Kanpur   University  v.  Samir
        Gupta
considering a similar problem, this
        Court   held   that   there   is   an   assumption
        about   the   key   answers   being   correct   and
        in   case   of   doubt,   the   Court   would
        unquestionably prefer the key answers. It
        is   for   this   reason   that   we   have   not
        referred to those key answers in respect
        whereof there is a doubt as a result of
        difference   of   opinion   between   the
        experts.   Regarding   the   key   answers   in
        respect whereof the matter is beyond the
        realm of doubt, this Court has held that
        it   would   be   unfair   to   penalise   the
        students   for   not   giving   an   answer   which
        accords   with   the   key   answer,   that  is   to
        say, with an answer which is demonstrated
        to   be   wrong.   There   is   no   dispute   about
        the   aforesaid   six   key   answers   being
        demonstrably   wrong   and   this   fact   has
        rightly   not   been   questioned   by   the
        learned   counsel   for   the   University.   In
        this   view,   students   cannot   be   made   to
16
suffer   for   the   fault   and   negligence   of
the University.
10.  The   High   Court   has   committed   a
serious   illegality   in   coming   to   the
conclusion   that   “it   cannot   be   said   with
certainty   that   answers   to   the   six
questions   given   in   the   key   answers   were
erroneous   and   incorrect”.   As   already
noticed, the key answers are palpably and
demonstrably   erroneous.   In   that   view   of
the   matter,   the   student   community,
whether the appellants or intervenors or
even those who did not approach the High
Court   or   this   Court,   cannot   be   made   to
suffer on account of errors committed by
the   University.   For   the   present,   we   say
no   more   because   there   is   nothing   on
record as to how this error crept up in
giving the erroneous key answers and who
was negligent. At the same time, however,
it   is   necessary   to   note   that   the
University and those who prepare the key
answers   have   to   be   very   careful   and
abundant   caution   is   necessary   in   these
matters   for   more   than   one   reason.   We
mention few of those; first and paramount
reason   being   the   welfare   of   the   student
as a wrong key answer can result in the
merit being made a casualty. One can well
understand   the   predicament   of   a   young
student   at   the   threshold   of   his   or   her
career if despite giving correct answer,
the student suffers as a result of wrong
and   demonstrably   erroneous   key   answers;
the second reason is that the courts are
slow   in   interfering   in   educational
matters   which,   in   turn,   casts   a   higher
responsibility   on   the   University   while
preparing   the   key   answers;   and   thirdly,
in   cases   of   doubt,   the   benefit   goes   in
favour   of   the   University   and   not   in
17
favour of the students. If this attitude
         of   casual   approach   in   providing   key
         answers   is   adopted   by   the   persons
         concerned,   directions   may   have   to   be
         issued   for   taking   appropriate   action,
         including   disciplinary   action,   against
         those   responsible   for   wrong   and
         demonstrably   erroneous   key   answers,   but
         we   refrain   from   issuing   such   directions
         in the present case.”
13. To   the   same   effect,   this   Court   in    Guru   Nank   Dev

University vs. Saumil Garg and others, 2005(13) SCC 749,

had directed the University to revaluate the answers of 8

questions with reference to key answers provided by CBSE.

This   Court   also   disapproved   the   course   adopted   by   the

University which has given the marks to all the students

who had participated in the entrance test irrespective of

whether someone had answered questions or not.
14. Another   judgment   which   is   referred   to   is
Rajesh

Kumar and others vs. State of Bihar and others
, 2013 (4)

SCC   690,   where   this   Court   had   occasion   to   consider   the

case   pertaining   to   erroneous   evaluation   using   the   wrong

answer key. The Bihar Staff Selection Commission invited

applications against the posts of Junior Engineer(Civil).

Selection   process   comprised   of   a   written   objective   type
18
examination.   Unsuccessful   candidates   assailed   the

selection.   Single   Judge   of   the   High   Court   referred   the

“model answer key” to experts. Based on the report of the

experts, Single Judge held that 41 model answers out of

100   are   wrong.     The   Single   Judge   held   that   the   entire

examination   was   liable   to   be   cancelled   and   so   also   the

appointments   so   made   on   the   basis   thereof.   The   Letters

Patent  Appeal  was  filed by  certain  candidates  which was

partly allowed by the Division Bench of the High Court.

The   Division   Bench   modified   the   order   passed   by   the

Single   Judge   and   declared   that   the   entire   examination

need   not   be   cancelled.   The   order   of   Division   Bench   was

challenged wherein this Court in paragraph 19 has held:
“19.  The   submissions   made   by   Mr   Rao
         are   not   without   merit.   Given   the   nature
         of the defect in the answer key the most
         natural and logical way of correcting the
         evaluation of the scripts was to correct
         the   key   and   get   the   answer   scripts   re­
         evaluated   on   the   basis   thereof.   There
         was, in the circumstances, no compelling
         reason for directing a fresh examination
         to   be   held   by   the   Commission   especially
         when   there   was   no   allegation   about   any
         malpractice,   fraud   or   corrupt   motives
         that   could   possibly   vitiate   the   earlier
         examination   to   call   for   a   fresh   attempt
         by   all   concerned.   The   process   of   re­
         evaluation   of   the   answer   scripts   with
19
reference   to   the   correct   key   will   in
         addition   be   less   expensive   apart   from
         being quicker. The process would also not
         give   any   unfair   advantage   to   anyone   of
         the candidates on account of the time lag
         between the examination earlier held and
         the one that may have been held pursuant
         to   the   direction   of   the   High   Court.
         Suffice it to say that the re­evaluation
         was and is a better option, in the facts
         and circumstances of the case.”
15. The key answers prepared by the paper­setter or the

examining   body   is   presumed   to   have   been   prepared   after

due   deliberations.   To   err   is   human.   There   are   various

factors   which   may   lead   to   framing   of   the   incorrect   key

answers.   The   publication   of   key   answers   is   a   step   to

achieve   transparency   and   to   give   an   opportunity   to

candidates to assess the correctness of their answers. An

opportunity   to   file   objections   against   the   key   answers

uploaded by examining body is a step to achieve fairness

and perfection in the process. The objections to the key

answers are to be examined by the experts and thereafter

corrective   measures,   if   any,   should   be   taken   by   the

examining   body.   In   the   present   case   we   have   noted   that

after   considering   the   objections   final   key   answers   were

published   by   the   Commission   thereafter   several   writ
20
petitions   were   filed   challenging   the   correctness   of   the

key   answers   adopted   by   the   Commission.   The   High   Court

repelled   the   challenge   accepting   the   views   of   the

experts.   The   candidates   still   unsatisfied,   have   come   up

in this Court by filing these appeals.
16. This Court while hearing the appeals found substance

in   some   of   the   submissions   raised   before   us   and

appellants   having   satisfied   this   Court   that   certain

questions   need   re­examination   by   experts,   this   Court

issued directions on 16.01.2018. As noted above, pursuant

to the directions of this Court the Expert Committee re­

examined   the   questions   with   regard   to   which   objections

were   raised   in   these   appeals.   After   the   order   of   this

Court   dated   16.01.2018   the   Commission   adopted   Expert

Committee   Report   which   re­examined   the   questions   with

regard to which objections were raised before us in these

appeals. An affidavit dated 17.04.2018 has been filed by

the   Commission.   The   affidavit   contains   the   following

statements:
(i)   on   the   basis   of   the   Report   of
        Experts, Answers to 22 Questions across
        9   subjects   were   corrected   and   revised.
21
[p.2­3   pr.6   of   Affidavit   ]   [Chart   has
       been annexed at p.5]
(ii) A perusal of the Revision conducted
       by   Experts   w.r.t.   Questions   in   Paper   I
       (General Awareness & General Studies) as
       per   Chart   [p.5   of   Affidavit]   reveals
       that:
(a)  Experts   accepted  Petitioner’s  
          Representation   and   retained   3
questions (Q Nos. 53, 57,  60) of 18
earlier deleted questions.
(b)  Experts   accepted  Petitioners’  
          Representation   and   corrected   the  
          answer of 1 question  (Q.No.3) in
            the    remaining 57 questions.
(c)  Experts   rejected  Petitioners’  
          Representation seeking       correction
          of answer of 5 questions     (Q. Nos.
25,     28, 33,  49, 58).
(iii)   RPSC   has   stated   that   out   of   the
       total number of Advertised posts(13,098)
       1045   vacancies   in   the   post   of   School
       Lecturers   still   exist.   [p.3   pr.7   of
       Affidavit]  [Chart   has   been   annexed   at
       p.47]
(iv)   RPSC   has   stated   that   48   of   311
       Special   Leave   Petitioners   before   this
       Hon’ble   Court   are   within   merit   for
       selection   as   School   Lecturers   after
       revision   of   their   answer   scripts.[p.3­4
       pr.8 of Affidavit]
17. By   our   order   dated   02.04.2018,   we   have   directed   to

supply   the   Report   of   the   Expert   Committee   to   all   the

parties.   The   copies   of   the   Report   have   been   supplied.
22
During   the   course   of   hearing,   learned   counsel   for   the

appellants   submitted   that   substantial   grievances   raised

in   these   appeals   have   been   redressed   by   the   Expert

Committee.   The   representations   made   by   the   appellants

have been substantially accepted as noted above. However,

learned   counsel   for   the   appellants   have   contended   that

certain answers given  by  the  Expert Committee  are  still

not   correct.   Before   us   certain   questions   have   been

pointed   out   which   according   to   the   appellants   have   not

been   satisfactorily   dealt   with   by   the   Expert   Committee.

It shall suffice to refer to the question No.58 of paper

No.1. Learned counsel for the appellants submit that the

Expert   Committee   has   accepted   option   No.4   as   correct

option   whereas   correct   option   is   option   NO.3.   Learned

counsel for the appellants has to make his point home has

placed before us the following  chart:
Question Option         RPSC  Expert Petitioner  Evidence in support
No.58    Answers        Answer Report Answer
                               (p.15)
Minimum    (1) 35      Option Option Option          1.
The RTE Act
Number     Teaching    4      4      3               specifies that 
of         Plus                                      “Minimum number of 
Working    Preparation                               working hours per 
Hours      Hours                                     week for the 
per week   (2) 40                                    teacher : Forty 
for the    Teaching                                  Five including 
teacher    plus                                      preparation hours”
23
in RTE    preparation
Act,      hours                                       2. RPSC asked same 
2009 is   (3) 45                                      question in School 
          Teaching                                    Lecturer Exam 2013 
          Hours                                       and considered “45 
          (4) 45                                      Teaching Hours” as 
          Teaching                                    correct Answer.
plus 
          preparation                                 Expert Committee 
          hours                                       has itself at p.15 
                                                      quoted the
RTE Act,
                                                      2009
quoted the 
                                                      minimum teaching 
                                                      hours as “45 
                                                      Teaching including 
                                                      Preparation Hours”
18. At   the  time  of  hearing   on  24.04.2018,  at   the  first

blush,   we   also   observed   that   there   may   be   substance   in

what   is   contended   by   the   learned   counsel   for   the

appellants   with   regard   to   question   No.21,   however,   when

we thoroughly examined the question and its answer given

by   the   Expert   Committee,   we   are   inclined   to   agree   with

the answer given by the Expert Committee. The reason for

our accepting the opinion of the Expert Committee is as

follows: The question No.58 which was asked  was:“Minimum

Number of Working Hours per week for the teacher in
RTE

Act, 2009
is”.
19. Thus   answer   had   to   indicate   the   number   of   working

hours.   Notification   has   been   issued   under   the
RTE   Act
24
where minimum teaching hours for a week is mentioned as :
“45   Teaching   including   Preparation   Hours”.   Thus   minimum

number of working hours per week has been provided as 45

which   figure   includes   both   teaching   and   preparation

hours.   The   statutory   provision   uses   the   word  teaching

including preparation hours whereas answer uses the words

teaching plus preparation hours. There is no dispute that

figure 45 is a correct figure only issue is with regard

to whether option No.3 is correct or option No.4. Option

No.3   mentions   “45   Teaching   Hours”.   The   answer   No.3   is

obviously   not   according   to   the   statutory   prescription

which provides “45 Teaching including Preparation Hours”.
Correct answer, thus,  is  option No.4  which  mentions  “45

Teaching   plus   preparation   hours”.   Instead   of   using   the

word  including  as used in statutory provision the  answer

uses word  plus. When the figure 45 includes teaching as

well as preparation hours the use of word teaching plus

preparation hours connotes the same meaning.  We, thus do

not find any substance in the above submission.
20. Learned counsel for the appellants have also pointed

out several other questions in paper No.1 which according
25
to the learned counsel for the appellants have not been

correctly   answered   by   the   Expert   Committee.   We   have

considered few more questions as pointed out and perused

the answers given by the Expert Committee and we are of

the view that no error can be found with the answers of

the Expert Committee with regard to three more questions

which   have   been   pointed   out   before   us.   The   Expert

Committee,   constituted to validation of answer key, has

gone through every objection raised by the appellants and

has satisfactorily answered the same. The Commission has

also accepted the Report of the Expert Committee and has

proceeded to revised the result of 311 appellants before

us. We, thus, are of the view that Report of the Expert

Committee which has been accepted by the Commission need

to be implemented.
21. One   of   the   submissions   raised   by   the   appellants   is

that   marks   of   deleted   questions   ought   not   to   have   been

redistributed   in   other   questions.   It   is   submitted   that

either   all   the   candidates   should   have   been   given   equal

marks   for   all   the   deleted   questions   or   marks   ought   to
26
have been   given only to those candidates who attempted

those questions.
22. The questions having been deleted from the answers,

the   question   paper   has   to   be   treated   as   containing   the

question   less   the   deleted   questions.   Redistribution   of

marks with regard to deleted questions cannot be said to

be arbitrary or irrational. The Commission has adopted a

uniform method to deal with all the candidates looking to

the number of the candidates. We are of the view that all

the   candidates   have   been   benefited   by   the   redistributed

of marks in accordance with the number of correct answers

which have been given by them. We, thus, do not find any

fault with redistribution of marks of the deleted marks.

The High Court has rightly approved the said methodology.
23. In   the   affidavit   filed   by   the   Commission   it   is

mentioned   that   the   result   has   been   revised   of   only   311

appellants who are before this Court. We are of the view

that key answers having been corrected, merit of all the

candidates   except   those   who   have   already   been   selected

needs  to  be redetermined.  In  our  order  dated  16.01.2018

it is mentioned that this exercise shall not affect those
27
who have already been selected. We, thus, are of the view

that   the   Commission   should   revise   the   entire   result   of

all   the   candidates   except   those   who   have   been   selected

on   the   basis   of   the   report   of   Expert   Committee   and

publish revise result of all the candidates. When the key

answers are correct of the candidates who appeared in the

examination,   they   are   entitled   for   revision   of   their

result, since, fault does not lie with the candidates but

lies with the examination body. It shall not be equitable

to   not   extend   the   benefit   to   those   candidates   who   have

not   come   to   the   Court   being   satisfied   with   the   steps

taken by the Commission and its earlier Expert Committee

which was given the task of revising the key answers.
24. In view of the foregoing discussions, we dispose of

these appeals with the following directions:
(1) The  Rajasthan   Public   Service   Commission  is   directed

to revise the result of all the candidates including all

the   appellants   on   the   basis   of   Report   of   the   Expert

Committee   constituted   in   pursuance   of   our   order   dated

16.01.2018 and publish the revised result.
28
(2) While carrying the above exercise the Commission need

not revise the result of all those candidates whose names

were   included   in   the   Select   List   earlier   published.   We

having   already   pointed   out   that   the   appointments   shall

not be affected by this exercise, there is no necessity

to   revise   their   result.   Thus,   this   exercise   shall   be

undertaken excluding all the candidates who are included

in the Select List.
(3) The Commission shall also publish the cut off marks

of   the   last   selected   candidates   in   the   respective

categories   who   were   included   in   the   Select   List   on   the

basis   of   which   appointments   have   been   made   by   the

Commission.
(4) On the basis of the revised result, those candidates

who   achieve   equal   or   more   marks   in   their   respective

categories   shall   be   offered   appointments   against   1045

vacancies   as   has   been   mentioned     by   the   Commission   in

paragraph 7 of the affidavit, noted above.


(5) The entire exercise of revising the result and making

recommendations   for   appointments   shall   be   completed   by
29
the   Commission   within   a   period   of   three   months   from

today. The State shall take necessary consequential steps

thereafter.
..........................J.
                                     ( A.K. SIKRI )



                                  ..........................J.
                                    ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )
NEW DELHI,
MAY 03,2018.