[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Vijay . vs Nana . on 11 May, 2018
Author:
Abhay Manohar Sapre
Bench:
S. Abdul Nazeer
,
Abhay Manohar Sapre
REPORTABLE

                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CIVIL APPEAL No.6272 OF 2010


                         Vijay Arjun Bhagat & Ors.                ….Appellant(s)


                                               VERSUS


                         Nana Laxman Tapkire & Ors.               …Respondent(s)




                                         J U D G M E N T

                         Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.   This   appeal   is   directed   against   the   final

                         judgment   and   order   dated   19.07.2007   passed   by

                         the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Bench at

                         Aurangabad   in   Second   Appeal   No.274   of   2002

                         whereby the Single Judge of the High Court allowed
Signature Not Verified
the appeal filed by respondent Nos.1 & 2 herein and
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2018.05.11
17:01:48 IST
Reason:
1
set   aside   the   judgment/order   dated   16.01.2002

passed by the District Judge, Ahmednagar in R.C.A.

No.21   of   2000   and   confirmed   the   judgment   dated

10.12.1999   passed   by   the   Civil   Judge,   Junior

Division, Ahmednagar in R.C.S. No.600 of 1982.
2.    In   order   to   appreciate   the   issues   involved   in

the appeal, few relevant facts need to be mentioned

hereinbelow.
3.    The   appellants   are   the   plaintiffs   whereas   the

respondents are the defendants in a civil suit out of

which this appeal arises.
4.    The   appellants   filed   a   civil   suit   (R.C.S.   No.

600/1982) against the respondents in the Court of

Civil   Judge,   Junior   Division,   Ahmednagar   for

declaration that, (1) the suit properties described in

detail in the schedule are ancestral properties of the

plaintiffs (2)  the plaintiffs are the owners of the suit

properties,     and   (3)  the suit  property  described  in
2
schedule   1(A)   is   not   a   Trust   property   and   be

declared as the plaintiffs’ private property.
5.    Defendant   No.   1   filed   its   written   statement

whereas   defendant   Nos.   3   and   4   filed   their   joint

written   statement.   The   defendants   raised   several

objections   about   maintainability   of   the   suit.   They

also denied plaintiffs’ claim on merits.
6.    The Trial Court framed issues. Parties adduced

evidence in support of their case. By judgment and

decree   dated   10.12.1999,   the   Trial   Judge   though

answered   some   issues   in   plaintiffs’   favour   but

eventually dismissed the plaintiffs’ suit on merits.
7.    The   plaintiffs   felt   aggrieved   and   filed   First

Appeal (R.C.A. No.21/2000) in the Court of District

Judge,   Ahmednagar.   By   order   dated   16.01.2002,

the   first   Appellate   Court   allowed   the   appeal,   set

aside   the   judgment   and   decree   of   the   Trial   Court

and decreed the plaintiffs’ suit.
3
8.   Against the said judgment, Defendant Nos. 3 &

4 (respondent Nos. 1 & 2 herein) filed appeal being

Second Appeal No. 274/2002 in the High Court of

Bombay (Bench at Aurangabad). The High Court on

30.11.2002   admitted   the   second   appeal   on   the

following substantial questions of law:
“(A) Whether   the   first   appellate   court   has
     misread   the   document   of   partition
     deed(Exh.81) and therefore the finding in this
     behalf suffers from perversity.
(B)   Whether   the   first   appellate   Court   has
     failed to consider the appropriate provisions
     of Order VII Rule 3 of C.P.C.
(C)  Whether   the   first   appellate   Court   has
     erroneously   relied   upon   Xerox  copies  of   the
     mortgage deed which is not registered.

     (D)   Whether   the   first   appellate   Court   has
     erroneously   that  the   suit   properties   are   the
     private properties of original plaintiffs.

     (E)    Whether the Civil Court has jurisdiction
     to   decide   the   nature   of   the   property   which
     issue required to be dealt with by the Charity
     Commissioner.
(F)   Whether   the   suit   is   barred   by
     limitation.”
4
9.    By   impugned   judgment,   the   Single   Judge   of

the   High   Court   allowed   the   appeal   and,   in

consequence,   set   aside   the   order   passed   by   the

District   Judge   in   R.C.A.   No.21   of   2000   and

confirmed the judgment passed by the Civil Judge

in R.C.S. No.600 of 1982   which has given rise to

filing of the present appeal by way of special leave

by the plaintiffs before this Court.
10.   The   short   question,   which   arises   for

consideration   in   this   appeal,   is   whether   the   High

Court was justified in allowing the appeal.
11.   Having   heard   the   learned   counsel   for   the

parties and on perusal of the record of the case, we

are   inclined   to   allow   the   appeal,   set   aside   the

impugned   judgment   and   remand   the   case   to   the

High Court for deciding the appeal afresh on merits

in accordance with law.
5
12.   In our considered view, the need to remand the

case to the High Court has occasioned because the

High  Court  while   deciding and eventually  allowing

the   second   appeal   did   not   follow   the   mandatory

procedure prescribed under
Section 100
of the Code

of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as

“the Code”).
13.   In   other   words,   we   find   that   the   manner   in

which   the   High   Court   proceeded   to   decide   the

second   appeal   did   not   appear   to   be   in   conformity

with   the   mandatory   procedure   prescribed   under
Section   100
of   the   Code.     It   is   clear   from   our

reasoning given infra.
14.
Section 100
of the Code reads as under:
“100.     Second   appeal­  (1)   Save   as  otherwise
      expressly  provided   in   the   body  of   this  Code
      or   by   any   other   law   for   the   time   being   in
      force,   an   appeal   shall   lie   to   the   High   Court
      from   every   decree   passed   in   appeal   by   any
      Court   subordinate   to   the   High   Court,   if   the
      High Court is satisfied that the case involves
      a substantial question of law.
6
(2)  An   appeal   may   lie   under   this   section
      from an appellate decree passed ex parte.
(3)    In   an   appeal   under   this   section,   the
      memorandum  of   appeal  shall  precisely  state
      the   substantial   question   of   law   involved   in
      the appeal.
(4)   Where the High Court is satisfied that a
      substantial question of law is involved in any
      case, it shall formulate that question.
(5)    The   appeal   shall   be   heard   on   the
      question   so   formulated   and   the   respondent
      shall, at the hearing of the appeal, be allowed
      to argue that the case does not involve such
      question:
Provided   that   nothing   in   this   sub­section
      shall be deemed to take away or abridge the
      power of the court to hear, for reasons to be
      recorded, the appeal on any other substantial
      question of law, not formulated by it, if it is
      satisfied   that   the   case   involves   such
      question.”
15.   Sub­section   (1)   of
Section   100
says   that   the

second   appeal   would   be   entertained   by   the   High

Court only if the High Court is "satisfied" that the

case involves a "substantial question of law". Sub­

section (3) makes it obligatory upon the appellant to

precisely state  in  memo of appeal the "substantial
7
question of law" involved in the appeal. Sub­section

(4) provides that where the High Court is satisfied

that any substantial question of law is involved in

the case, it shall formulate that question. In other

words, once the High Court is satisfied after hearing

the   appellant  or   his  counsel, as  the case may  be,

that   the   appeal   involves   a   substantial   question   of

law,   it   has   to   formulate   that   question   and   then

direct   issuance   of   notice   to   the   respondent   of   the

memo   of   appeal   along   with   the   question   of   law

framed by the High Court. Sub­section (5) provides

that the appeal shall be heard only on the question

formulated by the High Court under sub­section (4).
In other words, the jurisdiction of the High Court to

decide   the   second   appeal   is   confined   only   to   the

question   framed   by   the   High   Court   under   sub­

section(4).  The respondent, however, at the time of

hearing   of   the   appeal   is   given   a   right   under   sub­
8
section   (5)   to   raise   an   objection   that   the   question

framed   by   the   High   Court   under   sub­section   (4)

does not involve in the appeal. The reason for giving

this   right   to   the   respondent   for   raising   such

objection at the time of hearing is because the High

Court   frames   the   question   at   the   admission   stage

which is prior to issuance of the notice of appeal to

the   respondent.     In   other   words,   the   question   is

framed   behind   the   back   of   the   respondent   and,

therefore, sub­section(5) enables him  to raise such

objection   at   the   time   of   hearing   that   the   question

framed does not arise in the appeal.  The proviso to

sub­section (5), however, also recognizes the power

of the High Court to hear the appeal on any other

substantial question of law which was not initially

framed   by   the   High   Court   under   sub­section   (4).

However, this power can be exercised by the High

Court only after assigning  the reasons for framing
9
such   additional   question   of   law   at   the   time   of

hearing of the appeal  (See C.A. Nos.9118­9119 of

2010 titled
Surat Singh (Dead) vs. Siri Bhagwan

& Ors.
decided on 19.02.2018).
16.   Adverting to the facts of the case at hand, we

find   that   the   High   Court   on   30.11.2002   admitted

the   second   appeal   and   framed   six   substantial

questions   of   law   quoted   supra   as   required   under

sub­sections (1) and (4) of
Section 100
of the Code

which,   according   to   the   High   Court,   arose   in   the

second appeal.
17.   The   High   Court   was,   therefore,   required   to

decide the second appeal only on the six formulated

substantial questions of law as provided under sub­

section (5) of
Section 100
of the Code.
18.   We, however, find that the High Court instead

of   deciding   the   second   appeal   on   these   six

substantial questions of law framed at the time of
10
admission   allowed   the   appeal   on   two   additional

substantial   questions   of   law   (see   Para   10   of   the

impugned judgment) which were neither framed by

the   High   Court   at   the   time   of   admission   of   the

second appeal on 30.11.2002 and nor at the time of

hearing the second appeal.
19.   In   other   words,   the   High   Court   allowed   the

appeal on the two questions, which were framed in

the impugned judgment only. These two questions

read as under:
“In   S.A.   No.274/2002,   following
      substantial questions of law arise:
(i)    Whether the Civil Court has jurisdiction
             to   decide   the   question   whether   a
             particular   property   is   that   of   a   Public
             Trust or that it is not a property of the
             Public   Trust   and   belongs   to   individual
             claimant?
(ii)   Whether   the   suit   for   declaration   that
             the   properties   were   not   of   the   Public
             Trust   was   barred   by   limitation   and,
             therefore,   the   impugned   judgment   of
             the   first   appellate   Court   deserves
             interference?”
11
20.   In   our   considered   opinion,   the   High   Court,

therefore, committed two jurisdictional errors while

deciding the second appeal.
21.   First, though it rightly framed six substantial

questions   of   law   at   the   time   of   admission   of   the

appeal   on   30.11.2002   as   arising   in   the   case   but

erred in not answering these questions.
22.   As  mentioned above, the High Court had the

jurisdiction to decide the second appeal only on the

six substantial questions of law framed at the time

of   admitting   the   appeal.   In   other   words,   the

jurisdiction of the High Court to decide the second

appeal   was   confined   only   to   six   questions   framed

and not beyond it.
23.   Second,   the   High   Court   though   had   the

jurisdiction to frame additional question(s) by taking

recourse to proviso to sub­section(5) of
Section 100
of the Code but it was subject to fulfilling the three
12
conditions, first "such questions should arise in the

appeal", second, "assign the reasons for framing the

additional   questions"   and   third,   "frame   the

questions at the time of hearing the appeal".
24.   In   this   case,   the   High   Court   committed   an

error because it framed two additional questions in

the judgment itself.
25.   This   procedure   adopted   by   the   High   Court

while deciding the second appeal caused prejudice

to   the   rights   of   the   parties   because   the   parties,

especially   the   appellants   herein,   who   suffered   the

adverse order, had no knowledge about framing of

the two additional questions inasmuch as they were

deprived of the opportunity to address the Court on

the two additional questions on which the impugned

judgment was founded.
26.   Learned counsel for the respondents, however,

made   sincere   efforts   to   persuade   the   Court   to
13
uphold the impugned judgment on merits but in the

light of what we have held above, it is not possible

to accept the submissions of the learned counsel for

the respondents much less the submissions urged

on the merits of the controversy.
27.   We, however, make it clear that having formed

an  opinion   to  remand the case, we have refrained

from applying our mind to the merits of the case. It

is now for the High Court to decide the appeal on

merits.
28.   In   the   light   of   the   foregoing   discussion,   the

appeal   succeeds   and   is   allowed.   The   impugned

judgment is set aside. The case is remanded to the

High Court for deciding the appeal afresh on merits

in accordance with law without being influenced by

any of our observations.
14
29.   Since the appeal is quite old, the same shall be

decided expeditiously.
…...……..................................J.
                          [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]


                       ………...................................J.
                          [S. ABDUL NAZEER]
New Delhi;
May 11, 2018
15