[Cites
24
, Cited by
496
]
Supreme Court of India
Amrit Paul Singh vs Tata Aig General Insurance Co. Ltd. on 17 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2662, 2018 (7) SCC 558, (2019) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 98, (2018) 3 CGLJ 313, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2073, (2018) 72 OCR 207, (2019) 2 MAH LJ 534, (2019) 2 MPLJ 8, (2018) 3 RECCIVR 131, (2018) 3 RAJ LW 2561, (2018) 2 ACC 638, (2018) 2 UC 1198, 2018 (3) SCC (CRI) 255, (2018) 7 SCALE 502, (2018) 3 KER LT 911, (2018) 4 CIVLJ 834, (2018) 3 ACJ 1768, (2018) 3 KER LJ 1, (2018) 3 PAT LJR 217, (2018) 5 ALL WC 4423, (2018) 3 CURCC 70, (2018) 188 ALLINDCAS 28 (SC), (2018) 4 ANDHLD 182, (2018) 4 BOM CR 410, (2018) 130 ALL LR 179, (2018) 3 JLJR 182, (2018) 3 JCR 275 (SC), (2018) 3 TAC 1
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
D.Y. Chandrachud
1


                                                                      REPORTABLE 

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2253 OF 2018
                           (Arising out of S.L.P. (CIVIL) NO. 7692 of 2017)

         Amrit Paul Singh & Anr.                                        Appellant(s)


                                               VERSUS


         TATA AIG General Insurance                                     Respondent(s)
Co. Ltd. & Ors.
J U D G M E N T



         Dipak Misra, CJI.
The legal representatives of the deceased, Jagir Singh, the

         husband   of   the   second   respondent,   preferred   a   claim   petition

         being MACT Case No. 70 of 2013 under
Section 166
of the Motor

         Vehicles   Act,   1988   (for   brevity,   ‘the   Act’)   before   the   Motor

         Accident   Claims   Tribunal,   Pathankot   (for   short,   ‘the   tribunal’)

         claiming compensation to the tune of Rs. 36,00,000/­. The claim

         petition was filed on the basis that on 19.02.2013, Jagir Singh
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
was   travelling   to   Pathankot   on   his   motor   cycle   and   at   that
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.05.17
15:43:54 IST
Reason:
juncture, the offending truck bearing temporary registration No.
2
PB­06­6894 belonging to the appellant No. 2 driven in a rash and

negligent manner hit the motor cycle of the deceased as a result

of   which   he   sustained   multiple   injuries,   and   eventually,

succumbed to the same when being taken to the hospital. The

claim   put   forth   was   sought   to   be   sustained   on   many   a   basis

which need not be adverted to.
2.    The insurer, the first respondent herein, opposed the claim

on the ground that the vehicle in question was driven in violation

of the terms of the insurance policy and further the driver was

not having a valid and effective driving license and, therefore, it

was   not   obliged   to   indemnify   the  insured.   That   apart,   a   stand

was taken that the vehicle did not have the permit on the date of

the  accident. On behalf  of the owner of the vehicle and driver,

assertions were made that the vehicle was insured with the first

respondent   as   per   the   insurance   policy,   that   the   vehicle   was

registered   and   the   driver   had   the   requisite   driving   licence.

Additionally, copy of the route permit of the offending truck was

brought on record.
3.      The   tribunal   noted   that   the   vehicle   was   purchased   in

September 2012 and insured on 20.12.2012. It was registered on

26.02.2013.   The   accident,   as   stated   earlier,   occurred   on
3
19.02.2013.   The   tribunal,   placing   reliance   on   the   decision

rendered   by   this   Court   in
National   Insurance   Co.   Ltd.   v.

Challa Bharathamma
and others1, held that the insurer was

not liable and proceeded to quantify the amount of compensation

and   determined   the   same   at   Rs.   15,63,120/­.   The   tribunal

directed the amount to be paid by the insurer along with interest

at the rate of 9% from the date of award till its realisation and

recover   the   same   from   the   owner   and   driver   of   the   vehicle.   A

further   direction   was   given   for   attachment   of   the   truck   in

question till the award was satisfied.
4.    The   award   dated   20.11.2014   passed   by   the   tribunal   was

challenged in FAO No. 1702 of 2016   before the High Court of

Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh. It was contended in appeal

that the appellant No. 2, the owner of the offending vehicle, had

deposited   the   necessary   fees   along   with   application   on

19.02.2013 for issue of route permit and the same was issued on

27.02.2013.   It   was   further   urged   that   when   the   owner   of   the

vehicle   had   already   submitted   the   documents   in   the   transport

office   for   grant   of   permit   along   with   the   requisite   fees,   the

tribunal was in error in holding that the vehicle was being plied

1 (2004) 8 SCC 517
4
without a valid permit.
In support of the submissions, reliance

was   placed   upon  Ashok   Kumar   Khemaka   v.   Oriental

Insurance   Company   Ltd.   and   other2,
National   Insurance

Company   Limited   v.   Kamlesh   Kaur
and   others3    and  Moti

Ram v. ICICI Lombard and others4.
5.     The High Court scrutinized Annexure A­1 which was filed to

justify the stand that the application for issue of the route permit

was made to the competent authority and, on a scrutiny of the

same, came to hold that the owner had not been able to establish

that he had submitted the application for issue of permit before

the   accident.     Referring   to
Section   66
of   the   Act   and   placing

reliance on
Challa Bharathamma
case, the High Court opined

that even assuming that the owner had already applied for grant

of the permit before the accident, the same would not entitle the

owner   to   ply   the   vehicle.   It   is   worthy   to   note   that   the   learned

single   Judge   distinguished   the   decisions   cited   before   him   and,

resultantly, confirmed the award of the tribunal.




2 2014 (3) RCR (Civil) 1018
3 2006 (3) RCR (Civil) 634
4 2015 ACJ 1793
5
6.    We   have   heard   Mr.   Sudhir  Walia,  learned  counsel  for  the

appellants, and Mr. Amit Kumar Singh, learned counsel for the

respondent­insurer.
7.    The   conclusions   recorded   by   the   tribunal   and   further

confirmed   by   the   High   Court   clearly   show   that   the   accident

occurred on 19.02.2013 and the competent authority issued the

permit on 27.02.2013.  In this regard,
Sections 2(28)
and
2(31)
of

the Act that define “motor vehicle” or “vehicle” and “permit” are

reproduced below:­


            “(28) “motor vehicle” or “vehicle” means any
            mechanically   propelled   vehicle   adapted   for
            use   upon   roads   whether   the   power   of
            propulsion   is   transmitted   thereto   from   an
            external   or   internal   source   and   includes   a
            chassis   to   which   a   body   has   not   been
            attached and a trailer; but does not include
            a   vehicle   running   upon   fixed   rails   or   a
            vehicle of a special type adapted for use only
            in   a   factory   or   in   any   other   enclosed
            premises or a vehicle having less than four
            wheels   fitted   with   engine   capacity   of   not
            exceeding  twenty­five cubic centimetres;
            (31)   “permit”   means   a   permit   issued   by   a
            State or Regional Transport Authority or an
            authority   prescribed   in   this   behalf   under
            this   Act   authorising   the   use   of   a   motor
            vehicle as a transport vehicle;”
6
On a perusal of both the definitions, it is quite clear that a

permit has to be issued by the competent authority under the Act

for use of a motor vehicle as a transport vehicle. The emphasis is

on the words “use” as well as “transport vehicle”.
8.
Section 2(47)
states that “transport vehicle” means a public

service vehicle, a goods carriage, an educational institution bus

or   a   private   service   vehicle.
Section   66
stipulates   necessity   for

permits.   Sub­section   (1)   thereof   provides   that   no   owner   of   a

motor   vehicle   shall   use   or   permit   the   use   of   the   vehicle   as   a

transport vehicle in any public place, whether or not such vehicle

is actually carrying any passengers or goods save in accordance

with   the   conditions   of   a   permit   granted   or   countersigned   by   a

Regional   or   State   Transport   Authority   or   any   prescribed

authority.     Various   provisos   have   been   appended   to   the   main

provision   stipulating   conditions   for   use   of   the   vehicle   and

purpose of carriage of goods vehicle.  Sub­section (2) states that

the holder of a goods carriage permit may use the vehicle for the

drawing of any trailer or semi­trailer not owned by him, subject

to   such   conditions   as   may   be   prescribed.   It   is   necessary   to

mention here that a proviso has been added by Act 54 of 1994

with effect from 14.11.1994 allowing the holder of a permit of any
7
articulated   vehicle   to   use   the   prime­mover   of   that   articulated

vehicle for any other semi­trailer.
Section 2(2)
defines “articulated

vehicle”   to   mean   a   motor   vehicle   to   which   a   semi­trailer   is

attached.
9.    It   is   apt   to   note   here   that   sub­section   (3)   of
Section   66
carves out certain exceptions to sub­section (1). The relevant part

of sub­section (3) is extracted below:­


             “(3) The   provisions   of   sub­section   (1)   shall
             not apply—
(a) to   any   transport   vehicle   owned   by   the
             Central Government or a State Government
             and   used   for   Government   purposes
             unconnected   with   any   commercial
             enterprise;
(b) to any transport vehicle owned by a local
             authority   or   by   a   person   acting   under
             contract   with   a   local   authority   and   used
             solely   for   road   cleansing,   road   watering   or
             conservancy purposes;
(c) to   any   transport   vehicle   used   solely   for
             police, fire brigade or ambulance purposes;
(d) to   any   transport   vehicle   used   solely   for
             the conveyance of corpses and the mourners
             accompanying the corpses;
(e) to any transport vehicle used for towing a
             disabled vehicle or for removing goods from
             a disabled vehicle to a place of safety;
(f) to   any   transport   vehicle   used   for   any
             other public purpose as may be prescribed
             by the State Government in this behalf;
(g) to any transport vehicle used by a person
             who   manufactures   or   deals   in   motor
             vehicles or builds bodies for attachment to
8
chassis,   solely   for   such   purposes   and   in
accordance   with   such   conditions   as   the
Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;
(h)  x               x             x            x
(i) to   any   goods   vehicle,   the   gross   vehicle
weight   of   which   does   not   exceed   3,000
kilograms;
(j) subject to such conditions as the Central
Government   may,   by   notification   in   the
Official   Gazette,   specify,   to   any   transport
vehicle   purchased   in   one   State   and
proceeding to a place, situated in that State
or in any other State, without carrying any
passenger or goods;
(k) to any transport vehicle which has been
temporarily   registered   under   section   43
while proceeding empty to any place for the
purpose of registration of the vehicle;
(l)  x               x             x            x
(m) to any transport vehicle which, owing to
flood,   earthquake   or   any   other   natural
calamity, obstruction on road, or unforeseen
circumstances,   is   required   to   be   diverted
through any other route, whether within or
outside the State, with a view to enabling it
to reach its destination;
(n) to   any   transport   vehicle   used   for   such
purposes   as   the   Central   or   State
Government may, by order, specify;
(o) to any transport vehicle which is subject
to   a   hire­purchase,   lease   or   hypothecation
agreement and which owing to the default of
the owner has been taken possession of by
or   on   behalf   of   the   person   with   whom   the
owner has entered into such agreement, to
enable   such   motor   vehicle   to   reach   its
destination; or
(p) to any transport vehicle while proceeding
empty to any place for purpose of repair.”
9
10.   In   the   case   at   hand,   the   findings   would   show   that   the

appellant No. 2 did not have a permit for the vehicle. There is no

dispute that the vehicle initially had a temporary registration and

eventually   the   permanent   registration.   It   is   the   stand   of   the

appellants   that   the   tribunal   and   the   High   Court   did   not

appreciate   that   the   chasis   of  the   vehicle   was   sent   to   the   body

where the body of the truck was fabricated and when the vehicle

was driven out of the work shop at which point of time it met

with an accident. A contention has been made that the insurance

policy was in force at the relevant time and, hence, the insurer is

legally obliged to indemnify the insured.  A distinction has to be

made   between   “route   permit”   and   “permit”   in   the   context   of
Section 149
of the Act.
Section 149(2)
provides the grounds that

can be taken as defence by the insurer. It enables the insurer to

defend  on the   ground  that there has been breach of a specific

condition of the policy, namely, (i) a condition that excludes the

use of the vehicle, ­ (a) for hire or reward, where the vehicle is, on

the date of the contract of insurance, a vehicle not covered by a

permit to ply for hire or reward, or (b) for organized racing and

speed   testing,   or   (c)   for   a   purpose   not   allowed   by   the   permit

under which the vehicle is used, where the vehicle is a transport
10
vehicle, or (d) without side­car being attached where the vehicle

is a motor cycle.  That apart, it also entitles the insurer to raise

the   issue   pertaining   to   a   condition   that   excludes   driving   by   a

named   person   or   persons   or   by   any   person   who   is   not   duly

licensed or by any person who has been disqualified for holding

or obtaining a driving licence during the period of disqualification

or that excludes liability for injury caused or contributed to by

conditions  of  war, civil war, riot or civil commotion.   A further

defence that can be availed of by the insurer is that the policy is

void on the ground that it has been obtained by non­disclosure of

the material fact or by representation of act which is false in the

material particular.
11.   On a perusal of the written statement filed by the owner and

the driver, it is evident that the factum of accident having been

caused by the vehicle in question had been denied.  That apart,

there   is   also  a   denial  of   liability  that relates to  the  manner  in

which the accident had occurred as alleged in the claim petition.

It   was   the   specific   assertion   of   the   insurer   before   the   tribunal

that the vehicle was running in contravention of the provisions of

the Act, for it did not possess a route permit. The tribunal, on the

basis   of   the   materials   brought  on  record  to  the   effect  that  the
11
route   permit   was   issued   on   27.02.2013   and   the   accident

occurred   on  19.02.2013,  returned a finding that the vehicle in

question   did   not   have   the   permit.   As   stated   earlier,   the   High

Court has affirmed the same.
12.   Learned counsel for the appellants would submit that in the

obtaining   factual   matrix,   the   breach   would   not   exonerate   the

insurer from satisfying the judgment and an award in terms of
Section   149
of   the   Act.   He   has   drawn   inspiration   from   the

decision of a three­Judge Bench in
National Insurance Co. Ltd

v. Swaran Singh
and others5. In the said case, the Court was

dealing   with   the   interpretation   of
Section   149(2)(a)(ii)
vis­à­vis

the proviso appended to sub­sections (4) and (5) of
Section 149
of

the Act.  The issue centrally pertained to the necessity of having

a driving licence. After adverting to various provisions, the Court

also   delved   into   the   fundamental   concept   of   third   party   right.

Regard being had to the nature of the beneficial legislation, the

Court observed:­

             “39. The question as to whether an insurer
             can avoid its liability in the event it raises a
             defence   as   envisaged   in   sub­section   (2)   of
Section 149
of the Act corresponding to sub­
             section   (2)   of
Section   96
of   the   Motor

5 (2004) 3 SCC 297
12
Vehicles   Act,   1939
had   been   the   subject­
              matter   of   decisions   in   a   large   number   of
              cases.”
13.    The Court posed the question as to whether an insurer can

avoid its liability in the event it raised the defence as envisaged in

sub­section (2) of
Section 149
of the Act corresponding to sub­

section (2)   of
Section 96
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939. The

Court   analysed   the   language   employed   in   sub­section   (2)   of

Section   149,   specifically   clause   (a),   and,   after   scrutinizing   the

same and referring to various authorities, opined:­


              “69. The proposition of law is no longer res
              integra that the person who alleges breach
              must   prove   the   same.   The   insurance
              company is, thus, required to establish the
              said breach by cogent evidence. In the event
              the   insurance   company   fails   to   prove   that
              there   has   been   breach   of   conditions   of
              policy   on   the   part   of   the   insured,   the
              insurance   company   cannot   be   absolved   of
              its liability. (See Sohan Lal Passi6)
70. Apart from the above, we do not intend
              to  lay  down anything  further  i.e. degree of
              proof   which   would   satisfy   the
              aforementioned   requirement   inasmuch   as
              the   same   would indisputably depend upon
              the facts and circumstances of each case. It
              will also depend upon the terms of contract
              of   insurance.   Each   case   may   pose   a
              different   problem   which   must   be   resolved
              having regard to a large number of factors
6
Sohan Lal Passi v. P. Sesh Reddy and others
, (1996) 5 SCC 21
13
governing   the   case   including   conduct   of
parties   as   regards   duty   to   inform,   correct
disclosure,   suppression,   fraud   on   the
insurer etc. It will also depend upon the fact
as to who is the owner of the vehicle and the
circumstances   in   which   the   vehicle   was
being   driven   by   a   person   having   no   valid
and effective licence. No hard­and­fast rule
can,   therefor,   be   laid   down.   If   in   a   given
case there exists sufficient material to draw
an   adverse   inference   against   either   the
insurer or the insured, the Tribunal may do
so. The parties alleging breach must be held
to   have   succeeded   in   establishing   the
breach   of   conditions   of   the   contract   of
insurance,   on   the   part   of   the   insurer   by
discharging   its   burden   of   proof.   The
Tribunal, there cannot be any doubt, must
arrive   at   a   finding   on   the   basis   of   the
materials available on records.
71.   In   the   aforementioned   backdrop,   the
provisions   of   sub­sections   (4)   and   (5)   of
Section 149
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
may be considered as to the liability of the
insurer   to   satisfy   the   decree   at   the   first
instance.
x             x             x
83.   Sub­section   (5)   of
Section   149
which
imposes a liability on the insurer must also
be   given   its   full   effect.   The   insurance
company   may   not   be   liable   to   satisfy   the
decree   and,   therefore,   its   liability   may   be
zero   but   it   does   not   mean   that   it   did   not
have   initial   liability   at   all.   Thus,   if   the
insurance   company   is   made   liable   to   pay
any   amount,   it   can   recover   the   entire
amount paid to the third party on behalf of
the   assured.   If   this   interpretation   is   not
14
given to the beneficent provisions of the Act
             having regard to its purport and object, we
             fail   to   see   a   situation   where   beneficent
             provisions   can   be   given   effect   to.   Sub­
             section   (7)   of
Section   149
of   the   Act,   to
             which   pointed   attention   of   the   Court   has
             been drawn by the learned counsel for the
             petitioner,   which   is   in   negative   language
             may   now   be   noticed.   The   said   provision
             must   be   read   with   sub­section   (1)   thereof.
             The right to avoid liability in terms of sub­
             section   (2)   of
Section   149
is   restricted   as
             has   been   discussed   hereinbefore.  It   is   one
             thing to say that the insurance companies
             are   entitled   to   raise   a   defence   but   it   is
             another   thing   to   say   that   despite   the   fact
             that   its   defence   has   been   accepted   having
             regard to the facts and circumstances of the
             case, the Tribunal has power to direct them
             to satisfy the decree at the first instance and
             then   direct   recovery   of   the   same   from   the
             owner. These two matters stand apart and
             require contextual reading.”
                                             [Emphasis supplied]
14.   We may fruitfully note that the three­Judge Bench adverted

to situations  where the  driver does not have a licence and the

same has been allowed to be driven by the owner of the vehicle

by   such   person,   the   insurer   would   be   entitled   to   succeed   in

defence   and   avoid   liability,   but   the   position   would   be   different

where   the   disputed   question   of   fact   arises   as   to   whether   the

driver   had   a   valid   licence   and   where   the   owner   of   the   vehicle

committed a breach of the terms of the contract of insurance as
15
also the provisions of the Act by consciously allowing any person

to drive a vehicle who did not have a valid driving licence.
15.   The Court held that if, on facts, it is found that the accident

was   caused   solely   because   of   some   other   unforeseen   or

intervening   causes   like   mechanical   failures   and   similar   other

causes   having   no   nexus   with   the   driver   not   possessing   the

requisite type of licence, the insurer will not be allowed to avoid

its liability merely for technical breach of conditions concerning

driving licence. That apart, minor and inconsequential deviations

with regard to licensing conditions would not constitute sufficient

ground   to   deny   the   benefit   of   coverage   of   insurance   to   third

parties.  The other category of cases that the Court addressed to

included cases where the licence of the driver is found to be fake.
In that context, the Court expressed its general agreement with
United   India   Insurance   Co.   Limited   v.   Lehru7
and   stated

thus:­

             “92.
… In
Lehru
case  the matter has been
             considered in some detail. We are in general
             agreement with the approach of the Bench
             but   we   intend   to   point   out   that   the
             observations   made   therein   must   be
             understood to have been made in the light
             of   the   requirements   of   the   law   in   terms
             whereof   the   insurer   is   to   establish   wilful
7 (2003) 3 SCC 338
16
breach on the part of the insured and not
          for   the   purpose   of   its   disentitlement   from
          raising any defence or for the owners to be
          absolved from any liability whatsoever ..”
16.   The three­Judge Bench summed up its conclusions and we

think it appropriate to reproduce the relevant part of the same:­

          “110. (iii) The breach of policy condition e.g.
          disqualification   of   the   driver   or   invalid
          driving licence of the driver, as contained in
          sub­section   (2)(a)(ii)   of
Section   149
,  has   to
          be   proved   to   have   been   committed   by   the
          insured for avoiding liability by the insurer.
          Mere absence, fake or invalid driving licence
          or disqualification of the driver for driving at
          the   relevant   time,   are   not   in   themselves
          defences   available   to   the   insurer   against
          either   the   insured   or   the   third   parties.   To
          avoid   its   liability   towards   the   insured,   the
          insurer   has   to   prove   that   the   insured   was
          guilty   of   negligence   and   failed   to   exercise
          reasonable care in the matter of fulfilling the
          condition   of   the   policy   regarding   use   of
          vehicles by a duly licensed driver or one who
          was not disqualified to drive at the relevant
          time.
x             x            x            x
(vi) Even where the insurer is able to prove
          breach   on   the   part   of   the   insured
          concerning   the   policy   condition   regarding
          holding of a valid licence by the driver or his
          qualification   to   drive   during   the   relevant
          period, the insurer would not be allowed to
          avoid its liability towards the insured unless
          the   said   breach   or   breaches   on   the
17
condition   of   driving   licence   is/are   so
             fundamental   as   are   found   to   have
             contributed   to   the   cause   of   the   accident.
             The   Tribunals   in   interpreting   the   policy
             conditions   would   apply   “the   rule   of   main
             purpose”   and   the   concept   of   “fundamental
             breach”   to   allow   defences   available   to   the
             insurer under
Section 149(2)
of the Act.
(vii) The question, as to whether the owner
             has taken reasonable care to find out as to
             whether the driving licence produced by the
             driver   (a   fake   one   or   otherwise),   does   not
             fulfil   the   requirements   of   law   or   not   will
             have to be determined in each case.”
17.   Learned counsel for the appellants would submit that there

has been no fundamental breach of the policy conditions.
In this

context,   we   may   profitably   refer   to   the   decision   in
Challa

Bharathamma
(supra)   wherein   a   two­Judge   Bench   squarely

dealt with the absence of a permit and ruled that plying a vehicle

without a permit is an infraction and insurer is not liable.
18.
In
Lakhmi   Chand   v.   Reliance   General   Insurance8
,   the

Court   was   concerned   with   an   order   passed   by   the   National

Consumer   Disputes   Redressal   Commission   (NCDRC)   that   had

declined   the   relief   to   the   petitioner   therein.   The  insurer   in   the

said case had taken the plea that the complainant had violated

the terms and conditions of the policy, for five passengers were

8 (2016) 3 SCC 100
18
travelling   in   the   goods   carrying   vehicle   at   the   time   of   the

accident,   whereas   the   permitted   seating   capacity   of   the   motor

vehicle   of   the   appellant  was  only   1 + 1.
The  two­Judge Bench

referred to
Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Meena Variyal
and

others9 and expressed the view that in order to avoid liability, the

insurer must establish that there was breach on the part of the

insured.
19.   The obtaining fact situation is sought to be equated with the

factual score in the said case.
In this regard, it is useful to refer

to the Bench decision in
HDFC Bank Limited v. Reshma
and

others10. The issue that arose before the Court was whether the

financier was liable to pay the compensation or it was the liability

of the borrower. The tribunal had returned the finding that the

duty of the financier was to see that the borrower did not neglect

to   get   the   vehicle   insured   and,   therefore,   it   was   jointly   and

severally   liable   along   with   the   owner.   The   High   Court   had

concurred   with   the   said   conclusion.
The   Court   referred   to
Purnya Kala Devi v. State of Assam
and other11 that has dealt

with   the   definition   of   the   term   “owner”   as   contained   in

9 (2007) 5 SCC 428
10 (2015) 3 SCC 679
11 (2014) 14 SCC 142
19
Section 2(30)
of the Act. In the said case, the vehicle in question

was   under   the   requisition   of   the   State   of   Assam   under   the

provisions of law. In that context, the Court has expressed that:­


            “16. … The High Court failed to appreciate
            that   at   the   relevant   time   the   offending
            vehicle   was   under   the   requisition   of
            Respondent   1   State   of   Assam   under   the
            provisions   of   the
Assam   Act
.   Therefore,
            Respondent   1   was   squarely   covered   under
            the   definition   of   ‘owner’   as   contained   in
Section   2(30)
of   the   1988   Act.   The   High
            Court   failed   to   appreciate   the   underlying
            legislative   intention   in   including   in   the
            definition of ‘owner’ a person in possession
            of   a   vehicle   either   under   an   agreement   of
            lease   or   agreement   of   hypothecation   or
            under   a   hire­purchase   agreement   to   the
            effect   that   a   person   in   control   and
            possession   of   the   vehicle   should   be
            construed as the ‘owner’ and not alone the
            registered   owner.   The   High   Court   further
            failed to appreciate the legislative intention
            that   the   registered   owner   of   the   vehicle
            should not be held liable if the vehicle was
            not in his possession and control. The High
            Court also failed to appreciate that
Section
            146
of the 1988 Act requires that no person
            shall use or cause or allow any other person
            to   use   a   motor   vehicle   in   a   public   place
            without   an   insurance   policy   meeting   the
            requirements of Chapter XI of the 1988 Act
            and the State Government has violated the
            statutory provisions of the 1988 Act.”
20.   Be it noted, in the said case, the liability was fixed on the

State keeping in view the legislative intention behind
Section 146
20
of the Act, no person shall use or cause or allow any other person

to   use   a   motor   vehicle   in  a  public  place  without  an insurance

policy as that is the mandatory statutory requirement under the

Act. Emphasis was laid on possession and control of the vehicle

and accordingly liability was fixed on the State of Assam.
21.
In
HDFC   Bank   Limited
(supra),   the   three­Judge   Bench

opined that the hypothecation agreement did not convey that the

appellant financier had become the owner and was in control and

possession   of   the   vehicle.   It   was   the   absolute   fault   of   the

respondent No. 2 to take the vehicle from the dealer without full

payment   of   the   insurance,   more   so   when   nothing   had   been

brought on record that the said fact was known to the appellant

financier or that it was done in collusion with the financier.
22.   The Court held that when the intention of the legislature is

quite   clear   to   the   effect   that   a   registered   owner   of   the   vehicle

should not be held liable if the vehicle is not in his possession

and   control   and   there   was   evidence   on   record   that   the

respondent   No.   2,   plied   the   vehicle   without   the   insurance   in

violation of the statutory provision contained in
Section 146
of

the Act, the High Court could not have mulcted the liability on
21
the   financier   and   finally,   the   financer   was   absolved   of   the

liability.
23.   In   the   case   at   hand,   it   is   clearly   demonstrable   from   the

materials brought on record that the vehicle at the time of the

accident   did   not   have   a   permit.   The   appellants   had   taken   the

stand   that   the   vehicle   was   not   involved   in   the   accident.   That

apart,   they   had   not   stated   whether   the   vehicle   had   temporary

permit   or   any   other   kind   of   permit.   The   exceptions   that   have

been   carved   out   under
Section   66
of   the   Act,   needless   to

emphasise, are to be pleaded and proved. The exceptions cannot

be taken aid of in the course of an argument to seek absolution

from liability.
Use of a vehicle in a public place without a permit

is a fundamental statutory infraction.  We are disposed to think

so in view of the series of exceptions carved out in
Section 66
.

The said situations cannot be equated with absence of licence or

a fake licence or a licence for different kind of vehicle, or, for that

matter,   violation   of   a   condition   of   carrying   more   number   of

passengers.   Therefore,   the   principles
laid   down   in
Swaran

Singh
(supra) and
Lakhmi Chand
(supra) in that regard would

not be applicable to the case at hand. That apart, the insurer had

taken the plea that the vehicle in question had no permit. It does
22
not require the wisdom of the “Tripitaka”, that the existence of a

permit   of   any   nature   is   a   matter   of   documentary   evidence.

Nothing has been brought on record by the insured to prove that

he   had   a   permit   of   the   vehicle.   In   such   a   situation,   the   onus

cannot be cast on the insurer. Therefore, the tribunal as well as

the High Court had directed the insurer was required to pay the

compensation   amount   to   the   claimants   with   interest   with   the

stipulation that the insurer shall be entitled to recover the same

from   the   owner   and   the   driver.
The   said   directions   are   in

consonance with the principles stated in
Swaran Singh
(supra)

and other cases pertaining to pay and recover principle.
24.   In   view   of   the   aforesaid   analysis,   we   do   not   perceive   any

merit in the appeal and, accordingly, the same stands dismissed

without any order as to costs.
……………………….....CJI.
(Dipak Misra)



                                                     ………………………….….J.
                                                     (A.M. Khanwilkar)

New Delhi;
May 17, 2018