[Cites
20
, Cited by
8
]
Supreme Court of India
Pramod Laxman Gudadhe vs Election Commission Of India on 9 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2356, 2018 (7) SCC 550, 2018 (4) ABR 538, (2018) 191 ALLINDCAS 71, (2018) 2 JLJR 411, (2018) 3 CAL LJ 87, 2018 (3) KLT SN 1 (SC), (2018) 3 PAT LJR 1, (2018) 4 ANDHLD 171, (2018) 6 ALLMR 924, (2018) 7 SCALE 298, 2019 (134) ALR SOC 30 (SC), (2019) 2 MAH LJ 546, (2019) 2 MPLJ 1
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1


                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                          SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 9968 OF 2018


                         Pramod Laxman Gudadhe                       Petitioner (s)

                                                   VERSUS

                         Election Commission of India and Ors.       Respondent(s)




                                              JUDGMENT
Dipak Misra, CJI.
In a hallowed democratic body polity, the seminal

                         requirement is fair and timely election. Purity of election

                         abandoning any kind of dogmatic idea is consubstantial to

                         sustain the fundamental concept of democracy which is a

                         basic feature of our Constitution. If the ‗thought of

                         democracy‘ is sullied, the cornerstone of the rule of law is

                         corroded. When an individual, bereft of his status, goes to

                         an election booth to cast his vote, he feels empowered and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
dignified and his self-esteem is accentuated as his inner
SUBHASH CHANDER
Date: 2018.05.09
16:59:56 IST
conscience tells him that in his exercise of franchise, he is
Reason:
2
choosing   a   representative       who     shall    represent    the

constituency. This is the very sense of feeling empowered.
The participation makes him realize his political right and

the collective feels that there shall be governance in accord

with the Constitution so that the individual rights are

protected and the collective aspirations are taken care of. It

has been said by many protagonists of democracy that an

atmosphere     should   always      exist    when      precepts    of

democracy remain safe.
2.   The Constitution of India gives emphasis on many

aspects of political rights having regard to the rights of an

individual. Thus, in a democracy, holding of elections

becomes significant and the constitutional and statutory

provisions take care of it. Eligibility criteria has been

provided for to contest an election and sometimes more

restrictions are added in respect of elections to the local

self-governments.     Delimitation        and       reservation    of

constituencies are conceived of and fructified so that the

inclusive character of the Constitution is strengthened. The

provisions in the
Representation of the People Act, 1951
(for brevity, ‗the Act‘) are engrafted to cover many aspects of
3
election including the manner, method of holding elections

and the grounds for setting aside the election.
The Act
also

obliges the competent authority to see to it that no

constituency remains unrepresented beyond a definite

period. It is because the elected representative is expected

to echo the concerns of the electoral college in entirety.

The voters cannot be deprived of the said right if the

statute confers such a protection. Though the right to

contest an election is not a fundamental right, yet no

interpretation should be placed on a statutory provision

that will defeat the essential purpose of representation.
3.    The prefatory note has become a warrant as the

petitioner, a voter of Bhandara – Gondiya parliamentary

constituency, in this special leave petition, has, in an

astute manner, conceived a challenge by propounding that

the High Court has erroneously interpreted
Section 151A
of the Act.
4.    The elected representative, who was elected to the

aforementioned constituency in the General Election to the

Lok   Sabha   conducted    on       04.06.2014,   tendered   his

resignation as the Member of Parliament under
Article
4
101(3)
of the Constitution read with Rule 240(1A) of the

Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha

on 08.12.2017 and the same was accepted on 14.12.2017.
5.   As the seat fell vacant, the petitioner, a public spirited

person, approached the High Court of Judicature at

Bombay, Nagpur Bench at Nagpur under
Article 226
of the

Constitution in Public Interest Litigation No. 31 of 2018

contending, inter alia, that if the election commenced in the

month of May, 2018, the effective period which the new

incumbent would get is only upto March, 2019, that is, less

than one year and, therefore, he would not be in a position

to function with all vigour and render service to the public

and further, there shall be huge expenditure in conducting

the election. He had drawn support from Report No. 255 of

the Law Commission of India on Electoral Reforms.

Reliance was placed on
Section 151A
of the Act to

substantiate the stand that holding of election was not

permissible under the said provision.
6.   The High Court, scrutinizing the language employed

in
Section 151A
, opined that the argument advanced by the
5
petitioner was sans substance and resultantly dismissed

the Writ Petition.
7.   We have heard Mr. Vikas Singh, learned senior

counsel along with Ms. Anangha S. Desai, learned counsel

for the petitioner.
8.   The dates pertaining to the holding of election and the

resignation are not controverted. Further, it is not a case

where an election petition was pending against the elected

candidate before the High Court. It is also not in dispute

that the General Election to the Lok Sabha is to be held in

June, 2019.
9.   The said being the undisputed factual position, we are

only required to analyse the statutory provisions and

justifiability of the holding of bye-election.
Part IX of the Act
deals with Bye-Elections.
Section 147
deals with casual

vacancies in the Council of States.
Section 149
adverts to

casual vacancies in the House of the People.
Section 150
states about casual vacancies in the State Legislative

Assemblies and
Section 151
deals with casual vacancies in

the State Legislative Councils.
Section 151A
, which was

inserted by the Representation of the People (Amendment)
6
Act (21 of 1996) with effect from 01.08.1996, being relevant

for the present purpose, is extracted below:-
“151A. Time limit for filling vacancies
     referred to in sections 147, 149, 150 and
151.—Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 147
,
section 149
,
section 150
and
section 151
, a bye-election for filling any vacancy
     referred to in any of the said sections shall be
     held within a period of six months from the date
     of the occurrence of the vacancy:
Provided that nothing contained in this
     section shall apply if—
(a)   the remainder of the term of a member in
           relation to a vacancy is less than one year;
or
(b)   the Election Commission in consultation
           with the Central Government certifies that
           it is difficult to hold the bye-election within
           the said period.‖
10. The aforesaid provision commences with a non

obstante clause and clearly states that notwithstanding

anything contained in
Section 147
,
Section 149
,
Section

150
and
Section 151
, a bye-election for filling any vacancy

referred to in any of the said Sections shall be held within a

period of six months from the date of the occurrence of the

vacancy. The holding of election is controlled by a rider,

namely, that the remainder of the term of a member in
7
relation to a vacancy is less than one year. It is further

postulated therein that if the Election Commission in

consultation with the Central Government certifies that it

is difficult to hold the bye-election within the said period,

the principal part of the provision contained in
Section

151A
would not apply.     In the present case, we are not

concerned with the second postulate, for what has emerged

for consideration singularly pertains to the concept of

period.
11. It is submitted by Mr. Vikas Singh, learned senior

counsel for the petitioner that the prohibition contained in
Section 151A
directly comes into play and, therefore, the

High Court would have been well advised to restrain the

Election Commission not to hold the election. It is further

propounded by him that the amount to be spent from the

exchequer on holding of an election ultimately casts a

burden on the tax payers and additionally, the elected

candidate will only have some ceremonial role since he

would not be in a position to do anything for the members

of the electoral college and, therefore, the election should

not be allowed to be conducted.
8
12. At the very outset, we must make a distinction

between
Sections 147
,
149
,
150
and
151
on the one hand

and
Section 151A
of the Act on the other. While

interpreting these provisions, it has to be kept in mind that

though the right to elect a person is fundamental to

democracy, yet it is only a statutory right. It is also well

settled in law that the legislations governing the said right

have to be strictly construed.
13. A two-Judge Bench in
D. Sanjeevayya v. The

Election Tribunal, Andhra Pradesh
and others1, prior

to the insertion of
Section 151A
of the Act, was dealing with

the controversy that pertained to occurring of a casual

vacancy and, in that context, referred to the scheme of the

Chapter pertaining to bye-elections and analyzed
Article

190(3)
of the Constitution. The Court, referring to the said

Article and the various provisions of the statute and after

adverting to the fact situation where an election petition

was pending challenging the election, held:-
―4. We are unable to accept the argument of the
          appellant as correct. In our opinion, the
          provisions of
Section 150
of the Act must be
          interpreted in the context of
Sections 84
and
1
AIR 1967 SC 1211
9
98(c) and other relevant provisions of Part III of
     the same Act. If the interpretation contended for
     by the appellant is accepted as correct the
     vacancy must be filled by a bye-election as soon
     as a member resigns his seat notwithstanding
     the pendency of an election petition challenging
     his election. If the candidate who filed the
     election petition eventually gets a declaration
     that the election of the member is void and that
     he himself had been duly elected there will be
     two     candidates    representing      the    same
     constituency at the same time, one of them
     declared to be duly elected at the General
     Election and the other declared to have been
     elected at the bye-election and an impossible
     situation would arise, It cannot be supposed that
     Parliament contemplated such a situation while
     enacting
Section 150
of the Act. Parliament
     could not have intended that the provisions of
Part VI of the Act
pertaining to election petitions,
     should stand abrogated as soon as a member
     resigns his seat in the Legislature. It is a well
     settled rule of construction that the provisions of
     a statute should be so read as to harmonise with
     one another and the provisions of one section
     cannot be used to defeat those of another unless
     it is impossible to effect reconciliation between
     them. …‖


     Proceeding further, the Court ruled that when an

election petition has been referred to a tribunal by the

Election Commission and the tribunal is seized of the

matter, the petition has to be disposed of according to law.
The Tribunal has to adjudge at the conclusion of the

proceeding whether the returned candidate has or has not
10
committed any corrupt practice at the election and

secondly, it has to decide whether the second respondent

therein should or should not be declared to have been duly

elected. A returned candidate cannot get rid of an election

petition filed against him by resigning from the seat in the

Legislature, whatever the reason for his resignation may

be.
14.
In this regard, reference to the authority in
Election

Commission of India v. Telangana Rastra Samithi
and

another2 is extremely useful. In the said case, the

respondent had challenged the decision of the Election

Commission of India not to hold the bye-elections in

respect of two Assembly Constituencies in the State of

Andhra Pradesh which was set aside by the High Court.

The High Court had quashed the action placing reliance on
Section 151A
of the Act holding, inter alia, that the said

provision is mandatory especially when the vacancies had

already been notified by the Speaker of the Assembly as

contemplated under
Article 190(3)(b)
of the Constitution. It

is worth noting that the High Court had ignored the
2
(2011) 1 SCC 370
11
pendency of the election petitions against the candidates

who had resigned on the foundation that uncertain

consequences of the election petitions could not dilute the

effect of
Section 151A
of the Act. The two-Judge Bench,

scrutinizing the provisions of the Act and
Article 190(3)(b)
,

stated:-
―45.
The Act
is a complete code for the conduct
     of elections by the Election Commission of India
     appointed under
Article 324
of the Constitution
     which provides for superintendence, direction,
     control and conduct of elections to Parliament
     and to the Legislature of every State and also of
     elections to the offices of President and Vice-
     President held under the Constitution. The
     provisions of
Article 190(3)(b)
of the Constitution
     have, therefore, to be read along with the
     provisions of the 1951 Act.
Section 84
of the said
     Act cannot be rendered otiose by holding that all
     vacancies on account of the aforesaid provision
     of the Constitution become immediately available
     for being filled up by way of a bye-election. The
     same reasoning applies in regard to
Section 151-
     A
of the 1951 Act and its impact on the latter
     part of
Section 84
thereof. As has been
     mentioned hereinbefore, a proceeding under
Section 84
has to run its full course, particularly
     for the purposes of
Section 8-A
of the said Act.
     The views expressed by the Division Bench of the
     High Court on this point cannot, therefore, be
     sustained.‖


     The Court went on to say that the introduction of
Section 151A
did not alter the position as far as the
12
provisions of
Section 84
and, consequently,
Sections 98(c)
and
101(b)
of the Act are concerned, although a casual

vacancy may have occurred within the meaning of
Section

150
of the Act. The Court made a distinction between the

two categories of vacancies, namely, vacancies in which

election petitions had been filed and are pending and other

vacancies where no such cases were filed and pending.
The Court opined that in the first category of cases, the

vacancies could not have been treated to be available for

the purposes of filling up within the time prescribed under
Section 151A
of the Act merely because a member of the

House of a Legislature of a State had resigned and the

same had been accepted by the Speaker. To arrive at the

said conclusion, emphasis was laid on
Section 84
of the

Act. In the second category of cases, the Court pronounced

that the vacancies would have to be construed as clear

vacancies warranting action under
Section 151A
of the Act.
15. A Division Bench of the High Court of Karnataka in
Sri Thomas Mates Gudinho v. Election Commission of
13
India, New Delhi
and others3 , while interpreting
Section

151A
of the Act, has opined:-
―13. …
Section 151A
no doubt seeks to
          ensure that no Constituency remains un-
          represented for more than six months. But it is
          not unconditional. It is subject to two
          exceptions. i.e. where the remainder of the term
          of a member in relation to a vacancy is less than
          one year or where the Election Commission in
          consultation with the Central Government
          certifies that it is difficult to hold the bye-election
          within the said period. Further the non obstante
          clause is limited in its application to
Sections
          147
,
149
,
150
and
151
. The non obstante clause
          does not refer to
Section 84
or 98(c) or 101. It
          therefore follows that
Section 151A
will have no
          application if an Election Petition is pending
          where the prayer is not merely a challenge to the
          election of the elected candidate, but also seeks
          a declaration that the petitioner or some one else
          should be declared as having been elected under
Sections 84
read with
Section 101
of the Act.‖

          Be it noted, the said view has been approved in the

case of
Telangana Rastra Samithi
(supra).
16. In the case at hand, no election petition was pending.

The         elected     candidate   tendered   his   resignation    on

08.12.2017 and the same was accepted by the Speaker of

Lok Sabha on 14.12.2017. The command of
Section 151A
is to hold the election within a period of six months from

the date of occurrence of the vacancy. As the factual score
3
AIR 2002 Kant 232
14
depicts, the vacancy occurred when the resignation was

accepted by the Speaker of Lok Sabha on 14.12.2017. It is

beyond any dispute that the next General Election to Lok

Sabha is in June, 2019. Therefore, the remainder of the

term is not less than one year. Whether the election is to

be held or not would be governed by clause (b) to the

proviso to
Section 151A
and we are not concerned with the

same. The ground raised that the code of conduct would

come into play before the elections are held in June, 2019

is   absolutely   sans   substance   as   the   Act   does   not

contemplate so. It is the period alone that should be the

governing factor subject to the pendency of election petition

because that is not controlled by the non obstante clause.

Such an interpretation is in accord with the sanctified

principle of democracy and the intention of the Parliament

is not to keep a constituency remaining unrepresented. The

concern expressed with regard to load on the exchequer

cannot be treated as a ground. It is so because the

representative democracy has to sustain itself by the

elected representatives.   We may hasten to add that the

matter would be different when an election dispute is
15
pending against the candidate that comes within the ambit

and sweep of
Section 84
or
Section 98(c)
or
Section 101(b)
of the Act. That not being the case, the view expressed by

the High Court is absolutely impregnable.
17. Consequently, Special Leave Petition, being devoid of

merit, stands dismissed. There shall be no order as to

costs.
……………………….....CJI.
(Dipak Misra)



                                 ………………………….….J.
                                 (A.M. Khanwilkar)



                                 ……………………………..J.
                                 (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
New Delhi;
May 09, 2018