[Cites
7
, Cited by
67
]
Supreme Court of India
E. Sivakumar vs Union Of India on 18 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2486, 2018 CRI LJ 3064, (2018) 188 ALLINDCAS 45 (SC), (2018) 104 ALLCRIC 619, (2018) 188 ALLINDCAS 45, (2018) 3 CRIMES 37, (2018) 3 CURCRIR 76, (2018) 3 RECCRIR 111, 2018 (3) SCC (CRI) 49, (2018) 4 ALLCRILR 73, (2018) 4 BOM CR 436, (2018) 5 ANDHLD 97, (2018) 71 OCR 893, (2018) 7 SCALE 656, 2018 (7) SCC 365, (2019) 127 CUT LT 135, (2019) 1 ALD(CRL) 1001, (2019) 2 CALLT 85, AIR 2018 SC( CRI) 785
Author:
A.M. Khanwilkar
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1

                                                                         REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.                 OF 2018
                                            (Diary No.17180/2018)

                         E. SIVAKUMAR                               ....Petitioner(s)

                                                  :Versus:

                         UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.                    ....Respondent(s)




                                                 ORDER
A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
1.   This special leave petition takes exception to the

                         judgment and order of the High Court of Judicature at Madras

                         dated 26th April, 2018 in Writ Petition No.19335 of 2017,

                         whereby the High Court has issued a writ of mandamus to
Signature Not Verified
transfer the investigation of a criminal case concerning the
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
illegal manufacture and sale of Gutkha and Pan Masala,
Date: 2018.05.18
16:16:03 IST
Reason:
2
containing Tobacco and/or Nicotine, to the Central Bureau of

Investigation (“CBI”).
2.   The petitioner has been named as an accused in the FIR

because of his alleged involvement in the crime under

investigation. The petitioner at the relevant time was posted on

deputation as Food Safety Officer in the Food Safety and Drug

Administration Department, Ministry of Health. The stated

crime      was   being   investigated   by   the   State   Vigilance

Commission, constituted by the State of Tamil Nadu, headed

by a Vigilance Commissioner. The gravamen of the challenge

to the impugned judgment is on four counts:
(i)     First, that the prayer for transfer of investigation of
             the crime in question to the CBI has already been
             considered and negatived by the Coordinate Bench
             of the same High Court in Writ Petition No.1846 of
             2017 vide judgment dated 27th January, 2017 and
             again in Writ Petition No.12482 of 2017 vide
             judgment dated 28th July, 2017. These decisions
             have been completely disregarded in the impugned
             judgment.
3
(ii)    Second, the petitioner though named as an accused
                     in the FIR was not given an opportunity of hearing
                     nor was made a party in the public interest
                     litigation in which the impugned judgment has been
                     passed. Resultantly, the judgment under appeal is a
                     nullity and liable to be set aside only on this score.
(iii)   Third, no special circumstances have been noted by
                     the High Court in the impugned judgment for
                     transferring the investigation to CBI. The High
                     Court has not even bothered to examine the efficacy
                     of the status report regarding the investigation done
                     by the Vigilance Commission. In other words, there
                     was no tangible ground for directing investigation of
                     the crime in question by the CBI.
(iv)    Lastly, it is contended that the writ petition filed as
                     public interest litigation was politically motivated
                     having been filed by a member of the Legislative
                     Assembly in the State of Tamil Nadu.
3.   To buttress the above-mentioned grounds of challenge,

        reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in the case of
State of Punjab Vs. Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar and Ors.1
1
(2011) 14 SCC 770
4
4.   The admission of this special leave petition is opposed by

respondent No.14 (writ petitioner). It is urged on behalf of

respondent No.14 that the High Court has considered all

aspects   of   the   matter   and   being   satisfied   about   the

imperativeness of a fair investigation of the crime in question

involving high ranking officials and the tentacles of the

conspiracy in commission of the crime transcending beyond

the State of Tamil Nadu and into different States, it deemed it

appropriate to issue a writ of mandamus to transfer the

investigation to CBI. It is contended that there is no merit in

the objections raised on behalf of the petitioner.
5.   We have heard Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned senior

counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Mr. P.

Wilson, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of

respondent No.14.
6.   On a careful consideration of the impugned judgment, we

agree with respondent No.14 (writ petitioner) that the High

Court has cogitated over all the issues exhaustively and being

fully satisfied about the necessity to ensure fair investigation
5
of the crime in question, justly issued a writ of mandamus to

transfer the investigation to CBI.           As regards the first point

raised by the petitioner, we find that the High Court was alive

to the fact that the Coordinate Bench of the same High Court

had occasion to decide Writ Petition No.1846 of 2017 and Writ

Petition No.12482 of 2017, as can be discerned from the

discussion in paragraphs 107 to 122 of the impugned

judgment. As regards Writ Petition No.1846 of 2017, that was

filed by one P. Wilson, a lawyer by profession. Indeed, it was

filed   as   public     interest          litigation     to        initiate   an

inquiry/investigation    into       the     allegation        of    corruption,

investigate, prosecute and ferret out the truth regarding the

connivance   of   senior   police         officers     as     noted     by    the

Commissioner of Police, Chennai City, in his letter dated 22nd

December, 2016 addressed to the Principal Secretary, Home

Department, Government of Tamil Nadu. The Court, however,

found that the said petition lacked specific ground and

material and, more so, the Court doubted the bona fides of the

petitioner therein and thus summarily rejected the petition

vide judgment dated 27th January, 2017. As regards Writ
6
Petition No.12482 of 2017, filed by one K. Kathiresan, a lawyer

by profession, as public interest litigation, the relief claimed

was primarily to quash an order dated 30th June, 2017

granting extension of service to respondent No.5 therein and

further, to direct registration of a case in reference to the

communication sent by the Commissioner of Police, Chennai,

in respect of sale of banned substances, namely, Gutkha and

Pan Masala in the State of Tamil Nadu and to constitute a

Special Investigation Team to investigate the case under the

direct monitoring of the High Court. Thus, the primary

concern in the said writ petition was about the appointment of

respondent No.5 therein as Director General of Police on

account of his name being referred to in the incriminating

documents seized by the Income Tax Department from the

partners of a gutkha manufacturing concern. In the analysis

of the case, the Coordinate Bench vide its judgment dated 28th

July, 2017 noted the prayer of the said writ petitioner to direct

the CBI to take over the investigation by constituting a Special

Investigating Team. The Court did advert to the question of

entrusting the investigation to CBI in paragraphs 25A to 25D
7
of
the said judgment
. However, after perusal of the case diary

of the Director of Vigilance and Anti Corruption, the Court

opined that the investigation of the crime was in progress.

Therefore,   it   only   issued     directions    to   strengthen      the

investigation by Vigilance Commissioner in paragraph 30 of
the said judgment
. In that context the Court noted that it was

not necessary to transfer the inquiry/investigation to CBI.

That is the thrust of the analysis of the previous judgments, if

read in proper perspective.         These aspects have been duly

taken note of in the impugned judgment in paragraphs 107

onwards, including the legal position on the doctrine of res

judicata and finally answered in paragraphs 141 to 144 of the

impugned judgment in the following words:
“141. As observed by K.K. Sasidharan and G.R.
     Swaminathan,JJ. in K. Kathiresan, supra, the Vigilance
     Commission headed by the Vigilance Commissioner has
     extensive powers to curb corruption and initiate action
     against government servants and servants of public sector
     undertakings for acceptance of illegal gratification and
     matters incidental thereto. The State Vigilance Commission
     might enquire into allegations of corruption against officials
     of the State Government. The State Vigilance Commission
     might also conduct a detailed enquiry to fix the responsibility
     for the loss of the file containing incriminating materials
     handed over to the then Chief Secretary by the Principal
     Director of Income Tax (Investigation) on 12.8.2016 and
     ensure that the guilty are brought to book and appropriate
8
action taken in accordance with law. However, investigation
by the Vigilance department is from the angle of vigilance.
The aim is to detect corruption. The power of the Vigilance
Commission to investigate would not extend to an enquiry
into the modus operandi of the gutkha mafia, the mode and
manner of import from other States, distribution and sale of
gutkha and other chewable forms of tobacco, and detection
of the sources of supply. Enquiry by the Vigilance
Department would not unearth secret storage and
manufacturing units. Nor would such investigation be able
to detect incidents of illegal import, supply and sale or nab
those actually manufacturing, supplying, importing, selling
or otherwise dealing with prohibited food items containing
tobacco and nicotine such as gutkha.
142. Investigation by a centralized agency like the CBI would
be more comprehensive and cover all aspects of the illegal
manufacture, import, supply, distribution and sale of
banned chewable tobacco items, including the detection of
all those involved in such illegal import, manufacture,
supply, distribution and sale, as also the detection of
corruption and complicity of public servants and/or
government servants in this regard. As observed above, there
is no conflict between CBI investigation and investigation by
the State machinery. Investigation can be carried out more
effectively with the CBI and the Vigilance Department
working in cooperation.
143. The underground gutkha business is a crime against
society which needs to be curbed. We, therefore, deem it
appropriate to direct the CBI to investigate into all aspects of
the offence of illegal manufacture, import, supply,
distribution and sale of gutkha and other forms of chewable
tobacco which are banned in the State of Tamil Nadu and
the Union Territory of Puducherry, including detection of
and action against those involved in the offence as aforesaid,
whether directly or indirectly, by aiding abetting the offence
or interfering with attempts to curb the offence.
144. This order is, in our view, not only imperative to stop the
menace of the surreptitious sale of gutkha and chewable
forms of tobacco which pose a health hazard to people in
general and in particular the youth and to punish the guilty,
but also to instill faith of the people in the fairness and
impartiality of the investigation. We see no reason for the
9
State to view the entrustment of investigation to the CBI as
     an affront to the efficiency or efficacy of its own investigation
     system and we make it absolutely clear that this direction is
     not to be construed as any definite finding of this Court of the
     complicity of any constitutional functionary or of any specific
     official of the State Government.”
7.   The view so taken by the High Court in the facts of the

present case, in our opinion, being a possible view, the ground

under consideration is devoid of merit. Suffice it to observe

that it is not a case of disregarding the binding decision or

precedent of the Coordinate Bench of the same High Court. We

say so because, in the impugned judgment the decision of the

Coordinate Bench has been distinguished. Besides, the

question regarding the necessity to ensure a fair and impartial

investigation of the crime, whose tentacles were not limited to

the State of Tamil Nadu but transcended beyond to other

States and may be overseas besides involving high ranking

officials of the State as well as the Central Government, has

now been directly answered. For instilling confidence in the

minds of the victims as well as public at large, the High Court

predicated    that   it   was    but    necessary      to   entrust      the

investigation of such a crime to CBI. Viewed thus, there is no

infirmity in the conclusion reached by the High Court in the
10
impugned judgment, for having entrusted the investigation to

        CBI.
8.     As regards the second ground urged by the petitioner, we

        find that even this aspect has been duly considered in the

        impugned judgment.
In paragraph 129 of the impugned

        judgment, reliance has been placed on
Dinubhai Boghabhai

        Solanki Vs. State of Gujarat and Ors.2
, wherein it has been

        held that in a writ petition seeking impartial investigation, the

        accused was not entitled to opportunity of hearing as a matter

        of course.
Reliance has also been placed in the case of
Narender G. Goel Vs. State of Maharashtra and Anr.
3, in

        particular, paragraph 11 of the reported decision wherein the

        Court observed that it is well settled that the accused has no

        right to be heard at the stage of investigation. By entrusting

        the investigation to CBI which, as aforesaid, was imperative in

        the peculiar facts of the present case, the fact that the

        petitioner was not impleaded as a party in the writ petition or

        for that matter, was not heard, in our opinion, will be of no
2
(2014) 4 SCC 626
3
(2009) 6 SCC 65
11
avail. That per se cannot be the basis to label the impugned

        judgment as a nullity.
9.   Our attention was invited to the observations made in

        paragraph 73 in the
State of Punjab
(supra), which in turn

        adverts to the exposition in
D. Venkatasubramaniam & Ors.

        Vs. M.K. Mohan Krishnamachari & Anr.,4
wherein it has

        been held that an order passed behind the back of a party is a

        nullity and liable to be set aside only on this score. That may

        be so, if the order to be passed behind the back of the party

        was to entail in some civil consequence to that party. But a

        person who is named as an accused in the FIR, who otherwise

        has no right to be heard at the stage of investigation or to have

        an opportunity of hearing as a matter of course, cannot be

        heard to say that the direction issued to transfer the

        investigation to CBI is a nullity. This ground, in our opinion,

        is an argument of desperation and deserves to be rejected.
10. The third contention urged by the petitioner, that neither

        special reasons have been recorded nor the status report of
4
(2009) 10 SCC 488
12
the investigation already done by the Vigilance Commission

        has been considered, also does not commend us.                  As noted

        earlier, the High Court in the impugned judgment has

        exhaustively analysed all aspects of the matter as can be

        discerned from paragraphs 84 to 87, 91 to 97, 100 to 107;

        and again in paragraphs 141-144 which have been extracted

        hitherto.
In our opinion, in the peculiar facts of the present

        case, the High Court has justly transferred the investigation to

        CBI after due consideration of all the relevant aspects, which

        approach       is   consistent   with   the   settled   legal    position

        expounded in the decisions adverted to in the impugned

        judgment, including the decision in
Subrata Chattoraj Vs.

        Union of India and Ors.,5
which predicates that transfer of

        investigation to CBI does not depend on the inadequacy of

        inquiry/investigation carried out by the State police. We agree

        with the High Court that the facts of the present case and the

        nature of crime being investigated warrants CBI investigation.
5
(2014) 8 SCC 768
13
11.
In the case of
Dharam Pal Vs. State of Haryana and

        Ors.,6
this Court has underscored the imperativeness of

        ensuring a fair and impartial investigation against any person

        accused of commission of cognizable offence as the primary

        emphasis is on instilling faith in public at large and the

        investigating agency. The dictum in paragraph 24 and 25 of

        this reported decision is quite instructive which read thus:
“24. Be it noted here that the constitutional courts can direct
             for further investigation or investigation by some other
             investigating agency. The purpose is, there has to be a fair
             investigation and a fair trial. The fair trial may be quite
             difficult unless there is a fair investigation. We are absolutely
             conscious that direction for further investigation by another
             agency has to be very sparingly issued but the facts depicted
             in this case compel us to exercise the said power. We are
             disposed to think that purpose of justice commands that the
             cause of the victim, the husband of the deceased, deserves to
             be answered so that miscarriage of justice is avoided.
             Therefore, in this case the stage of the case cannot be the
             governing factor.
25. We may further elucidate. The power to order fresh, de
             novo or reinvestigation being vested with the constitutional
             courts, the commencement of a trial and examination of
             some witnesses cannot be an absolute impediment for
             exercising the said constitutional power which is meant to
             ensure a fair and just investigation. It can never be forgotten
             that as the great ocean has only one test, the test of salt, so
             does justice has one flavour, the flavour of answering to the
             distress of the people without any discrimination. We may
             hasten to add that the democratic set-up has the potentiality
6
(2016) 4 SCC 160
14
of ruination if a citizen feels, the truth uttered by a poor man
       is seldom listened to. Not for nothing it has been said that
       sun rises and sun sets, light and darkness, winter and
       spring come and go, even the course of time is playful but
       truth remains and sparkles when justice is done. It is the
       bounden duty of a court of law to uphold the truth and truth
       means absence of deceit, absence of fraud and in a criminal
       investigation a real and fair investigation, not an
       investigation that reveals itself as a sham one. It is not
       acceptable. It has to be kept uppermost in mind that
       impartial and truthful investigation is imperative. If there is
       indentation or concavity in the investigation, can the “faith”
       in investigation be regarded as the gospel truth? Will it have
       the sanctity or the purity of a genuine investigation? If a
       grave suspicion arises with regard to the investigation,
       should a constitutional court close its hands and accept the
       proposition that as the trial has commenced, the matter is
       beyond it? That is the “tour de force” of the prosecution and
       if we allow ourselves to say so it has become “idée fixe” but
       in our view the imperium of the constitutional courts cannot
       be stifled or smothered by bon mot or polemic. Of course, the
       suspicion must have some sort of base and foundation and
       not a figment of one’s wild imagination. One may think an
       impartial investigation would be a nostrum but not doing so
       would be like playing possum. As has been stated earlier,
       facts are self-evident and the grieved protagonist, a person
       belonging to the lower strata. He should not harbour the
       feeling that he is an “orphan under law”.
12. Suffice it to observe that we do not intend to deviate from

the conclusion reached by the High Court that in the peculiar

facts and circumstances of the case, it is but appropriate that

investigation of the crime in question must be entrusted to

CBI.
15
13. Reverting to the last contention that the High Court

        should have been loath to entertain a public interest litigation

        at the instance of respondent No.14, who happens to be a

        member of the Legislative Assembly in the State of Tamil Nadu

        or that he had pro-actively participated in raising the issue in

        the Assembly, has also been answered in the impugned

        judgment. The Court, while entertaining public interest

        litigation at the instance of respondent No.14, has relied upon

        the dictum in
K. Anbazhagan Vs. Superintendent of Police

        and Ors.,7
wherein it is observed that the political opponents

        play an important role both inside and outside the House and

        are the watchdogs of the Government in power. They are the

        mouthpiece to ventilate the grievances of the public at large, if

        genuinely and unbiasedly projected. Referring to this decision,

        the Court noted in paragraph 70 of the impugned judgment

        that a petition filed by such persons (such as respondent

        No.14) cannot be brushed aside on the allegation of political

        vendetta, if otherwise, it is genuine and raises a reasonable

        apprehension of likelihood of bias in the dispensation of
7
(2004) 3 SCC 767
16
criminal justice system. Accordingly, the ground of challenge

under consideration, in our opinion, is devoid of merits.
14.   While parting, we may restate the observations made by

the High Court in paragraph 144 of the impugned judgment to

clarify that the transfer of investigation of the crime in

question to CBI is no reflection on the efficiency or efficacy of

the investigation done by the State Vigilance Commission. We

reiterate that position.
15. As a result, this special leave petition is dismissed.
.………………………….CJI.
(Dipak Misra)




                                     …………………………..….J.
                                     (A.M. Khanwilkar)




                                     …………………………..….J.
                                     (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
New Delhi;
May 18, 2018.