[Cites
31
, Cited by
55
]
Supreme Court of India
Lok Prahari Through Its General ... vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 7 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2209, 2018 (4) ALJ 356, AIR 2018 SC (CIV) 2145, 2018 (3) SCC (CRI) 73, (2018) 7 SCALE 8, (2018) 4 ALL WC 3764, 2018 (6) SCC 1, (2018) 2 ESC 355, 2018 (8) ADJ 3 NOC
Author:
Ranjan Gogoi
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
R. Banumathi
,
Navin Sinha
,
Ranjan Gogoi
1

                                                             REPORTABLE

                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                      CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                    WRIT PETITION (C) NO.864 OF 2016


LOK PRAHARI THROUGH ITS GENERAL SECRETARY                      ...PETITIONER

                         VERSUS

THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS.                             …RESPONDENTS


                               JUDGMENT
RANJAN GOGOI, J.
1.        This writ petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of

     India raises a challenge to the validity of
Section 4(3)
of the

     Uttar   Pradesh      Ministers    (Salaries,    Allowances      and

     Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1981 (hereinafter referred to as

     “the 1981 Act”), as amended in 2016.
2.        The case has a somewhat chequered history. Suffice

     it will be to recapitulate that as former Chief Ministers of the

     State of Uttar Pradesh continued to occupy their official

     accommodation even after demitting office, in clear breach of
Section 4
of the 1981 Act as it had then existed, a writ petition

     was filed before the High Court of Allahabad by the present

     petitioner. During the pendency of the said writ petition, a set of
2
Rules namely “U.P. Ex-Chief Ministers Residence Allotment

          Rules, 1997” (hereinafter referred to as “the 1997 Rules”) were

          framed to provide for allotment of government accommodation

          to former Chief Ministers. The writ petition was accordingly

          amended to challenge the validity of the provisions of the 1997

          Rules. However, the same was closed by the High Court on a

          statement made on behalf of the State of Uttar Pradesh that

          former Chief Ministers would be henceforth allotted only Type V

          bungalows and that too on payment of rent etc.
3.
In the aforesaid situation, the present petitioner had

          filed Writ Petition (C) No.657 of 2004 (
Lok Prahari vs. State of

          Uttar Pradesh and others
) before this Court challenging the

          validity of the aforesaid 1997 Rules. By judgment and order

          dated 1st August 20161, the aforesaid writ petition was answered

          by this Court by striking down the 1997 Rules, inter alia, on the

          ground that the provision for accommodation for ex-Chief

          Ministers as made under the aforesaid 1997 Rules was in direct

          conflict with the provisions of
Section 4
of the 1981 Act.
Paragraphs 33, 37 and 38 of the said report in
Lok Prahari
(supra) would be relevant to notice:
“33. We may now turn to the issue whether the
                  impugned 1997 Rules are ultra vires
Article 14
of the
1
(2016) 8 SCC 389
3
Constitution of India and also repugnant to the
provisions of the 1981 Act. The relevant extract of the
1997 Rules is as under:
“4. Allotment of residence.—A residence on falling
vacant will be allotted by the Estate Officer to such ex-
Chief Minister who has given an application under
these Rules. There will be no right for allotment of a
house outside Lucknow under these Rules.
*      *     *
6. Period for which allotment subsists.—The
allotment of residence to ex-Chief Ministers shall be
effective only during their lifetime. The allotment shall
be deemed to be automatically cancelled upon the
death of ex-Chief Minister and family members
residing therein will have to invariably hand over the
possession of the residence concerned to the Estate
Department within 3 months from the date of death. If
the family members residing in the residence do not
hand over the possession, recovery rent, damages,
etc. shall be taken under the provisions of the
U.P.
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Act, 1972
.”

                       *       *   *
                       *       *   *
37. If we look at the position of other constitutional
post holders like Governors, Chief Justices, Union
Ministers, and Speaker, etc. all of these persons hold
only one “official residence” during their tenure. The
respondents have contended that in a federal set-up,
like the Union, the State has also power to provide
residential bungalow to the former Chief Minister. The
above submission of the respondent State cannot be
accepted for the reason that the 1981 Act does not
make any such provision and the 1997 Rules, which
are only in the nature of executive instructions and
contrary to the provisions of the 1981 Act, cannot be
acted upon.
38. Moreover, the position of the Chief Minister and the
Cabinet Ministers of the State cannot stand on a
separate footing after they demit their office. Moreover,
4
no other dignitary, holding constitutional post is given
      such a facility. For the aforestated reasons, the 1997
      Rules are not fair, and more so, when the subject of
      “salary and allowances” of the Ministers, is governed
      by
Section 4(2)(a)
of the 1981 Act.”
4.
Section 4
of the 1981 Act was amended in the year

2016. Under
Section 4(3)
brought in by the 2016 Amendment

(U.P. Act No.22 of 2016), former Chief Ministers of the State

became entitled to allotment of government accommodation for

their life time. The validity of the aforesaid
Section 4(3)
, as

amended, has been questioned by the writ petitioner, a

registered body, which claims to be “committed to upholding of

the Constitution and enforcement of the Rule of law”.
5.
Section 4
of the 1981 Act as originally enacted and as

amended in the year 2016 by 2016 Amendment is in the

following terms:
Section 4
of the Act, as
Section 4
of the Act, as
originally enacted               amended in the year 2016
                                 by 2016 Amendment (U.P
                                 Act No. 22 of 2016)
4.Residence.-(1)        Each     4. For
section 4
of the
Minister shall be entitled       principal Act, the following
without payment of any rent      sections shall be substituted,
to the use throughout the        namely:-
term of his office and for       4(1) The Chief Minister and
period    of    fifteen  days    each Minister shall be entitled,
thereafter, of a residence at    without payment of any rent to
Lucknow which shall be           the use, throughout the term
furnished and maintained at      of his office and for a period of
5
public expenses       at     the   fifteen days thereafter, of a
prescribed scale.                  residence at Lucknow which
                                   shall    be    furnished  and
(2) Where a Minister has not       maintained at public expense
been     provided    with   a      at the prescribed scale.
residence in accordance with
sub-Section (1), or does not       (2) Where the Chief Minister
avail of the benefit of the        or a Minister has not been
said sub section, he shall be      provided with a residence in
entitled to a compensatory         accordance        with      sub-
allowance at the rate of-          section(1) or does not avail of
(a) three hundred rupees per       the benefit of the said sub-
month in the case of Deputy        section, he shall be entitled to
Minister, and                      a compensatory allowance at
(b) five hundred rupees per        the rate of –
month in any other case.           (a) ten thousand rupees per
                                   month in the case of the Chief
                                   Minister, a Minister, a Minister
                                   of     State      (Independent
                                   Charge) and a Minister of
                                   State;
(b) eight thousand rupees per
                                   month in the case of a Deputy
                                   Minister.
(3) A government residence
                                   shall be allotted to a former
                                   Chief   Minister    of   Uttar
                                   Pradesh, at his/her request,
                                   for his/her life time, on
                                   payment of such rent as may
                                   be determined from time to
                                   time    by      the    Estate
                                   Department of the State
                                   Government.
6.          The 1981 Act was amended by the Uttar Pradesh

Ministers   and   State    Legislature,   Officers and    Members

Amenities Laws (Amendment) Act, 1990 (U.P. Act No.5 of 1990)

(hereinafter referred to as “1990 Amendment”) by insertion of
6
sub-section (1-A) to
Section 4
which is in the following terms:
“(1-A) Each Minister for whose use a
           residence at Lucknow has been provided
           under sub-section (1) shall immediately after
           the expiration of the period referred to in that
           sub-section, vacate such accommodation and
           an officer authorized by the State Government
           in this behalf may take possession of the
           accommodation and may for the purpose use
           such force as may be necessary in the
           circumstances.
Explanation – For the purposes of this sub-
           section ‘Minister’ includes a person who has
           ceased to be a Minister”, and also includes a
           person who was given the status of a Minister.”
7.         By another amendment to the 1981 Act by the Uttar

Pradesh Ministers and State Legislature, Officers and Members

Amenities Laws (Amendment) Act, 1997 (U.P. Act No.8 of 1997)

(hereinafter referred to as “1997 Amendment”)
Section 4-A
was

inserted, which is to the following effect:
“4-A. Special provisions regarding certain
           accommodations.- (1) On and from the
           commencement of the Uttar Pradesh Ministers
           and State Legislature Officers and Members
           Amenities Laws (Amendment) Act, 1997, the
           State Government may, with a view to
           ensuring timely availability of residence to a
           Minister under sub-section (1) of
Section 4
, by
           a notified order, specify any type-VI
           accommodation or an accommodation in
           which a Minister was in occupation at any
           time, under the control and Management of
           the Estate Department of the State
           Government, as Minister’s residence and an
           accommodation so specified shall be allotted
           to a Minister only and not to any other person.
7
(2) The State Government, or an officer
          authorized by it in this behalf may, if a person
          other than a Minister referred to in sub-section
          (1-A) of
Section 4
is in occupation of an
          accommodation specified as Minister’s
          residence under sub-section (1) on the basis
          of any allotment order or otherwise, cancel the
          allotment order of such person, if any, and by
          notice in writing require such person to vacate
          the said accommodation within fifteen days
          from the date of service upon him of such
          notice, and if such person fails to vacate the
          said accommodation within the said period, an
          officer authorized by the State Government in
          this behalf may take possession of the
          accommodation and may for the purpose use
          such force as may be necessary in the
          circumstances”.
8.        It will be worthwhile to note at this stage that while
Section 4
(1-A) of the 1981 Act has been deleted by the 2016

Amendment
Section 4-A
continues to remain on the statute

book.
9.
Section 4-A(2)
of the 1981 Act, extracted above,

visualize that if any person other than the Minister is in

occupation of accommodation specified as Minister’s residence

under sub-section (1) of
Section 4-A
(Type VI accommodation)

the allotment order of such person shall be cancelled and the

occupant would be required to vacate the said accommodation

within fifteen days from the date of service of notice, failing
8
which, the Authorized Officer would be competent in law to take

possession of the accommodation, if necessary, by use of such

force, as may be required.
10.        Having noted the salient features of the provisions of

the 1981 Act the question that arises for determination in the

present proceedings may be summarized as follows:
“Whether retention of official accommodation by the

functionaries mentioned in
Section 4(3)
of the 1981 Act after

they had demitted office violate the equality clause guaranteed

by
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.”
11.        The petitioner - body which is a registered society

under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860
is represented in

these proceedings by its Secretary Shri S.N. Shukla, who is a

retired I.A.S. Officer. Though Shri Shukla had advanced his

arguments and contentions with great clarity, yet, having regard

to the importance of the question raised we had thought it

proper to take the assistance of Shri Gopal Subramanium,

learned Senior Counsel of this Court and to assist him we had

thought it proper to request Shri Gopal Sankaranarayanan,

learned counsel, a member of the Supreme Court Bar

Association. Both Shri Gopal Subramanium, learned Senior
9
Counsel and Shri Gopal Sankaranarayanan, learned counsel

         have rendered their valuable assistance to this Court which

         assistance is being acknowledged by the Court at the very

         outset of the present order.
12.           Though the issue in the present proceeding is strictly

         confined to the provisions of the 1981 Act, having regard to the

         fact that there may be similar/pari materia provisions in force in

         different States/Union Territories and also in the Union we had

         thought it proper to inform, through the learned Amicus Curiae,

         the law officers of the Union and all the States/Union Territories

         of the pendency of the present writ petition and the issues

         arising therein.     Pursuant thereto, the responses of the Union

         and the States of Assam, Bihar, Tamil Nadu and Odisha have

         been received. Shri Aman Lekhi, learned ASG has submitted

         that the Government Accommodation is provided to former

         Presidents, Vice-Presidents, Prime Ministers of the country. The

         issue had come up for consideration in this Court in
Shiv Sagar

         Tiwari vs. Union of India
and others2 wherein this Court has

         approved the action taken in the matter of provision of official

         accommodation to the aforesaid dignitaries under the extant

         Rules in the following manner:
2
(1997) 1 SCC 444
10
“72. Keeping in view the very high
          constitutional position occupied by the
          President, Vice-President and Prime Minister,
          we feel no difficulty in stating that they should
          be accommodated in government premises
          after demitting of office by them, so that
          problem of suitable residence does not trouble
          them in the evening of life. What should be the
          terms of the same is a matter to be decided by
          the Government.”
13.       Insofar as the States of Tamil Nadu and Odisha are

concerned, it is clear from the communications received from

the Advocate Generals of the said States by the office of the

learned Amicus Curiae Shri Gopal Subramanium that no

provision for official accommodation to former Chief Ministers

has been made by the said two states whereas in the case of

States of Bihar and Assam such provision has been made by

executive instructions issued by the State under
Article 162
of

the Constitution of India.
14.         We had thought it proper to request the learned

Amicus Curiae to sound the Advocate Generals of the States on

the pendency of this writ petition to enable the States to render

assistance to the Court in the matter of adjudication of
11
the validity of
Section 4(3)
of the 1981 Act in view of the fact that

some of the States may have pari materia provisions in force.

No such contest by the States with regard to the validity of the
Section 4(3)
of the 1981 Act had been forthcoming except to the

extent mentioned hereinabove on behalf of the Union of India.

We, therefore, proceed to undertake the present exercise which,

we make it clear, is confined to the issue of validity of
Section

4(3)
of the 1981 Act.
15.    It would be appropriate to initiate the discourse by

remembering the preamble to the Constitution of India which is

in the following terms.
WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly
         resolved to constitute India into a SOVEREIGN
         SOCIALIST SECULAR DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
         and to secure to all its citizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political;
LIBERTY, of thought, expression, belief, faith and
         worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all

         FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the
         individual and the unity and integrity of the
         Nation;
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twenty-
         sixth day of November, 1949, DO HEREBY
         ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS
12
CONSTITUTION.
16.        The preamble to the Constitution of India embodies,

inter alia, the principles of equality and fraternity and it is on the

basis of these principles of equality and fraternity that the

Constitution recognizes only one single class of citizens with

one singular voice (vote) in the democratic process subject to

provisions made for backward classes, women, children, SC/ST,

minorities, etc.    A special class of citizens, subject to the

exception noted above, is abhorrent to the constitutional ethos.
17.        The resolve of ‘the People of India’ to have a

republican form of Government is a manifestation of the

constitutional philosophy that does not recognize any arbitrary

sovereign power and domination of citizens by the State. The

republican liberty and the doctrine of equality is the central

feature of the Indian democracy.
18.        It is, therefore, axiomatic that in a democratic

republican government public servants entrusted with duties of

public nature must act in a manner that reflects that ultimate

authority is vested in the citizens and it is to the citizens that

holders of all public offices are eventually accountable. Such a

situation would only be possible within a framework of equality
13
and when all privileges, rights and benefits conferred on holders

         of public office are reasonable, rational and proportionate.
19.           It may be necessary herein to recapitulate the Seven

         Principles of Public Life Report by Lord Nolan which find

         mention in the judgment of this Court in
Vineet Narain and

         others vs. Union of India
and another3 (paragraph 54).
This

         Court in paragraph 55 of the report in
Vineet Narain
(supra)

         had observed:
“These principles of public life are of general
                       application in every democracy and one is
                       expected to bear them in mind while
                       scrutinizing the conduct of every holder of a
                       public office.”

               The seven principles of public life stated in the Report by

         Lord Nolan are as follows:
“THE SEVEN PRINCIPLES OF PUBLIC LIFE

                                           Selflessness
                          Holders of public office should take
                       decisions solely in terms of the public interest.
                       They should not do so in order to gain financial
                       or other material benefits for themselves, their
                       family, or their friends.
Integrity
                          Holders of public office should not place
                       themselves under any financial or other
                       obligation     to      outside   individuals  or
                       organisations that might influence them in the
                       performance of their official duties.
Objectivity
3
(1998) 1 SCC 226
14
In carrying out public business, including
       making      public   appointments,     awarding
       contracts, or recommending individuals for
       rewards and benefits, holders of public office
       should make choices on merit.
Accountability
           Holders of public office are accountable for
       their decisions and actions to the public and
       must submit themselves to whatever scrutiny
       is appropriate to their office.
Openness
           Holders of public office should be as open
       as possible about all the decisions and actions
       that they take. They should give reasons for
       their decisions and restrict information only
       when the wider public interest clearly
       demands.
Honesty
           Holders of public office have a duty to
       declare any private interests relating to their
       public duties and to take steps to resolve any
       conflicts arising in a way that protects the
       public interest.
Leadership
           Holders of public office should promote and
       support these principles by leadership and
       example.”
20.    It would be significant to note that the legislative

anxiety to bring in a classless society, a constitutional

vision, inter alia, found manifestation in the Twenty-sixth

(26th) Amendment to the Constitution of India by which
Articles 291
and
362
were repealed and a new Article 366A

was incorporated, resulting in depriving the Rulers of

Princely States the recognition accorded to them and
15
declaring the abolition of the privy purse.
In the resultant

            challenge by a co-Ruler of an erstwhile sovereign Indian

            State of Kurundwad Jr. this Court in
Shri Raghunathrao

            Ganpatrao vs. Union of India4
while dealing with the

            challenge, inter alia, spoke as follows:
“96. Permanent retention of the privy purse
                       and the privileges of rights would be
                       incompatible with the sovereign and republican
                       form of Government. Such a retention will also
                       be incompatible with the egalitarian form of our
                       Constitution. That is the opinion of the
                       Parliament which acted to repeal the aforesaid
                       provisions in exercise of its constituent power.
                       The repudiation of the right to privy purse
                       privileges, dignities etc. by the deletion of
Articles 291
and
362
, insertion of
Article 363-A
and amendment of clause (22) of
Article 366
by which the recognition of the Rulers and
                       payment of privy purse are withdrawn cannot
                       be said to have offended
Article 14
or 19(g)
                       [sic 19(1)(f)] and we do not find any logic in
                       such a submission. No principle of justice,
                       either economic, political or social is violated
                       by the Twenty-sixth Amendment. Political
                       justice relates to the principle of rights of the
                       people, i.e. right to universal suffrage, right to
                       democratic form of Government and right to
                       participation in political affairs. Economic
                       justice is enshrined in
Article 39
of the
                       Constitution. Social justice is enshrined in
Article 38.
Both are in the directive principles
                       of the Constitution. None of these rights are
                       abridged or modified by this Amendment. We
                       feel that this contention need not detain us any
                       more and, therefore, we shall pass on to the
                       next point in debate.”
4
AIR 1993 SC 1267
16
21.           An instance of State action inconsistent with the

          constitutional goal to secure socio-economic justice was dealt

          with by this Court in
Victorian Granites (P) Ltd. Vs. P. Rama

          Rao
and others5. In the said case, the state action approving

          the assignment of a lease granted to an individual on expiry

          thereof in favour of a private Company, at the request of the

          outgoing lessee, without any publicity and without inviting

          objections from others was explicitly disapproved by this Court

          by holding that such a transfer was opposed to the common

          good and the constitutional objective of securing socio-

          economic justice which was described as the arch of the

          Constitution.      Material resources of the community must be

          distributed to sub-serve the common good, this Court had

          opined.
22.           Similarly, in
Akhil Bhartiya Upbhokta Congress vs.

          State of Madhya Pradesh
and others6 this Court held that:
“48. Part IV contains “directive principles of
                        State policy” which are fundamental in the
                        governance of the country and it is the duty of
                        the State to apply these principles in making
                        laws.
Article 39
specifies certain principles of
                        policy which are required to be followed by the
                        State. Clause (b) thereof provides that the
5
(1996) 10 SCC 665
6
(2011) 5 SCC 29
17
State shall, in particular, direct its policy
          towards securing that the ownership and
          control of the material resources of the
          community are so distributed as best to
          subserve the common good. Parliament and
          legislatures of the States have enacted several
          laws and the Governments have, from time to
          time, framed policies so that the national
          wealth and natural resources are equitably
          distributed among all sections of people so
          that have-nots of the society can aspire to
          compete with haves.”
23.
In
Akhil Bhartiya
(supra), this Court examined the

legality of the action of the Madhya Pradesh Government to

allot twenty acres of land to an Institution on the basis of

application made by the Trust.         This Court held that the

distribution of State largesse allocation of land, grant of permit,

licence etc. should always be in a fair and equitable manner. It

was held that the elements of favouritism or nepotism shall not

influence the exercise of discretion by the decision maker.

Observing that every action of the public authority should be

guided by public interest, free from arbitrariness, in para (65), it

was held as under:-
“65. What needs to be emphasised is that the
          State and/or its agencies/instrumentalities
          cannot give largesse to any person according to
          the sweet will and whims of the political entities
          and/or    officers  of    the   State.     Every
          action/decision of the State and/or its
          agencies/instrumentalities to give largesse or
          confer benefit must be founded on a sound,
18
transparent, discernible and well-defined policy,
                       which shall be made known to the public by
                       publication in the Official Gazette and other
                       recognised modes of publicity and such policy
                       must be implemented/executed by adopting a
                       non-discriminatory and non-arbitrary method
                       irrespective of the class or category of persons
                       proposed to be benefited by the policy. The
                       distribution of largesse like allotment of land,
                       grant of quota, permit licence, etc. by the State
                       and its agencies/instrumentalities should always
                       be done in a fair and equitable manner and the
                       element of favouritism or nepotism shall not
                       influence the exercise of discretion, if any,
                       conferred upon the particular functionary or
                       officer of the State.
(Underlining is ours)
24.
In
Sachidanand Pandey and another vs. State of

          West Bengal
and others7, this Court after referring to some of

          the available precedents, laid the following principles:-
“40. On a consideration of the relevant cases
                       cited at the Bar the following propositions may
                       be taken as well established: State-owned or
                       public-owned property is not to be dealt with at
                       the absolute discretion of the executive.
                       Certain precepts and principles have to be
                       observed. Public interest is the paramount
                       consideration. One of the methods of securing
                       the public interest, when it is considered
                       necessary to dispose of a property, is to sell
                       the property by public auction or by inviting
                       tenders. Though that is the ordinary rule, it is
                       not an invariable rule. There may be situations
                       where there are compelling reasons
                       necessitating departure from the rule but then
                       the reasons for the departure must be rational
                       and     should     not    be    suggestive    of
                       discrimination. Appearance of public justice is
7
(1987) 2 SCC 295
19
as important as doing justice. Nothing should
                      be done which gives an appearance of bias,
                      jobbery or nepotism.”
                                              (Underlining is ours)
25.
After Akhil Bhartiya
(supra) and
Sachidanand

          Pandey
(supra), in Centre for
Public Interest Litigation and

          others v. Union of India
and others8, it was held as under:-
“89. In conclusion, we hold that the State is
                      the legal owner of the natural resources as a
                      trustee of the people and although it is
                      empowered to distribute the same, the process
                      of distribution must be guided by the
                      constitutional principles including the doctrine
                      of equality and larger public good.”
26.         In Natural Resources Allocation, in Re, Special

          Reference No. 1 of 20129, while considering the allocation of

          2G Spectrum, this Court observed that as natural resources are

          public goods, the ‘Doctrine of Equality’ which emerges from the

          concepts of justice and fairness must guide the State in

          determining the actual mechanism for distribution of natural

          resources. Any further detailed reference to the opinion

          rendered is being avoided as the principles evolved are in

          furtherance of what has been had been laid down earlier, as

          noticed above.
8
(2012) 3 SCC 1
9
(2012) 10 SCC 1
20
27.       Coming back to the issue in hand a brief look at the

contentions advanced may be appropriate at this stage. The

State of Uttar Pradesh has sought to defeat the writ petition by

contending that the same being under
Article 32
of the

Constitution of India a direct infringement of the fundamental

rights of the petitioner must be established which is nowhere

apparent even on a close scrutiny. The writ petition, therefore,

is not maintainable.    Alternatively, it has been argued that

infringement of the equality clause under
Article 14
of the

Constitution of India is a far cry as there is an intelligible

differentia to justify a separate and exclusive treatment to former

Chief Ministers who form a class of their own.
28.       While it is true that
Article 32
of the Constitution is to

be invoked for enforcement of the fundamental rights of a

citizen or a non citizen, as may be, and there must be a

violation or infringement thereof we have moved away from the

theory of infringement of the fundamental rights of an individual

citizen or non citizen to one of infringement of rights of a class.

In fact, the above transformation is the foundation of what had

developed as an independent and innovative stream of

jurisprudence called “Public Interest Litigation” or class action.
21
Though evolved much earlier, a Solemn affirmation of the

aforesaid principle is to be found in paragraph 48 of the report in
Vineet Narain
(supra) which would be eminently worthy of

recapitulation and, therefore, is extracted below:
“48. In view of the common perception shared
        by everyone including the Government of India
        and the Independent Review Committee (IRC) of
        the need for insulation of the CBI from
        extraneous influence of any kind, it is imperative
        that some action is urgently taken to prevent the
        continuance of this situation with a view to
        ensure proper implementation of the rule of law.
        This is the need of equality guaranteed in the
        Constitution. The right to equality in a situation
        like this is that of the Indian polity and not merely
        of a few individuals. The powers conferred on
        this Court by the Constitution are ample to
        remedy this defect and to ensure enforcement of
        the concept of equality.”
                                       (Underlining is ours)
29.       Along with the aforesaid shift in the judicial thinking

there has been an equally important shift from the classical test

(classification test) for the purpose of enquiry with regard to

infringement of the equality clause under
Article 14
of the

Constitution of India to, what may be termed, a more dynamic

test of arbitrariness.   The shift which depicts two different

dimensions of a challenge on the anvil of
Article 14
is best

demonstrated by a comparative reading of the judgments of this

Court in the case of
Budhan Choudhry and others vs. State
22
of Bihar10
, and
E.P. Royappa vs. State of Tamil Nadu
and

          another.11
30.
In
Budhan Choudhry
(supra), the classical test

          based on a reasonable classification to give legitimacy to an act

          of differential treatment was expounded in the following terms:
“……It is now well established that while
Article 14
forbids class legislation, it does not
                       forbid reasonable classification for the
                       purposes of legislation. In order, however, to
                       pass the test of permissible classification two
                       conditions must be fulfilled, namely, (i) that the
                       classification must be founded on an
                       intelligible differentia which distinguishes
                       persons or things that are grouped together
                       from others left out of the group and, (ii) that
                       differentia must have a rational relation to the
                       object sought to be achieved by the statute in
                       question. The classification may be founded
                       on different bases; namely, geographical, or
                       according to objects or occupations or the like.
                       What is necessary is that there must be a
                       nexus between the basis of classification and
                       the object of the Act under consideration. It is
                       also well established by the decisions of this
                       Court that
Article 14
condemns discrimination
                       not only by a substantive law but also by a law
                       of procedure.”
31.          The more dynamic version came two decades later in

          the case of
E.P. Royappa
(supra) wherein Bhagwati, J.

          expanded the scope of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India in
10
AIR 1955 SC 191
11
(1974) 4 SCC 3
23
the following terms:
“85…….From a positivistic point of view,
                        equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact
                        equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies;
                        one belongs to the rule of law in a republic
                        while the other, to the whim and caprice of an
                        absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it
                        is implicit in it that it is unequal both according
                        to political logic and constitutional law and is
                        therefore violative of
Article 14
, and if it effects
                        any matter relating to public employment, it is
                        also violative of
Article 16.
Articles 14
and
16
strike at arbitrariness in State action and
                        ensure fairness and equality of treatment.
                        They require that State action must be based
                        on valid relevant principles applicable alike to
                        all similarly situate and it must not be guided
                        by any extraneous or irrelevant considerations
                        because that would be denial of equality.
                        Where the operative reason for State action,
                        as distinguished from motive inducing from the
                        antechamber of the mind, is not legitimate and
                        relevant but is extraneous and outside the
                        area of permissible considerations, it would
                        amount to mala fide exercise of power and that
                        is hit by
Articles 14
and
16.
Mala fide exercise
                        of power and arbitrariness are different lethal
                        radiations emanating from the same vice: in
                        fact the latter comprehends the former. Both
                        are inhibited by
Articles 14
and 16.”
32.           The evolution of the dynamic facet of
Article 14
of the

          Constitution of India was carried forward in numerous

          pronouncements of this Court of which reference must be

          made,     illustratively,   to
Ramana       Dayaram       Shetty   vs.

          International Airport Authority of India and others
12;
12
(1979) 3 SCC 489
24
Sharma Transport vs. Govt. of A.P. and others13;
Kumari

          Shrilekha Vidyarthi and others vs. State of U.P.
and others14;
State of Punjab and another vs. Brijeshwar Singh Chahal
and another15.
33.
Paragraph 23 and 35 of Kumari Shrilekha
(supra)

          may be extracted with profit only to notice the absolute clarity in

          carrying forward the principle
laid down by
Hon. Bhagwati J., in
Royappa
(supra).
“23. Thus, in a case like the present, if it is
                        shown that the impugned State action is
                        arbitrary and, therefore, violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution, there can be no
                        impediment in striking down the impugned act
                        irrespective of the question whether an
                        additional right, contractual or statutory, if any,
                        is also available to the aggrieved persons.

                        …………
35. It is now too well settled that every State
                        action, in order to survive, must not be
                        susceptible to the vice of arbitrariness which is
                        the crux of
Article 14
of the Constitution and
                        basic to the rule of law, the system which
                        governs us. Arbitrariness is the very negation
                        of the rule of law. Satisfaction of this basic test
                        in every State action is sine qua non to its
                        validity and in this respect, the State cannot
                        claim comparison with a private individual
                        even in the field of contract. This distinction
                        between the State and a private individual in
                        the field of contract has to be borne in the
13
(2002) 2 SCC 188
14
(1991) 1 SCC 212
15
(2016) 6 SCC 1
25
mind.”
34.         The “final” culmination is in
Shayara Bano vs. Union

          of India
and others16 where two members of the Bench

          (Hon’ble R.F. Nariman and Uday Umesh Lalit, JJ.) wrote as

          follows:
“101. It will be noticed that a Constitution
                      Bench of this Court in
Indian Express
                      Newspapers (Bombay) (P) Ltd. v. Union of
                      India
stated that it was settled law that
                      subordinate legislation can be challenged on
                      any of the grounds available for challenge
                      against plenary legislation. This being the
                      case, there is no rational distinction between
                      the two types of legislation when it comes to
                      this ground of challenge under
Article 14.
The
                      test of manifest arbitrariness, therefore, as
laid
                      down in
the aforesaid judgments would apply
                      to invalidate legislation as well as subordinate
                      legislation under
Article 14.
Manifest
                      arbitrariness, therefore, must be something
                      done by the legislature capriciously, irrationally
                      and/or without adequate determining principle.
                      Also, when something is done which is
                      excessive      and      disproportionate,    such
                      legislation would be manifestly arbitrary. We
                      are, therefore, of the view that arbitrariness in
                      the sense of manifest arbitrariness as pointed
                      out by us above would apply to negate
                      legislation as well under Article 14.”
35.         The above view received support of a third member of

          the Constitution Bench (Hon’ble Kurian Joseph, J.)
16
(2017) 9 SCC 1
26
36.       In the light of the above views the allocation of

government      bungalows      to     constitutional   functionaries

enumerated in
Section 4(3)
of the 1981 Act after such

functionaries demit public office(s) would be clearly subject to

judicial review on the touchstone of
Article 14
of the Constitution

of India. This is particularly so as such bungalows constitute

public property which by itself is scarce and meant for use of

current holders of public offices. The above is manifested by

the institution of
Section 4-A
in the 1981 Act by the Amendment

Act of 1997 (Act 8 of 1997). The questions relating to allocation

of such property, therefore, undoubtedly, are questions of public

character and, therefore, the same would be amenable for

being adjudicated on the touchstone of reasonable classification

as well as arbitrariness.
37.       The present petitioner, as already noticed in the

opening paragraphs of this judgment, had earlier approached

this Court under
Article 32
of the Constitution challenging the

validity of the 1997 Rules. Not only the said writ petition was

entertained but the 1997 Rules were, in fact, struck down. In

doing so, this Court had, inter alia, considered the validity of the

1997 Rules in the light of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India.
27
The insertion of
Section 4(3)
by the 2016 Amendment as a

substantive provision of the statute when the 1997 Rules to the

same effect were declared invalid by the Court would require

the curing of the invalidity found by this Court in the matter of

allotment of government accommodation to former Chief

Ministers.    The defect found earlier persists.     The impugned

legislation, therefore, can very well be construed to be an

attempt to overreach the judgment of this Court in
Lok Prahari
(supra).
38.          Natural resources, public lands and the public goods

like government bungalows/official residence are public property

that belongs to the people of the country.         The ‘Doctrine of

Equality’ which emerges from the concepts of justice, fairness

must guide the State in the distribution/allocation of the same.

The Chief Minister, once he/she demits the office, is at par with

the common citizen, though by virtue of the office held, he/she

may be entitled to security and other protocols. But allotment of

government bungalow, to be occupied during his/her lifetime,

would not be guided by the constitutional principle of equality.
39.          Undoubtedly,
Section 4(3)
of the 1981 Act would have

the effect of creating a separate class of citizens for conferment
28
of benefits by way of distribution of public property on the basis

of the previous public office held by them. Once such persons

demit the public office earlier held by them there is nothing to

distinguish them from the common man. The public office held

by them becomes a matter of history and, therefore, cannot

form the basis of a reasonable classification to categorize

previous holders of public office as a special category of

persons entitled to the benefit of special privileges. The test of

reasonable classification, therefore, has to fail. Not only that the

legislation i.e.
Section 4(3)
of the 1981 Act recognizing former

holders of public office as a special class of citizens, viewed in

the aforesaid context, would appear to be arbitrary and

discriminatory thereby violating the equality clause.       It is a

legislative     exercise   based    on   irrelevant   and    legally

unacceptable considerations, unsupported by any constitutional

sanctity.
40.           Consequently, we hold that
Section 4(3)
of the 1981

Act cannot pass the test of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India

and is, therefore, liable to be struck down. We, therefore, hold

that the aforesaid
Section 4(3)
of the Uttar Pradesh Ministers

(Salaries, Allowances and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1981

is ultra vires the Constitution of India as it transgresses the
29
equality clause under
Article 14.
The writ petition in question,

therefore, is allowed.
……….................J.
                                            (RANJAN GOGOI)


                                            ……….................J.
                                             (R. BANUMATHI)

NEW DELHI
MAY 07, 2018.