[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Dtc Security Staff Union (Regd.) vs Dtc on 11 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2018 SC 1473
Author:
Navin Sinha
Bench:
Navin Sinha
,
R. Banumathi
,
Ranjan Gogoi
NON­REPORTABLE

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                CIVIL APPEAL NO(s).5005  OF 2018
               (arising out of SLP(C) No.8039 of 2016)

DTC SECURITY STAFF UNION (REGD.)                    ….APPELLANT(S)
                                  VERSUS
DTC AND ANOTHER                                     ….RESPONDENT(S)


                                  JUDGMENT
NAVIN SINHA, J.
Leave granted.
2.    The Appellant sought a Reference on 24.10.1979, under

the
Industrial   Disputes   Act,  1947
(hereinafter   referred  to   as

‘the Act’) with regard to revision of pay­scale of Security Staff

up   to   the   rank   of   Assistant   Security   Inspector,  in   the   Delhi

Transport   Corporation   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   ‘the

Corporation’).   The   Industrial   Tribunal,   by   Award   dated

22.08.1985   held   that   Assistant   Security   Officer,   Security

Havaldar   and   Security   Guard   in   the   services   of   the

Corporation   were   entitled   to   the   pay­scale   of   Rs.425­700/­,
1
Rs.260­350/­   and   Rs.225­308/­respectively,  with   effect   from

01.10.1979, at par with their counterparts in the Delhi Police

Force. The  Corporation challenged the Award unsuccessfully

before   the   Single   Judge.     The   Division   Bench   set   aside   the

Award, and which is presently assailed.
3.    Ms.   Anitha   Shenoy,   learned   counsel   for   the   appellant,

submitted that the Tribunal granted parity in pay­scale with

the  Delhi police based on consideration of material evidence

inter alia with regard to similarity in nature of duties, existing

parity   for   the   post   of   Deputy   Security   Officer   and   Security

Officer   with   that   in   the   Delhi   Police,   the   next   below   post

principle in the Corporation itself, and the pay­scale available

to similarly situated security staff in the Food Corporation of

India, the Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd, etc.  In absence of any

infirmity in the decision­making process by the Tribunal, the

Division Bench erred in exercising appellate jurisdiction over

the Award.   The principles and the nature of the jurisdiction

exercised under
Article 226
of the Constitution of India with
2
regard   to   matters   concerning   pay­scale,   including   equal   pay

for   equal   work,   are   fundamentally   different   from   the

adjudication of the same by an Industrial Tribunal under the

Act.     The   primary   purpose   of   industrial   adjudication   is   to

ensure social justice, secure peace and harmony between the

employer and workmen and to ensure full cooperation between

them.     The   Tribunal   for   the   purpose   can   confer   rights   and

privileges   which   it   considers   reasonable   and   proper   and

essential for keeping industrial peace.
4.    It is pointed out that parity in pay­scale of the security

cadre in the Corporation with that in the Delhi Police existed

till   1962.     Thereafter,   though   parity   existed   with   the   Delhi

Police   for   the   rank   of   Deputy   Security   Officer   and   Security

Officer in the Corporation, the same was denied for the post of

Assistant   Security   Officer,   Security   Havaldar   and   Security

Guard   in   the   Corporation.     The   discrimination,   for   no

justifiable reason was completely arbitrary and contrary to the

constitutional ethos for a living wage and parity in pay­scales
3
based on wholesome identity, applying the principle of equal

pay for equal work, it is argued.  There was a great amount of

similarity in the nature of duties of the three posts with that of

the equivalent ranks in the Delhi Police.  Paucity of funds can

never be justification to deny parity in pay­scale, it is further

contended.
5.    Dr. Monika Gusain, learned counsel for the Corporation,

submitted that the pay­scales for posts in the Security Cadre

were   based   on   the   3rd  Pay   Commission   recommendations

dated   01.01.1973.   The   pay­scales   have   been   revised

periodically   in   accordance   with   recommendations   of   4 th  Pay

Commission   dated   01.01.1986,   5th  Pay   Commission   dated

01.01.1996,   6th  Pay   Commission   dated   01.01.2006   and

ultimately   the   7th  Pay   Commission   recommendations   have

been   made   applicable   to   the   employees   of   the   Corporation,

including   the   posts   in   the   security   cadre.     The   Corporation

was   funded   by   the   Government   of   the   National   Capital

Territory   of   Delhi,   which   did   not   approve   implementation   of

the award inter alia because of the financial implications.
4
6.    We   have   considered   the   submissions.     The   Security

Cadre   of   the   Corporation   comprises   of   the   Deputy   Security

Officer,   Security   Officer,   Assistant   Security   Officer,   Security

Havaldar   and   Security   Guard.     Parity   of   pay­scales   in   the

security cadre of the Corporation, with that of the Delhi Police,

did   exist   till   1962.     Pursuant   to   the   1 st  and   2nd  Pay

Commission recommendations, parity in pay­scales of Deputy

Security Officer and Security Officer was maintained with that

in the Delhi Police, but not for the rank of Assistant Security

Officer, Security Havaldar and Security Guard.       Aggrieved,

the   Appellant­Union   sought   Reference   under   the   Act.     The

Corporation contended in its written statement that pay­scales

of Assistant Security Officer, Security Havaldar and Security

Guard were fixed in accordance with the 3rd  Pay Commission

recommendation   dated   01.01.1973.   A   pay   commission   had

been constituted to prepare a wage structure for all employees

of the Corporation, and which was to submit its report shortly.
The   Tribunal   opined   that   it   was   an   arduous   and   time

consuming   task.     On   that   basis,   the   Tribunal   proceeded   to
5
assume   jurisdiction   with   regard   to   grant   of   the   appropriate

pay­scale.  It hardly needs emphasis that grant of pay scale is

a   highly   technical   and   complex   matter,   which   requires

consideration of a host of factors, such as the qualifications

for the posts, the method of recruitment, the nature of duties,

etc.  Therefore, the Courts/ Tribunal are loathe to interfere in

matters with regard to grant of pay­scale. In
Union of India v.

P.V.   Hariharan
,  (1997)   3   SCC   568,   it   was   observed   as

follows:­

         “5…We   have   noticed   that   quite   often   the   Tribunals
         are   interfering   with   pay   scales   without   proper
         reasons and without being conscious of the fact that
         fixation of pay is not their function. It is the function
         of   the   Government   which   normally   acts   on   the
         recommendations   of   a   Pay   Commission.   Change   of
         pay scale of a category has a cascading effect. Several
         other   categories similarly situated, as well as those
         situated   above  and  below,  put  forward  their  claims
         on   the   basis   of   such   change.   The   Tribunal   should
         realise that interfering with the prescribed pay scales
         is a serious matter. The Pay Commission, which goes
         into the problem at great depth and happens to have
         a   full   picture   before   it,   is   the   proper   authority   to
         decide   upon   this   issue.   Very   often,   the   doctrine   of
         “equal   pay   for   equal   work”   is   also   being
         misunderstood   and   misapplied,   freely   revising   and
         enhancing the pay scales across the board. We hope
         and   trust   that   the   Tribunals   will   exercise   due
         restraint in the matter….”
6
7.    There   is   no   material   to   hold   that   pay­scale   of   Deputy

Security   Officer   and  Security   Officer  in   the  Corporation   was

consciously kept at par with that of the Delhi Police keeping in

mind   aspects   with   regard   to   the   qualifications,   nature   of

duties, etc.  Merely because the pay­scale may have been and

remained   the   same,   it   cannot   lead   to   the   conclusion   of   a

conscious parity on the principle of equal pay for equal work

so   as   to   make   it   discriminatory   and   a   ground   for   grant   of

parity   to   Assistant   Security   Officer,   Security   Havaldar   and

Security   Guard   also.     The   Tribunal   ought   to   have   refrained

from going into the exercise of fixation of pay­scales no sooner

that   it   was   brought   to   its   attention   that   a   Commission

constituted for the purpose was examining the same.  Though

the   Tribunal   examined   the   pay   scales   given   to   similarly

situated   security   personnel   in   other   organisations,   and   also

the next below post principle in the Corporation itself, ignoring

the difference in the methods of recruitment and qualifications

for appointment in the two organisations, it primarily based its

conclusion  to  grant  parity  of  pay­scale to Assistant  Security

Officer, Security Havaldar and Security Guard merely for the
7
reason that parity of pay­scale existed for the posts of Deputy

Security   Officer   and   Security   Officer   with   that   of   the   Delhi

Police.
8.    It is not in dispute that the pay­scale of the employees of

the   Corporation,   including   the   security   cadre,   have   been

revised   from   time   to   time   in   accordance   with   the

recommendations of 4th, 5th, 6th Pay­Commission and now the

7th  Pay­Commission.   There is no material on record that the

appellant at any time filed any objection or raised issues for

grant   of   appropriate   pay­scale   either   before   the   4 th  Pay­

Commission or the successive Commissions.   If the award of

the Tribunal is to be implemented today, it will create a highly

anomalous   position   in   the   Corporation,   and   shall   lead   to

serious   complications   with   regard   to   the   issues   of   pay­scale

vis­à­vis recommendations of the Pay­Commission and would

generate   further   heartburn   and   related   problems   vis­à­vis

other employees of the Corporation.
8
9.    The Government of Delhi, which would have had to bear

the   financial   burden,   did   not   concur   with   the   Board   of   the

Corporation to abide by the Award.  The vast difference in the

nature of general duties performed by personnel of the police

force   in   contradistinction   to   that   of   security   personnel

discharging   limited   security   duties   in   the   confines   of   the

Corporation hardly needs any emphasis.  We find no reason to

interfere with the order of the Division Bench.
10.   The appeal is dismissed.
………………………………….J.
                                                 (Ranjan Gogoi) 




                                          ………………………………….J.
                                                 (R. Banumathi)




                                          .……….………………………..J.
                                                     (Navin Sinha)
New Delhi,
May 11, 2018.
9