[Cites
17
, Cited by
1470
]
Supreme Court of India
Alakh Alok Srivastava vs Union Of India on 1 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2440, 2018 CRI LJ 2929, 2018 ALLMR(CRI) 3590, (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 231 (SC), (2018) 192 ALLINDCAS 231, (2018) 1 WLC(SC)CVL 770, (2018) 2 ALD(CRL) 170, (2018) 2 BOMCR(CRI) 711, (2018) 2 CRIMES 324, (2018) 2 CURCRIR 330, (2018) 2 JLJR 353, 2018 (2) KLT SN 68 (SC), (2018) 2 MADLW(CRI) 805, (2018) 2 ORISSA LR 136, (2018) 2 PAT LJR 417, (2018) 3 ALLCRILR 732, (2018) 3 ANDHLD 179, (2018) 3 BOM CR 746, (2018) 3 CIVLJ 908, (2018) 3 JCR 99 (SC), (2018) 3 MAD LJ(CRI) 282, (2018) 71 OCR 1, (2018) 7 SCALE 88, (2019) 106 ALLCRIC 334, AIR 2018 SC( CRI) 755
Author:
Dipak Misra
Bench:
D.Y. Chandrachud
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
,
Dipak Misra
1


                                                                          REPORTABLE


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                  WRIT PETITION (C) No.76 OF 2018


          ALAKH ALOK SRIVASTAVA                                    ......PETITIONER

                                                   VERSUS



          UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                    .......RESPONDENTS
J  U  D  G  M  E  N  T



          Dipak Misra, CJI.
The instant Writ Petition initially raised two issues, first, the

          treatment of an eight month old female child who had become a

          victim   of   a   crime   committed   under   the
Protection   of   Children

          from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
(for brevity, ‘the
POCSO Act
’) and

          the second, speedy trial and monitoring of the trials under the
Signature Not Verified
POCSO Act in a child friendly court regard being had to the letter
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2018.05.02
19:23:58 IST
Reason:
and spirit of the provisions contained in the said Act.
2
2.      The   first   prayer   was   dealt   with   vide   orders   dated   31 st

January,  2018,  1st  February, 2018 and 12th  March, 2018. It is

necessary   to   note   here   that   regard   being   had   to   the   health

condition   of   the   child,   a   team   of   doctors   from   the   All   India

Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) was sent to visit the patient

at Kalawati Saran Children Hospital. That apart, a direction was

issued   to   the   authorities   of   the   Delhi   State   Legal   Services

Authority to accompany the team of doctors.
3.     A team of doctors along with the competent authority of the

Delhi   State   Legal   Services   Authority   examined   the   victim   and

submitted   a   report.   The   relevant   part   of   the   report   reads   as

follows:­


      “Examination   revealed   8   month   old   female   infant
      alert and active, sharing bed with another girl child.
      She was breast feeding with normal vital signs (HR
      120/min,   Respiratory   rate   32/min,   no   distress,
      saturation 98% on room air, temperature 36.8 C).
      Her   weight   was   5.6   kilogram   and   physical
      appearance looks normal. Systemic examination did
      not   reveal   any   abnormality.   The   operated   perineal
      would   was   looking   normal  and  the  colostomy  was
      healthy.
Overall   the   child   looks   stable   and   recouping
      following   surgery.   The   surgical   wound   will   need
      regular aseptic dressings and further management
      will   be   done   as   per   need.   In   view   of   providing
      holistic   care,   the   team   felt   that   the   child   may   be
3
shifted   to   AIIMS   under   care   of  Pediatrics   Surgery,
     Pediatrics   &   Obstetrics   Department   with   support
     from   Psychiatry   (for   parenteral   counseling).   Team
     talked to family (Father & Mother) took consent for
     transfer   of  child   under  care by AIIMS team which
     they agreed but were worried and concerned about
     child’s   health.   Father   was   counseled   and   given
     assurance for providing best care. Being less than
     one year age all medical expenses will be exempted
     at   AIIMS   under   Janani   Shishu   Suraksa   Yojana   of
     Government of India.”
4.   Be it stated, the Member Secretary of the Delhi State Legal

Services Authority filed a status report which mentions that the

child had been shifted to AIIMS for better treatment. That apart,

the Member Secretary stated thus:­


     “That,   in   the   instant   case   as   per   report   received
     from DLSA concerned it has stated that vide order
     dated   30.01.2018   by   the   Court   of   Ld.   Additional
     Sessions   Judge,   Rohini   Court   an   interim
     compensation of Rs.75,000/­ has been awarded in
     accordance   with   Delhi   Victim   Compensation
     Scheme,   2015.   After   completion   of   necessary
     formalities i.e. bank account etc. the amount of the
     said   interim   compensation   would   be   disbursed
     immediately through RTGS.
That,   it   is   submitted   that   DLSA   Secretary,
     North­West   has   also   visited   at   Kalawati   Saran
     Hospital   and   met   the   parents   of   the   child   in   the
     morning of 31.01.2018 and apprised them of their
     legal   rights   qua   Delhi   Witness   Protection   Scheme,
     2015,   Delhi   Victim   Compensation   Scheme,   2015
     etc. It is also submitted Legal Services Advocate of
     DLSA has been appointed for providing legal aid in
     the matter.”
4
5.    On   12.03.2018,   when   the   matter   was   listed,   it   was

submitted   by   Ms.  Pinky   Anand,   learned   Additional   Solicitor

General, that the victim child had been discharged from AIIMS

but she was required to undergo another surgery which had been

fixed for 17th April, 2018.
6.    As far as the child in the instant case is concerned, we have

been apprised that she has undergone a second surgery and she

is presently stable. Ms. Pinky Anand, learned Additional Solicitor

General, would submit that if any medical assistance is required

and     the   same   is   brought   to   her   notice,   proper   care   shall   be

provided to the child.
7.    With   regard   to   the   second   aspect,   on   01.02.2018,   it   was

urged by petitioner who appeared in person that as far as cases

under   the
POCSO   Act
are   concerned,   there   should   be   speedy

disposal   of   such   cases   and   on   a   subsequent   date,   information

was sought from the High Courts in respect of the monitoring of

speedy disposal of such cases.
8.    When the matter was called up today, the petitioner filed a

chart stating the number of cases under the
POCSO Act
pending
5
in   various   States   and   sought   intervention   of   this   Court   for

issuing   directions   so   that   sensitivity   with   regard   to   the   said

legislation is shown by the trial courts and further, there should

be a speedy trial as postulated in the
POCSO Act
.
9.    We   have   heard   Mr.   Alakh   Alok   Srivastava,   the   petitioner,

who   has   appeared   in   person   and   Ms.   Pinky   Anand,   learned

Additional Solicitor for the respondent­Union of India.
10.
The   POCSO   Act
has   been   legislated   keeping   in   view   the

fundamental   concept   under
Article   15
of   the   Constitution   that

empowers the State to make special provisions for children and

also
Article 39(f)
which provides that the State shall in particular

direct   its   policy   towards   securing   that   the   children   are   given

opportunities and facilities to develop in a healthy manner and in

conditions of freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth

are protected against exploitation and against moral and material

abandonment.  The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act

indicate the focus for reduction of child abuse and protection of

children from the offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment

and   pornography,   etc.   The   relevant   part   of   the   Statement   of

Objects and Reasons of the POCSO Act is extracted below:­
6
“3.     The     date   collected   by   the   National   Crime
     Records     Bureau       shows     that     there   has   been
     increase   in   cases   of   sexual     offences   against
     children.   This   is   corroborated   by   the   ‘Study     on
     Child Abuse: India 2007’ conducted by the Ministry
     of     Women     and     Child   Development.   Moreover,
     sexual offences against children are not adequately
     addressed by the existing laws. A  large  number of
     such offences are neither  specifically  provided  for
     nor  are  they adequately  penalized.  The  interests
     of the child, both as a victim as well as a witness,
     need to be protected. It is felt that offences  Against
     children need to be defined explicitly and countered
     through                commensurate                  penalties
     as an effective deterrence.
4. It is, therefore, proposed to enact a self contained
     comprehensive   legislation   inter   alia   to   provide   for
     protection   of   children   from   the   offences   of   sexual
     assault,   sexual   harassment   and   pornography   with
     due   regard   for   safeguarding   the   interest   and   well
     being   of   the   child   at   every   stage   of   the   judicial
     process   incorporating   child  friendly   procedures   for
     reporting,   recording   of   evidence,   investigation   and
     trial   of   offences   and   provision   for   establishment   of
     Special Courts for speedy trial of such offences.”
11. In this context, it is apposite to reproduce the long Preamble

of the POCSO Act. It is as follows:­


     “
An Act
to protect children from offences of sexual
     assault,   sexual   harassment   and   pornography   and
     provide for establishment of Special Courts for trial
     of   such   offences   and   for   matters   connected
     therewith or incidental thereto.
Whereas   clause   (3)   of
article   15
of   the
     Constitution, inter alia, empowers the State to make
     special provisions for children;
7
And   whereas,   the   Government   of   India   has
acceded   on   the   11th   December,   1992   to   the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, adopted by
the General Assembly of the United Nations, which
has prescribed a set of standards to be followed by
all State parties in securing the best interests of the
child;
And   whereas   it   is   necessary   for   the   proper
development   of   the   child   that   his   or   her   right   to
privacy   and   confidentiality   be   protected   and
respected by every person by all means and through
all stages of a judicial process involving the child;
And   whereas   it   is   imperative   that   the   law
operates in a manner that the best interest and well
being   of   the   child   are   regarded   as   being   of
paramount importance at every stage, to ensure the
healthy physical, emotional, intellectual and social
development of the child;
And   whereas   the   State   parties   to   the
Convention on the Rights of the Child are required
to undertake all appropriate national, bilateral and
multilateral measures to prevent –
(a)   the   inducement   or   coercion   of   a   child   to
engage in any       unlawful sexual activity;
(b)   the   exploitative   use   of   children   in
prostitution or other   unlawful sexual practices;
(c)     the   exploitative   use   of   children   in
pornographic performances and materials;
And   whereas   sexual   exploitation   and   sexual
abuse of children are heinous crimes and need to be
effectively addressed.”
8
12. In Eera through Dr. Manjula Krippendorf v. State (NCT

of   Delhi)   and   another1,   one   of   us   (Dipak   Misra,   J),   dwelling

upon the purpose of the Statement of Objects and Reasons and

the Preamble of the POCSO Act, observed:­


      “20. … the very purpose of bringing a legislation of
      the   present  nature   is to  protect the  children from
      the   sexual   assault,   harassment   and   exploitation,
      and to secure the best interest of the child. On an
      avid and diligent discernment of the preamble, it is
      manifest that it recognizes the necessity of the right
      to   privacy   and   confidentiality   of   a   child   to   be
      protected   and   respected   by   every   person   by   all
      means and through all stages of a judicial process
      involving the child. Best interest and well being are
      regarded as being of paramount importance at every
      stage   to   ensure   the   healthy   physical,   emotional,
      intellectual   and   social   development   of   the   child.
      There is also a stipulation that sexual exploitation
      and sexual abuse are heinous offences and need to
      be   effectively   addressed.   The   statement   of   objects
      and   reasons   provides   regard   being   had   to   the
      constitutional mandate, to direct its policy towards
      securing   that   the   tender   age   of   children   is   not
      abused   and   their   childhood   is   protected   against
      exploitation and they are given facilities to develop
      in a healthy manner and in conditions of freedom
      and dignity. There is also a mention which is quite
      significant that interest of the child, both as a victim
      as   well   as   a   witness,   needs   to   be   protected.   The
      stress   is   on   providing   childfriendly   procedure.
      Dignity   of   the   child   has   been   laid   immense
      emphasis   in   the   scheme   of   legislation.   Protection
      and interest occupy the seminal place in the text of
      the
POCSO Act
.”


1 (2017) 15 SCC 133
9
13. At the very outset, it has to be stated with authority that the
POCSO   Act
is   a   gender   neutral   legislation.
This   Act
has   been

divided into various Chapters and Parts therein.
Chapter II of the

Act
titled  “Sexual Offences Against Children” is segregated into

five   parts.   Part   A   of   the   said   Chapter   contains   two   Sections,

namely
Section 3
and
Section 4
.
Section 3
defines the offence of

“Penetrative   Sexual   Assault”   whereas
Section   4
lays   down   the

punishment   for   the   said   offence.   Likewise,   Part   B   of   the   said

Chapter   titled   “Aggravated   Penetrative   Sexual   Assault   and

Punishment   therefor”   contains   two   sections,   namely
Section   5
and
Section 6
. The various sub­sections of
Section 5
copiously

deal   with   various   situations,   circumstances   and   categories   of

persons   where   the   offence   of   penetrative   sexual   assault   would

take the character of the offence of aggravated penetrative sexual

assault.
Section 5(k)
, in particular, while laying emphasis on the

mental   stability   of   a   child   stipulates   that   where   an   offender

commits   penetrative   sexual   assault   on   a   child,   by   taking

advantage   of   the   child’s   mental   or   physical   disability,   it   shall

amount to an offence of  aggravated penetrative sexual assault.
10
14. That   apart,
Section   28
which  occurs  in  Chapter   VII   titled

“Special Courts” requires for designation of a Court of Session in

each district as Special Court specifically, to try offences under

the
POCSO Act
for ensuring a speedy trial which is one of the

fundamental objectives of the Act. Further,
Section 32
stipulates

that State Government shall appoint a Special Public Prosecutor

for   every   Special   court,   so   designated   under
Section   28
,   for

conducting cases only under the
POCSO Act
.
15.
Chapter VIII of the Act
deals with the procedure and powers

of theses Special Courts and the procedure for recording evidence

of the child victim.
Section 33
falling under Chapter VIII provides

for various safeguards at the trial stage and ensures that various

manifold   interests   of   the   child   are   protected.    We   think   it

appropriate to reproduce the relevant part of
Section 33
:­ 


      “33. Procedure and powers of Special Court – (1) A
      Special  Court may  take cognizance of any  offence,
      without the accused being committed to it for trial,
      upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute
      such offence, or upon a police report of such facts.
      (2)   The   Special   Public   Prosecutor,   or   as   the   case
      may be, the counsel appearing for the accused shall,
      while   recording   the   examination­in­chief,   cross­
      examination   or   re­examination   of   the   child,
      communicate the questions to be put to the child to
      the   Special   Court   which   shall   in   turn   put   those
11
questions to the child.
(3)The Special Court may, if it considers necessary,
      permit frequent breaks for the child during the trial.
      (4)The   Special   Court   shall   create   a   child­friendly
      atmosphere   by   allowing   a   family   member,   a
      guardian, a friend or a relative, in whom the child
      has trust or confidence, to be present in the court.
      (5) The Special Court shall ensure that the child is
      not called repeatedly to testify in the court.
      (6)   The   Special   Court   not   permit   aggressive
      questioning or character assassination of the child
      and ensure that dignity of the child is maintained at
      all times during the trial.
(7) The Special Court shall ensure that the identity
      of the child is not disclosed at any time during the
      course of investigation or trial:
Provided that for reasons to be recorded in writing,
      the Special Court may permit such disclosure, if in
      its opinion such disclosure is in the interest of the
      child.
Explanation. – For the purposes of this sub­section,
      the identity of the child shall include the identity of
      the  child’s  family, school, relatives, neighbourhood
      or any other information by which the identity of the
      child may be revealed.”
16.
Section 35
provides for recording of the evidence of the child

and   disposal   of   the   cases.   The   same   being   important   for   the

present purpose, it is quoted here:­


      “35.   Period   for   recording   of   evidence   of   child   and
      disposal of case. – (1)The evidence of the child shall
      be   recorded   within   a   period   of   thirty   days   of   the
12
Special Court taking cognizance of the offence and
      reasons  for delay, if  any, shall be recorded by the
      Special Court.
(2) The Special Court shall complete the trial, as far
      as   possible,   within   a   period   of   one   year   from   the
      date of taking cognizance of the offence.”
17. The   aforesaid   provisions   make   it   clear   as   crystal   that   the

legislature   has   commanded   the   State   to   take   various   steps   at

many   levels   so   that   the   child   is   protected   and   the   trial   is

appropriately conducted.
18.
Section 37
provides that the Special Court shall try cases in

camera  and  in  the   presence of the parents of the child or  any

other person in whom the child has trust or confidence;
Section

36
casts a duty on the Special Court to ensure that the child is

not exposed in any way to the accused at the time of recording of

the evidence while at the same time ensuring that the accused is

in a position to hear the statement of the child and communicate

with his advocate.   The objective of the
POCSO Act
is to protect

the   child   from   many   an  aspect  so that  he/she does not  feel  a

sense   of   discomfort   or   fear   or   is   reminded   of   the   horrified

experience   and   further   there   has   to   be   a   child   friendly

atmosphere.
13
19. Speaking   about   the   child,   a   three­Judge   Bench   in
M.C.

Mehta v. State of T.N.
and others2 opined that:­


      “… “child is the father of man”. To enable fathering
      of   a   valiant   and   vibrant   man,   the   child   must   be
      groomed well in the formative years of his life. He
      must receive education, acquire knowledge of man
      and materials and blossom in such an atmosphere
      that on reaching age, he is found to be a man with a
      mission, a man who matters so far as the society is
      concerned.”
20.
In Supreme Court
Women Lawyers Association (SCWLA)

v. Union of India
and another3, this Court has observed:­


      “In   the   case   at   hand,   we   are   concerned   with   the
      rape committed on a girl child.  As has been urged
      before   us   that   such   crimes   are   rampant   for
      unfathomable reasons and it is the obligation of the
      law   and   law­makers   to   cultivate   respect   for   the
      children   and   especially   the   girl   children   who   are
      treated   with   such   barbarity   and   savageness   as
      indicated   earlier.     The   learned   Senior   Counsel
      appearing for the petitioner has emphasised on the
      obtaining horrendous and repulsive situation.”



      Alice   Miller,   a   Swiss   psychologist,   speaking   about   child

abuse has said:­ 


      “Child   abuse   damages   a   person   for   life   and   that
      damage is in no way diminished by the ignorance of
      the perpetrator. It is only with the uncovering of the
2 (1996) 6 SCC 756
3 (2016) 3 SCC 680
14
complete truth as it affects all those involved that a
      genuinely   viable   solution   can   be   found   to   the
      dangers of child abuse.”
21. Keeping   in   view   the   protection   of   the   children   and   the

statutory scheme conceived under the
POCSO Act
, it is necessary

to issue certain directions so that the legislative intent and the

purpose are actually fructified at the ground level and it becomes

possible   to   bridge   the   gap   between   the   legislation   remaining   a

mere parchment or blueprint of social change and its practice or

implementation in true essence and spirit is achieved.
22.  Mr. Srivastava has provided us a chart relating to the cases

pending   under   the
POCSO   Act
in   all   States   except   Andhra

Pradesh,   Telangana,   Rajasthan   and   Jammu   and   Kashmir   in

respect   of   which   the   data   is   not   available.   We   may   take   the

example   of   two   States,   namely,   Madhya   Pradesh   and   Uttar

Pradesh.     The   pendency   of   such   cases   in   the   State   of   Uttar

Pradesh   is   approximately   30884   and   in   the   State   of   Madhya

Pradesh, approximately 10117.
23. It is submitted by Mr. Srivastava that in both the States, the

cases are pending at the evidence stage beyond one year.  We are

absolutely conscious that
Section 35(2)
of the Act says “as far as
15
possible”. Be that as it may, regard being had to the spirit of the

Act, we think it appropriate to issue the following directions:­
(i)    The   High   Courts   shall   ensure   that   the   cases
     registered under the
POCSO Act
are tried and disposed
     of by the Special Courts and the presiding officers of
     the said courts are sensitized in the matters of child
     protection and psychological response.
(ii)   The Special Courts, as conceived, be established,
     if not already done, and be assigned the responsibility
     to deal with the cases under the
POCSO Act
.
(iii) The instructions should be issued to the Special
     Courts   to   fast   track   the   cases   by   not   granting
     unnecessary   adjournments   and   following   the
     procedure
laid   down   in
the
POCSO   Act
and   thus
     complete the trial in a time­bound manner or within a
     specific time frame under the Act.
(iv)   The   Chief   Justices   of   the   High   Courts   are
     requested to constitute a Committee of three Judges to
     regulate and monitor the progress of the trials under
     the
POCSO Act
. The High Courts where three Judges
     are not available the Chief Justices of the said courts
     shall constitute one Judge Committee.
(v)  The   Director   General   of   Police   or   the   officer   of
     equivalent rank of the States shall constitute a Special
     Task Force which shall ensure that the investigation is
16
properly conducted and witnesses are produced on the
       dates fixed before the trial courts.
(vi)   Adequate steps shall be taken by the High Courts
       to   provide   child   friendly   atmosphere   in   the   Special
       Courts   keeping   in  view the provisions  of the
POCSO
       Act
so that the spirit of the Act is observed.
24. The   Registry   is   directed to  communicate  this  order  to the

Registrar   General   of   the   High   Courts   so   that   it   can   be

immediately implemented. With the aforesaid directions, the writ

petition stands disposed of.
…….……….................CJI.
(DIPAK MISRA)




                                                ……...............................J.
                                                (A.M. KHANWILKAR)
                                                   
                                                               
                         
                                  
                                                    ..…….…..........................J.
                                                    (Dr. D.Y. CHANDRACHUD)


NEW DELHI;
MAY 01, 2018.