[Cites
31
, Cited by
70
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Haryana Suraj Malting Ltd. vs Phool Chand on 18 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2670, 2018 (16) SCC 567, (2019) 1 PUN LR 228, (2018) 4 MAH LJ 12, (2018) 2 LAB LN 555, (2018) 5 MAD LW 704, (2018) 3 MPLJ 17, (2018) 3 SCT 97, (2018) 7 SCALE 706, (2018) 5 SERVLR 73, (2018) 3 KER LJ 13, (2018) 4 PAT LJR 1, (2018) 3 CURLR 36, (2018) 4 ALL WC 4195, (2018) 6 ALLMR 946 (SC), (2018) 158 FACLR 589, (2018) 3 JLJR 321, 2018 (3) KCCR SN 265 (SC)
Author:
Kurian Joseph
Bench:
Navin Sinha
,
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
Kurian Joseph
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5650 OF 2018
                               (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No. 6091 of 2010)

     M/S. HARYANA SURAJ MALTING LTD.                            ... APPELLANT (S)

                                                VERSUS

     PHOOL CHAND                                                 ... RESPONDENT (S)

                                                WITH

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5649 OF 2018
                               (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No. 6092 of 2010)

                                                AND
                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.5893 OF 2012

                                            JUDGMENT
KURIAN, J.:
Leave granted.
2.   The question arising for consideration in this case is

                           whether the Industrial Tribunal/Labour Court is functus

                           officio after the award has become enforceable, and is

                           thus, prevented from considering an application for setting

                           aside an ex parte award.
3.   In view of the conflict between two decisions of this Court -
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2018.05.21
14:22:09 IST
Sangham Tape Co. v. Hans Raj1
and
Radhakrishna
Reason:
1
(2005) 9 SCC 331
1
Mani Tripathi v. L.H Patel and another
2, by order dated

    21.01.2011 in
Haryana Suraj Malting Limited v. Phool

    Chand3
, a reference to a larger bench was made in the

    following terms:
“1. Whether the Industrial Tribunal/Labour Court
     becomes functus officio after 30 days of the
     pronouncement/publication of the award and loses
     all powers to recall an ex parte award on an
     application made by the aggrieved party after 30
     days from the date of pronouncement/publication of
     the award is the question that once again arises for
     consideration in these cases.
2. It may be noted that on this question two
     Division Bench decisions have taken apparently
     conflicting views.
In
Sangham Tape Co. v. Hans Raj
a two-Judge Bench held and observed that an
     application for recall of an ex parte award may be
     entertained by the Industrial Tribunal/Labour Court
     only in case it is filed before the expiry of 30 days
     from the date of pronouncement/publication of the
     award.
A contrary view was taken in
Radhakrishna
     Mani Tripathi v. L.H. Patel
to which one of us (Aftab
     Alam, J.) was a party.
3.
In both cases, that is to say, Sangham Tape
     Co. and Radhakrishna Mani Tripathi, the Court
     referred to and relied upon the earlier decisions in
Grindlays Bank Ltd. v. Central Govt. Industrial
     Tribunal
and
Anil Sood v. Labour
Court but read and
     interpreted those two decisions completely
     differently.
4. The conflict which has arisen as a result of
     the two decisions can only be resolved by a larger
2
(2009) 2 SCC 81
3
(2012) 8 SCC 579
2
Bench. Let these cases be, therefore, listed before
      a three-Judge Bench.”
4.   Heard learned counsel appearing for the parties and Mr.

     Shekhar Naphade, learned senior counsel assisting the

     Court as Amicus Curiae.
5.
The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
(hereinafter referred to

     as “the Act”) was enacted “…to make provision for the

     investigation and settlement of industrial disputes, and for

     certain other purposes”. Chapter IV provides for the

     “procedure, powers and duties of authorities”. Under
Section 11(1)
of Chapter IV, it is provided that the Labour

     Court or Tribunal can follow such procedure as it thinks fit.
“11(1) Subject to any rules that may be
       made in this behalf, an arbitrator, a Board, Court,
       Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal shall
       follow such procedure as the arbitrator or other
       authority concerned may think fit.”
6.   Under
Section 17(1)
, an award shall be published by the

     appropriate Government within 30 days of its receipt.

     Under
Section 17(2)
, the award becomes final subject to
Section 17A
. Under
Section 17A
, an award becomes

     enforceable on the expiry of 30 days from the date of its

     publication under
Section 17
.
3
7.
Section 20
deals with the commencement and conclusion

     of proceedings. Under
Section 20(3)
, proceedings before

     the   Court/Tribunal   shall   be   deemed   to   have   been

     concluded on the date on which the award becomes

     enforceable under
Section 17A
.
“20. Commencement and conclusion of
     proceedings.-(1) A conciliation proceeding shall
     be deemed to have commenced on the date on
     which a notice of strike or lock- out under section
     22 is received by the conciliation officer or on the
     date of the order referring the dispute to a Board,
     as the case may be.
(2) A conciliation proceeding shall be deemed
     to have concluded-
(a)   where a settlement is arrived at, when a
                 memorandum of the settlement is
                 signed by the parties to the dispute;
(b)   where no settlement is arrived at, when
                 the report of the conciliation officer is
                 received by the appropriate Government
                 or when the report of the Board is
                 published under section 17, as the case
                 may be; or
(c)   when a reference is made to a Court,
                 Labour Court, Tribunal or National
                 Tribunal] under
section 10
during the
                 pendency of conciliation proceedings.
          (3) Proceedings before an arbitrator under
section 10A
or before a Labour Court, Tribunal or
     National Tribunal shall be deemed to have
     commenced on the date of the reference of the
     dispute for arbitration or adjudication, as the case
4
may be and such proceedings shall be deemed to
      have concluded on the date on which the award
      becomes enforceable under
section 17A
.”
8.
Section 38
provides for power to frame rules for the

      purpose of giving effect to the provisions of the Act

      including   the     powers    and     procedure        of   the

      Courts/Tribunals.
9.     Rule 10B(9), as introduced in 1984 of the Industrial

      Disputes (Central) Rules, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as

      the “Central Rules”), reads as follows:
“10B(9). In case any party defaults or fails to
          appear at any stage the Labour Court,
          Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may
          be, may proceed with the reference ex parte
          and decide the reference application in the
          absence of the defaulting party:
Provided that the Labour Court,
          Tribunal or National Tribunal, as the case may
          be, may on the application of either party
          filed before the submission of the award
          revoke the order that the case shall proceed
          ex parte, if it is satisfied that the absence of
          the party was on justifiable grounds.”
10.    Rule 22 of the Central Rules also provides that the

      Court/Tribunal can proceed ex parte in case any party fails

      to attend the Court/Tribunal without sufficient cause being

      shown. The Rule reads as follows:
5
“22. Board, Court, Labour Court, Tribunal, National
      Tribunal or Arbitrator may proceed ex parte.-If
      without sufficient cause being shown, any party to
      proceeding before a Board, Court, Labour Court,
      Tribunal, National Tribunal or Arbitrator fails to attend
      or to be represented, the Board, Court, Labour Court,
      Tribunal, National Tribunal or Arbitrator may proceed,
      as if the party had duly attended or had been
      represented.”
11.   Rule 24 provides that the Boards, Courts, Labour Courts,

          Tribunals and National Tribunals shall have the same

          powers as are vested in a Civil Court in respect of the

          matters specified within the Rule. The Rule reads as

          follows:
“24. Power of Boards, Courts, Labour
              Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals.-
              In addition to the powers conferred by the Act,
              Boards, Courts, Labour Courts, Tribunals and
              National Tribunals shall have the same powers
              as are vested in a Civil Court under
the Code of
              Civil Procedure
, 1908, when trying a suit, in
              respect of the following matters, namely:-
(a)    discovery and inspection;

              (b)    granting adjournment;
(b)   reception of evidence taken on affidavit,
              and the Board, Court, Labour Court, Tribunals
              or National Tribunal may summon and examine
              any person whose evidence appears to it to be
              material and shall be deemed to a civil court
              within the meaning of
sections 480
and
482
of
              the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.”
6
12.   Thus,   under     the    statutory    scheme,       the    Labour

          Court/Tribunal is empowered to follow its own procedure as

          it thinks fit, meaning thereby, a procedure which is fit and

          proper for the settlement of the industrial dispute and for

          maintaining industrial peace. If a party fails to attend the

          Court/Tribunal   without    showing    sufficient    cause,     the

          Court/Tribunal can proceed ex parte and pass an ex parte

          award. The award, ex parte or otherwise, has to be sent to

          the appropriate Government as soon as it is made and the

          appropriate Government has to publish it within 30 days of

          its receipt. The award thus published becomes enforceable

          after a period of 30 days of its publication.
13.   In case of an ex parte award, whether the Court/Tribunal

          can set aside the same after 30 days of its publication, is

          the question to be considered.
14.   That an ex parte award can be set aside in case the

          Court/Tribunal   is    approached    within   30    days   of   its

          publication under
Section 17
of the Act, is no more res

          integra.
In
Grindlays Bank Ltd. v. Central Government

          Industrial Tribunal
and others4, it has been held at
4
1980 (Supp) SCC 420
7
paragraph-14 that:
“14. The contention that the Tribunal had
              become functus officio and, therefore, had no
              jurisdiction to set aside the ex parte award and
              that the Central Government alone could set it
              aside, does not commend to us. Sub-section (3)
              of
Section 20
of the Act provides that the
              proceedings before the Tribunal would be
              deemed to continue till the date on which the
              award becomes enforceable under
Section 17-A
.
              Under
Section 17-A
of the Act, an award
              becomes enforceable on the expiry of 30 days
              from the date of its publication under Section
17. The proceedings with regard to a reference
              under
Section 10
of the Act are, therefore, not
              deemed to be concluded until the expiry of 30
              days from the publication of the award. Till then
              the Tribunal retains jurisdiction over the dispute
              referred to it for adjudication and up to that
              date it has the power to entertain an application
              in connection with such dispute. That stage is
              not reached till the award becomes enforceable
              under
Section       17-A
…….”


At paragraph-6 in
Grindlays
(supra), it was held that the Tribunal

can exercise such powers, if it thinks fit, in the interest of justice. It

has also been held that the Tribunal is endowed with such incidental

or ancillary powers as are necessary to discharge its functions

effectively for the purpose of doing justice between the parties,

unless there is any express indication in the statute to the contrary.
To quote:
“6. We are of the opinion that the Tribunal
8
had the power to pass the impugned order if it
           thought fit in the interest of justice. It is true
           that there is no express provision in the Act or
           the rules framed thereunder giving the Tribunal
           jurisdiction to do so. But it is a well known rule
           of statutory construction that a Tribunal or body
           should be considered to be endowed with such
           ancillary or incidental powers as are necessary
           to discharge its functions effectively for the
           purpose of doing justice between the parties. In
           a case of this nature, we are of the view that the
           Tribunal should be considered as invested with
           such incidental or ancillary powers unless there
           is any indication in the statute to the contrary.
           We do not find any such statutory prohibition.
           On the other hand, there are indications to the
           contrary.”
15.   In paragraph-7, it has been held that although the Tribunal

      or other authorities specified in
Section 11
of the Act are

      not Courts, they have the trappings of a Court and they

      exercise quasi-judicial functions.
16.   At     paragraph-8, it has been held that “... all these

      authorities    being   quasi-judicial   in   nature,   objectively

      determining matters referred to them, have to exercise

      their discretion in a judicial manner, without caprice and

      according to the general principles of law and rules of

      natural justice”.
17.   At paragraph-10, it has been held that an award passed
9
without participation on sufficient causes is a nullity, and

      hence, the Court/Tribunal has the power and duty to set

      aside an ex parte award.
18.   At paragraph-11, it has been held that the view taken at

      paragraph-10 is in consonance with the mandate of Rule
22.
19.   At paragraph-12, the Court took the view that going by

      Rule    24   of   the     Central   Rules   regarding    grant   of

      adjournment       being    governed    by
the   Code    of   Civil

      Procedure
, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as “
the CPC
”), the

      provisions of
Order IX Rule 13 of the CPC
would apply in

      case of an ex parte award.
20.   In paragraph-13, it was held that setting aside an ex parte

      award is a matter of procedural review exercised ex debito

      justitiae to prevent abuse of its process and such powers

      are inherent in every Court or Tribunal.
21.   Paragraphs-10 to 13 read as follows:
“10. When sub-section (1) of
Section 11
expressly and in clear terms confers power upon
            the Tribunal to regulate its own procedure, it
            must necessarily be endowed with all powers
10
which bring about an adjudication of an existing
industrial dispute, after affording all the parties
an opportunity of a hearing. We are inclined to
the view that where a party is prevented from
appearing at the hearing due to a sufficient
cause, and is faced with an ex parte award, it is
as if the party is visited with an award without a
notice of the proceedings. It is needless to stress
that where the Tribunal proceeds to make an
award without notice to a party, the award is
nothing but a nullity. In such circumstances, the
Tribunal has not only the power but also the duty
to set aside the ex parte award and to direct the
matter to be heard afresh.
11. The language of Rule 22 unequivocally
makes the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to render
an ex parte award conditional upon the
fulfilment of its requirements. If there is no
sufficient cause for the absence of a party, the
Tribunal undoubtedly has jurisdiction to proceed
ex parte. But if there was sufficient cause shown
which prevented a party from appearing, then
under the terms of Rule 22, the Tribunal will have
had no jurisdiction to proceed and consequently,
it must necessarily have power to set aside the
ex parte award. In other words, there is power to
proceed ex parte, but such power is subject to
the fulfilment of the condition
laid down in
Rule
22. The power to proceed ex parte under Rule 22
carries with it the power to enquire whether or
not there was sufficient cause for the absence of
a party at the hearing.
12. Under Rule 24(b) a Tribunal or other
body has the powers of a civil court under
Order
17 of the Code of Civil Procedure
, relating to the
grant of adjournments. Under Order 17, Rule 1, a
civil court has the discretion to grant or refuse
an adjournment. Where it refuses to adjourn the
hearing of a suit, it may proceed either under
Order 17, Rule 2 or Rule 3. When it decides to
11
proceed under Order 17, Rule 2, it may proceed
to dispose of the suit in one of the modes
directed in that behalf by Order 9, or to make
such other order as it thinks fit. As a necessary
corollary, when the Tribunal or other body
refuses to adjourn the hearing, it may proceed
ex parte. In a case in which the Tribunal or other
body makes an ex parte award, the provisions of
Order 9, Rule 13 of the Code are clearly
attracted. It logically follows that the Tribunal
was competent to entertain an application to set
aside an ex parte award.
13. We are unable to appreciate the
contention that merely because the ex parte
award was based on the statement of the
manager of the appellant, the order setting
aside the ex parte award, in fact, amounts to
review. The decision in
Patel Narshi Thakershi v.
Pradyumansinghji Arjunsinghji
is distinguishable.
It is an authority for the proposition that the
power of review is not an inherent power, it must
be conferred either specifically or by necessary
implication. Sub-sections (1) and (3) of
Section
11
of the Act themselves make a distinction
between procedure and powers of the Tribunal
under the Act. While the procedure is left to be
devised by the Tribunal to suit carrying out its
functions under the Act, the powers of civil court
conferred upon it are clearly defined. The
question whether a party must be heard before
it is proceeded against is one of procedure and
not of power in the sense in which the words are
used in
Section 11
. The answer to the question
is, therefore, to be found in sub-section (1) of
Section 11
and not in sub-section (3) of Section
11. Furthermore, different considerations arise
on review. The expression “review” is used in the
two distinct senses, namely (1) a procedural
review which is either inherent or implied in a
court or Tribunal to set aside a palpably
erroneous       order    passed      under       a
12
misapprehension by it, and (2) a review on
         merits when the error sought to be corrected is
         one of law and is apparent on the face of the
         record. It is in the latter sense that the court in
Patel Narshi Thakershi
case held that no review
         lies on merits unless a statute specifically
         provides for it. Obviously when a review is
         sought due to a procedural defect, the
         inadvertent error committed by the Tribunal
         must be corrected ex debito justitiae to prevent
         the abuse of its process, and such power inheres
         in every court or Tribunal.”
                                     (Emphasis supplied)
22.   The Court has unambiguously held that it is the power and

      duty of the Tribunal exercising its ancillary and incidental

      powers to set aside an award which is a nullity. In that

      process, the Tribunal is governed by the principles of
Order

      IX Rule 13 of the CPC
. However, apparently, on facts, the

      Court came to the conclusion that the power to set aside

      an ex parte award remained only till the award had

      become enforceable under
Section 17A
, viz., before the

      expiry of 30 days from the date of its publication under
Section 17
. It may be seen that the application for setting

      aside the award in
Grindlays
(supra) was filed within 30

      days of publication; the award was made on 09.12.1970,

      published on 25.12.1976 and the application was filed on

      19.01.1977.
It is interesting to note that in
Grindlays
13
(supra), the Court summarised the legal position in the

          concluding paragraph to the effect that     “...There is no

          finality attached to an ex parte award because it is always

          subject to its being set aside on sufficient cause being

          shown. The Tribunal had the power to deal with an

          application properly made before it for setting aside the ex

          parte award and pass suitable orders.”
23.
In
Anil Sood v. Presiding Officer, Labour
Court II5 ,

          the Court relied on
Grindlays
(supra).
The facts in the

          case of
Anil Sood
(supra) are important for the purpose

          of calculating the 30 days period. In this case, a

          reference was made to the Labour Court and the award

          was made on 11-09-1995. An application was filed by

          the appellant therein on 06-11-1995 contending that he

          had no notice of the proceedings. That application was

          dismissed on the ground that the Labour Court had

          become functus officio. It is pertinent to note that the

          decision does not mention the date of publication of the

          award.
Following the decision in
Grindlays
(supra), the

          Court held as follows:
5
(2001) 10 SCC 534
14
“5. This Court in
Grindlays Bank Ltd.
case
examined the scheme of the provisions under the
Industrial Disputes Act
and enunciated that
Section 11
of the Industrial Disputes Act conferred
ample powers upon the Tribunal to devise its own
procedure in the interest of justice which includes
powers which bring out the adjudication of an
existing industrial dispute. Sub-sections (1) and
(3) of
Section 11
of the Act thereby indicate the
difference between procedure and powers of the
Tribunal under the Act, while the procedure is left
to be devised by the Tribunal to suit carrying out
its functions under the Act, the extent of powers
of the civil court are clearly set out.
6. The aspect that the party against whom
award is to be made due opportunity to defend
has to be given is a matter of procedure and not
that of power in the sense in which the language
is adopted in
Section 11
. When matters are
referred to the tribunal or court they have to be
decided objectively and the tribunals/courts have
to exercise their discretion in a judicial manner
without arbitrariness by following the general
principles of law and rules of natural justice.
7. The power to proceed ex parte is available
under Rule 22 of the Central Rules which also
includes the power to inquire whether or not there
was sufficient cause for the absence of a party at
the hearing, and if there is sufficient cause shown
which prevented a party from appearing, then if
the party is visited with an award without a notice
which is a nullity and therefore the Tribunal will
have no jurisdiction to proceed and consequently,
it must necessarily have power to set aside the ex
parte award.
8. If this be the position in law, both the High
Court and the Tribunal (sic Labour Court) fell into
an error in stating that the Labour Court had
become functus officio after making the award
though ex parte. We set aside the order made and
the award passed by the Labour Court and
15
affirmed by the High Court in this regard, in view
       of the fact that the learned counsel for the
       respondent conceded that application filed by the
       appellant be allowed, set aside the ex parte
       award and restore the reference. To decide the
       matter afresh, the parties shall appear before the
       Labour Court on 11-12-2000 to take further
       directions as regards the proceedings. As the
       matter is very old, it would be appropriate for the
       Labour Court to dispose of this reference as
       expeditiously as possible but not later than six
       months from today.”
24.
In
Sangham
(supra), the Court took the view that the

      Labour Court/Tribunal retains jurisdiction over disputes

      referred to it for adjudication only up to the expiry of 30

      days of the publication of the award, and thereafter, the

      Court/Tribunal   becomes   functus   officio.
Referring   to

      paragraph-14 in
Grindlays
(supra), the Court held as

      follows:
“8.  The said decision is, therefore, an
       authority for the proposition that while an
       Industrial Court will have jurisdiction to set aside
       an ex parte award, but having regard to the
       provision contained in
Section 17-A
of the Act, an
       application therefor must be filed before the
       expiry of 30 days from the publication thereof. Till
       then the Tribunal retains jurisdiction over the
       dispute referred to it for adjudication, and only up
       to that date, it has the power to entertain an
       application in connection with such dispute.
XXX          XXX                 XXX
10. In view of this Court's decision in
16
Grindlays Bank [1980 Supp SCC 420 : 1981 SCC
       (L&S) 309] such jurisdiction could be exercised by
       the Labour Court within a limited time frame,
       namely, within thirty days from the date of
       publication of the award. Once an award becomes
       enforceable in terms of
Section 17-A
of the Act,
       the Labour Court or the Tribunal, as the case may
       be, does not retain any jurisdiction in relation to
       setting aside of an award passed by it. In other
       words, upon the expiry of 30 days from the date
       of publication of the award in the gazette, the
       same having become enforceable, the Labour
       Court would become functus officio.
11. Grindlays Bank has been followed in
Satnam Verma v. Union of India
and
J.K.
       Synthetics Ltd. v. CCE.”
                                     (Emphasis
supplied)
25.   This Court in
Sangham
(supra) also referred to the

      decision in
Anil Sood
(supra) and noted as follows:
“12.This Court in Anil Sood did not lay
        down any law to the contrary. The contention
        raised on the part of Mr Jain to the effect that in
        fact
in that case
an application for setting aside
        an award was made long after 30 days cannot
        be accepted for more than one reason. Firstly, a
        fact situation obtaining in one case cannot be
        said to be a precedent for another.
(See
Mehboob      Dawood      Shaikh    v.   State    of
        Maharashtra
). Secondly, from a perusal of
the
        said decision
, it does not appear that any date of
        publication of the award was mentioned therein
        so as to establish that even on fact, the
        application was made 30 days after the expiry of
        publication of the award. Furthermore
,
the said
        decision
appears to have been rendered on
        concession.”
                                     (Emphasis supplied)
17
26.
In Jammu Tehsil v. Hakumar Singh and others6,

          following the decisions in
Grindlays
(supra), this Court at

          paragraph-5 held that “In view of this Court's decision

          in
Grindlays Bank
case such jurisdiction could be exercised

          by the Labour Court within a limited time-frame, namely,

          within thirty days from the date of publication of the

          award. Once an award becomes enforceable in terms of
Section 17-A
of the Act, the Labour Court or the Tribunal,

          as the case may be, does not retain any jurisdiction in

          relation to setting aside of an award passed by it. In other

          words, upon the expiry of 30 days from the date of

          publication of the award in the Gazette, the same having

          become enforceable, the Labour Court would become

          functus officio”.
27.
In
Radhakrishna Mani Tripathi
(supra) the argument

          was that Rule 26 (2) of the Industrial Disputes (Bombay)

          Rules is ultra vires. The Rule as quoted in the decision, to

          the extent relevant, reads as follows:
“(2) Where any award, order or decision is
             made ex parte under sub-rule (1), the aggrieved
             party, may within thirty days of the receipt of a
6
(2006) 12 SCC 193
18
copy thereof, make an application to the Board,
            Court, Labour Court, Tribunal or an arbitrator, as
            the case may be, to set aside such award, order
            or decision. If the Board, Court, Labour Court,
            Tribunal or arbitrator is satisfied that there was
            sufficient cause for non-appearance of the
            aggrieved party, it or he may set aside the award,
            order or decision so made and shall appoint a
            date for proceeding with the matter:
Provided that, no award, order or decision shall be
            set aside on any application as aforesaid unless
            notice thereof has been served on the opposite
            party.”

It was contended that under
Section 17-A
of the Act an award

becomes enforceable on expiry of 30 days from the date of its

publication whereupon the Labour Court is rendered functus officio.
Reliance was placed on certain observations in
Grindlays
(supra)

and it was further submitted that the provision of Rule 26(2) of the

Bombay Rules was in derogation of
Section 17-A
of the Act.
However, the Court held as follows:
“15. Similarly, the Court pointed out in
            Grindlays Bank, the provision of Rule 24(b)
            empowered the Industrial Courts to refuse to
            adjourn the hearing and to proceed ex parte.
            Hence, in a case in which the Industrial Court
            makes an ex parte award the provisions of
Order 9 Rule 13 CPC
would be clearly attracted.
            It logically follows that the Tribunal is competent
            to entertain an application to set aside an ex
            parte award. (Vide para 12 of the decision.) The
            Court thus founded the Industrial Court’s
            jurisdiction and power to recall an ex parte
            award on Rules 22 and 24(b) of the Central
            Rules. It is thus to be seen that in Grindlays
19
Bank what this Court held to be implicit in Rule
         22 of the Central Rules is made explicit and
         clear in the Bombay Rules in the form of
         sub-rule (2) of Rule 26.”
28.   After referring to and quoting paragraph-14 in
Grindlays
(supra), it was further held that:
“16. ...From the above quotation it would
         appear that in Grindlays Bank the recall
         application was filed within thirty days from the
         date of publication of the award and hence, the
         objection raised on the basis of
Section 17-A
did
         not arise in this case. In Grindlays Bank this
         Court did not say that the Industrial Courts
         would have no jurisdiction to entertain an
         application for setting aside an award made
         after thirty days of its publication. Nevertheless,
         on the basis of the passage marked in italics in
         the above quotation Ms Issar strongly
         contended that that is the true import of the
         judgment.
17. We are unable to accept. The position is
         made clear in the later decision in Anil Sood v.
Labour Court. In Anil Sood interestingly the
         Labour Court had rejected the recall application
         on the very same ground that after making the
         award it became functus officio in the matter.
         The order of the Labour Court was challenged
         before the High Court but the High Court also
         took the same view. In appeal this Court noted
         that the award was made on 11-9-1995 and the
         application for its recall was filed on 6-11-1995.
         …
18.In light of the decision in Anil Sood we
         find no substance in the appellant's submission
         based on
Section 17-A
of the Act. There being
         no substance in the first limb of the submission
20
there is no question of any conflict between
             Rule 26(2) of the Bombay Rules and
Section
             17-A
of the Act.”
                                      (Emphasis supplied)
29.
Kapra Mazdoor Ekta Union v. Birla Cotton Spinning

          and Weaving Mills Ltd. and Another
7 is a decision by a

          Bench of 3 Judges which has also referred to
Grindlays
(supra). It is a case where the award was made on

          12.06.1987 and published on 10.08.1987. The recall

          application was made on 07.09.1987, before the expiry of

          the 30 days period provided under
Section 17A
. It is also to

          be noted that the application for recall of the award was

          with a prayer for raising an additional issue. To quote from

          paragraph-20 of the judgment, “...The recall of the award

          of the Tribunal was sought not on the ground that in

          passing the award the Tribunal had committed any

          procedural illegality or mistake of the nature which vitiated

          the proceeding itself and consequently the award, but on

          the ground that some matters which ought to have been

          considered by the Tribunal were not duly considered.
7
(2005) 13 SCC 777
21
Apparently the recall or review sought was not a

procedural review, but a review on merits.
Such a review

was not permissible in the absence of a provision in the

Act conferring the power of review on the Tribunal either

expressly or by necessary implication.”
Therefore, Kapra
(supra) is distinguishable on facts and on the question of

law dealt with therein: it was a case of substantive review

whereas, setting aside an ex parte award is a matter of

procedural review.
In the case of procedural review, as held

in
Kapra
(supra), the party “... has to establish that the

procedure followed by the court or the quasi-judicial

authority suffered from such illegality that it vitiated the

proceeding and invalidated the order made therein,

inasmuch as the opposite party concerned was not heard

for no fault of his, or that the matter was heard and

decided on a date other than the one fixed for hearing of

the matter which he could not attend for no fault of his. In

such cases, therefore, the matter has to be reheard in

accordance with law without going into the merit of the

order passed. The order passed is liable to be recalled and

reviewed not because it is found to be erroneous, but
22
because it was passed in a proceeding which was itself

      vitiated by an error of procedure or mistake which went to

      the   root   of   the   matter   and    invalidated   the   entire

      proceeding.
In
Grindlays   Bank     Ltd. v. Central   Govt.

      Industrial Tribunal
it was held that once it is established

      that the respondents were prevented from appearing at

      the hearing due to sufficient cause, it followed that the

      matter must be reheard and decided again.”
30.   Therefore, all the decisions hereinabove noted by us

      referred to
Grindlays
(supra).
On a close reading of

      paragraph-14 of
Grindlays
(supra), in the background of

      the analysis of law under paragraphs-10 to 13, it is difficult

      for us to comprehend that the power to set aside an ex

      parte award is not available to a Labour Court/Industrial

      Tribunal.
On the principles of natural justice, and on a

      purposive interpretation of the scheme of the Act and

      Rules, we find it difficult also to discern that the ratio of the

      decision in
Grindlays
(supra), is what is stated in

      paragraph-14 to the extent that an application for setting

      aside an ex parte award has to be filed within 30 days of

      publication of the award.
On the contrary, the ratio in
23
Grindlays
(supra) is that the Tribunal can exercise its

           ancillary and incidental powers, on the broader principles

           contained under
Order IX Rule 13 of the CPC
. No doubt, the
Limitation Act, 1963
is not applicable to the Labour

           Court/Tribunal8.
31.
In
Union of India and another v. Paras Laminates (P)

           Ltd9
this Court held that the legislature has intended and

           has conceded certain powers to the tribunals in their

           assigned field of jurisdiction for the efficacious and

           meaningful exercise of their power. Such powers are

           implied in every tribunal unless expressly barred.

              “8. There is no doubt that the Tribunal functions
           as a court within the limits of its jurisdiction. It has
           all the powers conferred expressly by the statute.
           Furthermore, being a judicial body, it has all those
           incidental and ancillary powers which are necessary
           to make fully effective the express grant of statutory
           powers. Certain powers are recognised as incidental
           and ancillary, not because they are inherent in the
           Tribunal, nor because its jurisdiction is plenary, but
           because it is the legislative intent that the power
           which is expressly granted in the assigned field of
           jurisdiction is efficaciously and meaningfully
           exercised. The powers of the Tribunal are no doubt
           limited.
Its area of jurisdiction is clearly defined, but
           within the bounds of its jurisdiction, it has all the
8
M.P. Steel Corporation v. Commissioner of Central Excise
(2015) 7
SCC 58;
Nityananda, M. Joshi and others v. Life Insurance Corporation of India
and others
(1969) 2 SCC 199.
9
(1990) 4 SCC 453
24
powers expressly and impliedly granted. The implied
              grant is, of course, limited by the express grant and,
              therefore, it can only be such powers as are truly
              incidental and ancillary for doing all such acts or
              employing all such means as are reasonably
              necessary to make the grant effective. As stated
              in Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes (11th edn.)
              “where an Act confers a jurisdiction, it impliedly also
              grants the power of doing all such acts, or
              employing such means, as are essentially necessary
              to its execution”. [See also
ITO v. M.K. Mohammed
              Kunhi
].”

In
J. K. Synthetics Ltd v. Collector of Central Excise10
, while

dealing with a case from the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control)

Appellate Tribunal (CEGAT), this Court went a step further to hold

that there are certain inherent powers vested in every tribunal in

regulating their own procedure. It held at paragraph-6 as follows:
“6. If, in a given case, it is established that the
           respondent was unable to appear before it for no fault of
           his own, the ends of justice would clearly require that
           the ex parte order against him should be set aside. Not
           to do so on the ground of lack of power would be
           manifest injustice. Quite apart from the inherent power
           that every tribunal and court constituted to do justice
           has in this respect, CEGAT is clothed with express power
           under Rule 41 to make such order as is necessary to
           secure the ends of justice. CEGAT has, therefore, the
           power to set aside an order passed ex parte against the
           respondent before it if it is found that the respondent
           had, for sufficient cause, been unable to appear.”
32.     In case a party is in a position to show sufficient cause for

             its absence before the Labour Court/ Tribunal when it was
10
(1996) 6 SCC 92
25
set ex parte, the Labour Court/Tribunal, in exercise of its

        ancillary or incidental powers, is competent to entertain

        such an application. That power cannot be circumscribed

        by limitation. What is the sufficient cause and whether its

        jurisdiction is invoked within a reasonable time should be

        left to the judicious discretion of the Labour Court/Tribunal.
33.     It is a matter of natural justice that any party to the judicial

        proceedings should get an opportunity of being heard, and

        if such an opportunity has been denied for want of

        sufficient reason, the Labour Court/Tribunal which denied

        such an opportunity, being satisfied of the sufficient cause

        and within a reasonable time, should be in a position to set

        right its own procedure. Otherwise, as held in Grindlays,

        an award which may be a nullity will have to be technically

        enforced. It is difficult to comprehend such a situation

        under law.
34.     In this context, it is also necessary to refer to
Section 29
,

        the penal sanction which includes imprisonment for breach

        of award.
“29. Penalty for breach of settlement or
      award.- Any person who commits a breach of any term
26
of any settlement or award, which is binding on him
      under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment
      for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine,
      or with both, and where the breach is a continuing one,
      with a further fine which may extend to two hundred
      rupees for every day during which the breach continues
      after the conviction for the first and the Court trying the
      offence, if it fines the offender, may direct that the
      whole or any part of the fine realised from him shall be
      paid, by way of compensation, to any person who, in its
      opinion, has been injured by such breach.”
35.     Merely because an award has become enforceable, does

        not necessarily mean that it has become binding. For an

        award    to   become   binding,   it   should   be   passed   in

        compliance with the principles of natural justice. An award

        passed denying an opportunity of hearing when there was

        a sufficient cause for non-appearance can be challenged

        on the ground of it being nullity. An award which is a nullity

        cannot be and shall not be a binding award. In case a party

        is able to show sufficient cause within a reasonable time

        for its non-appearance in the Labour Court/Tribunal when it

        was set ex parte, the Labour Court/Tribunal is bound to

        consider such an application and the application cannot be

        rejected on the ground that it was filed after the award had

        become enforceable. The Labour Court/Tribunal is not

        functus officio after the award has become enforceable as
27
far as setting aside an ex parte award is concerned. It is

      within its powers to entertain an application as per the

      scheme of the Act and in terms of the rules of natural

      justice. It needs to be restated that the
Industrial Disputes

      Act, 1947
is a welfare legislation intended to maintain

      industrial peace. In that view of the matter, certain powers

      to do justice have to be conceded to the Labour

      Court/Tribunal, whether we call it ancillary, incidental or

      inherent.
36.   We may also add that when an application for setting aside

      an ex parte award is made at the instance of the

      management, the Labour Court/Tribunal has to balance

      equities. The appeals are hence disposed of as follows. The

      awards are remitted to the Labour Court for consideration

      as to whether there was sufficient cause for non-

      appearance of the management. Since the litigation has

      been pending for a long time, we direct the appellants to

      pay an amount of       Rs.1,00,000/- in each case to the

      workmen by way of provisional payment. However, we

      make it clear that the payment is subject to the final

      outcome of the awards and will be adjusted appropriately.
28
We   record   our   deep   appreciation       for   the    gracious

       assistance rendered by Mr. Shekhar Naphade.
..............................................J.
                                            [KURIAN JOSEPH]



                              ..............................................J.
                               [MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR]



                             ...............................................J.
                                        [NAVIN SINHA]

NEW DELHI;
May 18, 2018.
29
ITEM NO.1501                 COURT NO.5                SECTION IV

                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F     I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (C)    No. 6091 of 2010

M/S. HARYANA SURAJ MALTING LTD.                       Appellant(s)

                                  VERSUS

PHOOL CHAND                                           Respondent(s)

WITH
SLP (C) No. 6092 of 2010 (IV)
C.A. No. 5893/2012 (XIV)
Date : 18-05-2018 These matters were called on for Judgment today.

For Appellant(s)     Mr. Chetan Joshi, Adv.
Mr. Rameshwar Prasad Goyal, AOR

                      Mr. Aftab Ali Khan, AOR

For Respondent(s)     Mr. Rishi Malhotra, AOR


       Hon'ble Mr. Justice Kurian Joseph pronounced the reportable

Judgment of the Bench comprising His Lordship, Hon'ble Mr. Justice

Mohan M. Shantanagoudar and Hon'ble Mr. Justice Navin Sinha.
Leave granted in SLP (C) No. 6091 of 2010 and SLP (C) No. 6092

of 2010.
The appeals are disposed of.
Pending Interlocutory Applications, if any, stand disposed of.
(JAYANT KUMAR ARORA)                                 (RENU DIWAN)
   COURT MASTER                                   ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
(Signed reportable Judgment is placed on the file)
30