[Cites
6
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Meenal Bhargava vs Naveen Sharma on 9 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2839, 2018 (15) SCC 23, (2018) 191 ALLINDCAS 160 (SC), (2018) 191 ALLINDCAS 160, (2018) 2 CURCC 357, (2018) 2 DMC 298, (2018) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 58, (2018) 3 ICC 254, (2018) 4 CAL HN 211, (2018) 4 KER LT 1211, (2018) 5 ANDHLD 20, (2018) 6 MAD LJ 212, (2018) 7 SCALE 288, 2019 (134) ALR SOC 25 (SC), AIR 2018 SC( CRI) 1019
Author:
A.K.Sikri
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                                 REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1606 OF 2018


     MEENAL BHARGAVA                                               .....APPELLANT(S)

                                          VERSUS

     NAVEEN SHARMA                                               .....RESPONDENT(S)


                                                     WITH

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3629 OF 2018


                                              JUDGMENT
A.K.SIKRI, J.
These are the cross-appeals, filed by both the parties challenging

                         different parts of the orders dated January 9, 2018 passed by the High

                         Court of Judicature at Rajasthan in D.B. Civil Contempt Petition No.

                         1846 of 2017. The parties are husband and wife. After their marriage in

                         the year 2007, the wife joined her husband in the United States of

                         America (USA).    Their child, named Pranav, was born out of this

                         wedlock in August, 2009 at Baltimore, USA. In 2010, they migrated to
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Canada. For certain reasons, the matrimonial relations became strained
Date: 2018.05.09
17:04:39 IST
Reason:
and the wife viz. Meenal Bhargava (hereinafter referred to as the

                         ‘appellant’), left the company of her husband Naveen Sharma
2
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘respondent’) and on July 26, 2013, went

  away from her husband, taking Pranav with her. Initially, for some time,

  she stayed in Buffalo, New York and thereafter came to India in August,

  2013.
2. The respondent filed a case for custody of Pranav in a Canadian Court.

  Vide order dated October 29, 2014, the Court granted temporary

  custody of Pranav to the respondent.       By that time, appellant had

  brought Pranav to India i.e. on August 4, 2013.        After order dated

  October 29, 2014 granting temporary custody of Pranav was passed in

  favour of the respondent, the mother of the appellant filed a motion in a

  Court at Canada stating that the said Court at Canada had no

  jurisdiction in the matter. This contention was, however, rejected by the

  Court and, thereafter on April 2, 2015, another order was passed

  directing the appellant to return Pranav to its jurisdiction and appear

  before the Court on April 16, 2015. The appellant did not comply with

  this order, which led to issuance of red corner notice by the FBI/Interpol

  against the appellant.
3. Since the appellant had travelled out of territorial jurisdiction of the

  Canadian Court and had come to India with Pranav, finding no other

  alternative, the respondent herein filed a Habeas Corpus Petition in the

  High Court of Judicature at Rajasthan. In the said petition, notice was
3
issued to the appellant herein. Having regard to the nature of dispute,

  the High Court deemed it proper to explore the possibility of settlement

  in the first instance.   Thus, by order dated December 17, 2015, the

  parties were referred to mediation.          This effort bore fruits as the

  respondent and appellant settled the matter.
4. The appellant agreed to come back to USA and join the company of the

  respondent along with Pranav. Consent terms were recorded and on

  the basis thereof, the High Court disposed of the Habeas Corpus

  Petition vide order dated December 17, 2015 incorporating those terms

  of settlement in its order and directing the parties to abide by the same.

  These consent terms are as under:
“(1) Both the parties will withdraw their respective cases within 4
        months from today.
(2) Mr. Naveen Sharma will find out 3-4 flats for choice of Smt.
        Meenal and Smt. Meenal will then go to U.S.A. to select one of
        them. This process should complete within 18 months.

        (3) In the meantime Mr. Naveen Sharma will come to India to
        meet Mrs. Meenal and Pranav at least for 3 time. Similarly Mrs.
        Meenal will go to U.S.A. along with her son under the security with
        condition that Mr. Naveen will arrange all their expenses including
        travelling expenses and will undertake that if both of them desire
        to return India then Mr. Naveen will arrange their safe return to
        India.
(4) The flat which is going to purchase by Mr. Naveen Sharma
        should be in joint name of both party. None of the party will entitle
        to sale this flat or it’s any part independently. Mr. Naveen Sharma
        will arrange collateral security against loan and in no case the flat
        should be taken from ownership and possession of Mrs. Meenal
        Sharma. In case any mis-happening the flat will remain in
        ownership of Mrs. Meenal Sharma.
4
(5) Mr. Naveen, Mrs. Meenal and Pranav will live jointly at U.S.A.
        after purchase of flat. None of the family member of both parties
        will disturb and interfere in their lives.”
5. For certain reasons, the laudable settlement, hoping to achieve win-win

  situation, did not turn into reality.   As per the respondent, it is the

  appellant who committed breach of the said settlement and also violated

  the directions contained in the order of the High Court to comply with

  these terms. As she failed to adhere to the settlement and did not

  comply with the directions of the High Court in this behalf, the

  respondent herein filed Civil Contempt Petition in the High Court seeking

  execution of the consent terms and punishment to the appellant under

  the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’).

  The appellant also, thereafter, filed application in the High Court seeking

  recall of the consent order dated December 17, 2015. The High Court

  has, by impugned judgment dated January 9, 2018, found the appellant

  to be in contempt and award maximum punishment of six months civil

  imprisonment under
Section 12(1)
read with
Section 12(3)
of the Act with

  direction to the appellant to surrender within four weeks. The High Court

  has also dismissed the application preferred by the appellant for recall of

  order dated December 17, 2015.          However, it has not accepted the

  request of the respondent to give him the custody of Pranav pursuant to

  the Canadian Court’s order dated April 16, 2015 and, instead, permitted

  the respondent to seek execution of the said order.
5
6. The appellant has challenged the aforesaid order against the findings of

  the High Court holding her to be in contempt of its order and awarding

  the said punishment.     The respondent feels aggrieved by that part of

  the order whereby the High Court has refused to grant him the custody

  of Pranav and showed him the route of execution. This, in nutshell, is

  the scope of two appeals before this Court.
7. As noted above, Pranav was born in Baltimore, USA on August 22,

  2009.    He is having US citizenship.       Both the parties, after their

  marriage, have resided in America or Canada. They have also became

  Permanent Residents of Canada as well as America. From the date of

  his birth in August, 2009, Pranav remained with their parents, initially in

  America and thereafter in Canada till July 26, 2013, when the appellant

  went away with him to Buffalo, New York and thereafter came to India on

  August 4, 2013. Pranav stayed with his father, along with her mother,

  for four years and since then he is living with her mother to the exclusion

  of the respondent. He was 4 years of age when he was brought to India

  by the appellant and is in India now for more than 4½ years. Another

  pertinent fact which is to be noted is that the respondent has got orders

  from the Canadian Court giving custody of Pranav to him and has

  directed the appellant herein to return the child back to Canada.
8. In the aforesaid background, the respondent had filed petition for
6
Habeas Corpus. However, the said petition was not heard on merits

inasmuch as parties were relegated to mediation where they settled the

matter leading to disposal of the Habeas Corpus petition vide order

dated December 17, 2015 on the consent terms which were made part

of the order with specific directions to both the parties to adhere to those

conditions. We have already noted the consent terms as per which the

parties had to withdraw their respective cases against each other within

4 months from the date of the order of the High Court. The respondent

was obligated to find out 3-4 flats for choice of the appellant. After

having chosen these flats, he was to show the same to the appellant.

The appellant, at that stage, was supposed to go to USA to select one of

the said flats. On this selection, she was to join the respondent with

Pranav, thereby achieving again the matrimonial alliance and Pranav

having benefit of the company of both his parents. This entire process

was to be completed within 18 months. During the aforesaid period of

18 months which was given to the respondent to find out flats in USA,

the respondent was permitted to come to India, at least three times, to

meet the appellant and Pranav. Likewise, the appellant and Pranav

were also supposed to go to USA under security and for such visits, it

was the responsibility of the respondent to arrange all their expenses

including travelling expenses. During such visits, they were entitled to

remain in USA as per their choice and as and when they desired to
7
return to India, the respondent had to arrange their safe return to India.
9. Three main obligations, as per the consent terms, were foisted upon the

  respondent, viz.:
(i)     To find 3-4 flats in USA to enable the appellant to select one of

  them. The chosen flat was to become abode of the family.
(ii)    To withdraw the cases filed against the appellant. This included

  complaint filed with Police and also take steps to ensure that

  warrants/red-corner notice issued by the FBI/Interpol also stands

  withdrawn. This was necessary for smooth entry of the appellant in

  USA.
(iii) After the selection of the flat by the appellant, the respondent was

  obligated to purchase the said flat in joint names.
10.Likewise, the appellant was bound to carry out the following tasks as per

  the aforesaid statements:
(i)     To withdraw all the cases filed by her against the respondent.
(ii)    After earmarking of 3-4 flats by the respondent, to go to USA to

  select one of them.
(iii)   On selecting the flat and purchase thereof by the respondent in

  joint names of the appellant and respondent, she was to go to USA

  along with Pranav and stay there with the respondent.
11.For certain reasons, the parties fell apart and the settlement terms could
8
not be fructified leading to the unfortunate situation.         As per the

  respondent, he had played his part by complying with the said terms

  inasmuch     as     he    withdrew   the    illinois   police    complaint,

  warrants/red-corner notice issued by FBI/Interpol on February 12, 2016.

  He also visited India three times i.e. in August, 2016, December, 2016

  and August, 2017. During these visits, the respondent had shown to the

  appellant various flats selected online by him with request to the

  appellant to make her choice. However, on his third visit in August, 2017,

  the appellant did not allow Pranav to meet the respondent as a result of

  which police complaint was filed with the SHO, Ajmer on August 26,

  2017. The respondent also sent air tickets to the appellant on August 31,

  2017 for travel on September 3, 2017 to enable her and Pranav to visit

  USA. The respondent further claims that he had also planned a trip to

  Disney World, Florida for Pranav along with the appellant. According to

  the respondent, in spite of all the efforts made by the respondent, it is

  the appellant who backed out and resiled from the settlement as she

  failed to perform her role.
12.The appellant, on the other hand, blames the respondent which led to

  the aforesaid failure. Her accusation is that after the Habeas Corpus

  Petition was disposed of vide order dated December 17, 2015, she filed

  following three petitions on April 12, 2016 seeking to withdraw the

  following cases filed by her:
9
(i)     Custody Petition filed by her before the Family Court, Ajmer.
(ii)    Maintenance case filed by her before the Family Court, Ajmer.
(iii)   Divorce case filed by her before the Family Court, Ajmer.
13.It is further claimed by the appellant that even the criminal proceedings

  launched by her under
Section 498-A
IPC etc. were quashed by the

  High Court on a petition filed by the respondent under
Section 482
of the

  Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (
Cr.P.C
.) which happened because of

  her no objection as per the settlement.         Pointing the finger at the

  respondent, her imputation is that he did not withdraw the custody case

  filed by him in the Canadian Court and/or sought vacation/rescinding of

  order dated April 16, 2015 by which custody of Pranav was ordered in

  favour of the respondent. She also alleges that the respondent failed to

  send a list of flats to her within the stipulated 18 months time which was

  mentioned in the consent terms. Thus, according to the appellant, it is

  the respondent who has not fulfilled his obligations under the settlement.

  In fact, she even filed miscellaneous application in the petition that was

  filed by the respondent under
Section 482
Cr.P.C. and was allowed by

  the High Court on April 12, 2017, seeking recall of the said order on the

  ground that it was the respondent who had committed breach of the

  settlement.     High Court, however, rejected the said application vide

  order dated May 9, 2017 on the ground that the said order had been

  passed after issuance of notice to the appellant.
10
14.With this kind of impasse, the respondent filed a miscellaneous

  application in the Habeas Corpus Petition seeking revival thereof on the

  ground that the appellant had breached the consent terms. This

  application was, however, not accepted by the High Court on the ground

  that if there was any breach or disobedience on the part of the appellant

  herein, there was an alternative remedy available to the respondent to

  file contempt petition.    This application was, thus, dismissed as

  withdrawn by order dated October 5, 2017 with liberty to the respondent

  to file the contempt petition.    Thereafter, the respondent filed the

  contempt petition on November 7, 2017 which has culminated in the

  impugned judgment dated January 9, 2018.
15.We may mention at this stage that when the notice of the contempt

  petition was served upon the appellant, she filed reply thereto stating

  that she had taken requisite steps under the settlement and it is the

  respondent who failed to get orders dated April 16, 2015 passed by

  Canadian Court nullified thereby disabling her to go to America

  inasmuch as she could be arrested immediately on landing in

  USA/Canada in view of the aforesaid order. She also alleged that list of

  flats was not sent to her. Moreover, conduct of the respondent,

  post-settlement, was not good. She had also filed additional reply dated

  December 11, 2017 contending (i) pursuant to High Court orders, she
11
had gone to Delhi hotel to meet respondent and his mother but she was

  publicly humiliated there, (ii) she had found that the respondent had

  been fired by his employer IBM for taking bribes and he had not been

  truthful to the Government also and (iii) respondent had not paid a single

  penny as maintenance.        This was followed by application dated

  December 19, 2017 by the appellant seeking recall of order dated

  December 17, 2015.
16.The aforesaid stand of the appellant has been taken note of with a

  specific purpose, namely, it is the contention of Mrs. Anjana Prakash,

  learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant, that the High Court

  has, in the impugned judgment, not even discussed and dealt with the

  submissions of the appellant that she had not committed any breach of

  the order or consent terms and on the contrary, it is the respondent who

  failed to fulfil his obligations thereunder. She submitted that from the

  reading of the impugned order, it can be discerned that the High Court

  Bench kept on insisting the appellant to join the company of the

  respondent along with Pranav and on her refusal to do so, the High

  Court has taken the view that appellant has shown strong defiance to

  the orders of the Court. In the process, the High Court has not even

  cared to examine who was at fault insofar as adherence to the consent

  order is concerned. She also submitted that the High Court took into

  consideration another extraneous factor. It has noted in the impugned
12
judgment that statement was given in the Court by the father of the

  appellant that the application for recall of order dated May 9, 2017

  passed in petition filed by the respondent under
Section 482
Cr.P.C.,

  was moved by the counsel for the appellant without her instructions.

  That, however, was found to be false assertion inasmuch as the High

  Court called for the record of that case and found that each page of the

  application was signed by the appellant and on realising this, it was

  conceded that lawyer was instructed to make such an application. It

  was contended by the learned senior counsel that even if this was

  correct, it has no bearing insofar as the contempt case is concerned.
17.Mr. Jauhar, learned counsel appearing for the respondent, on the other

  hand, put entire blame upon the appellant who, according to him, took

  summersault with intention to commit breach of settlement terms as

  there was change of heart and she decided not to join the company of

  the husband. He took pains to demonstrate that respondent had took all

  the necessary steps in terms of the settlement.      He still wanted the

  appellant to resume matrimonial alliance for the sake of saving the

  family ties and also to enable Pranav be in the company of both the

  parents.
18.We have duly considered the submissions of counsel for both the

  parties. As noted in detail above, both the parties are blaming each
13
other for the failure of settlement terms. In this backdrop, we have gone

through the impugned order passed by the High Court. In the entire

judgment, the High Court has not adverted to the important aspect that

needed attention in such a case, namely, whether it was the appellant

who was responsible for not adhering to the terms of the consent order

and thereby violated the directions issued by the High Court in in its

orders dated May 09, 2017.      After all, the respondent had filed the

contempt petition attributing breach of the directions on the part of the

appellant. In reply, the appellant had taken up the stand that she was

not responsible for the happenings and squarely blamed the respondent

therefor. The High Court has not discussed these aspects. On the

contrary, the approach of the High Court was to insist the appellant to

adhere to the settlement terms even at that stage and on her refusing to

do so it arrived at a finding that she had committed the contempt of the

court’s order as the aforesaid conduct was found to be abhorrent. It is,

thus, the stubborn attitude shown by the appellant during the hearing of

the contempt petition which has weighed      by the High Court. That,

according to us, was not the correct approach for punishing the

appellant for contempt of court. The contempt petition was filed by the

respondent alleging that the appellant had not fulfilled her obligations

under the consent terms and the directions given by the High court in

this behalf. It was, thus, necessary for the High Court to discuss and
14
consider, in the first instance, as to whether these allegations of the

  respondent were correct.
19.There is another way of looking into the matter. The consent terms on

  which the parties settled the matter contained an important part of

  agreement, namely, both the parties decided to live together again. This

  happened in the proceedings which essentially related to the custody of

  child. No doubt, when the parties agreed to resume the matrimonial

  relations and decided to live again as husband and wife, the problem of

  custody of Pranav got automatically solved thereby as it brought about

  an ideal situation where Pranav could have the company of his both the

  parents.   Unfortunately, this did not materialise.    In a case like this

  whether the High Court could force the appellant to join the company of

  the respondent and live with him, if he had decided for certain reasons

  not to do so?    Even when a decree of conjugal rights is filed by a

  competent court of law in favour of one of the spouses, such a decree

  cannot be executed and the other spouse who is directed to resume the

  conjugal relations, cannot be forced to do so. It is a different matter that

  for not obeying such a decree, other consequence follow including right

  to the decree holder to seek divorce. When that is the position even in

  respect of a decree passed by competent court of law forcing the

  appellant to join the company of the respondent and on her failing to do

  so punishing her in committing contempt of the court’s order, that too by
15
awarding maximum civil imprisonment in law cannot be countenanced.

  In a matter like this, the focus of the High Court should have been on the

  custody of the child, which was a subject matter of the Habeas Corpus

  petition. However, as far as that aspect is concerned, the High Court

  simply stated that it would be open to the respondent to execute the

  order of the Canadian Court dated April 16, 2015. Here again the High

  Court has fallen into error. In fact, in a matter like this, the High Court

  should have restored the Habeas Corpus Petition and decided the same

  on merits. However, when application for this purpose was filed by the

  respondent, instead of doing so the High Court passed the orders dated

  October 05, 2017 giving liberty to the respondent to file the contempt

  petition.
20.Having regard to our aforesaid discussion, we allow the appeal filed by

  the appellant and set aside the order of the High court whereby the

  appellant is punished for contempt. It would be open to the respondent

  to press the contempt petition before the High Court and if he so choses

  the High Court shall decide the contempt petition in the light of the

  aforesaid observations made by this Court, namely, to first find out as to

  whether the appellant is correct in her submissions that it is the

  respondent who did not take necessary steps to ensure that the

  appellant joins the company of the respondents along with Pranav in

  USA. We also allow the appeal of the respondent partly by setting aside
16
the direction of the High Court permitting the respondent to file the

  execution petition. Instead with the consent of both the parties, order

  dated October 05, 2017 passed in Miscellaneous Application filed by

  respondent in Habeas Corpus petition is set aside and her Habeas

  Corpus petition is revived which shall be dealt with by the High Court on

  merits in order to decide as to whether custody of Pranav is to be

  handed over to the respondent.         Before us, both the parties have

  advanced arguments on this aspect whereas the appellant submitted

  that the welfare of Pranav lies in continuing his custody with his mother.

  The respondent had made a fervent plea to claim the custody on the

  basis of the order of the Canadian Court. However, we are deliberately

  not dealing with this aspect as this aspect is the subject matter of

  Habeas Corpus Petition pending in the High Court and it is the High

  Court which has to deal with and decide this question, in the first

  instance.
21.Both the aforesaid appeals are allowed on the aforesaid terms, without

  any orders as to costs.
22.Before we part with, we are constrained to make few comments about

  the conduct of the parties who are not fully acknowledging the truth and

  reality of the situation. It is either the appellant or the respondent or may

  be, to some extent, both of them, who are to be blamed for the egoist

  approach. No doubt, on an earlier occasion, some differences arose
17
between them which led to strained relations and the appellant even

came back to India.     Legal battles of all kinds started with both the

parties filing multiple proceedings against each other. In these dark

clouds enveloping the relationship between the parties, a silver lining

emerged in the form of mediation.       As both the parties acted with

wisdom and maturity, mediation exercise was successful.          Both the

parties not only buried their acrimony against each other but decided to

have a new beginning. The magic of mediation worked at that moment.

The consent terms which were recorded in the settlement arrived at

during mediation proceedings brought about the resolution which could

truly be levelled as ‘win-win’ situation. The accord was aimed at reuniting

the two spouses with the aim of bringing happiness in the matrimonial

relationship. More importantly, paramount interest of Pranav as a child

was acknowledged by the parties as any child, particularly at this age,

needs the company of both the parents for him/her to bloom and for

ideal bringing up. In fact, as is clear from the events noted above, both

the parties even took initial steps to make this settlement a success.

However, before it could be seen as ‘happy ending’ and parties could

reach that end of the road where they could find their final destination as

envisaged in the settlement, they encountered a road block. Whether it

happened due to the fault of the appellant or that of respondent, we are

not commenting about the same. Unfortunate part is that instead of
18
acknowledging the truth, parties are grumbling continuously and

complaining against each other.          This accusation, castigation,

chargeability and dilation, depicting deviation from rectitude is a

mindless exercise and, in the process, true welfare of Pranav is sought

to be sacrificed.   We are compelled to express these sentiments

because of the reason that things have still not gone beyond repair. Had

the parties shown positive and cooperative attitude (which, we are sure,

they had demonstrated during mediation talks) they could still achieve

an amiable resolution, inasmuch as it is even now possible to work out

the terms of the compromise that was entered into between them. In

fact, the respondent had expressed his willingness to go an extra-mile to

save the settlement and the matrimonial home. However, the appellant

stood firm in her attitude as she kept on saying that she could no longer

repose confidence and trust in the respondent. She has a grudge that

respondent lured her into the settlement with selfish motive to take away

the custody of Pranav with no love towards her and his moves lack bona

fides. The respondent, on the other hand, maintained the position that

appellant was resorting to falsehood because of her selfish motives

which were kept higher in priority, even at the cost of family life.

However, we may re-emphasise that all is not lost and situation can still

be brought under control if there is a dispassionate and objective

thinking by both the parties, keeping aside their ego. Life has problems.
19
Parties have to understand those problems and to reflect on the reasons

    why these problems have arisen leading to such kind of disputes. Both

    the parties have also to reflect on the future and to make up their mind

    on that basis as to whether it would be in their interest, as well as in the

    interest of Pranav to bury the hatched and have a new beginning. We

    say no more.
.............................................J.
                                                                            (A.K. SIKRI)



                                                .............................................J.
                                                              (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
MAY 09, 2018.