[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ex Navy Direct Entry Artificers Asso. vs The Union Of India Ministry Of Defence ... on 8 May, 2018
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 2340, 2018 LAB IC 2328
Author:
A.K.Sikri
Bench:
Ashok Bhushan
,
A.K. Sikri
1

                                                                                    REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6785 OF 2014


     EX NAVY DIRECT ENTRY ARTIFICERS
     ASSOCIATION & ORS.                                               .....APPELLANT(S)

                                          VERSUS

     THE UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                     .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                                JUDGMENT
A.K.SIKRI, J.
Appellant No. 1 is a registered Association of Ex Navy Direct Entry

                         Artificers, whereas appellant Nos. 2 to 5 are Ex Direct Entry Artificers of

                         the Navy. Primarily, it is the cause of appellant Nos. 2 to 5 which is

                         espoused by their Association as well i.e. appellant No. 1.         These

                         appellant Nos. 2 to 5 have rendered actual service of 10 years. For an

                         Artificer to become entitled to pension, he is supposed to render

                         minimum service of 15 years as per Regulation 78 of the Navy (Pension)

                         Regulations, 1964.      The appellants claim that after their initial
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
engagement period of 10 years as Artificers, they were placed in Fleet
Date: 2018.05.08
17:44:23 IST
Reason:
Reserve for a period of 10 years and as per Regulations, 50% of the

                         period of Reserve is to be counted for the purpose of pension. On that
2
basis, it is claimed that 5 years period of Reserve would enure to their

  benefit and on adding this period of 5 years with actual service of 10

  years, it is to be treated that they have rendered 15 years of service and

  are accordingly entitled to receive pensionary benefits.                    The

  respondents deny the placement of appellant Nos. 2 to 5 in Fleet

  Reserve for a period of 10 years as claimed by the said appellants.

  Therefore, the moot question is as to whether the appellants, after

  rendering actual service of 10 years in the Navy, were drafted into Fleet

  Reserve or not.
2. The appellants had filed O.A. No. 8 of 2013 before the Armed Forces

  Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the ‘AFT’), Regional Bench, Kochi in

  which prayer to grant benefit was sought by them. The AFT, however,

  has not accepted the case set up by the appellants. As a result, their

  O.A. stands dismissed by the AFT vide order dated January 22, 2014.

  The appellants thereafter filed review petition seeking review of that

  judgment which was also dismissed by the AFT on March 25, 2014.

  Simultaneously, however, prayer for leave to appeal to this Court have

  been granted by the AFT seeking authoritative pronouncement of this

  Court on the following questions of law formulated by the Tribunal:
“(1) Whether the applicants’ reserve liabilities imposed at the time
       of enrolment ipso facto amounted to their being drafted to Fleet
       Reserve without any specific order to draft them to the Reserve on
       completion of regular Naval service? If so, whether the period of
       such reserve liability as per the stipulated scheme was liable to be
3
taken into account for computing the length of service of the
         applicants for pension purposes?
(2) Whether the applicants Nos. 2 to 5 were entitled to be treated
         at par with the Apprentice Entry Artificers for pension purposes
         only on the ground that both of them belong to the same
         homogenous class of Artificers?
3. Both these orders passed in O.A. as well as in review petition have been

   assailed by the appellants by way of instant appeal preferred under
Section 30
of the Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007.
4. We now advert to the seminal facts which have led to the present

   litigation.
5. In the Indian Navy, the sailors are of two classes, the Artificers class and

   the non-Artificer class. Artificers are considered to be skilled sailors and

   they work on sophisticated technologies of warships. For the Artificer

   Class, there are two channels of Entry, known as Apprentice Entry

   Artificers and Direct Entry Artificers. The appellants joined Indian Navy

   as Direct Entry Artificers. At the relevant point of time (i.e. prior to July 3,

   1976), the initial engagement of the Apprentice Entry Artificers as well as

   of the Direct Entry Artificers (appellants herein) was for 10 years active

   service. On the expiry of this term, they could be drafted into Fleet

   Reserve for a period of 10 years. A person who is kept in Fleet Reserve

   can be recalled at any time, during the said period of 10 years, to serve

   in the Navy.
4
6. The Apprentice Entry Artificers (with education qualification of

  Matriculation) get 4 years training in Indian Navy during which period

  they get a special rate of pay (fixed stipend per month). After the 4

  years training period in naval establishment, the Apprentice Entry

  Artificers are advanced to the rank of Artificer Vth Class and their initial

  engagement of 10 years active service commences. At the end of it,

  they could also be kept in Fleet Reserve for 10 years.          It may be

  mentioned that after one year in the rank of Artificer Vth Class, these

  Apprentice Entry Artificers are advanced to the rank of Artificer Acting

  IVth Class to complete the engagement 10 years active service. On the

  other hand, Direct Entry Artificers, to which class appellants belong, with

  qualification of 3 years Diploma in Engineering from recognized

  Universities in the country are directly enrolled to the rank of Artificer

  Acting IVth Class with initial engagement of 10 years active service. It

  may also be stated that in the rank of Artificer Acting IVth Class, the

  Apprentice Entry Artificers and Direct Entry Artificers are merged

  together, and are treated at par for the purposes of rank, work,

  promotions, pay and allowances, leave and other benefits allowed for

  sailors. They are all governed by the same Navy (Pension) Regulations,

  1964. In their respective ranks, they relieve each other when transferred

  to ships and establishments.
5
7. These facts are noted, as stated by the appellants, because of the

  reason that the appellants are claiming that since Apprentice Entry

  Artificers are given the pension, after counting the 4 years training

  period in Naval Establishment, same treatment be given to the

  appellants as well. Question No. 2 framed by the AFT and referred to

  this Court touches upon this aspect.
8. Reverting to the facts of the appellants’ case, as pointed out above,

  appellant Nos. 2 to 5 were engaged as Direct Artificers for a period of 10

  years. All these appellants were engaged prior to July, 1976. This is the

  actual service rendered by them. According to them, they were drafted

  into Fleet Reserve for a period of 10 years and 50% of this period have

  been counted for pension. On that basis, they claim that they have

  become entitled to receive pension. Therefore, they made a request on

  May 10, 2012 to the respondents to grant pension to them. However,

  vide reply dated June 25, 2012, respondents turned down their request

  as ‘not tenable in accordance with the extent rules/regulations’. The

  reason given by the respondents was that the appellants were not

  drafted into Fleet Reserve at all and, therefore, there was no reason to

  count 50% of the Fleet Reserve period. The respondents, in this behalf,

  referred to Government Order No. AD/5374/2/76/2214/S/D(N.II) dated

  July 3, 1976 as per which drafting into Fleet Reserve was discontinued

  from 1976 onwards and, therefore, the appellants were never drafted
6
into Fleet Reserve. After receiving this rejection of their request, the

  appellants approach the AFT in the form of O.A. which has met the fate

  of dismissal, as already mentioned above.
9. A perusal of the impugned judgment of the AFT would reveal that the

  appellants were enrolled into Navy under Regulation 268(1) of the Navy

  Regulations, Part III.   Regulation 269 thereof provides for an initial

  engagement of 10 years, followed by liability to remain 10 years in Fleet

  Reserve. However, further 10 years service in Fleet Reserve is subject

  to regulations of Fleet Reserve. At the time of recruitment itself of the

  appellants, it was made clear to them that they would be drafted into

  Fleet Reserve only if required and regulations for Indian Fleet Reserve

  specifically stipulate that ‘no man can claim to join Fleet Reserve as a

  right’. Therefore, the appellants did not have any automatic right to get

  drafted into Fleet Reserve. In any case, in terms of Government’s letter

  dated July 3, 1976, transfer of sailors into Fleet Reserve was

  discontinued and, therefore, no orders for drafting the appellants into

  Fleet Reserve were ever made. There is no notation on records that

  they are being drafted into Fleet Reserve on expiry of their active

  service.   In this behalf, the AFT has quoted relevant portion of

  Government’s letter dated July 3, 1976 which is as under:
“SUB: CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF SAILORS.
I am directed to state that the President is pleased to approve the
       following modifications in the conditions of service of sailors:--
----
7
(f) Transfer to Current Fleet Reserve:-- Transfer of sailors into
       the Fleet Reserve to be discontinued. -------
3. Appropriate Government Regulations/Orders will be amended in
       due course.”
10.The AFT also found that subsequently, Regulations for the Navy was

  amended by the Government of India vide SRO.No.106 of 1978 dated

  28th March 1978. Relevant portions of the SRO are given below:
“S.R.O.106:-- In exercise of the powers conferred by
section 184
of the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957), the Central Government
       hereby makes the following regulations further to amend the Navy
       Ceremonial, Conditions of Service and Miscellaneous Regulations,
       1964, namely:--
2.   In the Naval Ceremonial, Conditions of Service and
       Miscellaneous Regulations, 1964--
(i) in regulation 269, in sub-regulation (1), for the brackets and
       figure “(1)”, the brackets, figure and words “(1) Old Entrants” shall
       be substituted, and after subregulation (1) as so amended, the
       following sub-regulation shall be inserted, namely:--
“(1A) New Entrants:--(a) Boys, Artificer, Apprentices and Direct
       Entry sailors may be enrolled for a period calculated to permit a
       period of 15 years' service to be completed from the date of
       enrolment or from the date of attaining the age of 17 years,
       whichever is later, provided their services are so long required.
…...........
(1B)(a) In case of the existing sailors, their period of engagement
       shall be governed by sub-regulation (1), except that they shall not
       be transferred to Fleet Reserve.
(b) . . . . . .
(1C) Persons joining service on or after the 3rd July, 1976 shall be
       deemed to be New Entrants.”
11.After going through the various provisions of
Navy Act
, Navy
8
Regulations, Part III and the aforesaid amendments, the AFT culled out

the relevant features in the form of salient points in the following

manner:
“25. Salient points that emerge from the above Regulations, which
     are of relevance in this case are:--
(a) Sailors having 10 years continuous service shall be liable, if
     required, for further service in Indian Fleet Reserve, subject to
     provisions of Regulations for Indian Fleet Reserve (Regulation
269).
(b) When an active service rating is within six months of
     completion of his term of enrollment, the Commanding
     Officer has to inform the Registrar of Reserves whether or not
     he is recommended for Fleet Reserve Service and his service
     certificate is to be endorsed accordingly (
Regulation 11
of Fleet
     Reserve).
(c) Qualifications have been specified for enrolment into Fleet
     Reserves. Joining Reserves is not a Right (Regulations 4 and 6
     of Fleet Reserves).
(d) Recruiting officers are mandated to explain and make the
     recruits fully understand terms and conditions of service and
     liabilities before they are enrolled into the Navy (Regulation 264 of
     Regulations for the Navy).
(e) A Fleet Reservist Certificate will be issued to each person on
     enrolment in Fleet Reserves.
26. It is evident from the Regulations that a Sailor after his active
     service has to be drafted into Fleet Reserve and it is not an
     automatic re-enrollment. There is no specific claim or right to join
     the Fleet Reserve as there are terms and conditions which have to
     be fulfilled by a person before he can be drafted into Fleet
     Reserve. It is also evident that, at the time of initial enrollment
     no recruit can be given any guarantee/promise of his being
     enrolled into Fleet Reserve as his performance in the active
     service and recommendations he receives would decide his
     eligibility for enrollment into Fleet Reserve. Therefore even
     prior to the promulgation of policy for discontinuance of drafting
     into Fleet Reserve from 1976, Respondents 1 and 2 were clearly
     at liberty to decide if a Sailor is to be enrolled into Fleet Reserve or
     not. In view of the above, we cannot agree with the submission of
9
the learned counsel for applicants that they were made to
        understand anything else.”
12.The appellants advanced two arguments before the AFT. In the first

  instance, it was argued that at the time of their recruitment into the

  service, which was before the Government’s order dated July 3, 1976

  was passed, they were given to understand that they would be rendering

  10 years of active service followed by 10 years of Fleet Service. Thus,

  they understood that 50% of the Fleet Service was counted towards

  pension to enable them to receive pension. Hence, the Government

  was bound by Principle of Promissory Estoppel to accord the aforesaid

  benefit to them. Second argument advanced by the appellants was that

  the appellants, namely, Direct Entry Artificers and Apprentice Entry

  Artificers formed a homogenous class. Thus, when pensionary benefits

  were accorded to the Apprentice Entry Artificers, there was no reason to

  deny the same to the appellants and such a denial was discriminatory

  and violated the provisions of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India. Both

  these contentions have been negated by the AFT. At the same time, as

  already noticed above, on both these aspects, questions of law have

  been framed while granting leave to appeal to the appellants.
13.We now proceed to take up the two questions for our consideration.



  Question No. 1 - Whether the applicants’ reserve liabilities imposed at
  the time of enrolment ipso facto amounted to their being drafted to Fleet
  Reserve without any specific order to draft them to the Reserve on
10
completion of regular Naval service? If so, whether the period of such
  reserve liability as per the stipulated scheme was liable to be taken into
  account for computing the length of service of the applicants for pension
  purposes?
14.To find an answer to the aforesaid question, we shall have to traverse

  through some relevant provisions of the
Navy Act
, the Naval Regulations

  Part-III as well as decision taken by the Government to discontinue with

  the policy of drafting into Fleet Reserve.              Insofar as
Navy Act
is

  concerned, following provisions therefrom are relevant for deciding the

  controversy.
“14. Liability for service of officers and sailors:--
(1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), officers and
        sailors shall be liable to serve in the Indian Navy or the Indian
        Naval Reserve Forces, as the case may be, until they are duly
        discharged, dismissed with disgrace, retired, permitted to resign,
        or released.
17.     Provisions as to discharge.—(4) Every sailor who is
        dismissed, discharged, retired, permitted to resign or released
        from service shall be furnished by the prescribed officer with a
        certificate in the language which is the mother tongue of such
        sailor and also in the English language setting forth—
(a) the authority terminating his service;
(b) the cause for such termination; and
(c) the full period of his service in the Indian Navy and the Indian
        Naval Reserve Forces.
[184A. Power to make regulations with retrospective effect.—
        The power to make regulations conferred by this Act shall
        include the power to give retrospective effect, from a date not
        earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the
        regulations or any of them, but no retrospective effect shall be
        given to any regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests
        of any person to whom such regulation may be applicable.”
11
15.The relevant regulations from the Pension Regulations for the Navy,

   1964 are re-produced below:
“78. Minimum qualifying service for pension – Unless otherwise
        provided, the minimum service which qualifies for service pension
        is fifteen years.
79.    Service qualifying for pension and gratuity – (1) All
        service from the date of enrolment or advancement to the rank
        of ordinary seaman or equivalent to the date of discharge shall
        qualify for pension or gratuity with the exception of -----
87. Sailors transferred to the reserve—A sailor transferred to
        the reserve after earning a service pension shall be granted
        such pension from the date of his transfer.
……..
92. Reservist pension and gratuity--(1) A reservist who is not
        in receipt of a service pension may be granted, on completion
        of the prescribed naval and reserve qualifying service of ten
        years each, a reservist pension of rupees eleven per mensem
        or a gratuity of rupees nine hundred in lieu of pension.

        (2) A reservist who is not in receipt of a service pension and
        whose qualifying service is less than the period of engagement
        but not less than fifteen years may, on completion of the period
        of engagement or on earlier discharge from the serve otherwise
        than at his own request, be granted a reservist pension at
        rupees seven hundred and fifty in lieu of pension.”
16.Navy Regulations Part III laid down the conditions of service of sailors in

   the Navy. Some of the provisions thereof, with which we are concerned,

   are as under:
“261. Recruitment – The Chief of the Naval Staff may recruit
        sailors required for the Service.
(2) Recruitment of sailors shall be made through boy entry,
       artificer apprentice entry, and direct entry, as necessary….
……..
12
268. Engagements – (1) Boys, Artificer Apprentices and Direct
       Entry sailors shall be enrolled for co0ntinuous service as
       provided in sub-regulation (1) of Regulation 269.
269. Continuous Service – (a) Old Entrants Boys, Artificer
       Apprentices and Direct Entry sailors may be enrolled for a
       period calculated to permit a period of 10 years’ service to be
       completed from the date of attaining 17 years of age or from
       the date of being ranked in the Man’s rank on successful
       completion of initial training, whichever is later, provided their
       services are so long required.
Continuous Service sailors of all Branches shall be liable, if
       required, for a further 10 years’ service in the Indian Fleet
       Reserve, subject to the provisions of the Regulation for the
       Indian Reserve.
(1-A) New Entrants:-
(a) Boys, Artificer-Apprentices and Direct Entry sailors may be
       enrolled for a period calculated to permit a period of 15 years
       service to be completed from the date of attaining the age of 17
       years, whichever is later, provided their services are so long
       required.
…….
(1-B) (a) In case of the existing sailors, their period of
       engagement shall be governed by sub regulation (1) except that
       they shall not be transferred to Fleet Reserve.
……….
(1-C) Persons joining service on or after the 3rd July, 1976 shall
      be deemed to be New Entrants.”
17.It will also be apt to reproduce Regulation 269 (unamended) as it existed

  prior to the amendments carried out in the year 1978, which is as

  follows:
“269. Continuous Service: – (1) Boys, Artificer Apprentices and
       Direct Entry sailors may be enrolled for a period calculated to
       permit a period of 10 years’ service to be completed from the date
       of attaining 17 years of age or from the date of being rated in the
       Mans rate on successful completion of initial training, whichever
       is later, provided their services are so long required.
13
Continuous Service sailors of all Branches shall be liable, if
      required, for a further 10 years’ service in the Indian Fleet
      Reserve, subject to the provisions of the Regulations for the
      Indian Fleet Reserve.”
18.We have already reproduced portions of Government of India’s decision

  dated 3rd July, 1976 whereby transfer of Sailors into Fleet Reserve was

  discontinued. Likewise, we have already extracted the relevant portions

  of SRO 106 dated 28th March, 1976. In addition, it would also be

  pertinent to note Regulations for Indian Fleet Reserve which are as

  follows:
“4.
Regulation 4
, lays down Qualification criteria in respect of
      Character, Efficiency, Medical Status and Age for joining the fleet
      reserve.
6. Claim to join Fleet Reserved:--No man can claim to join the
      Fleet Reserve as a right.
……..
11. Enrolment:-- The Registrar of Reserves is authorized to enrol
      or re-enrol ratings in the Royal Indian Fleet Reserve, acting
      under the authority of the Officer Commanding the Royal Indian
      Navy.
(a) When an Active Service rating is within six months of
      completing his terms of enrolment the Commanding Officer of the
      ship in which he is serving is to inform the Registrar whether or
      not he is recommended for Fleet Reserve Service and is to
      endorse his Service Certificate accordingly.
13. Fleet Reservist Certificate:-- Every man on enrollment or
      re-enrollment in Royal Indian fleet Reserve is to be issued with a
      Fleet Reservist Certificate (Form RINF.3P).        This certificate
      identifies the man as a member of the Royal Indian Fleet Reserve
      and contains a detachable Emergency Movement Order for use
      on General Mobilisation.
19.
Regulation 19
lays down mandatory training period for
      reservists.
14
21. Notations on Service Certificates:-- On the conclusion of
          each period of training the Registrar will cause the following
          information to be entered in the Service Certificates of the ratings
          concerned:--
(a) Character.
(b) Ability in substantive rating held.
(c) Fitness to hold non-substantive rating (vide
Article 7(v)]
The Registrar is to sign the Service Certificate on page 4 as being
          satisfied that the prescribed training has been carried out and that
          the man is in possession of his Fleet Reservist Certificate and
          know where to report on mobilization.”
19.Following position emerges from the conjoint reading of the aforesaid

  provisions:
(i)      Once a person is enrolled as Sailor/Officer in the Indian Navy, he is

  liable to serve in the Indian Navy or in the Indian Naval Forces, as the

  case may be, until he is discharged, dismissed with disgrace, retired,

  permitted to resign or released.
(ii)     In the event of discharge, dismissal etc, i.e., at the time of

  severance from Naval service, every sailor has to be furnished with a

  certificate in his mother tongue and also in English language. Such a

  certificate states the authority terminating his services; the cause of such

  termination; and the full period of service in the Indian Navy and the

  Indian Naval Reserve Forces.
(iii)    In order to become qualified to receive service pension, minimum

  service of 15 years is required.
20.Calculating the qualifying period for the purpose of pension and gratuity,
15
entire service from the date of enrolment or advancement to the rank of

  ordinary seaman or equivalent till the date of discharge is to be counted.

  Thus, whereas full continuous service in the Navy is to be reckoned for

  pension, insofar Fleet Reserve is concerned those who are drafted

  thereinto are entitled to count 50% of the period of Fleet Reserve as

  reckonable service towards pension.
21.Insofar as, drafting into Fleet Reserve is concerned, Regulations in

  respect thereof provide as under:
(i)     Those Sailors who are having 10 years’ service as Sailors are

  eligible for drafting in Indian Fleet Reserve.
(ii)    As per Regulation 269, those who have rendered 10 years’

  service, their service is to be treated as continuous service. This

  Regulation further provides that continuous service of Sailors of all

  branches shall be liable, if required, for a further 10 years’ service in the

  Indian Fleet Reserve.
(iii)
Regulation 4
of the Regulations for Indian Fleet Reserve lays down

  qualification criteria in respect of character, efficiency, medical status

  and age for joining the Fleet Service, which means only those who fulfill

  qualifications contained in
Regulation 4
can be considered for drafting

  into Fleet Reserve. Further,
Regulation 6
specifically declares that no

  person can join the Fleet Reserve as a matter of right. The manner of

  enrolment is mentioned in
Regulation 11
, as per which, Commanding
16
Officer has to make a specific recommendation for such an enrolment,

  i.e., he has to say as to whether or not he is recommending a particular

  Sailor for Fleet Reserve service and his service certificate has to be

  endorsed accordingly.
(iv)   In case of positive recommendation, a Fleet Reserve certificate

  has to be issued to such a person on enrolment in Fleet Reserve.
22.It is clear from the above that liability to serve in the Indian Fleet

  Reserve, if required, as stipulated in Regulation 269, is only when such

  a Sailor is drafted into Indian Fleet Reserve. There has to be, thus, a

  positive act of enrolment in the Fleet Reserve. A person who is enrolled

  as Artificer in the Indian Navy and completes 10 years’ of service, cannot

  presume that he stands automatically enrolled in Fleet Reserve.
23.So far as Appellant Nos. 2 to 5 are concerned, there was no such

  enrolment in Fleet Reserve.
24.In fact, the appellants were conscious of the aforesaid position. That

  was the reason that Principle of Promissory Estoppel was invoked on

  the ground that since their enrolment was prior to July 03, 1976, the

  decision of the Government of India to discontinue transfer of Sailors

  into Fleet Reserve as contained in communication dated July 03, 1976 is

  not binding on them. Even if we proceed on that basis, the legal position

  that has been culled out from the relevant statutory provision and
17
enumerated above, clearly shows that there was no promise held out to

    these appellants that after the completion of continuous service of 10

    years as Sailors, they would be drafted into Fleet Reserve. The Tribunal

    has correctly remarked that at the time of initial enrolment no recruit can

    be given any guarantee/promise of his being enrolled into Fleet Reserve

    as his performance in the active service and recommendations he

    receives would decide his eligibility for enrolment into Fleet Reserve.

    Therefore, even prior to the promulgation of policy for discontinuance of

    drafting into Fleet Reserve from 1976, Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were

    clearly at liberty to decide if a Sailor is to be enrolled into Fleet Reserve

    or not. It may be pertinent to mention that the aforesaid view of ours has

    not been taken for the first time. We are not treading on unchartered

    territory.   Precisely, this very question has been decided by a three

    Judge Bench of this Court in
T.S. Das & Ors. v. Union of India & Anr.1
.

    The factual background in which the aforesaid judgment is rendered is

    identical as can be seen from the following question posed therein for

    determination:
“25. In the absence of an express order of the competent authority
          to take the applicants on the Fleet Reserve Service, the moot
          question is: whether the applicants can be treated as deemed to
          be in the Fleet Reserve Service on account of the stipulation in the
          appointment letter—that on completion of 10 years of naval
          service as a Sailor, they may have to remain on Fleet Reserve
          Service for another 10 years. That condition in the appointment
          letter cannot be read in isolation. The governing working
          conditions of Sailors must be traced to the provisions in the 1957
          Act or the Regulations framed thereunder concerning service
1         (2017) 4 SCC 218
18
conditions. From the provisions in the 1957 Act, there is nothing to
        indicate that the Sailor after appointment or enrolment is
        “automatically” entitled to continue in Fleet Reserve Service after
        completion of initial active service period of 10 years. The
        provisions, however, indicate that on completion of initial active
        service of 10 years or enhanced period as per the amended
        provisions is entitled to take discharge in terms of
Section 16
of
        the Act. The applicants assert that none of the applicants opted for
        discharge. That, however, does not mean that they would or in fact
        have continued to be on the Fleet Reserve Service after expiration
        of the term of active service as a Sailor. There ought to have been
        an express order issued by the competent authority to draft the
        applicant concerned in the Fleet Reserve Service. In the absence
        of such an order, on completion of the term of service of
        engagement, the Sailor concerned would stand discharged.
Concededly, retention on the Fleet Reserve Service is the
        prerogative of the employer, to be exercised on case-to-case
        basis. In the present case, however, on account of a policy
        decision, the Fleet Reserve Service was discontinued in terms of
        Notification dated 3-7-1976.”
25.The Court reproduced the aforesaid notification dated July 7, 1976 and

  continue with the discussion in the following manner:
“27. As noted hitherto, none of the relevant provisions even
        remotely suggest that the Sailor is “automatically” transferred to
        the Fleet Reserve Service. Whereas, it is expressly provided that
        on expiration of the term of service of engagement the Sailor
        would be placed on Fleet Reserve Service only if an express order
        in that behalf is passed by the competent authority to draft him on
        the Fleet Reserve and not otherwise.
Section 16
of the Act merely
        gives an option to the Sailor to take a discharge after expiration of
        term of service of engagement. It is not a deeming provision that if
        such option is not exercised by the Sailor concerned, he would be
        treated as having been drafted on the Fleet Reserve Service for
        another 10 years “automatically”.
28. Regulation 269 spells out the conditions of service. It
        reinforces the position that the services of a Sailor would be
        continued “so long required” or “if required”. The second part of
        sub-regulation (1) of that Regulation uses the expression “if
        required”, for further 10 years' service in the Indian Fleet Reserve,
        subject to the provisions of the Regulations for the Indian Fleet
        Reserve. This view taken by the Tribunal (Principal Bench, New
        Delhi) in Niranjan Chakroborty v. Union of India [Niranjan
19
Chakroborty v. Union of India, 2010 SCC OnLine AFT 803]
             commends to us.
29. As aforesaid, on introducing the new policy on 3-7-1976, the
             Fleet Reserve was discontinued and instead the Sailors in service
             at the relevant time were given an option to continue in active
             service for a further term of 5 years. Some of the Sailors opted to
             continue till completion of 15 years, who, then became eligible for
             “service pension” having qualifying service.
30. The quintessence for grant of reservist pension, as per
Regulation 92
, is completion of the prescribed Naval and Reserve
             qualifying service of 10 years “each”. Merely upon completion of
             10 years of active service as a Sailor or for that matter continued
             beyond that period, but falling short of 15 years or qualifying
             Reserve Service, the Sailor concerned cannot claim benefit under
Regulation 92
for grant of reservist pension. For, to qualify for the
             reservist pension, he must be drafted to the Fleet Reserve Service
             for a period of 10 years. In terms of
Regulation 6
of the Indian
             Fleet Reserve Regulations, there can be no claim to join the Fleet
             Reserve as a matter of right. None of the applicants were drafted
             to the Fleet Reserve Service after completion of their active
             service. Hence, the applicants before the Tribunal, could not have
             claimed the relief of reservist pension...”
26.In the absence of any such assurance of enrolment of drafting into Fleet

      Reserve, at the time of initial recruitment, the Principle of Promissory

      Estoppel cannot be invoked. The Tribunal has, in this behalf, taken note

      of certain judgments2 of this Court and on that basis rightly concluded

      that mere recruitment/enrolment for active as well as reserve service

      without making any order of transfer to Indian Fleet Reserve under

      Regulation 269 of Navy Regulation Part III as well as Regulations of

      Indian Fleet Reserve, it cannot be treated that any promise was

      accorded to the appellants about drafting into Fleet Reserve, at any


2
Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.
(1979) 2
SCC 409;
Bakul Cashew Co. & Ors. v. Sales Tax Officer, Quilon & Anr.
(1986) 2 SCC 365
20
time.
We would, at this juncture, like to reproduce para 31 of
T.R. Das
case.
“31. The original applicants contend that if the Government Policy
          dated 3-7-1976 is applied to the serving Sailors, inevitably, it will
          result in retrospective application thereof to their detriment. That is
          forbidden by
Section 184-A
of the Act. This argument does not
          commend to us. In that, the effect of the Government Policy is to
          disband the establishment of the Reserve Fleet Service with effect
          from 3-7-1976. As found earlier, drafting of Sailors to the Reserve
          Fleet Service was not automatic, but dependent on an express
          order to be passed by the competent authority in that behalf on
          case-to-case basis. The Sailors did not have a vested or accrued
          right for being placed in the Reserve Fleet Service. Hence, no right
          of the Sailors in active service was affected or taken away
          because of the Policy dated 3-7-1976...”
27.It would, however, be pertinent to mention here that in T.R. Das, though

  the Court had specifically held that such direct Entry Artificers were not

  entitled to reservist pension, they were entitled for special pension, in

  terms of
Regulation 95
of the Pension Regulations. The relevant portion

  of the discussion which ensued on this aspect is contained in paras 34

  and 36 of the judgment in T.R. Das and these paras read as under:
“34. The next question is whether the Sailors appointed before
          1973 were entitled to a special pension, in terms of
Regulation 95
of the Pension Regulations. Indeed, this is a special provision and
          carves out a category of Sailors, to whom it must apply. Discretion
          is vested in the Central Government to grant special pension to
          such Sailors, who fall within the excepted category. Two broad
          excepted categories have been noted in
Regulation 95
. Firstly,
          Sailors who have been discharged from their duties in pursuance
          of the government policy of reducing the strength of establishment
          of the Indian Navy; or secondly, of reorganisation, which results in
          paying off of any ships or establishment. In the present case,
          clause (i) of
Regulation 95
must come into play, in the backdrop of
          the policy decision taken by the Government as enunciated in the
          Notification dated 3-7-1976. On and from that date, concededly,
          the Fleet Reserve Service has been discontinued. That, inevitably
          results in reducing the strength of the establishment of the Fleet
21
Reserve of the Indian Navy to that extent, after coming into force
       of the said policy. None of the Sailors have been or could be
       drafted to the Fleet Reserve after coming into force of the said
       policy—as that establishment did not exist anymore and the
       strength of establishment of the Indian Navy stood reduced to that
       extent. Indisputably, the Sailors appointed prior to 3-7-1976, had
       the option of continuing on the Fleet Reserve Service after
       expiration of their active service/empanelment period. As noted
       earlier, in respect of each applicants the appointment letter
       mentions the period of appointment as 10 years of initial active
       service and 10 years thereafter as Fleet Reserve Service, if
       required. The option to continue on the Fleet Reserve Service
       could not be offered to these applicants and similarly placed
       Sailors, by the Department, after expiration of their empanelment
       period of 10 years or less than 15 years as the case may be. It is
       for that reason, such Sailors were simply discharged on expiration
       of their active service/empanelment period. In other words, on
       account of discontinuation of the Fleet Reserve establishment of
       the Indian Navy, in terms of Policy dated 3-7-1976 it has entailed
       in reducing the strength of establishment of the Indian Navy to that
       extent.
xxx           xxx        xxx
36. Thus understood, all Sailors appointed prior to 3-7-1976 and
       whose tenure of initial active service/empanelment period expired
       on or after 3-7-1976 may be eligible for a special pension under
Regulation 95
, subject, however, to fulfilling other requirements. In
       that, they had not exercised the option to take discharge on expiry
       of engagement (as per
Section 16
of the 1957 Act) and yet were
       not and could not be drafted by the competent authority to the
       Fleet Reserve because of the policy of discontinuing the Fleet
       Reserve Service w.e.f. 3-7-1976. The cases of such Sailors (not
       limited to the original applicants before the Tribunal) must be
       considered by the competent authority within three months for
       grant of a “special pension” from three years prior to the date of
       application made by the respective Sailor and release payment
       after         giving       adjustment      of      gratuity      and
       death-cum-retirement-gratuity (DCRG) already paid to them from
       arrears. They shall be entitled for interest @ 9% p.a. on the
       arrears, till the date of payment.”
28.We, thus, answer question no. 1 in the negative and hold that the

  appellants are not entitled to count 50% of the Fleet Reserve as they

  were never drafted into the said reserve. Consequently, the appellants
22
are not entitled to reservist pension. However, their cases would be

  considered for grant of special pension on same lines as was done in

  T.R. Das judgment and directed in para 36 of
the said judgment
.

  Question No. 2 - Whether the applicants Nos. 2 to 5 were entitled to be
  treated at par with the Apprentice Entry Artificers for pension purposes
  only on the ground that both of them belong to the same homogeneous
  class of Artificers?
29.Insofar as Apprentice Entry Artificers are concerned they are getting

  pension and the appellants’ claim that since Artificer is one

  homogeneous class, whether the Entry thereto is after completing the

  Apprenticeship course or it is a direct entry (as         in the case of

  Appellants) all the Artificers are to be treated alike. There is no quarrel

  about this proposition. However, in the instant case, we are concerned

  with the question as to whether the appellants are eligible for service

  pension even after they have rendered only 10 years of service (as they

  are held not entitled to count any period of Fleet Reserve in which they

  were never drafted). Had Apprentice Artificers also got the pension on

  rendition of 10 years’ service, there would have been some force in the

  argument of the appellants. However, that is not so. As already noted

  above, insofar as Apprentice Entry Artificers are concerned, they had

  undergone 4 years’ training in Naval establishment. Thereafter, they

  were advanced to the rank of Artificer V and their initial engagement of

  10 years’ active service commenced.         After one year in the rank of

  Artificer Vth Class, these Apprentice Entry Artificers were advanced to
23
the rank of Artificer acting IVth Class. In their cases, the training period

      of four years has been counted for considering their eligibility for the

      purpose of pension. This has happened pursuant to the judgment of this

      Court in
Anuj Kumar Dey & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.
3. In the

      cases of Apprentice Entry Artificers, the Government had refused to

      reckon the period for the purpose of pension. The question before this

      court was as to whether the training period spent on Apprentice Artificers

      was liable to be taken into account for pension purposes. The Court

      decided the question in favour of the Apprentice Entry Artificers. Thus,

      these Apprentice Entry Artificers became entitled to pension on the

      inclusion of training period towards the service. Their case is, therefore,

      entirely different from the appellant’ who are Direct Entry Artificers and

      had no benefit of such training.
30.An attempt was made by learned counsel for appellants to argue that

      Anuj Kumar Dey does not lay down correct law as the training period

      could not have been reckoned for calculating qualifying period for

      pension. However, it is not open to the appellants to raise such an

      argument.    In the first place, this argument would not enure to the

      benefit of the appellants as it would not entitle them to pension in any

      case. Even if the contention of the appellants is presumed as correct,

      the only effect thereof would be to hold that even Apprentice Entry


3          (1997) 1 SCC 366
24
Artificer are not entitled to pension. We may note, however, that learned

     counsel for appellants was candid in his submission that he did not

     want Apprentice Entry Artificers to be deprived of their pension.

     Secondly, in any case, in the absence of Apprentice Entry Artificers,

     such an argument cannot be considered. Thirdly, the law
laid down in
Anuj Kumar Dey has held the filed for more than 20 years and there is

     no reason to upset the same.      For all these reasons, we reject the

     contention and answer Question no. (2) against the appellants.
31.As a consequence, this appeal stands dismissed insofar as claim for

     reservist pension is concerned. However, their cases for grant of special

     pension shall be considered as directed above.
No order as to costs.
.............................................J.
                                                                           (A.K. SIKRI)



                                               .............................................J.
                                                             (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
MAY 08, 2018.