[Cites
11
, Cited by
570
]
Supreme Court of India
Additional Secretary To The Government ... vs Smt. Alka Subhash Gadia And Anr on 20 December, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1990 SCR, SUPL. (3) 583 1992 SCC SUPL. (1) 496
Author:
P.B. Sawant
Bench:
P.B. Sawant
,
A.M.  Ahmadi
,
S.C.  Agrawal
PETITIONER:
ADDITIONAL SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OFINDIA AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SMT. ALKA SUBHASH GADIA AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/12/1990

BENCH:
SAWANT, P.B.
BENCH:
SAWANT, P.B.
AHMADI, A.M. (J)
AGRAWAL, S.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1990 SCR  Supl. (3) 583  1992 SCC  Supl.  (1) 496
 JT 1991 (1)   549	  1990 SCALE  (2)1352


ACT:
    Constitution  of  India, 1950:
Articles 14
, 19
,  21
and
22--
Liberty  of a person--Deprival  of--Whether	 permissible
without apprising grounds of arrest--Whether State  required
to disclose facts in advance.
Articles 32
and
226--
Jurisdictionary powers of  judicial
review-Whether	Courts could refuse to	exercise--Non-inter-
ference	  with	the  termination  order	  at   pre-execution
stage--Whether amounts to abandonment of power and denial to
the  proposed detenu remedy of judicial review and right  to
challenge the order.
Conservation  of  Foreign  Exchange	 and  Prevention  of
Smuggling  Activities  Act,  1974
:
Section  3(1)
--Detention
order--Whether could be challenged before arrest of proposed
detenu--Whether	 proposed detenu or somebody on	 his  behalf
entitled  to  the order prior to its execution at  least  to
verify	whether	 it could be challenged on  limited  grounds
available--Whether the order and grounds to be served on the
proposed detenu in advance.



HEADNOTE:
    An order of detention passed against the first  respond-
ent's  husband	under
Section 3(1)
of  the  Conservation  of
Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act,
1974  could not be served on the proposed detenu as  he	 was
absconding.  Hence  a  declaration was made that  he  was  a
person	who  fell within the category mentioned	 in
Section
2(b)
of  the Smugglers and  Foreign  Exchange	Manipulators
(Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976. Thereafter, a notice was
issued	to  him under sub-section (1) of
section  6
of	 the
SAFEMA	to show cause as to why the properties mentioned  in
the  schedule to the notice should not be forfeited  to	 the
Central	 Government.  A copy of the notice  along  with	 the
schedule and the copy of the reasons for forfeiture was also
sent to the first respondent.
    The	 first	respondent filed writ petition in  the	High
Court  challenging the detention order as well as  the	show
cause notice. The High Court held that the writ petition was
maintainable for challenging the
584
detention  order even though the detenu was not served	with
the  order and had thus not surrendered to the	authorities,
that the detention order, the grounds of detention, and	 the
documents  relied  upon for passing the detention  order  be
furnished  to the detenu, and to the counsel for  the  first
respondent and that they should also be produced before	 the
court.
    A  day before the matter was to come for  directions  an
affidavit was filed on behalf of the appellants stating that
under
Article	22(5)
of the Constitution  the	 grounds  of
detention  had	to be given to the person when	he  was	 de-
tained, and therefore, the detaining authority could not  be
compelled  to  furnish the documents to anybody	 else  other
than the detenu, after he was detained. However, the author-
ity was willing to produce the documents for the perusal  of
the  Court without showing them first to the first  respond-
ent.  Finding that the appellants had not made any  applica-
tion  for any extension in time to carry out the  orders  of
the Court, nor made any statement expressing their difficul-
ty  to comply with the order, the High Court held  that	 the
officers were guilty of contempt of court, and directed	 the
matter	to be listed for taking appropriate action for	con-
tempt of court. At that stage, Special Leave Petitions	were
filed before this Court.
    It was contended on behalf of the appellants that  since
the  detention	law was constitutionally  valid,  the  order
passed under it could be challenged only in accordance	with
the  provisions of, and the procedure laid down, by it,	 and
the  High  Court and this Court should	not  exercise  their
extraordinary jurisdiction in a manner which would enable  a
party  to  by-pass the machinery provided by the  law,	that
unlike	the  order passed under other  laws,  the  detention
order  if  stayed  or not allowed to be	 executed  would  be
frustrated and the very object of the detention law would be
defeated,  and therefore, the detention order should  in  no
case be allowed to be challenged before it was executed	 and
the  detenu  was  taken in custody;  besides  the  detention
jurisdiction being essentially a suspicion jurisdiction, the
concept of complete justice was alien to detention law;	 the
liberty	 guaranteed  by
Article 21
of the  Constitution	 was
subject to the provisions of
Article 22
and, therefore, in a
detention  matter the provisions of the two  Articles  could
not  be separated; so long as the detention law	 was  intra-
vires the Constitution, and it stated that the detenu should
be  informed of the grounds of his detention only  after  he
lost his liberty, the detenu could not by resort to
Article
226
,  by-pass the provisions of that law or invite the	High
Court  to do so and secure the grounds before submitting  to
the order; the detention law in question had not taken	away
the judicial
585
review	of the order passed under it, but only postponed  it
by implication and the Courts had done so by a self-regulat-
ed procedure consistent with the object of the law; and	 the
judicial  review  under the detention law had  to  be  post-
decisional,  that  the law by itself did not place  any	 re-
striction  on  the writ-jurisdiction of the Court;  and	 the
restriction exercised by the Court was self-imposed and	 was
not  inconsistent with the basic structure of the  Constitu-
tion.
    On	behalf	of  the respondent it  was  contended,	that
Article 22
was an additional protection of liberty which was
guaranteed  by
Articles 14
, 19
, and
21
of the  Constitution;
an  individual had an absolute right to liberty and,  there-
fore, the burden was on the State to satisfy that the depri-
vation of the liberty was necessary in the interests of	 the
general	 public,  security of the State, public	 order	etc.
before	apprising  him	of the grounds of  his	arrest;	 and
consequently,  it must place all its cards before the  Court
before his arrest, particularly when he approached the Court
making a grievance against the order; that the extent of the
right to life and liberty under
Article 21
of the  Constitu-
tion had been expanded by this Court to include not only the
right to live but also the right to live with dignity, which
was  affected the moment the person lost his liberty  before
knowing the reasons for the same or having an opportunity to
challenge  them; a person could be deprived of his life	 and
liberty only under a valid law which laid down a fair proce-
dure  for deprivation of the liberty of the individual;	 and
the State could not be said to have adopted a fair procedure
for arrest of a person when it refused to disclose the facts
on  the basis of which it proposed to arrest him;  and	that
judicial  review being a part of the basic structure of	 the
Constitution  the power of the High Court under
Article	 226
of the Constitution could not be circumscribed in any way by
any  law, including detention law; and as such it  could  be
challenged  at	any stage, and	the  artificial	 distinction
between	 pre-decisional	 and post-decisional  challenge	 was
inconsistent  with and alien to, the wide  powers  conferred
under
Articles 32
and
226
of the Constitution, and that this
Court  had  in fact, interfered with  the  detention  orders
before the detenus had submitted to them.
Allowing the appeals, this Court,
    HELD:  1.1.	 It  is well settled  that  the	 fundamental
rights under Chapter III of the Constitution are to be	read
as a part of an integrated scheme. They are not exclusive of
each other but operate, and are, subject to each other.	 The
action complained of must satisfy the tests of all the	said
rights so far as they are applicable to individual cases. In
586
particular,
Article 22(5)
is not the sole repository of	 the
detenu's  rights. His rights are also governed by the  other
fundamental rights, particularly those enshrined in
Articles
14
,  19
, and
21.
Hence, while examining action resulting  in
the  deprivation of the liberty of any person,	the  limita-
tions  on  such	 action imposed	 by  the  other	 fundamental
rights, where and to the extent applicable have to be  borne
in mind. [592F-G, 593B]
    Rustom  Cavasjee Cooper v. Union of India, [1970] 3	 SCR
530  and Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, [1978] 2 SCR	621,
relied on.
    1.2	 While
Article 21
permits the State  to  deprive  a
person of his life or personal liberty, provided it is	done
strictly  according  to procedure established by  law,	this
permission  is expressly controlled by
Article 22
in  cases
both of punitive and preventive detention. By law or  proce-
dure is, of course, meant validly enacted law or  procedure.
Thus,  the provisions of
Articles 21
and
22
read  together,
make  it clear that a person can be deprived of his life  or
personal liberty according to procedure established by	law,
and if the law made for the purpose is valid, the person who
is  deprived  of his life or liberty has  to  challenge	 his
arrest	or detention, as the case may be, according  to	 the
provisions  of	the law under which he is  arrested  or	 de-
tained. [593C-D, 594D]
    1.3	 Therefore, in the face of the clear  provisions  of
the  Constitution  and of the valid Act, it is not  open  to
contend that the provisions of
Articles 14
, 19
and
21
of the
Constitution prevent a person being deprived of his  liberty
without	 first apprising him of the grounds of	his  arrest,
and that since the State has all the facts in its possession
which  require	the arrest and detention of the	 person,  it
must  first disclose the said facts before depriving him  of
his  liberty. The provisions of
Article 22
of the  Constitu-
tion  and  of the Act made thereunder permit  the  State  to
arrest	and  detain a person without  first  disclosing	 the
grounds, even though they are in its possession before or at
the time of his arrest. [608F-G]
    1.4 However vital and sacred the liberty of the individ-
ual,  the responsible framers of the Constitution,  although
fully  conscious of its implications, have made a  provision
for  making  a law which may deprive an	 individual  of	 his
liberty without first disclosing to him the grounds of	such
deprivation. [609D]
    2.1 Denial of the right to the proposed detenu to  chal-
lenge  the  detention order and the grounds on which  it  is
made before he is taken in custody does not amount to denial
of remedy of judicial review of the order because there is a
difference between the existence of power and its  exercise.
[609E-F]
587
    2.2	 Neither the Constitution, including the  provisions
of
Article 22
thereof, nor the COFEPOSA place any  restric-
tion  on  the  powers of the High Court and  this  Court  to
review	judicially the order of detention. The powers  under
Articles  226
and
32
are wide, and are untrammeled  by	 any
external  restrictions,	 and can reach any  executive  order
resulting  in civil or criminal consequences.  However,	 the
Courts	have over the years evolved certain  self-restraints
for exercising these powers. They have done so in the inter-
ests  of  the administration of justice and for	 better	 and
more  efficient	 and informed exercise of the  said  powers.
These self-imposed restraints are not confined to the review
of  the orders passed under detention law only. They  extend
to  the	 orders passed and decisions made  under  all  laws.
[609G-H, 610A]
    2.3	 It  is in pursuance of this  self-evolved  judicial
policy	and  in conformity with	 the  self-imposed  internal
restrictions  that  the	 Courts insist	that  the  aggrieved
person	first allow the due operation and implementation  of
the  concerned law and exhaust the remedies provided  by  it
before	approaching the High Court and this Court to  invoke
their discretionary extraordinary and equitable jurisdiction
under
Articles 226
and
32
respectively. That jurisdiction by
its very nature is to be used sparingly and in circumstances
where no other efficacious remedy is available. If in  every
case a detenu is permitted to challenge and seek the stay of
the  operation of the order before it is executed, the	very
purpose	 of the order and of the law under which it is	made
will  be frustrated since such orders are in operation	only
for a limited period. The courts have the necessary power to
entertain  grievances against any detention order  prior  to
its  execution, and they have used it in proper	 cases,	 al-
though such cases have been few and the grounds on which the
courts have interfered with them are necessarily very limit-
ed  in	scope and number, viz., where the courts  are  prima
facie  satisfied (i) that the order is not passed under	 the
Act  under which it is purported to have been  passed,	(ii)
that  it  is sought to be executed against a  wrong  person,
(iii) that it is passed for a wrong purpose, (iv) that it is
passed	on vague, extraneous and irrelevant grounds  or	 (v)
that  the authority which passed it had no authority  to  do
so.  The  refusal by the courts to use	their  extraordinary
powers	of judicial review to interfere with  the  detention
orders prior to their execution on any other ground does not
amount	to abandonment of the said power or to their  denial
to  the	 proposed detenu, but prevents their abuse  and	 the
perversion  of the law. It is always open for the detenu  or
anyone on his behalf to challenge the detention order by way
of  habeas corpus petition on any ground available  to	him.
[610A-H]
588
    2.4 The judicial review of the detention order is always
available. This applies also to the cases under other  laws.
But  in	 a detention case, the stage at which  the  judicial
review is made by the Court only stands deferred till  after
the  order is executed. A ground on which a detention  order
is  challenged	which requires investigation and  cannot  be
adjudicated  without  hearing  the other  side	and  without
proper material, has necessarily to await decision till	 the
final  hearing. In such cases the operation of the order  of
detention  by its very nature cannot be stayed	pending	 the
final  outcome. The only proper course in such cases  is  to
hear the petition as expeditiously as possible. [611A-B]
    3. The detenu is not entitled to the order of  detention
prior  to  its execution even to verify whether	 it  can  be
challenged at its preexecution stage on the limited  grounds
available,  for	 the reasons that (1) the  Constitution	 and
valid law made thereunder do not make any provision for	 the
same.  On the other hand, they permit the arrest and  deten-
tion of a person without furnishing to the detenu the  order
and  the grounds thereof in advance, (2) when the order	 and
the  grounds are served and the detenu is in a	position  to
make  out prima facie the limited grounds on which they	 can
be  successfully challenged, the courts, have power even  to
grant  bail to the detenu pending the final hearing  of	 his
petition.  Alternatively, the Court can and does  hear	such
petition  expeditiously to give the necessary relief to	 the
detenu. (3) In the rare cases where the detenu before  being
served	with  them  learns of the detention  order  and	 the
grounds	 on  which it is made, and satisfies  the  Court  of
their  existence by proper affirmation, the Court  does	 not
decline	 to  entertain the writ petition even  at  the	pre-
execution  stage,  of course, on the  very  limited  grounds
stated	above, though the Court, even in such cases, is	 not
obliged	 to interfere with the order at that stage  and	 may
insist	that the detenu should first submit to it. It  will,
however, depend on the facts of each case. Thus, the  courts
have  power to interfere with the detention orders  even  at
the  pre-execution stage but they are not obliged to  do  so
nor will it be proper for them to do so save in	 exceptional
cases.	Much less can a detenu claim such exercise of  power
as a matter of right. The discretion is of the Court and  it
has  to be exercised judicially on well-settled	 principles.
[611C-H]
    In	the instant case, the proposed detenu is  absconding
and had been evading the service of the detention order. The
first respondent who is his wife has sought to challenge the
said  order because the show-cause notice under	 sub-section
(1) of
Section 6
of the SAFEMA was issued to him, a copy  of
which is also sent to her. Thus, the assistance of the	High
Court under
Article 226
of the Constitution is sought
589
by  the first respondent on behalf of the detenu  to  secure
the  detention order with a view to defend  the	 proceedings
under  the  SAFEMA. In other words, the proposed  detenu  is
trying	to  secure the detention  order	 indirectly  without
submitting to it. Moreover, he is also trying to secure	 the
grounds	 of  detention as well as the  documents  supporting
them  which he cannot get unless he submits to the order  of
detention.  No prima facie case is made out for	 challenging
the  detention order, which would impel the Court to  inter-
fere  with it at this pre-execution stage. The	High  Court,
disregarding  the  law on the subject  and  the	 longsettled
principles  on which alone it can interfere with the  deten-
tion order at pre-execution stage, has directed the authori-
ties  not only to furnish to the detenu the order of  deten-
tion  but  also the grounds of detention and  the  documents
relied upon for passing the detention order. [612B-E]
    In the circumstances, both the orders of the High  Court
directing the appellants to furnish to the detenu or to	 the
first respondent or her counsel the order of detention,	 the
grounds	 of detention and the documents supporting  them  as
well as the contempt notice are clearly illegal and unjusti-
fied and they are accordingly quashed. [613E-F]
    Special Reference No. 1 of 1964 [1965] 1 SCR 492;  Dwar-
kanath,	 Hindu	 Undivided  Family  v.	Income-Tax  Officer,
Special	 Circle, Kanpur & Anr., [1965] 3 SCR 536;  State  of
Bihar  v. Rambalak Singh "Balak" & Ors., AIR 1966  SC  1441;
Khudiram  Das v. The State of West Bengal & Ors.,  [1975]  2
SCR  832  at 842; Francis Coralie Muffin  v.  Administrator,
Union Territory of Delhi & Ors., [1981] SCC 608; Smt. Poonam
Lata  v. M.L. Wadhwan & Ors., [1987] 11 SCR 1123 and  S.M.D.
Kiran  Pasha v. The Government of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.,  JT
(1989) 4 SC 366, referred to.
    Minerva  Mills Ltd. v. Union of India & Ors.,  [1981]  1
SCR 206; S.P. Sampath Kumar v. Union of India & Ors., [1987]
1  SCC	124  and P. Sambamurthy & Ors. v.  State  of  Andhra
Pradesh & Anr., [1987] 1 SCC 362, referred to.
    Jayantilal Bhagwandas Shah etc. v. State of Maharashtra,
[1981] 1 Cr. LJ 767; Abdul Aziz Mohammad v. Union of  India,
[1984] Cr. LJ 1307; Omar Ahmed Ebrahim Noormani v. Union  of
India  & Ors., [1984] Cr. LJ. 1915; Yogesh Shantilal  Choksi
v.  Home Secretary, Government of Kerala & Anr.. [1983]	 Cr.
LJ  393	 and Simmi v. State of U.P. & Ors., [1985]  All.  LJ
598, referred to.
590



JUDGMENT: