[Cites
5
, Cited by
56
]
Supreme Court of India
P. Orr And Sons (P) Ltd vs Associated Publishers (Madras) ... on 9 November, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1990 SCR, SUPL. (2) 615 1991 SCC (1) 301, AIRONLINE 1990 SC 56, 1991 (1) SCC 301, 1991 HRR 45, (1990) 2 REN CR 648, (1991) 1 RENT LR 64, (1990) 2 MAD LJ 12, (1990) 2 MAD LW 547, (1990) 4 JT 374, (1991) 2 REN CJ 97, (1991) 1 APLJ 67, (1990) 4 JT 374 (SC)
Author:
T.K.  Thommen
Bench:
T.K.  Thommen
,
K.N.  Saikia
,
N.M.  Kasliwal
PETITIONER:
P. ORR AND SONS (P) LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
ASSOCIATED PUBLISHERS (MADRAS) LIMITED

DATE OF JUDGMENT09/11/1990

BENCH:
THOMMEN, T.K. (J)
BENCH:
THOMMEN, T.K. (J)
SAIKIA, K.N. (J)
KASLIWAL, N.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1990 SCR  Supl. (2) 615  1991 SCC  (1) 301
 JT 1990 (4)   374	  1990 SCALE  (2)960


ACT:
Rent  Control and Eviction--Tamil Nadu Buildings  (Lease
and  Rent Control) Act, 1960
:
Sections 10
and
14(1)(b)
bona
fide requirement and bona fide personal requirement  demoli-
tion   and   reconstruction   of   building--Condition	  of
building--Prime	   factor--Deterioration    to	   crumbling
state--Whether	necessary--Absence  of need for	 urgency  by
reason of sound condition of building--Whether negative bona
fide character of the requirement for demolition.
    Judicial  Review: Findings of competent  authority--When
open  to Court's interference--Appreciation of evidence	 and
findings  of  facts--Authority empowered  by  statute--Final
judge of facts--Court not to sit judgment thereon.
    Words & Phrases: 'Immediate'--'Immediate  Purpose'-Mean-
ing of.



HEADNOTE:
    The respondent-landlord filed a petition before the Rent
Controller  for eviction of the appellant-tenant under	sec-
tion  14(1)(b) of the
Tamil Nadu Buildings (Lease  and	Rent
Control)  Act, 1960
on the ground that the condition of	 the
building  compelled immediate demolition and that the  land-
lord  wanted to put the property to the best  possible	use.
The  appellant-tenant denied the allegations  and  contended
that the building was structurally safe, and that the  stand
taken by the respondent-landlord in the earlier	 proceedings
under the Act falsified its claim. On the basis of  evidence
on  record, the Rent Controller found that the building	 was
structurally  safe  and	 sound. However, he  held  that	 the
condition of the building as such was not decisive in decid-
ing  the question of bona fide requirement of  the  landlord
under
section 14(1)(b)
of the Act. Accordingly, he passed an
order  of  eviction.  The tenant preferred  an	appeal.	 The
appellate  authority concurred with the Rent Controller	 and
confirmed the order of eviction.
    Aggrieved,	the tenant approached the High	Court.	Con-
firming the findings of the authorities, the High Court held
that though the
616
building  was  structurally sound, it was  required  by	 the
landlord  for a legitimate scheme of demolition	 and  recon-
struction  with	 a  view to putting the	 property,  to	more
profitable and better use.
    Against the High Court's order, the tenant has preferred
the  present appeal, by special leave, contending  that	 the
respondent-landlord  has  sought eviction of  the  appellant
solely in terms of
section 14(1)(b)
of the Act, which relate
to the condition of the building compelling immediate  demo-
lition	and since the condition of the building was  not  as
such, the eviction could not have been ordered.
    On	behalf of the respondent-landlord it  was  contended
that
section  14(1)(b)
of the Act referred  to  bona	fide
requirement  of the landlord for demolition and	 reconstruc-
tion. It was also contended that due to various factors,  if
it  became uneconomical to allow the old building to  stand,
notwithstanding	 its  sound and safe condition, and  a	much
larger profit could be derived from the larger reconstructed
building, a prudent landlord would be perfectly justified in
seeking eviction of the tenant under
section 14(1)(b)
of the
Act.
Allowing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD:  1.1
Section 14(1)(b)
of the Tamil Nadu  Buildings
(Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960 is satisfied only if	 the
building  is  bona  fide required by the  landlord  for	 the
"immediate", i.e., direct, sole and timely purpose of demol-
ishing it with a view to erecting a new building on the site
of the existing building. Various circumstances such as	 the
capacity of the landlord, the size of existing building, the
demand for additional space, the condition of the place, the
economic  advantage and other factors justifying  investment
of  capital on reconstruction may be taken into	 account  by
the  concerned authority in considering an  application	 for
recovery;  but	the essential and  overriding  consideration
which,	in the general interests of the public and  for	 the
protection  of the tenants from unreasonable  eviction,	 the
legislature  has in mind the condition of the building	that
demands timely demolition by reason of the extent of  damage
to its structure, making it uneconomical or unsafe to under-
take repairs. While the condition of the building by  itself
may  not  necessarily establish the  bona  fide	 requirement
under  clause  (b), that condition is not only	one  of	 the
various'  circumstances which may be taken into	 account  by
the  Rent Controller but it is the essential condition.
The
Act
does  not accept the requirement by the landlord  as  a
bona  fide requirement within the meaning of  the  provision
unless the condition of the building, in the context of	 the
relevant circumstances,
617
requires  demolition.  These  are matters which	 are  to  be
proved by evidence. [635H; 636A-D]
    1.2 In order to satisfy the test under
section  14(1)(b)
the condition of the building need not have deteriorated  to
the  extent  of the building being in  danger  of  crumbling
down,  but the condition mast be such as to indicate a	bona
fide requirement for the timely, genuine and direct  purpose
of  demolition and reconstruction. The personal	 requirement
of the landlord or any member of his family for residence or
business  is not germane to
section 14
, and to	import	that
concept	 for the construction of that section, as  the	High
Court  appears to have done, is to project
section  10
into
section 14
, and that is an exercise which has no warrant  in
the law. [636E-F]
    Metalware  &  Co.  etc. v. Bansilal Sarma  &  Co.  etc.,
[1979] 3 SCC 398; Neta Ram v. Jiwan Lal, [1962] Suppl. 2 SCR
623 relied on.
    Mehsin Bhai v. Hale & Company G.T., Madras, [1964] 2 MLJ
147;  K. Ramachandra Rao v. Krishnaswami lyengar  and  Ors.,
[1976] 1 MLJ 267; K.P. Lonaopan and Sons v.S. Mohamed lqbal,
[1981] 1 MLJ 386 approved.
    R.P. David and Anr. v. N. Denial and Ors., [1967] 1	 MLJ
110;  V.P. Selvaraj v. V. Narasimhe Rao, [1969] 1  MLJ	587;
Bharat Trading Company v. K. Shanmughasundaram, [1982] 1 MLJ
94;  Manakayal'	 Ammal	& Ors. v. V.S.	Sundaram  and  Ors.,
[1984] 1 MLJ 310; A.S. Sheikh Fathma and Ors. v. Omer  Cloth
State and Ors., AIR 1986 Madras 90 overruled.
    Panchamal  Narayan Shenoy v. Basthi	 Venkatesha  Shenoy,
[1970] 1 SCC 499 distinguished.
    Mahboob  Badsha v. M. Manga Devi and Anr., [1965] 2	 MLJ
209; K.J Sivalingam v.S. Guruswamy and Anr., [1983] 2 MLJ 85
referred to.
    2. In the construction of sections such as 10 and 14  of
the Act, the Court must be guided by the overriding legisla-
tive  object  articulated in the Preamble to the  Act,	that
'the  control of rents of such buildings and the  prevention
of  unreasonable eviction of tenants therefrom in the  state
of Tamil Nadu." [636H; 637A]
    Prabhakaran Nair and Ors. v. State of Tamil Nadu & Ors.,
[1987] 4 SCC 238 relied on.
618
    3.
Section 14(1)(b)
, however, does not require  instant
demolition,  but  demolition  within  the  specified   time.
"Immediate purpose", in the context in which the  expression
appears,  relates to directness rather than speed,  although
absence	 of the letter negative the former. It denotes	con-
nection	 and  timely  action, but not  instant	action;	 yet
delayed	 action	 is  a sign of remoteness  of  purpose.	 The
expression  must be understood as a directly  connected	 and
timely	purpose, and not a secondary or remote or  premature
purpose.  Significantly,  the clause does not say  "for	 the
purpose	 of immediately demolishing" which words might	have
denoted	 instant demolition. What
section 14(1)(b)
says  is
"immediate  purpose of demolishing". The legislative  intent
is  that the purpose should be immediate or direct  and	 not
mediate or remote or indirect or secondary. The condition of
the building need not be such as to warrant instant  demoli-
tion, but it must be grave enough to need timely action	 and
rule  out  undue or protracted delay. The  landlord  is	 not
expected to wait till the building is in imminent or immedi-
ate  danger of crumbling down so as to necessitate  recovery
of possession for instant demolition. The purpose of demoli-
tion  must  of course be immediately or	 directly  connected
with the requirement so as not to be separated by any inter-
vening consideration. Demolition for the purpose of erection
of a new building must be the direct immediate, genuine	 and
real requirement of the landlord. The bona fide character of
the requirement is proved by the appropriateness of time and
the  absence  of any ulterior  or  irrelevant  consideration
separating  the requirement from the statutory or  permitted
purpose.  The direct and immediate nexus between  these	 two
element is proved by the condition of the building and other
relevant  circumstances. Absence of any need for urgency  by
reason	of  the strong and sound condition of  the  building
will  negative the bona fide character of  the	requirement.
What  is the degree of urgency warranted by what  extent  of
damage	to the building that makes the requirement  directly
and  immediately connected with the statutory purpose  is  a
question  of  fact  which must be decided in  each  case  on
evidence.  But a building which is sound and safe  does	 not
qualify	 for  demolition in terms of
section  14(1)(b)
.	 Any
such building fails totally outside its ambit. [627B-H]
    Black's Law Dictionary, 5th Edn: Concise Oxford Diction-
ary, New 7th Edn., referred to.
    4.	The  requirement for demolition can be	regarded  as
genuine and bona fide only when the condition of the  exist-
ing building is such that a reasonable and prudent  landlord
would regard it to be uneconomical to repair it rather	than
demolish it and reconstruct a new building
619
Apart from the condition of the building, the nature of	 the
locality,  the	advantages arising from	 reconstruction	 the
capacity of the landlord to erect a new building the  demand
for accommodation and other factors suggesting the bona fide
character of the landlord's request for recovery of  posses-
sion  under
section 14(1)(b)
are relevant. Even  where	 the
condition of the building demands demolition, it is possible
that, in view of the landlord's lack of capacity to  rebuild
or the futility of reconstruction by reason of the condition
of  the	 time and place, the authority may  regard,  without
prejudice  to whatever power there is to enforce repairs  or
demolition  in	certain circumstances, that  the  landlord's
application lacks bona fide. The authority has to take	into
account the totality of the circumstances. [628H; 629A-C]
    5. The absence of any provision to compel reinduction of
the tenant after reconstruction or to compel  reconstruction
after demolition and the non-applicability of the Act for  a
period of five years after reconstruction make it imperative
that the reasonableness of the landlord's requirement should
be  considered	with care and caution, bearing in  mind	 the
fundamental  legislative object to protect the	tenant	from
unreasonable eviction. [628E-F]
    6.	The  over-riding  consideration	 underlying
section
14(1)(b)
is  the  bona fide need for  demolishing  the	 old
building and erecting a new building, once the demolition of
the  old building is completed, for loss of time  means	 not
only  loss of income, but probably also	 increased  expendi-
ture. This construction must necessarily lead to the  inevi-
table  conclusion  that the condition of the building  is  a
basic and essential requirement of
section 14(1)(b)
.  [628G-
H]
    7. The requisite circumstances warranting repairs  under
clause	(a) or demolition under clause (b) of
section  14(1)
are matters for determination by the competent authority  on
the basis of relevant evidence and the applicable provisions
of  the law. In proceedings for judicial review,  the  Court
does  not sit in judgment over appreciation of evidence	 and
finding of facts by the authority empowered by the  statute.
He is the final judge of facts, and so long as he has  taken
into  account all relevant facts and has eschewed  from	 his
mind  all irrelevant circumstances and has correctly  under-
stood  and applied the law. including the rules	 of  natural
justice, his judgment is generally regarded as final and not
open to challenge. On the other hand, where he has acted  in
excess of his jurisdiction or asked himself the wrong  ques-
tions  or misunderstood or misapplied the law or  failed  to
consider  the  relevant circumstances, his  conclusions	 are
liable to be reversed as perverse
620
by  a  court exercising judicial review. Any  repository  of
power  must act in accordance with the law and on the  basis
of  relevant evidence. He must be guided by reason and	jus-
tice and not by private opinion. [629D-F]
    8. In the present case the Rent Controller asked himself
the  wrong question. He did not think that the condition  of
building was relevant. He disregarded the clear admission of
the landlord and other evidence as regards the sound  condi-
tion  of the building. The crucial condition for  demolition
was thus absent. The Controller was totally misguided as  to
the  conclusions  which he reached. So	were  the  appellate
authority and the High Court. [636F-G]



JUDGMENT: