[Cites
3
, Cited by
33
]
Supreme Court of India
K. Jagadeesan vs Union Of India And Others on 19 February, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1990 AIR 1072, 1990 SCR (1) 444, AIR 1990 SUPREME COURT 1072, 1990 (2) SCC 228, 1990 LAB. I. C. 839, 1990 ALL CJ 133, (1990) 1 LABLJ 495, (1990) 60 FACLR 847, (1990) 1 UPLBEC 383, (1990) 1 CURLR 574, (1990) 2 SERVLR 59, 1990 UJ(SC) 1 630, (1990) 1 LAB LN 730, (1990) 1 JT 247 (SC), 1990 SCC (L&S) 231
Author:
M.H. Kania
Bench:
M.H. Kania
,
R.M.  Sahai
PETITIONER:
K. JAGADEESAN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT19/02/1990

BENCH:
KANIA, M.H.
BENCH:
KANIA, M.H.
SAHAI, R.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1990 AIR 1072		  1990 SCR  (1) 444
 1990 SCC  (2) 228	  JT 1990 (1)	247
 1990 SCALE  (1)238
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1991 SC 363	 (14)


ACT:
    Civil  services: Geological Survey of India	 (Group	 'A'
and 'B' posts) Recruitment Rules, 1967: Promotion--Promotion
to  the	 post of Director (M. E.  )--Requirement  of  Degree
qualification--Notification    by    Government	    amending
Rules--Whether given retrospective effect-Validity of  noti-
fication.



HEADNOTE:
    The appellant, a diploma holder, was, in 1964, appointed
as  Transport  Officer (Class-I Technical Grade,  Group	 A),
which  post was later redesignated and merged with the	post
of  Mechanical	Engineer (Junior) in  1968.  The  Geological
Survey of India (Group 'A' and Group 'B' posts)	 Recruitment
Rules,	1967, framed under
Article 309
of  the	Constitution
were brought into force in 1969. The appellant was  promoted
as a Mechanical Engineer (Senior) in 1973 and his conditions
of  service were governed by the said Rules, which had	been
amended	 from time to time. One such amendment made in	1984
prescribed  that  for  promotion to  the  post	of  Director
(M.E.),	 a degree in Engineering was a requisite  qualifica-
tion.  The appellant challenged before the Central  Adminis-
trative	 Tribunal, the validity of the said notification  on
the  ground  that it affected his chances  of  promotion  or
alternatively  his right to be considered for  promotion  to
the post of Director (M.E.). It was contended that  applying
the amended Rule, in so far as the appellant was  concerned,
would amount to giving retrospective effect to the operation
of the rule, and no retrospective rule could be framed under
Article	 309
of the Constitution. The Tribunal rejected	 the
contention  and held that it was for the Government to	pre-
scribe	such  qualifications as it considered fit,  and	 the
Tribunal  could	 not  interfere unless it was  shown  to  be
perverse.
    Aggrieved  against the Tribunal's order,  the  appellant
has preferred this appeal by special leave.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
HELD: 1. Mere chance of promotion is not condition of  serv-
ice
445
and  the  fact that there was reduction in  the	 chances  of
promotion  did not tantamount to a change in the  conditions
of service. A right to be considered for promotion is a term
of service, but mere chances of promotion are not. [448D]
    state  of  Maharashtra  and Anr.  v.  Chandrakant  Anant
Kulkarnt and Others, [1981] 4 SCC 130, relied on.
    T.R.  Kapur and Others v. State of Harvana	and  Others,
[1986] (Suppl.) SCC 584, referred to.
    2. In the instant case, no retrospective effect has been
given to the said amended rule. It is not the case that	 the
appellant has been reverted from the post which he  occupies
on the ground of lack of any qualification. The only  effect
is  that  his  chances of promotion to the  higher  post  is
adversely  affected.  Alteration  of  rules  of	 eligibility
cannot be invalidated on the ground that an employee's claim
to  be	eligible for promotion is adversely  affected.	This
cannot	be regarded as retrospective effect being  given  to
the  amendment of the rules carried out by the	Notification
and  the challenge to the said notification on	that  ground
must fail. [448F-G]
    3. The fact that for the higher post of Deputy  Director
General (Engineering Service), it is not necessary to hold a
graduate  degree is no reason why a degree  requirement	 for
the  post  of Director (Mechanical) should  be	regarded  as
unreasonable  or  bad in law. It is for	 the  Government  to
decide what qualification was required for promotion to	 the
post  of  Director (M.E.) and, unless that  requirement	 was
totally irrelevant or unreasonable, it could not be said  to
be bad in law. [419B-C]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3607  of
1989.
From  the  Judgment and Order dated 25.4.88	 of  Central
Administrative Tribunal Hyderabad in T.A. No. 1185/86.
    R.	Venkataramani, V.G. Pragasam and S.M. Garg  for	 the
Appellant.
Kapil  Sibal,  Additional Solicitor General,  B.  Datta,
Mrs. Indra Sawhney, Ms. Sushma Suri, B. Rajeshwar Rao, Vimal
Dave and C.V. Subba Rao for the Respondents.
446
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    KANIA,  J. This is an appeal by special leave against  a
decision  of the Central Administrative Tribunal,  Hyderabad
in  Transfer Application No. 1185 of 1986 (W.P. NO. 8226  of
1985).
All the relevant facts have been set out by the Tribunal
in  its judgment. As we are in agreement with the  reasoning
and conclusions of the Tribunal in the impugned judgment, we
propose	 to set out only the brief facts necessary  for	 the
disposal Of the appeal.
Under the relevant rules, the recruitment to the post of
Superintending	Mechanical  Engineer was  by  promotion	 and
failing that by direct recruitment. It may be mentioned that
for direct recruitment to the said post, the  qualifications
of  a  degree in Mechanical or	Automobile  Engineering	 was
prescribed as essential. For promotion to the post of Direc-
tor  (M.E.) the requisite qualification was five  years	 01'
service	 in the grade of Mechanical Engineer  (Senior).	 The
appellant became eligible for promotion in 1978, but he	 was
not promoted as there were some senior persons in his grade,
who  were promoted to the said post. On January 31, 1984,  a
Notification  was issued by respondent No. 1,  amending	 the
said  Rules and the said Notification was duly published  in
the Gazette of India. By the said amendment, the said  Rules
were amended and it was prescribed that for promotion to the
post of Director (M.E.) a degree in Engineering was a requi-
site qualification. The appellant challenges the validity of
this Notification on the ground that it affected his chances
of promotion or alternatively his right to be considered for
promotion to the post of Director (M.E.). The appellant is a
Mechanical  Engineer  (Senior) in the Geological  Survey  of
India, Southern Region, Hyderabad. The appellant is a diplo-
ma  holder and does not hold any degree in  engineering.  On
April  27,  1964  he  was  appointed  as  Transport  Officer
(Class-I Technical Grade, Gruop 'A'). This post was redesig-
nated  and  merged  with the  post  of	Mechanical  Engineer
(Junior) in March 1968. On November 28, 1969, the Geological
Survey of India (Group 'A' and Group 'B' Posts)	 Recruitment
Rules, 1967, made under
Article 309
of the Constitution were
brought into force. The appellant was promoted as a Mechani-
cal  Engineer (Senior) with effect from March 17,  1973	 and
his  conditions	 of service were governed by  the  aforesaid
rules.	These rules have been amended from time to time.  It
was submitted by learned counsel for the appellant that	 the
said  amendment	 purported  to be carried out  by  the	said
Notification  was  bad	in law as it  adversely	 affected  a
condition of service relating to promotion. It was submitted
447
by  learned  counsel  for the appellant that  if  the  rule,
requiring  a degree qualification for promotion to the	post
of Director (M.E.), was applied as far as the appellant	 was
concerned, it would amount to giving a retrospective  effect
to the operation of the said rule and no retrospective	rule
could be framed under
Article 309
of the Constitution.	This
contention  was rejected by the Tribunal which held that  it
was  for the Government to prescribe such qualifications  as
it  considered fit for the post of Director (M.E.)  and	 the
Tribunal could not go into the question whether that  quali-
fication  was  necessary unless the prescribing of  the	 re-
quirement could be said to be perverse. The Tribunal further
took  the  view that the appellant had no  vested  right  to
promotion but had a mere chance of promotion and he was	 not
entitled to challenge the rule merely on the ground that  it
affected his chance of promotion. The said appeal is direct-
ed against the said decision.
The	 main argument of learned counsel for the  appellant
is  that the Tribunal was in error in holding that the	rule
affected  merely a chance of promotion which  the  appellant
had.  It  was submitted by him that although  the  appellant
could  not claim any right to be promoted, he certainly	 had
the  right to be considered for promotion and the  amendment
to  the rule carried out by the said Notification  depriving
of that right was bad in law.
Strong  reliance was placed by the learned	counsel	 for
the  appellant on the decision of this Court in
T.R.  Kapur
and Others v. State of Haryana and Others
, [1986] Supl.	 SCC
584 at 595 where it was held that right to be considered for
promotion  is  a  condition of service.	 This  decision	 is,
however, of no assistance to the learned counsel in  support
of  his argument because the Bench which rendered
the	said
decision
has stated (at paragraph 16, page 595 of the	said
report) as follows:
"It is well settled that the power to frame. rules to  regu-
late the conditions of service under the proviso to
Article
309
of the Constitution carries with it the power to  amend
or alter the rules with a retrospective effect. It is equal-
ly  well settled that any rule which affects the right of  a
person	to  be considered for promotion is  a  condition  of
service although mere chance of promotion may not be."
It was further held that:
"an authority competent to lay down qualifications for
448
promotion,  is also competent to change the  qualifications.
The rules defining qualifications and suitability for promo-
tion  are  conditions  of service and they  can	 be  changed
retrospectively"-
It was, however, clarified that:
"unless	 it is specifically provided in the rules,  the	 em-
ployees who are already promoted before the amendment of the
rules,	cannot	be reverted and their promotions  cannot  be
recalled."
It	is  only in this sense, that is, as set out  in	 the
immediately preceding paragraph that the view has been taken
that  the rules cannot be retrospective. The ratio  of	this
decision is not applicable to the case before us as there is
no  question of reverting the appellant. Again, it has	been
held  by  a Bench comprising three learned  Judges  of	this
Court,	in
State of Maharashtra and Another  v.	 Chandrakant
Anant  Kulkarni and Others
, [1981] 4 SCC 130  (at  paragraph
16,  page  141	of the said report), that  mere	 chances  of
promotion  are not conditions of service and the  fact	that
there  was  reduction in the chances of	 promotion  did	 not
tantamount to a change in the condition of service. A  right
to  be	considered for promotion is a term of  service,	 but
mere  chances of promotion are not. It was also	 held  there
that mere passing of the departmental examination  conferred
no  right  on the concerned S.T. Inspectors  of	 Bombay,  to
promotion.  They merely became eligible for promotion.	They
had  to	 be brought on to a select list, not merely  on	 the
length	of service but on the basis  of	 merit-cum-seniority
principle.
In our opinion, n0 retrospective effect has been  given
to  the said amended rule. It is not argued that the  appel-
lant  has been reverted from the post which he	occupies  on
the ground of any lack of any qualification. The only effect
is that his chances of promotion or his right to be  consid-
ered for promotion to the higher post is adversely affected.
This cannot be regarded as retrospective effect being  given
to  the amendment of the rules carried out by  the  impugned
Notification  and the challenge to the said notification  on
that ground must fail.
The  next	argument advanced before us by	the  learned
counsel for the appellant is that employees in the  drilling
stream who might be diploma holders could move by  promotion
to  the grade of Director (Drilling) which is equivalent  to
the  post of Director (Mechanical Engineering) and would  be
further eligible to be considered for the
449
next  higher  post of Deputy Director  General	(Engineering
Service)  on  the basis of a common seniority  of  Directors
(Mechanical)  and  Directors (Drilling).  It  was  submitted
that,  in  this situation, the requirement of a	 degree	 for
promotion  to  the  post of Director  (Mechanical)  must  be
regarded  as unreasonable and bad in law. This argument	 was
rejected  by the Tribunal on the ground that the  fact	that
for the higher post of Deputy Director General	(Engineering
Service),  it is not necessary to hold a graduate degree  is
no reason why a degree requirement for the post of  Director
(Mechanical)  should be regarded as unreasonable or  bad  in
law.  It is for the Government to decide what  qualification
was  required  for  the promotion to the  post	of  Director
(M.E.)	and, unless that requirement was totally  irrelevant
or  unreasonable, it could not be said to be bad in law.  In
this regard, we agree with the reasoning and conclusions or'
the Tribunal.
In the result, the appeal fails and is dismissed.  There
will be no order as to costs.
G.N.						Appeal	dis-
missed.
450