[Cites
16
, Cited by
132
]
Supreme Court of India
Gram Panchayat And Anr vs Shree Vallabh Glass Works Limited And ... on 15 March, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1990 AIR 1017, 1990 SCR (1) 966, AIR 1990 SUPREME COURT 1017, (1991) 71 COMCAS 169, (1990) 2 UPLBEC 885, (1992) 3 COMLJ 346, (1992) 86 STC 41, 1990 UJ(SC) 2 27, (1990) 1 JT 438 (SC), 1990 (1) JT 438, (1990) 3 BOM CR 109, 1990 (2) SCC 440, (1990) BANKJ 695, 1990 BOM LR 92 330
Author:
K.J.  Shetty
Bench:
K.J.  Shetty
,
R.M.  Sahai
PETITIONER:
GRAM PANCHAYAT AND ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SHREE VALLABH GLASS WORKS LIMITED AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/03/1990

BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
SAHAI, R.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1990 AIR 1017		  1990 SCR  (1) 966
 1990 SCC  (2) 440	  JT 1990 (1)	438
 1990 SCALE  (1)439


ACT:
The Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions)	Act,
1985
: Ss. 16. 17 & 22--Sick industrial	company--Proceedings
for recovery of amount due--Validity of.



HEADNOTE:
Section  16
of the Sick Industrial	 Companies  (Special
Provisions)  Act, 1985 authorises the Board  for  Industrial
and  Financial Reconstruction established under the  Act  to
make enquiry for determining whether any industrial  company
has become a sick industrial company.
Section 17(2)
empowers
the  Board to grant a reasonable time to such a	 company  to
make  its  net worth positive. Where such a  course  is	 not
practicable
s. 17(3)
empowers the Board to appoint an  oper-
ating agency to prepare a scheme for  rehabilitation/revival
of  the	 company.
Section 22(1)
provides that  in  case	 the
enquiry	 under
s. 16
is pending or any scheme	referred  to
under  s.  17 is under preparation or consideration  by	 the
Board or any appeal under
s. 25
is pending, then proceedings
for  winding up, execution, distress or the like are  to  be
suspended  or presumed to be suspended. The  proceedings  in
respect	 of these matters could, however, be continued	with
the  consent of the Board or of the appellate  authority  as
the case may be.
Section 22(5)
provides for exclusion of the
period during which the remedy remains suspended, in comput-
ing the period of limitation for enforcement of the right.
    The respondent company had been declared by the Board to
be  a sick industrial company under
s. 16
of the Act and  an
operating  agency had been appointed under
s. 17(3)
to	pre-
pare a scheme for rehabilitation/revival of the company.
    The respondent company owed a large sum to the petition-
er Panchayat on account of property tax and other dues. When
the  petitioners initiated coercive proceedings	 to  recover
that  amount  the company moved the High Court by way  of  a
writ  petition under
Article 226
of the Act. The High  Court
restrained  the petitioners from recovering the said  amount
without the consent of the Board.
Dismissing the special leave petition, the Court,
967
    HELD:  The	High  Court was justified  in  quashing	 the
recovery  proceedings  taken against the properties  of	 the
company. [970G-H]
    The Board by order dated 27 August, 1987 had stated that
it  was satisfied that the company had become a sick  indus-
trial	company	 and  directed	that   further	 proceedings
under .the Act shall be taken. By another order made on	 the
same day under
s. 17(2)
the Board had found that it was	 not
practicable  for the company to make its net worth  positive
within	a reasonable time and had proceeded to	take  action
under  s.  17(3) and appointed the ICICI  as  the  operating
agency to prepare a scheme for rehabilitation/revival of the
company. In view of these steps taken by the Board under
ss.
16
and
17
of the Act, no proceedings for execution, distress
or the like against any of the properties of the  industrial
company shall lie or be proceeded with further by virtue  of
s. 22(1)
except with the consent of the Board. [970A-D]
    The Board at its discretion may accord approval. If	 the
approval  is not granted the remedy is not extinguished.  It
is  only  postponed. Sub-section (5) of
s. 22
provides	 for
exclusion of the period during which the remedy is suspended
while computing the period of limitation for recovering	 the
dues. [970F-G]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) No. 14395 of 1989.
From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  18.7.1989  of	 the
Bombay High Court in W.P. No. 6108 of 1987.
V.N. Ganpule for the Petitioners.
P.	Chidambram,  Mrs. Raian Karaniawala,  N.H.  Seerbai,
Karanjawala and Ravinder Kumar for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    K.	JAGANNATHA SHETTY, J. The petitioners seek leave  to
appeal against the decision of the Bombay High Court in Writ
Petition  No. 6108/87 quashing the proceedings for  recovery
of  property tax and other expenses due from the  first	 re-
spondent-company.
The	 matter arises in this way: For the purpose of	pre-
vention and revival of sick industries, the Central  Govern-
ment has enacted the Act called "The Sick Industrial  Compa-
nies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985
968
('
The Act
').
The Act
extends to the whole of India including
the  State  of Jammu & Kashmir. It came into  force  (except
sections  15
to
34
) with effect from 15 May 1987.
The	 Act
covers	only sick industrial companies or industrial  compa-
nies which have the potential to become sick.
The Act
empow-
ers the Central Government to establish a Board to be  known
as  the Board for Industrial & Financial  Reconstruction  to
exercise  the  jurisdiction and powers,	 and  discharge	 the
functions and duties imposed under the Act.
    The	 first	respondent-company M/s Shree  Vallabh  Glass
Works Ltd. has been declared to be a sick industrial company
within	the  meaning of clause (0) of  sub-section   (1)  of
Section	 3
of the Act. 'Sick Industrial Company'  "means  an
industrial  company being a company registered for not	less
than seven years which has at the end of any financial	year
accumulated  losses  equal to or exceeding  its	 entire	 net
worth  and has also suffered cash losses in  such  financial
year  and  the	financial year	immediately  preceding	such
financial year."
The	 first petitioner is the Gram Panchayat, Salwad	 and
second petitioner is the Chairman of the Gram Panchayat. The
petitioners initiated coercive proceedings under
Section 129
of  the	 Bombay Village Panchayat Act to recover  a  sum  of
Rs.9,47,539 stated to be the property tax and other  amounts
due  from  the company. Challenging  that  proceedings,	 the
Company	 moved the High Court by way of Writ Petition  under
Article 226
of the Constitution claiming protection provided
under
Section 22
of the Act. The High Court has accepted the
writ petition and restrained the petitioners from recovering
the said amount without the consent of the Board.
    The question is whether the Panchayat could not  recover
the amount due to it from out of the properties of the	sick
industrial company without the consent of the Board?
Section 22
provides, as far as material, as follows:
"
Section  22-
-Suspension  of Legal  Proceedings,  contracts,
etc-
(1)  Where in respect of an industrial company,	 an  inquiry
under
Section 16
is pending or any scheme referred to  under
Section 17
is under preparation or consideration or a  sanc-
tioned	scheme	is under implementation or where  an  appeal
under
Section 25
relating to an industrial company
969
is pending, then, notwithstanding anything contained in	 the
Companies Act, 1956
, or any other law or the memorandum	 and
articles  of  association of the Industrial Company  or	 any
other  instrument having effect under the said Act or  other
law,  no  proceedings for the winding up of  the  industrial
company	 or for execution, distress or the like against	 any
of  the	 properties  of the industrial company	or  for	 the
appointment of a receiver in respect thereof shall lie or be
proceeded with further, except with the consent of the Board
or, as the case may be, the Appellate Authority.
22(2)	  to	 22(4)	   xxx	   xxx	   xxx
22(5) In computing the period of limitation for the enforce-
ment  of any right, privilege, obligation or liability,	 the
period	during	which it or the remedy for  the	 enforcement
thereof	 remains suspended under this section shall  be	 ex-
cluded."
Section  22(1)
provides that in case the  enquiry  under
Section	 16
is pending or any scheme referred to under	Sec-
tion  17 is under preparation or consideration by the  Board
or  any	 appeal	 under
Section 25
is  pending  then  certain
proceedings  against the sick industrial company are  to  be
suspended  or presumed to be suspended. 'The nature  of	 the
proceedings  which  are	 automatically	suspended  are:	 (1)
Winding	 up of the industrial company, (2)  Proceedings	 for
execution,  distress or the like against the  properties  of
sick  industrial  company, and (3) Proceedings for  the	 ap-
pointment  of receiver. The proceedings in respect of  these
matters could, however, be continued against the sick indus-
trial  company with the consent or approval of the Board  or
of the Appellate Authority as the case may be.
Section 16
authorises the Board to make such enquiry  as
it  may	 deem  fit for determining  whether  any  industrial
company has become a sick industrial company. Where Board is
satisfied that a company has become a sick industrial compa-
ny,  it could give a reasonable time to the company to	make
its  net worth positive (
Sec. 17(2)
). Where it is not  prac-
ticable	 for sick industrial company to make its  net  worth
positive  within a reasonable time,
Section 17(3)
steps  in
authorising  the  Board to direct any  operating  agency  to
prepare	 a scheme in relation to the company. The Board	 may
specify the various measures to be considered by the operat-
ing  agency. These measures are detailed out in
Section	 18
.
The  operating	agency has to prepare a scheme	as  per	 the
order specified by the Board.
970
In the instant case, the Board by order dated 27  August
1987  has stated that it was satisfied that the company	 has
become	a sick industrial company. The Board  directed	that
further	 proceedings under the Act shall be taken  with	 re-
spect to the company. On the same day the Board after having
heard  the  representatives of the ICICI, the  company,	 the
concerned Banks, the other public financial institutions and
the  State  Government	of Gujarat,  considered	 the  entire
material on record, held that it was not practicable for the
company	 to make its net worth positive within a  reasonable
time  and that further proceedings under sub-section (3)  of
Section	 17
of the Act are, therefore, to be taken.  Accord-
ingly,	in  exercise of the powers conferred  under
Section
17(3)
of  the	Act, the Board appointed the  ICICI  as	 the
operating     agency	to    prepare	 a    scheme	 for
rehabilitation/revival of the company keeping in view of the
provisions of
Sections 18
and
19
and the guidelines. At	 the
same  time the Board appointed Shri Y.V.  Sivaramakrishnayya
as the special director of the company for safeguarding	 its
financial andother interests.
In	the  light  of the steps taken by  the	Board  under
Sections 16
and
17
of the Act, no proceedings for execution,
distress or the like proceedings against any of the  proper-
ties of the company shall lie or be proceeded further except
with the consent of the Board. Indeed, there would be  auto-
matic suspension of such proceedings against. the  company's
properties.  As	 soon  as the inquiry under
Section  16
is
ordered by the Board, the various proceedings set out  under
sub-section  (1) of
Section 22
would be deemed to have	been
suspended.
It may be against the principles of equity if the credi-
tors are not allowed to recover their dues from the company,
but such creditors may approach the Board for permission  to
proceed	 against  the  company for  the	 recovery  of  their
dues/outstandings/overdues or arrears by whatever name it is
called. The Board at its discretion may accord its  approval
for  proceeding against the company. If the approval is	 not
granted,  the remedy is not extinguished. It is	 only  post-
poned.	Subsection (5) of
Section 22
provides for  exclusion
of  the	 period during which the remedy is  suspended  while
computing the period of limitation for recovering the dues.
    In our opinion, the High Court was justified in quashing
the recovery proceedings taken against the properties of the
company	 and we accordingly, reject this petition,  with  no
order as to costs.
P.S.S.						    Petition
dismissed.
971