[Cites
20
, Cited by
12
]
Supreme Court of India
Ayub @ Pappu Khan Nawab Khan Pathan vs S.N. Sinha And Anr on 21 August, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1990 AIR 2069, 1990 SCR (3) 927
Bench:
A.M.  Ahmadi
,
M.M. Punchhi
PETITIONER:
AYUB @ PAPPU KHAN NAWAB KHAN PATHAN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
S.N. SINHA AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT21/08/1990

BENCH:
REDDY, K. JAYACHANDRA (J)
BENCH:
REDDY, K. JAYACHANDRA (J)
AHMADI, A.M. (J)
PUNCHHI, M.M.

CITATION:
 1990 AIR 2069		  1990 SCR  (3) 927
 1990 SCC  (4) 552	  JT 1990 (3)	 50
 1990 SCALE  (2)273


ACT:
Gujarat Prevention of Anti-Social Activities Act,  1985
:
Sections   2(c)
and
3(1)
--"Dangerous	 person"--Habitually
committing     offences	    --What    is--Not	  such	   a
person--Detained--Detention order--Validity of.
Words and Phrases: 'Habitually'--Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 Petitioner was detained under
section 3(1)
of	 the
Gujarat Prevention of Anti-Social Activities Act, 1985.	 The
grounds	 were  served within time and referred to  3  crimes
registered  in	various police stations, on  the  allegation
that  the  petitioner and his associates armed	with  deadly
weapons	  committed  offences  punishable   under
sections
307
,
451
,
143
,
147
and
148
IPC, and
section 25(1)
of the	Arms
Act. The grounds also referred to 8 crimes under the  provi-
sions  of  the
Prohibition Act
where he was described  as  a
bootlegger.  Earlier detention under the Act and release  by
the  High  Court were also mentioned.  It  was	specifically
mentioned that in one of the three cases, the petitioner was
remanded to judicial custody and since there were chances of
his being released, the detention was ordered to prevent him
from  acting  prejudicially to the  maintainance  of  public
order.
    In this Writ Petition, the Petitioner has challenged the
validity  of the detention order passed by the	Commissioner
of Police.
    It	was contended on behalf of the petitioner  that	 the
detaining  authority  has not applied his mind	inasmuch  as
relevant material has not been taken into account and  there
were absolutely no grounds warranting detention.
    This Court allowed the Petition on. 7.8.1990 for reasons
to be given later.
Giving reasons for allowing the Writ Petition,
HELD:  1. A person is said to be a habitual criminal who  by
force
928
of  habit  or  inward disposition is  accustomed  to  commit
crimes.	 It implies commission of such crimes repeatedly  or
persistently and prima facie there should be a continuity in
the commission of those offences. [931C-D]
    Vijay Narain Singh v. State of Bihar and Ors., [1984]  3
SCC  14	 and Rashidmiya @ Chhava Ahmedmiya Shaik  v.  Police
Commissioner, Ahmedabad and Anr., [1989] 3 SCC 32 1,  relied
on.
    2.	Unless	there is material to show  that	 the  detenu
committed  any one of the acts mentioned in the	 definition,
he  can not come within the meaning of 'Bootlegger'.  Though
in  the grounds there is a reference to 8 crimes  under	 the
provisions  of	the
Prohibition Act
, the  detenu,  does	 not
figure	in  any	 one of these cases. There  is	no  material
whatsoever of his involvement in any manner in any of  these
prohibition  cases.  Therefore, he can not be said to  be  a
bootlegger. [930F-G]
    3.	Admittedly, the detenu was acquitted in two  of	 the
three  criminal	 cases against him. The	 third	case,  viz.,
Crime No. 96/90 was pending investigation and the detenu was
granted	 bail. Thus. this is the only case  pending  against
him,  and  the main allegation was that he,  out  of  sudden
excitement, fired the revolver and as a result of which	 one
Mehbub Khan received injury on his leg and again he fired  a
shot into the air and that he and his associates were moving
around in a jeep threatening the people in the area. But  in
the  order passed by the learned Sessions Judge	 on  13.3.90
while releasing the petitioner on bail, it is noted that the
said  Mehbub  Khan had no fire-arm injury at all  and  as  a
matter of fact, the public prosecutor conceded the same. The
learned	 Sessions Judge has also noted that no medical	evi-
dence  is produced to prove that any one was injured  during
the alleged occurrence. If such is the only crime pending in
which the detenu is alleged to have participated in, it	 can
by  no stretch of imagination be said that he  comes  within
the meaning of 'dangerous person' and the conclusions  drawn
by the detaining authority are bereft of sufficient material
as  required  under
Section 2(c)
of the	 Act.  This  betrays
non-application	 of mind by the detaining authority.  Conse-
quently, the grounds on which the detention order is passed.
are irrelevant and non-existing. [932B-E]



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Writ Petition (Criminal) No.	 687
of 1990.
(Under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India).
B .K. Mehta, Ms. Shalini Soni and P.H. Parekh for the  Peti-
tioner.
929
D.A.  Dave,	 A. Sachthey, C.B. Nath,  B.K.	Jad,  Ashish
Verma and M.N. Shroff for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    K.	JAYACHANDRA REDDY, J. We allowed the  Writ  Petition
vide our Order dated 7.8.90 and released the detenu for	 the
reasons	 to be given later. We accordingly proceed  to	give
the reasons.
The	 petitioner was detained under
Section 3(1)
of	 the
Gujarat	 Prevention  of	 Anti Social  Activities  Act,	1985
('Act'	for short) by an Order dated 13.3.90 passed  by	 the
Commissioner  of  Police, Ahmedabad City. The  grounds	were
served	within	time. The said order is challenged  in	this
Writ  Petition.	 It is mainly contended that  the  detaining
authority has not applied his mind in passing the  detention
order  inasmuch as the relevant material has not been  taken
into  account at the time of passing the order. Even  other-
wise, according to the learned counsel, there are absolutely
no  grounds  which  warrant detention. It  is  also  further
submitted  that the provisions of the Act are not  attracted
even  if all the averments in the grounds are  accepted.  To
appreciate this contention it becomes necessary to refer  to
the contents of the grounds in brief.
The	 detenu is a resident of Ahmedabad City. There is  a
reference in the grounds to about three crimes registered in
various	 police	 stations and they are	Crime  Nos.  122/86,
70/88  and 96/90. In all these cases it is alleged that	 the
detenu	and  his associates armed with deadly  weapons	like
Swords, Dhariya and fire-arms committed offences  punishable
under
Sections 307
,
45
1
,
143
,
147
,
148
I.P.C. and
Section
25(1)
of the Arms Act. So far as the first two	 crimes	 are
concerned admittedly the detenu was acquitted. In Crime	 No.
96/90, in which investigation is pending, bail was  granted.
Then  there is a reference to 8 crimes under the  provisions
of  the
Prohibition Act
registered in Kagdapith Police	Sta-
tion on the basis whereof he is described as a	'bootlegger'
within the meaning of
Section 2(b)
of the Act. Some ended in
conviction and some are pending in trial but admittedly	 the
detenu does not figure in any one of these cases. Thereafter
it  is stated in the grounds in general that the detenu	 was
having dangerous weapons and with the aid of his associates,
has  been subjecting innocent citizens to  physical  beating
causing	 physical  injuries and that he and  his  associates
have been threatening and beating the peace loving  citizens
and  people  residing and doing their business in  the	said
area are afraid and an atmosphere of fear, danger and terror
prevails and
930
that  the  detenu  comes within the  meaning  of  'dangerous
person' as defined under
Section 2(c)
of the Act The detain-
ing  authority	has also referred to  an  earlier  detention
order dated 20.8.85 passed against the detenu and noted that
he  was released by the High Court. Then the  detaining	 au-
thority proceeds to mention that taking action under
Section
59(1)
of  the Bombay Police Act, 1951 is not  possible	 and
also  is  not appropriate under the  circumstances.  In	 the
concluding  paragraph it is particularly mentioned that	 the
detenu	was  a strong-headed 'dangerous person' and  he	 was
using  the dangerous weapons creating an atmosphere of	ter-
ror.  Towards the end it is specifically mentioned  that  in
respect	 of  Crime No. 96/90 registered with  the  Sattelite
Police	Station. the Chief Judicial Magistrate had  remanded
him  to	 the  judicial custody till 15.3.90  and  there	 are
chances of his being released, therefore to prevent him from
acting prejudicially to the maintenance of public order, the
detention was ordered.
Section	 2(b)
of the Act defines 'bootlegger'	which  reads
thus:
"bootlegger"  means  a person  who  distills,  manufactures,
stores,	 transports, imports, exports, sells or	 distributes
any liquor, intoxicating drug or other intoxicant in contra-
vention	 of  any provision of the
Bombay  Prohibition	Act,
1949
,  (Bom.  XXV  of 1949) and the rules  and	orders	made
thereunder, or any other law for the time being in force  or
who  knowingly expends or applies any money or supplies	 any
animal, vehicle, vessel or other conveyance or any  recepta-
cle  or	 any  other material whatsoever	 in  furtherance  or
support of the doing of any of the things described above by
or  through  any  other person, or who abets  in  any  other
manner the doing of any such thing;"
Unless	there is material to show that the detenu  committed
any one of the acts mentioned in the definition, he can	 not
come  within  the  meaning of 'bootlegger'.  Though  in	 the
grounds	 there is a reference to 8 crimes under	 the  provi-
sions  of the
Prohibition Act
, the detenu, as  already	men-
tioned, does not figure in any one of these cases. There  is
no  material whatsoever of his involvement in any manner  in
any  of	 these prohibition cases. Therefore, he can  not  be
said to be a bootlegger.
Now we shall consider whether he comes within the  mean-
ing of 'dangerous person' as defined in
Section 2(c)
of	 the
Act which reads as under:
931
"2(c)  "dangerous-person"  means  a person,  who  either  by
himself	 or as a member of or leader of a  gang,  habitually
commits,  or attempts to commit or abets the  commission  of
offences,  punishable under Chapter XVI or Chapter  XVII  or
Chapter	 XXII of the
Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), or	 any
of the offences punishable under
Chapter V of the Arms	Act,
1959
(54 of 1959)".
As  per this definition, a person, who 'habitually'  commits
or  attempts to commit or abets the commission	of  offences
mentioned  therein  either by himself or as a member  of  or
leader	of  a gang is a "dangerous person".  The  expression
'habitually'  is very significant. A person is said to be  a
habitual  criminal who by force of habit or inward  disposi-
tion  is accustomed to commit crimes. It implies  commission
of  such crimes repeatedly or persistently and	prima  facie
there  should  be a continuity in the  commission  of  those
offences.  In Vijay Narain Singh v. State of Biharand  Ors.,
[1984]	3 SCC 14 the majority explained the meaning  of	 the
word 'habitually' thus:
"The expression 'habitually' means 'repeatedly' or 'persist-
ently'. It implies a thread of continuity stringing together
similar	 repetitive acts. Repeated, persistent and  similar,
but not isolated. individual and dissimilar acts are  neces-
sary to justify an inference of habit. It connotes  frequent
commission of acts or commissions of the same kind  referred
to in each of the said sub-clauses or an aggregate of  simi-
lar acts or commissions".
Rashidmtva (C) Chhava Ahmedmiya Shaik v. Police	 Commission-
er,  Ahmedabad and Another, [1989] 3 SCC 321 is yet  another
case where the scope of
Section 2(c)
of the Act came up	 for
consideration before this Court and it is held that:
"Therefore,  this solitary incident would hardly  be  suffi-
cient to conclude that the detenu was habitually  committing
or  attempting to commit or abetting the commission  of	 of-
fences."
It  is submitted that in the instant case except  Crime	 No.
96/90  there  is  no other case pending and  the  other	 two
crimes which are referred to in the grounds ended in acquit-
tal and the definition of 'dangerous person' in
Section 2(c)
does not include cases under the
Prohibition Act
.  Therefore
the detenu is not a habitual offender so as to come
932
within the meaning of 'dangerous.person'. We find considera-
ble  force  in	this submission. We have  gone	through	 the
entire	record. The learned counsel appearing for the  State
could  not place any material from which it can be  inferred
that  the  petitioner was a habitual offender.	No  doubt  a
lengthy	 counter is filed in which it is repeatedly  averred
in  general  that the detenu was  indulging  in	 prejudicial
activities but as already mentioned, only Crime No. 96/90 is
pending	 investigation and from this alone we can not  infer
that the petitioner is a dangerous person' within the  mean-
ing of
Section 2(c)
of the Act. To satisfy ourselves we have
also  carefully perused the FIR in Crime No. 96/90  and	 the
complaint  annexed to the same. The main allegation  against
the detenu was that he, out of sudden excitement, fired	 the
revolver  and as a result of which one Mehbub Khan  received
injury on his leg and again he fired a shot into the air and
that  he  and his associates were moving around	 in  a	jeep
threatening the people in the area. But in the order  passed
by the learned Sessions Judge on 13.3.90 while releasing the
petitioner  on bail, it is noted that the said	Mehbub	Khan
had  no fire-arm injury at all and as a matter of fact,	 the
public	prosecutor conceded the same. The  learned  Sessions
Judge has also noted that no medical evidence is produced to
prove  that  any one was injured during the  alleged  occur-
rence. If such is the only crime pending in which the detenu
is alleged to have participated in, it can by no stretch  of
imagination  be	 said that he comes within  the	 meaning  of
'dangerous person' and the conclusions drawn by the  detain-
ing authority are bereft of sufficient material as  required
under
Section 2(c)
of the Act.	This betrays non-application
of  mind  by  the  detaining  authority.  Consequently,	 the
grounds on which the detention order is passed, are  irrele-
vant  and non-existing. These are the reasons which  weighed
with us for not upholding the detention.
G.N.				       Petition allowed.
933