[Cites
4
, Cited by
20
]
Supreme Court of India
U.P. State Road Transport Corporation vs Muniruddin on 17 August, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1990 SCR (3) 777, 1990 SCC (4) 464, AIRONLINE 1990 SC 222
Author:
M.H. Kania
Bench:
M.H. Kania
PETITIONER:
U.P. STATE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATION

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MUNIRUDDIN

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/08/1990

BENCH:
KANIA, M.H.
BENCH:
KANIA, M.H.
REDDY, K. JAYACHANDRA (J)

CITATION:
 1990 SCR  (3) 777	  1990 SCC  (4) 464
 JT 1990 (3)   494	  1990 SCALE  (2)250


ACT:
    Service    Law:  Disciplinary   Enquiry--Non-supply	  of
carbon	copies	of  important  documents--Whether  prejudice
caused to the employee--High Court setting aside  concurrent
findings  of courts below--Whether justified--Lump sum	com-
pensation  towards  back wages awarded	instead	 of  driving
parties	    to	  go	through	    indefinite	   execution
proceedings--Relief under
Section 89
of the Income Tax	Act,
1961 for spreading to be given.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 respondent, a bus-conductor in the  appellant-State
Road Transport Corporation, was dismissed on the charge that
he  had	 erased the way-bills and resold some  already	sold
tickets. He filed a suit challenging the dismissal order  on
the ground that carbon copies of certain important documents
were  not made available to him during the enquiry and	this
had  caused serious prejudice to him. The trial	 court	dis-
missed the suit and the first appellate court also dismissed
his  appeal.  However,	the High Court	allowed	 his  second
appeal,	 and  held  that the important	documents  had	been
purposely  withheld,  which had resulted  prejudice  to	 the
employee.
    The appellant-Corporation filed a Special Leave Petition
before this Court, contending that the High Court had gross-
ly erred in interfering in second appeal with the concurrent
findings, and that the failure to produce the carbon  copies
of some of the documents did not cause any prejudice and. at
any rate, it was a question of fact.
Disposing of the appeal, by special leave, this Court,
    HELD:  1.  The High Court has not  committed  any  error
which warrants interference. 1780E]
    The	 respondent's  plea has been that  from	 the  carbon
copies he would have shown that he could not have carried on
the  erasures  or made false entries  and,  therefore;	non-
supply of these carbon copies had caused great prejudice  to
him. However, the trial court and the first appellate  court
held that no prejudice was caused since he was
778
shown the originals. The High Court no doubt has  considered
this  aspect in detail and in doing so referred to the	con-
tents  of  various documents. From this alone it  cannot  be
said  that the High Court has not kept in view the scope  of
second appeal. [779G-H; 780A-B]
    Since the employee has been throughout pleading that  he
did  not  make	the erasures or any other  false  entry,  it
naturally  became  necessary to see whether they  were	also
found in carbon copies. Therefore, the High Court considered
the  various figures and entries in the originals  in  which
such erasures were alleged to have been made by the employee
and eventually observed that the entire enquiry was based on
some  of these documents, and if a carbon copy of the  docu-
ments  had  been  shown, the authority may  well  have	been
convinced  that	 the  charge levelled against  him  was	 not
correct, and that, therefore, the non-supply of these  docu-
ments had caused prejudice. [780 D-E]
    2. The litigation is going on for the last 25 years	 and
the  respondent has already reached the age  of	 superannua-
tion. Hence the parties need not be driven to go through the
indefinite  execution  proceedings again for  backwages	 and
allowances  and	 ends  of justice require that	a  lump	 sum
compensation  should  be granted. Accordingly,	a  lump	 sum
amount of Rs.35,000 is awarded and the amount should be paid
to  the	 respondent without deducting the  income  tax.	 The
respondent  may make an application under
Section 89
of	 the
Income Tax Act, 1961 for spreading over this amount, and the
concerned Income Tax Officers should also give the necessary
relief without any further enquiry. [780F; 781C-E]
    Sohan  Singh v. Union of India & Anr., [1984] 1 SCC	 162
and  Sundaram Motors Pvt. Ltd. v. Ameerjan & Ant., [1985]  1
SCC 118, relied on.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3 169  of
1981.
From the Judgment and Order dated 7.5.1981 of the  Alla-
habad High Court in Second Appeal No. 1018 of 1974.
    Jagan  Mohan  Rao  and R. Ramachandran  (N.P.)  for	 the
Appellant.
Subodh  Markandeya, Mrs. Chitra Markandeya, W.A.  Nomani
and G.S. Giri for the Respondent.
779
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    K.	JAYACHANDRA REDDY, J. This is a case where an  order
of dismissal passed in a departmental enquiry was challenged
in  civil  court and ultimately has found its  way  to	this
Court  after  a long litigation for over 16 years.  The	 re-
spondent  was a bus-conductor in U.P. State  Road  Transport
Corporation  (Corporation'  for	 short).  A  trap  was	laid
against	 him  and a disciplinary enquiry was  initiated	 and
dismissal  order was passed on 23rd March, 1965. He filed  a
civil suit questioning the same. One of the main plea  taken
by the respondent was that certain important documents	were
not made available to him during the enquiry and this caused
serious prejudice to him. The trial court dismissed the suit
and  an	 appeal preferred by him was also dismissed  by	 the
appellate court. Relentless as he was, he carried the matter
to  the High Court by way of second appeal and his plea	 was
accepted  by  the High Court and the second appeal  was	 al-
lowed.	Aggrieved by the said judgment, the Corporation	 has
approached this Court.
On	behalf of the Corporation it is contended  that	 the
High  Court  has grossly erred in interfering  in  a  second
appeal with the concurrent findings and that the plea of the
respondent that relevant documents were not supplied to	 him
during the enquiry has no substance.
One of the main issues framed before the trial court was
whether	 all  the way-bills, carbon copies  of	the  tickets
issued on the said dates and carbon copy of checking  report
were not shown to the delinquent employee by the investigat-
ing  officer and if so what would be its effect? The  charge
against	 the respondent was that he erased the waybills	 and
resold	some  already sold tickets. During the	enquiry	 the
delinquent  employee was permitted to inspect the  documents
but  he	 intended to inspect the carbon copies	and  made  a
request	 by way of a letter. However, the carbon  copies  of
the  way-bills dated 7th, 8th and 10th January,	 1963  which
are  the  relevant dates and carbon copies of  the  checking
report	were  not shown to him. The plea of  the  delinquent
employee has been that from the carbon copies he would	have
shown that he could not have carried on such erasure or made
false entries and non-supply of them had caused great preju-
dice.  As already mentioned, the trial court as well as	 the
first appellate court did not accept this plea and held that
no prejudice was caused inasmuch as he was shown the  origi-
nals  and also on the ground that he did not later  insisted
on  those carbon copies being shown to him. The High  Court,
however,  in an elaborate judgment referred to	the  various
documents
780
and it ultimately reached the conclusion that the  important
documents  have	 been purposely withheld which	resulted  in
prejudice  to  the  employee. In this  appeal,	the  learned
counsel for the Corporation contended that where failure  to
produce	 the carbon copies of some of the documents did	 not
cause any prejudice and that at any rate it is a question of
fact,  the  High Court erred in interfering  in	 the  second
appeal.	 To satisfy ourselves we wanted to peruse the  judg-
ments  of the trial court as well as of the first  appellate
court  but  the	 Corporation has not placed a  copy  of	 the
appellate  court  judgment before us. We  have	perused	 the
trial court judgment and we find at more than one place that
the  learned District Munsif has observed that the  employee
could  have insisted on production of these  documents.	 The
High Court no doubt has considered this aspect in detail and
in  doing  so has referred to the contents  of	the  various
documents.  From this alone it cannot be said that the	High
Court has not kept in view the scope of second appeal. Since
the  employee has been throughout pleading that he  did	 not
make  the  erasures or any other false entry,  it  naturally
became	necessary  to see whether they were  also  found  in
carbon	copies. From this point of view the High Court	con-
sidered the various figures and entries in the originals  in
which  such  erasures and entries are alleged to  have	been
made by the employee and eventually observed that the entire
enquiry was based on some of these documents and if a carbon
copy of the way-bills had been shown, the authority may well
have been convinced that the charge levelled against him was
not  correct,  and that, therefore the non-supply  of  these
documents has caused prejudice. Having examined the findings
arrived at by the High Court, we are unable to say that	 the
High Court has committed any error which warrants  interfer-
ence under
Article 136
of the Constitution.
    The	 High Court decreed the suit for  pendente-lite	 and
future	pay and allowances and this was passed on  7th	May,
1981.  It can therefore be seen that for the last  25  years
this litigation went on i.e. from the date of dismissal till
today. Admittedly the respondent has already reached the age
of  superannuation  some years ago.
During these  years	 the
respondent must have sought some employment or the other and
the  learned  counsel also could not seriously	dispute	 the
same.  Under  these circumstances the  question	 is  whether
again the parties should be driven to go through the indefi-
nite execution proceedings. On the question of granting lump
sum  amount  towards the backwages and allowances  till	 the
date of his retirement we have also heard both sides.  Under
somewhat similar circumstances this Court in
Sohan Singh  v.
Union of India and Another
, [1984] 1 SCC 162 granted lump
781
sum  amount  instead  of driving the parties to	 go  to	 the
executing  court for further relief. That was a	 case  where
the  service of an airman in the Air Force was not  extended
for  a	period of six years as per the	regulation  and	 the
matter	ultimately  came up before this Court.	Taking	into
consideration  the facts and circumstances this	 Court	held
that the employee should be compensated by payment of a lump
sum  amount in lieu of the benefits to which he	 would	have
been  otherwise entitled if he had continued in service	 for
the  extended  period of six years. Without going  into	 the
merits	of  the	 actual claim this Court awarded  a  sum  of
Rs.35,000 by way of compensation.
In the instant case also we are of the view that ends of
justice require that such a relief should be granted. Taking
into  consideration  all these aspects	including  that	 the
respondent  would  have been entitled  for  some  retirement
benefit,  we award Rs.35,000 and direct the U.P. State	Road
Transport  Corporation,	 the appellant herein, to  pay	this
amount to the respondent within two months from today. Since
the amount would be received in lump sum by the	 respondent,
it may attract the levy of income tax. But since the  amount
represents  the salary and allowances over the last so	many
years  the respondent may make an application under
Section
89
of the Income Tax Act for spreading over this  lump	 sum
amount. We may also point out that in similar circumstances,
this  Court,  in
Sundaram Motors Pvt. Ltd. v.  Ameerjan	 and
Another
,  [1985] 1 SCC 118 where the compensation by way  of
lump  sum amount was awarded, observed that the same  should
be spread over and gave a direction to the concerned  Income
Tax Officer to give immediate relief under
Section 89
with-
out further enquiry.
Accordingly	 We direct the Corporation to pay  the	lump
sum amount of Rs.35,000 without deducting income tax.  Since
the  respondent is entitled for relief under
Section  89
of
the  Income  Tax Act, he shall make an	application  to	 the
concerned  Income Tax Officer who shall give  the  necessary
relief	without any further enquiry. The appeal is  disposed
of accordingly. In the circumstances of the case there	will
be no order as to costs.
N.P.V.					    Appeal  disposed
of.
782