[Cites
8
, Cited by
49
]
Supreme Court of India
Pankaj Bhargava And Anr vs Mohinder Nath And Anr on 11 December, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1991 AIR 1233, 1990 SCR SUPL. (3) 508
Bench:
N.D.  Ojha
,
Jagdish Saran  Verma
PETITIONER:
PANKAJ BHARGAVA AND ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
MOHINDER NATH AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT11/12/1990

BENCH:
VENKATACHALLIAH, M.N. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATACHALLIAH, M.N. (J)
OJHA, N.D. (J)
VERMA, JAGDISH SARAN (J)

CITATION:
 1991 AIR 1233		  1990 SCR  Supl. (3) 508
 1991 SCC  (1) 556	  JT 1990 (4)	628
 1990 SCALE  (2)1251
 CITATOR INFO :
 RF	    1992 SC1555	 (2,16,20)


ACT:
Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958
:
Sections 21
and
39-
-Tenan-
cy  for limited period---Rent Controller on basis of  admis-
sions  of parties granting permission--Whether can be  chal-
lenged in collateral proceedings.
Appeal--'Substantial question of law'--What is.
Code   of  Civil  Procedure
,  1908:
Section   9-
--Civil
Court--Jurisdiction  of--Competence  to	 take  decision--The
test.
Indian  Contract Act, 1872
:
Section	 8-
-Stipulation	 for
payment of rent--Whether brings about a contract of tenancy.
Transfer	 of    Property	   Act,	   1882
:     Section
105--Lease--Yearly     rent    paid    by     cheque--Cheque
returned--Effect on lease--What is.
Words & Phrases: 'Substantial question of law'--Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
    The appellants and the respondents by their joint appli-
cation	to the Rent Controller sought for and obtained	per-
mission for a limited tenancy, under
Section 21
of the Delhi
Rent  Control Act, 1958. The Respondents not having  surren-
dered possession upon the expiry of the said period of	five
years, the appellants commenced proceedings for re-delivery.
Respondents resisted the proceedings raising several conten-
tions. They urged that the appellants were not the owners of
the  premises at all; that the permission under
Section  21
was  vitiated by fraud resulting from a suppression  by	 the
appellants  of the material fact that at the  relevant	time
the  premises  was not available for letting  at  all;	that
respondents  having been inducted into possession as  tenant
from  March 5, 1978 itself, one of the basic  jurisdictional
requirements  for the grant of permission under
Section  21
was  absent,  and  that at all events  a  fresh	 contractual
tenancy	 had  been created with effect from  April  6,	1983
immediately  upon  the expiry of the five year term  of	 the
limited tenancy.
509
    The	 Rent Controller rejected all the aforesaid  conten-
tions and made an order granting possession.
    The respondents' appeal before the Rent Control Tribunal
was unsuccessful, but the second appeal under
Section 39
of
the  Act was allowed by the High Court which held that	even
prior  to the limited tenancy the respondents had  been	 in-
ducted	into  possession  as tenants;  that  the  subsequent
permission  for the limited tenancy was a mere pretence	 and
the result of a fraud on the statute and therefore a  nulli-
ty,  and relying on this Court's decision in  Subhash  Kumar
Lata  v.  R.C.	Chhiba, [1988] 4 SCC 709 held  that  such  a
nullity	 could be pleaded in and against execution as  well.
It accordingly reversed the orders of the authorities below,
and dismissed the appellants' claim for possession.
    In the landlords' appeal to this Court it was  contended
that: (1) both the Rent Controller and the Appellate  Tribu-
nal  having  concurrently held that  with  the	respondents'
occupation  of the premises from March 5, 1978 to  April  5,
1978 even if true, did not constitute a tenancy in that	 the
other requisite indicia of such tenancy, namely, the  stipu-
lation	of a consideration was absent and that being a	pure
question  of fact, the High Court in exercise of its  juris-
diction under
Section 39
which permitted only an appeal on a
substantial  question  of  law could  not  reappreciate	 the
evidence and upset the finality of that finding of fact, (2)
that  even if the limited tenancy under
Section 21
was	 ob-
tained despite the subsistence of a tenancy created earlier,
the  respondents  were bound to assail the validity  of	 the
limited tenancy during its subsistence and not as a  collat-
eral  plea in the course of execution, (3) Even if  the	 re-
ceipt  Ex. D.W.1/3 was susceptible of an inference that	 the
transaction  envisaged by it was one of lease could be	said
to be a question of law, by no standards it could be said to
be a substantial question of law within the meaning and	 for
the purposes of
Section 39
of the Act.
    On behalf of the tenants it was urged that
Section 21
to
the  extent  it runs counter and forms an exception  to	 the
general scheme of the statute its operation was required  to
be  restricted	severely  to the  expressed  conditions	 and
limitations  contained	in that section	 and  that  wherever
permission  for	 a limited tenancy was sought  and  obtained
suppressing  any jurisdictional fact such as that  the	pro-
spective  limited  tenant  was already in  occupation  as  a
regular	 tenant, the transaction amounted to a fraud on	 the
statute	 rendering the permission void ab initio,  that	 the
jurisdiction  of the Rent Controller to grant permission  is
conditional  and  that if the conditions  upon	which  alone
permission  can	 be  granted are  not  fulfilled  permission
cannot be granted in invitum
510
and  that consequently the landlord cannot  recover  posses-
sion.
Allowing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD:  1(a)	 The receipt dated March 5,  1978  on  which
Respondents  relied  contained a recital that a	 cheque	 for
Rs.18,000 mentioned in it was given as rent for the premises
for the period of. 12 months w.e.f. March 5, 1978. The	Rent
Controller and the Tribunal, quite erroneously, proceeded to
hold  that the mere fact that the cheque had been  shown  to
have been returned had the effect of taking away the consid-
eration	 for the lease. These authorities mistook  the	non-
payment of rent in point of fact as equivalent to absence of
consideration  in point of law. This was clearly  erroneous.
[515D]
      A stipulation for payment of rent was by itself suffi-
cient to bring about a contract of tenancy where, of course,
the  other element of exclusivity of possession	 was  shown.
The  High  Court held that a consideration  promised  is  as
valid  as  one paid, and that, therefore,  the	circumstance
that  the  cheque was returned would not  detract  from	 the
legal consequence of the stipulation to pay rent implicit in
Exhibit	 DW  1/3. The High Court construed the	receipt	 and
found that a lease was intended. [515E]
    2.	The construction of a document which is the  founda-
tion of the rights of the parties raises a question of	law.
An  inference from facts admitted or found is a question  of
law  if such an inference is to be drawn on the	 application
of proper principles of law to the facts. Such determination
is a mixed question of the fact and law. The submission that
the  High  Court treaded on the forbidden  ground  of  facts
cannot therefore be accepted. [515F]
    3.	What is a 'substantial question of law'	 would	cer-
tainly depend upon facts and circumstances of every case. If
a  question of law had been settled by the highest court  of
the country that question however important and difficult it
may have been regarded in the past and however large may  be
its  effect on any of the parties, would not be regarded  as
substantial question of law. [515H]
     Raghunath Prasad  v. Deputy Commissioner of Partabgarh,
[1927]	54 I.A. 126; Sir Chunilal V. Mehta and Sons Ltd.  v.
The  Century  Spinning and Manufacturing  Co.  Ltd.,  [1962]
Supp.  3 SCR 549 at 557 and 558 and Union of India  v.	M/s.
Chaman Lal & Co., AIR 1957 SC 652 at 655 & 656, relied on.
511
    Kaikhushroo	 Pirojsha  Ghaira  v. C.P.  Syndicate  Ltd.,
[1948]	I.  Bom. L.R. 744; Dinkarrao  v.  Rattansey,  I.L.R.
(1949) Nag. 224 and Rimmalapudi Subba Rao  v. Noony Veeraju,
I.L.R. 1952 Mad. 264, referred to.
    4(a)  In view of the pronouncements of this Court as  to
the limitations on the permissible challenge to the exercise
of  jurisdiction under
Section 21
, any appeal to the  remedy
based  on concept of nullity and collateral attack is  inap-
propriate. [521H]
    (b)	 In a collateral challenge the exercise is  not	 the
invalidation  of a decision, but only to  ascertain  whether
the  decision "exists" in law at all and to rely upon  inci-
dents  and  effect of its  "non-existence".  The  permission
granted	 must be presumed to be valid till set	aside.	Doc-
trine  of collateral challenge will not apply to a  decision
which is valid ex-hypothesis and which has some	 presumptive
existence,  validity and effect in law. Such a decision	 can
be  invalidated	 by the right person in	 'right	 proceedings
brought	 at  the right time. It is only a  nullity  stemming
from  lack  of inherent jurisdiction or	 a  proceeding	that
wears  the  brand of invalidity on its forehead	 that  might
afford a defence even against enforcement. Such a collateral
challenge  may	not be available where there is no  lack  of
inherent  jurisdiction	but  what is disputed  is  only	 the
existence or non-existence of facts which though  collateral
to the merits do require investigation into and adjudication
upon  their existence or non-existence on the basis of	evi-
dence. If the parties before the Rent Controller have admit-
ted  that the fact or the event which gives  the  Controller
jurisdiction is in existence and there was no reason for the
Controller to doubt the bona fides of that admission as to a
fact or event, the Controller is under no obligation to make
further	 enquiries on his own as to that factual state.	 The
test of jurisdiction over the subject matter is whether	 the
Court or Tribunal can decide the case at all and not whether
the court has authority to issue a particular kind of  order
in the course of deciding the case. [522A-E]
Subhash	 Kumar Lata v. R.C. Chhiba, [1988] 4 SCC  709,	com-
mented upon.
    S.B.  Naronah v. Prem Kumari Khanna, [1980] 1  SCR	281;
J.R.  Vohra v. Indian Export House Pvt. Ltd., [1985]  2	 SCR
899; Shiv Chander Kapoor v. Amar Bose, [1990] 1 SCC 234	 and
Yamuna Maloo v. Anand Swarup, [1990] 3 SCC 30, explained.
Joginder  Kumar Butan  v. R.P. Oberoi, [1987] 4 SCC 20,	 re-
ferred to.
512
    5.	The  expression 'fraud on the statute' is  merely  a
figurative description of a colourable transaction to  evade
the  provisions of a statute and does not, for	purposes  of
choice	of  the remedy, distinguish itself from	 the  conse-
quences	 of fraud as vitiating the permission under
Section
21
. [523H-524A]
    6.	Permission  under
Section 21
for  letting  out	 the
premises  to the same tenant for limited periods  more	than
once  successively  would  not by itself  and  without	more
vitiate the subsequent grants. In one sense, the  successive
grants	of  permission would share, the	 characteristics  of
post-facto grant. [524B]
Dhanvanti v. D.D. Gupta, [1986] 3 SCC 1, relied on.
    7. The jurisdiction of a court depends upon its right to
decide	the  case and not upon the merits of  its  decision.
[522G]
    Hugh  B. Cox. "The Void Order and the Duty to Obey",  16
U.Chi. L.Rev. 86 (1948), relied on.



JUDGMENT: