[Cites
6
, Cited by
37
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Andhra Pradesh & Anr. Etc vs R.V. Rayanim Etc. Etc on 15 January, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1990 AIR 626, 1990 SCR (1) 54, AIR 1990 SUPREME COURT 626, 1990 (1) SCC 433, 1990 UJ(SC) 1 591, (1990) 1 JT 57 (SC), (1990) 1 CURLJ(CCR) 378, (1990) 1 ARBILR 1, 1990 REVLR 1 289, (1990) 1 LJR 562, (1990) 1 LANDLR 387, (1990) 2 CIVLJ 474, (1990) 16 ALL LR 508, (1990) 1 CURCC 433, (1990) 1 APLJ 55
Author:
Sabyasachi  Mukharji
Bench:
Sabyasachi  Mukharji
,
M.M. Punchhi
PETITIONER:
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH & ANR. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
R.V. RAYANIM ETC. ETC.

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/01/1990

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (CJ)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (CJ)
PUNCHHI, M.M.
REDDY, K. JAYACHANDRA (J)

CITATION:
 1990 AIR  626		  1990 SCR  (1)	 54
 1990 SCC  (1) 433	  JT 1990 (1)	 57
 1990 SCALE  (1)47
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1992 SC 232	 (30)


ACT:
Arbitration	  Act,	1940
:
Sections	 14
,
17
,
30
and
33-
-Award-Challenge   of--Error	  apparent   on	  face	  of
record--Arbitrator  exceeded jurisdiction--Only in  speaking
award Court can look into reasons.



HEADNOTE:
    The respondent-contractor had entered into an  agreement
with the petitioner for formation of an earth dam.  Disputes
and  difference arose between the parties. A  reference	 was
made  to the arbitrator wherein the respondent	made  eleven
claims	out  of	 which one claim was  later  withdrawn.	 The
arbitrator  gave a non-speaking award in favour of  the	 re-
spondent amounting to a consolidated sum of Rs.19.39 lakhs.
    The	 respondent flied a proceeding before the  Court  to
make  the award rule of the Court. The petitioner  preferred
an  application for setting aside the award which  was	dis-
missed. The High Court dismissed the appeal and the revision
of the petitioner.
    Before  this Court it was contended inter alia that	 the
award purported to grant damages on the basis of  escalation
of  cost  and prices, and such escalation was not  a  matter
within the domain of the bargain between the parties. It was
also  contended that the fact that the arbitrator had  taken
into consideration the question of escalation would make the
award  bad  because it was not discernible  whether  he	 had
awarded any amount on account of excalation.
Dismissing the special leave petition, this Court,
    HELD: (1) In matters of challenging an award, there	 are
often  two distinct and different grounds. One is  an  error
apparent on the face of the record and the other is that the
arbitrator has exceeded his jurisdiction. In the latter case
the Court can look into the arbitration agreement but  under
the former It cannot, unless the agreement was	incorporated
or recited In the award. [58A-B]
    M/s	 Sudarshan  Trading Co. v. Government  of  Kerala  &
Anr., [1989] 2 SCC 38, referred to.
11
55
    (2) Only in a speaking award the court can look into the
reasoning of the award. It is not open to the court to probe
the mental process of the arbitrator and speculate, where no
reasons are given by the arbitrator, as to what impelled the
arbitrator to arrive at his conclusion. [58D]
    (3) It is not discernible on the face of the record that
the  arbitrator	 has exceeded his jurisdiction	in  awarding
damages on account of escalation. All that the award  states
is that he has considered the claim on the basis of  escala-
tion.  Such a consideration does not make the award, on	 the
race of it, bad on the ground of error apparent on the	face
of the record.' [58G-H; 59A-B]
    (4)	 The Arbitrator does not state that he	has  awarded
any  amount  on	 that account. There is	 neither  any  error
apparent  on  the face of the record, nor  any	material  to
satisfy that the arbitrator has exceeded his jurisdiction in
awarding the amount as he did. [59B-C]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) No. 8094 of 1988.
From the Judgment and Order dated 16.3.88 of the  Andhra
Pradesh High Court in (A.A.O.) No. 1152/86 & C.R.P. No. 2728
of 1986.
C. Sitaramiah and G. Prabhakar for the Petitioners.
    R.F.  Nariman,  K. Prabhakar and R.N. Kishwani  for	 the
Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SABYASACHI	MUKHARJI,  CJ. The  respondent	R.V. Rayanim
was,  at  all material times, a Class I contractor  who	 had
entered	 into  an agreement with the  Government  of  Andhra
Pradesh	 for  formation of earth dam in gorge  portion	from
chainage  3360 to 3380-M of Raiwada Reservoir  Project	near
Devarapalli village, Chodavaram Taluk, Distt. Visakhapatnam,
Andhra	Pradesh. Disputes and differences arose between	 the
parties	 in respect of the aforesaid agreement. A  reference
was  made to the arbitrator as per the arbitrator clause  in
the  agreement	between	 the parties.  The  respondent	made
eleven claims claiming various amounts, particulars  whereof
have been set out by the arbitrator as follows.
56
"I.Payment for forming cross     (Rs. in lakhs) 15.89
       bund and refund of the	      (subsequently reduced
       amount recovered.	      to Rs.14.89 lakhs)
     II.Refund of Seigniorage	      2.071 (withdrawn)
       Charges
     III.Escalation and damages	      14.00
     IV.Extra load for sand	      1.075 (subsequently
				      reduced to Rs.0.575
				      lakhs).
V.Payment for excavation	      1.030
       under water for probing
       diaphram wall
     VI. Compensation for loss	      1.500
       suffered due to partial
       prevention by the
       department.
       VII. Compensation for loss     2.015
       suffered due to non-payment
       for the work done.
       VIII.Refund of excess hire     0.730
       charges recovered.
       IX. Overheads		      0,960
       X.  Costs		      O. 100
XI.  (a)  Interest on II and VIII at 24% from  the  date  of
recovery.
(b)  On  Rs.8.30 lakhs at 24% p.a.  from	30.11.81  to
12.5. 3982.
(c) Interest at 24% on the award amount except II and VIII
from the date of petition."
The	 arbitrator  gave a non-speaking  award	 dated	27th
July,  1985  in	 favour	 of  the  respondent,  amounting  to
Rs.19.39 lakhs, wherein he stated as follows:
"Claim	II has been withdrawn by the petitioner	 himself  on
the ground it was subsequently refunded by the	respondents.
On  the	 balance  claims (I and III to X)  according  to  my
assessment, I award a consolidated amount of Rs.19.39  lakhs
to the extent of the claims judged admissible. The  respond-
ents shall pay Rs.Nineteen lakhs and thirty nine thousand to
the petitioner."
It  is,	 therefore, apparent the claim No. II  as  mentioned
above,
57
had  been  withdrawn. On the balance claims I  and  III	 the
arbitrator  had	 awarded a consolidated amount	of  Rs.19.39
lakhs  'to the extent of the claims judged admissible'.	 The
respondent  filed a proceeding before the Court to make	 the
award rule of the Court. The petitioner preferred an  appli-
cation	for  setting aside the award. By a  common  judgment
dated  21st April, 1985, the Second Additional	Judge,	City
Civil Court, Hyderabad, dismissed the petition of the  peti-
tioner for setting aside the award and allowed the  judgment
in  terms of the award. The petitioner preferred  an  appeal
and a civil review petition before the High Court of Hydera-
bad. By a judgment dated 16th March, 1988 the division bench
of  the High Court dismissed the appeal and the revision  of
the  petitioner. It held that the non-speaking award of	 the
arbitrator was not liable to be set aside by the Court.
    The petitioner has preferred this special leave petition
challenging  the said decision of the High Court.  The	main
contention  which  was sought to be urged on this  case	 was
that  the  award was a nonspeaking award and, as  such,	 was
bad.  On  this ground, on or about 9th December,  1988	this
Court directed that the matter should be taken up along with
civil  appeal  No. 5645 and 5645A of 1986 pending  before  a
larger bench. At that time, the question was pending consid-
eration by the Constitution Bench of this Court. This  Court
further	 directed  on  9th December, 1988  that	 the  entire
amount of award, if not deposited in the trial court, should
be deposited in the trial court within two months from	that
date, and upon the deposit being made the respondent will be
at liberty to withdraw 50% of the amount which has not	been
withdrawn on furnishing security to the satisfaction of	 the
trial  court. It was further recorded that 50%	had  already
been withdrawn.
As mentioned hereinbefore, the main contention sought to
be urged was that the award being a non-speaking award,	 was
bad in law. In view of the decision of this Court in  Raipur
Development  Authority	etc. v.	 M/s  Chokhamal	 Contractors
etc.,  Jmt.  Today 2 SC 285, this contention  is  no  longer
sustainable.  It was then contended that the award has	pur-
ported	to grant damages on the basis of escalation of	cost
and prices; and such escalation was not a matter within	 the
doman  of the bargain between the parties and  having  taken
that  factor into consideration the award was bad.  We	have
set out the relevant portion of the award. From reading	 the
award,	as set out hereinbefore, it is clear that the  arbi-
trator has considered the claim made on the basis of  'esca-
lation	and  damages'  but he has awarded  a  total  sum  of
Rs.19.39 lakhs insofar as he finds admissible in respect  of
the  claims which the arbitrator has adjudged. It speaks  no
further. In such a situation it is
58
not  possible  to  contend that there was  any	exercise  of
jurisdiction by the arbitrator beyond his competence. It  is
well-settled that in matter of challenging the award,  there
are  often  two distinct and different grounds.
One  is  an
error  apparent on the face of the record and the  other  is
that  the arbitrator has exceeded his jurisdiction.  In	 the
latter's case the Court can look into the arbitration agree-
ment  but under the former it cannot, unless  the  agreement
was  incorporated or recited in the award. An award  may  be
remitted or set aside on the ground that the arbitrator,  in
making	it,  had exceeded his jurisdiction and	evidence  of
matters not appearing on the face of it, will be admitted in
order to establish whether the jurisdiction had been exceed-
ed  or not, because the nature of the dispute  is  something
which has to be determined outside the award--whatever might
be said about it in the award or by the arbitrator. See	 the
observations  of this Court in M/s
Sudarshan Trading Co.  v.
Government of Kerala & Anr.
, [1989] 2 SCC 38.
    Only  in  a speaking award the court can look  into	 the
reasoning of the award. It is not open to the court to probe
the mental process of the arbitrator and speculate, where no
reasons are given by the arbitrator; as to what impelled the
arbitrator to arrive at his conclusion.
In	the instant case the arbitrator has not awarded	 any
amount	on account of escalation of costs and  expenses.  At
last the arbitrator has not expressly awarded any amount  on
the ground of such escalation and if so, what amount, is not
apparent on the face of the record. In these  circumstances,
in  our opinion, on the basis of well-settled principles  of
law  such  an  award, especially in view of  the  fact	that
excluding  item	 No. III the remaining items would  also  be
well over Rs.19.33 lakhs, it is not discernible on the	face
of the record that arbitrator has exceeded his	jurisdiction
in awarding damages on account of escalation of charges	 and
expenses  which were beyond the arbitration ambit. The	fact
that  the  arbitrator has considered the claim made  by	 the
respondent  on account of escalation, does not make  per  se
the award to be bad.
Mr.  C. Sitaramiah, learned counsel appearing  for	 the
appellant  contended that the fact that the  arbitrator	 has
taken  into consideration the question of  escalation  would
make the award bad because it is not discernible whether  he
has  awarded any amount on account of escalation. We are  of
the  opinion that this argument is not open. In case  of  an
error  apparent	 on  the face of the record, it	 has  to  be
established  that an item or an amount which the  arbitrator
had no jurisdiction to
59
take  into consideration, has been awarded or granted.	That
is  not apparent on the face of the award in this case.	 All
that the award states is that he has considered the claim on
the basis of escalation. Such a consideration does not	make
the  award  on the face of it, bad on the  ground  of  error
apparent on the face of the record. Indeed, the	 arbitrator,
when  a claim is made, has to take that	 into  consideration
either	for acceptance or rejection of the claim  made.	 The
award states that he has taken the claim made, into  consid-
eration.  The award does not state that he has	awarded	 any
amount on that account. There is neither any error  apparent
on the face of the record, nor any material to satisfy	that
the arbitrator has exceeded his jurisdiction in awarding the
amount as he did.
In	that view of the matter the special  leave  petition
has no merit made must, therefore, fail, and is	 accordingly
dismissed.  The	 petitioners were allowed  to  withdraw	 the
awarded sum on furnishing security but in view of the  deci-
sion  now rendered, they will be entitled to take  back	 the
security. We order accordingly. The application is dismissed
with aforesaid directions.
R.S.S.						    Petition
dismissed.
60