[Cites
4
, Cited by
23
]
Supreme Court of India
Dr. V.L. Chandra And Ors. Etc vs All India Institute Of Medical Sciences ... on 22 March, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1990 SCR (2) 104, 1990 SCC (3) 38, AIR 1990 SUPREME COURT 1670, 1990 (3) SCC 38, 1990 LAB. I. C. 1368, (1990) 1 CURLJ(CCR) 633, (1990) 13 ATC 571, (1990) 1 LAB LN 720, (1990) 41 DLT 29.2, (1990) IJR 280 (SC), (1990) 2 LABLJ 29.2, (1990) 1 JT 515 (SC), (1990) 1 UPLBEC 685, 1990 UJ(SC) 1 600, (1990) 2 SERVLR 430, (1990) 1 CURLR 656, 1990 (1) JT 515, (1990) 60 FACLR 726, 1990 SCC (L&S) 435
Author:
Misra Rangnath
Bench:
Misra Rangnath
,
M.M. Punchhi
,
K. Ramaswamy
PETITIONER:
DR. V.L. CHANDRA AND ORS. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL SCIENCES AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/03/1990

BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
BENCH:
MISRA RANGNATH
PUNCHHI, M.M.
RAMASWAMY, K.

CITATION:
 1990 SCR  (2) 104	  1990 SCC  (3)	 38
 JT 1990 (1)   515	  1990 SCALE  (1)534


ACT:
All	 India	Institute  of Medical  Sciences	 Act,  1956
:
Sections   13
and
14-
--A.	1.   1.	  M.S.	  --Research
Projects--Researchers-- Termination  of services on  comple-
tion  of Project--Scheme to be evolved to build up  team  of
Researchers  to meet general requirements of  research--Con-
tinuous Research Projects to be sponsored--Employment to  be
provided to the Researchers--Directions issued.
    Constitution  of  India, 1950:
Article  32--
Researchers
employed  by  A.I.I.M.S.--Completion  of   project--Services
terminated--Researchers to be provided employment--Direction
issued.



HEADNOTE:
    The Petitioners were employed by the  respondent--Insti-
tute  for  carrying  out assignments  of  research  projects
undertaken by the Institute. The employment of three of	 the
four petitioners was terminated. The petitioners filed	Writ
Petitions in this Court alleging that they were continuously
employed for more than 10-15 years and had reached an age in
life where they were no more entitled to enter into  Govern-
ment service or any other suitable employment and, with	 the
deprivation  of their employment they were deprived  of	 the
source of sustenance and the nation of their useful service,
as  they  had picked up requisite expertise which  would  be
useful in carrying out any normal research project.
    In the common affidavit filed on behalf of the  respond-
ents,  the respondent-Institute stated that  the  employment
was project-wise,.and once the project was complete, the job
came to an end, and the services of the petitioners were  no
longer required in the absence of any research project,	 and
that  the fortuitous circumstances of continuous  engagement
did not confer any right on the petitioners to be in contin-
ued employment even when no research project was in hand.
Disposing of the petitions, this Court,
HELD: The All India Institute of Medical Sciences set up by
105
statute is intended to carry on research in a continuous way
to improve the level of medical knowledge. The Institute  is
entrusted  from time to time with research projects  by	 the
World  Health  Organisation, the Indian Council	 of  Medical
Research  and  other government and  semigovernment  bodies.
Therefore,  a scheme should be evolved by the  Institute  in
coordination with the Health Ministry and the Indian Council
of  Medical Research so that a team of researchers is  built
up  to	meet the general requirements of  research.  Certain
projects would quite possibly require specialised hands	 and
on  such occasions a special team could be set up on  casual
basis by drawing the competent hands from different institu-
tions for a period but to keep up the tempo of research if a
team of researchers is built up, it would be convenient	 for
the Institute for purposes of discipline and control as also
for efficiency. [108B-C]
    The	 Health	 Ministry must also sponsor  continuous	 re-
search projects in the field of medicine and health and	 for
such purpose several projects should be listed out from time
to time and entrusted to the respondent-Institute as also  a
similar	 Institute  at Chandigarh and to Institutes  as	 and
when  set up elsewhere. This would assist in updating  rele-
vant  medial information and knowledge, apart from  building
up  a  scientific tone and temper for  general	circulation.
[108D-E]
    The	 Institute should initiate seriously action in	this
regard	without delay and the Ministry of Health and  Indian
Council	 of  Medical Research should  collaborate  with	 the
Institute. [108E]
    Since the respondent-Institute has immediately no  scope
to  employ  the petitioners, excepting the one	already	 re-
tained,	 the remaining three petitioners should be  provided
employment either as Researchers or in any suitable alterna-
tive employment until their inclusion in a team of research-
ers  is considered. The Indian Council of  Medical  Research
should	take appropriate steps to offer adequate  employment
to the three petitioners within two months hence. If  neces-
sary,  the  Ministry of Health should  cooperate  and  place
adequate  funds	 at the disposal of the	 Indian	 Council  of
Medical Research. [108F-H]



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL  JURISDICTION: Writ Petition Civil Nos. 999  of
1988 and 1043 of 1989.
(Under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India).
    R.K. Jain, Rakesh K. Khanna, Ms. Sangeeta Mandal,  Surya
Kant and R.P. Singh, (NP) for the Petitioners.
106
S.	Hegde, Additional Solicitor General, Ms.  A.  Subha-
shini, Ms. Uma Jain and R.K. Mehta for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    RANGANATH  MISRA, J. Both these are	 applications  under
Art.  32
of the Constitution, the first one by	three  peti-
tioners	 and  the second by one. The  respondent  All  India
Institute  of Medical Sciences has been set up under a	Cen-
tral  Act of that name of 1956.
Section 13
of the  Act	pro-
vides the objects of the Institute which are:
"(a)  to  develop patterns of teaching in  udergraduate	 and
post-graduate medical education in all its branches so as to
demonstrate  a	high standard of medical  education  to	 all
medical colleges and other allied institutions in India; (b)
to bring together in one place educational facilities of the
highest order for the training of personnel in all important
branches  of health activity; and (c) to attain	 self-suffi-
ciency in post-graduate medical education."
Section  14
of the Act lays down the functions  of	 the
Institute and, inter alia provides in cls. (a) and (b):
"14.  With a view to the promotion of the objects  specified
under
section 13
, the Institute may--
(a)  provide  for undergraduate  and  post-graduate
teaching in the science of modern medicine and other  allied
sciences including physical and biological sciences;
(b) provide facilities for research in the  various
branches of such sciences";
Petitioners	 have alleged that ever since its  inception
the Institute has taken up various research projects and has
made valuable contribution to the updating of medical knowl-
edge and building up coordinated research activity. For	 the
purposes of carrying out such research programme in conjunc-
tion with the world Health Organisation, the Indian  Council
of Medical Research and other celebrated organisations--both
national and international--research projects are undertaken
by the Institute by employing researchers. For the  carrying
out of the assignments of research projects the	 petitioners
were employed more than a decade ago and their assertion  to
the effect that
107
they have continuously worked for more than 10-15 years	 has
not been disputed. Petitioners have also asserted that	they
have  worked to the satisfaction of the authorities and	 the
guides	and there is no denial of that fact too. It  is	 the
case  of  the petitioners that by working for  such  a	long
period continuously and in different projects under  differ-
ent  guides,  they have picked up  the	requisite  expertise
which  would be useful in carrying out any  normal  research
project. Petitioners allege that there is work in the  hands
of  the Institute but petitioners' employment  excepting  in
the case of Dr. Jasbir Kaur Dhawan (Kochhar), petitioner no.
3  in the first writ petition, as Researchers have now	been
terminated.  They  contend  that having worked	for  a	long
period	in  the Institute they have reached an age  in	life
where  they  are no more entitled to enter  into  Government
service or any other suitable public employment. While	they
have gathered the requisite expertise and are useful for the
purpose of assisting research programme with the deprivation
of  their employment and faced with the ban of over age	 for
any  public  employment they are deprived of the  source  of
sustenance and the nation is deprived of their useful  serv-
ice.
The	 Institute,  the Union of India in the	Ministry  of
Health	and  the  Indian Council of  Medical  Research	have
responded to the notice on the petition. A common  affidavit
has been filed purporting to be on behalf of the respondents
by the Director of the Institute. It has been stated therein
that  the  Institute is assigned projects  and	the  Project
Guides	pick up Researchers depending upon suitability.	 The
employment is project-wise and once the project is complete,
the  job comes to an end. The fact that there has been	con-
tinuous	 engagement  available to the petitioners  does	 not
change	the nature of employment and the fortuitous  circum-
stance of continuity does not confer any right in the  peti-
tioners	 to be continued in employment even when the  Insti-
tute does not have any research project in hand. It has been
specifically  pleaded that the services of  the	 petitioners
are  not required any longer in the absence of any  research
project	 with  the Institute where their services  would  be
suitable.
The	 other two respondents being the Union of India	 and
the  Indian Council of Medical Research have not  filed	 any
counter affidavit of their own. The Institute and the  Union
of India appeared through separate Advocates at the time  of
hearing.
Mr. Hegde, learned Additional Solicitor General indicat-
ed his sympathy to the cause of the petitioners and took  an
adjournment  from  the Court to explore the  possibility  of
offering a solution to the
108
problem	 and  returned to tell us that though  there  was  a
human problem, no solution could be worked out.
    The Institute set up by statute is intended to carry  on
research in a continuous way to improve the level of medical
knowledge.
Under the Act
the Institute is an autonomous body
though	the  Chairman  thereof is no other  than  the  Union
Minister  of  Health. It is true that the Institute  is	 en-
trusted	 from  time to time with research  projects  by	 the
World  Health  Organisation, the Indian Council	 of  Medical
Research and other government and semi-government bodies. It
is appropriate that a scheme should be evolved by the Insti-
tute in coordination with the Health Ministry and the Indian
2Council  of Medical Research so that a team of	 researchers
is built up to meet the general requirements of research. It
is  quite possible that certain projects would require	spe-
cialised hands and on such occasions a special team could be
set  up on casual basis by drawing the competent hands	from
different institutions for a period but to keep up the tempo
of  research if a team of researchers is built up, it  would
be  convenient for the Institute for purposes of  discipline
and control as also for efficiency. The Health Ministry must
also  sponsor continuous research projects in the  field  of
medicine  and health and for such purpose  several  projects
should be listed out from time to time and entrusted to	 the
respondent Institute as also a similar Institute at  Chandi-
garh  and to institutes as and when set up  elsewhere.	This
would  assist in updating relevant medical  information	 and
knowledge,  apart  from building up a  scientific  tone	 and
temper	for general circulation. We commend that the  Insti-
tute initiates seriously action in this regard without delay
and  we suggest that the Ministry of Health and	 the  Indian
Council	 of Medical Research collaborate with the  Institute
to work out the same.
Respondent no.3--Indian Council of Medical Research	 has
not chosen to appear separately before us inspite of service
of  notice.  Since we have been told  that  the	 respondent-
Institute has immediately no scope to employ the petitioners
excepting  the one that we have named above, we direct	that
the  remaining	three  petitioners in  these  two  petitions
should	be provided employment either as Researchers  or  in
any suitable alternative employment until their inclusion in
a  team of researchers is considered. The Indian Council  of
Medical	 Research  shall  take appropriate  steps  to  offer
adequate  employment  to the three  petitioners	 within	 two
months hence. If the question of funding becomes  necessary,
we  direct  the Ministry of Health to  cooperate  and  place
adequate  funds	 at the disposal of the	 Indian	 Council  of
Medical Research.
109
These  two petitions are disposed of with the  aforesaid
directions and without any order for costs, with liberty  to
the  petitioners to apply, with the fond hope that all	con-
cerned will appreciate the spirit of the order and implement
the direction in the proper way as stipulated.
N.P.V.				     Petitions disposed of.
110