[Cites
6
, Cited by
84
]
Supreme Court of India
Anand Bihari And Ors vs Rajasthan State Road Transport ... on 20 December, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1991 AIR 1003, 1990 SCR SUPL. (3) 622, AIR 1991 SUPREME COURT 1003, 1991 (1) SCC 731, 1991 AIR SCW 284, 1991 LAB. I. C. 494, 1991 (1) UJ (SC) 385, 1991 (1) UPLBEC 52, (1990) 4 JT 794 (SC), 1991 SCC (L&S) 393, (1998) 3 LABLJ 1209, (1991) 16 ATC 449, (1991) 1 CIVLJ 476, (1991) 1 CURLR 525, (1991) 1 LAB LN 603, (1991) 1 SERVLR 575, (1991) 1 UPLBEC 52, (1991) 2 ACJ 848, (1991) 2 CURLJ(CCR) 3, (1991) 78 FJR 153, (1991) 62 FACLR 81, (1992) 1 ACC 496, (1992) 1 TAC 526
Author:
P.B. Sawant
Bench:
P.B. Sawant
,
S.C.  Agrawal
PETITIONER:
ANAND BIHARI AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RAJASTHAN STATE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATION,JAIPUR THROUGH IT

DATE OF JUDGMENT20/12/1990

BENCH:
SAWANT, P.B.
BENCH:
SAWANT, P.B.
AGRAWAL, S.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1991 AIR 1003		  1990 SCR  Supl. (3) 622
 1991 SCC  (1) 731	  JT 1990 (4)	794
 1990 SCALE  (2)1286


ACT:
Industrial	Disputes Act, 1947
:
Sections 2(00)
&
25-F
.
Retrenchment--State		 Road		   Transport
Corporation--Drivers--Occupational  hazards  Development  of
defective,  weak  or sub-normal eye-sight in the  course  of
employment--Pre-mature termination of services--Held  termi-
nation	was not retrenchment and consequent compliance	with
section 25-F
not necessary--But termination held unjustified
and inequitable--Scheme formulated by the Supreme  Court.for
relief	to drivers--Directions for giving  retirement  bene-
fits, providing alternative jobs and payment of compensatory
amount	proportionate to length of service rendered  by	 the
drivers.
    Retrenchment--Exceptions--
Section	 2(00)
sub-clause
(c)--Expression	 "continued ill-health"--Meaning  and  Scope
of--Includes  cases of drivers who have developed  defective
or sub-normal vision during the course of employment.
Employees'	 State	 Insurance   Act,   1948
:
Section
2(8)
--Second Schedule--Part I--Item 4  Part II--Items  31,32
and 32A--Third Schedule--Item 11.
    State  Road Transport  Corporation--Drivers--Development
of  sub-normal eye-sight or loss of required  vision  during
the course of employment--Held not an "employment injury" or
"Occupational disease".
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923
:
Section 3(2)
.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 appellants (in C.A. No. 1859-61) were appointed  as
drivers and had put in a long service to the satisfaction of
the  respondent Corporation. Subsequently on  their  medical
examination  it was found that they had developed  defective
eye-sight  i.e.	 they did not have the required	 vision	 for
driving the buses. The respondent Corporation issued notices
to them and after considering their explanation ter-
623
minated	 their services on the ground that they	 were  unfit
for  driving buses. The appellants filed Writ  Petitions  in
the High Court challenging their termination order  contend-
ing  that  their  termination was illegal  because  (i)	 the
termination  amounted 10 retrenchment within the meaning  of
section	 2(00)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  and  it
was  without  compliance with the  mandatory  provisions  of
Section	 25-F
of the Act; (ii) pursuant  to  the  agreement
between the Workers' Union and the Corporation, the respond-
ent-Corporation was bound to provide the alternative jobs to
the  unfit drivers. The High Court dismissed the Writ  Peti-
tions. Hence these appeals by the Workmen-drivers.
    In	the  connected	appeal (C.A. No.  1862)	 the  driver
developed  weak eye-sight on account of an accident  in	 the
course	of  his	 employment. He was given  employment  as  a
helper but subsequently his services as a helper were termi-
nated. He filed a Writ Petition in the High Court  challeng-
ing his termination which was dismissed. Hence appeal by the
workmen-driver.
    In the other connected appeal (C.A. No. 1863) the  serv-
ices  of a driver were terminated on the ground that he	 had
lost  vision of his right eye. He fried a Writ	Petition  in
the High Court challenging the order of termination contend-
ing that ever since the loss of sight of his one eye, he was
working	 as a helper and though he was not found unfit,	 yet
his  services  were terminated. The High Court	quashed	 his
termination order and directed the Corporation to absorb him
as a helper. Against this order of the High Court the Corpo-
ration flied an appeal before this Court.
    In	appeals to this Court it was contended on behalf  of
the  appellants;  (i) since the expression  "continued	iii-
health" as used in clause (c) of
section 2(00)
of the Indus-
trial
Disputes Act, 1947
does not cover the cases of a	loss
of  limb or an organ or its permanent use and  covers  cases
only of a general physical or mental debility or  incapacity
to execute the work, their termination not being covered  by
the  said clause amounted to retrenchment which was  illegal
for  non-compliance  with
Section 25-F
;  (ii)	the  workmen
should have been given alternative jobs irrespective of	 the
fact  whether  there  was an agreement or  not	between	 the
Corporation  and  the Union to provide alternative  jobs  to
unfit drivers.
Disposing the appeals, this Court,
HELD: 1. The expression "ill-health" used in sub-clause	 (c)
of
624
Section 2(00)
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 has to be
construed  relatively  and in its context. It  must  have  a
bearing	 on  the normal discharge of duties. It is  not	 any
illness	 but  that which interferes with the  usual  orderly
functioning  of	 the duties of the post which would  be	 at-
tracted	 by the sub-clause. Conversly, even if	the  illness
does  not affect general health or general capacity  and  is
restricted  only to a particular limb or organ	but  affects
the  efficient	working	 of the work entrusted	it  will  be
covered by the phrase. For it is not the capacity in general
but  that which is necessary to perform the duty  for  which
the  workman is engaged which is relevant and  material	 and
should be considered for the purpose. Therefore, any  disor-
der  in health which incapacitates an individual  from	dis-
charging  the  duties entrusted to him or affects  his	work
adversely  or comes in the way of his normal  and  effective
functioning  can be covered by the said phrase.	 The  phrase
has  also  to  be construed from the point of  view  of	 the
consumers  of  the concerned products and  services.  If  on
account of a workman's disease or incapacity or debility  in
functioning, the resultant product or the service is  likely
to be affected in any way or to become a risk to the health,
life or property of the consumer, the disease or  incapacity
has  to be categorised as all-health for the purpose of	 the
sub-clause,  otherwise, the purpose of production for  which
the  services of the workman are engaged will be  frustrated
and  worse still in cases such as the present one they	will
endanger the lives and the property of the consumers,  Hence
the  Court should place a realistic and not a  technical  or
pedantic  meaning  on the said phrase. Therefore,  the	said
phrase	would include cases of drivers such as	the  present
ones who have developed a defective or sub-normal vision  or
eye-sight  which  is bound to interfere	 with  their  normal
working	 as  drivers.  Accordingly the	termination  of	 the
services of the drivers in the present case being covered by
sub-clause  (c)	 of
Section 2(00)
would not  amount  to	 re-
trenchment  within the meaning of
Section 2(00)
of the	Act.
Hence  the  termination per se is not  illegal	because	 the
provisions  of
Section 25-F
have not  been  followed  while
effecting it. [63 ID-H, 632A-D]
    Workmen of the Bangalore Woolien, Cotton and Silk  Mills
Ltd. v. Its Management, [1962] 1 L.L.J. 213, referred to.
    New	 Coilings  Concise  English  Dictionary;   Webster's
Comprehensive  Dictionary (International Edition),'  Concise
Oxford Dictionary (3rd Edition); and Shorter Oxford  English
Dictionary, referred to.
    2. It is also clear from the provisions of the
Employees
State  Insurance Act
that the cases of sub-normal  eye-sight
or loss of the
625
required vision to work as a driver would not be covered  by
the provisions of that Act as an employment injury or as  an
occupational  disease,	for no provision is made  there	 for
compensation for a disability to carry on a particular	job.
The present workmen cannot be said to have suffered either a
permanent, total or partial disablement to carry on any	 job
or  to have developed cataract due to infra-red	 radiations.
The  workmen are and will be able to do any work other	than
that of a driver with the eye-sight they possess. [635E-F]
    3. There is no dispute that the drivers developed a weak
or  subnormal  eye-sight or lost their	required  vision  on
account	 of their occupation as drivers in the	Corporation.
They  have  to drive the heavy motor vehicles  in  sun-rain,
dust  and dark hours of night. In the process they  are	 ex-
posed' to the glaring and blazing sun light and beaming	 and
blinding  lights  of the vehicles coming from  the  opposite
direction. They are required to strain their eye-sight every
moment	of the driving, keeping a watchful eye on  the	road
for  the bumps, bends and slopes, and to avoid all kinds  of
obstacles  on the way. It is this constant training of	eyes
on  the road which takes its inevitable toil of the  vision.
The very fact that in a short period, the Corporation had to
terminate the services of no less than 30 drivers shows	 the
extent	of the occupational hazard to which the	 drivers  of
the  Corporation are exposed during their service.  It	also
shows  that  weakening of the eye-sight is not	an  isolated
phenomenon  but a wide-spread risk to which those  who	take
the employment of a driver expose themselves. Yet the Corpo-
ration treats their cases in the same manner and fashion  as
it  treats  the	 cases of other workmen who  on	 account  of
reasons	 not connected with the employment suffer from	ill-
health or continued ill-health. That by itself is  discrimi-
natory	against the drivers. The discrimination against	 the
employees  such	 as the drivers in the	present	 case,	also
ensues	from  the fact that whereas they have to  face	pre-
mature	termination  of service on account  of	disabilities
contracted from their jobs, the other employees continue  to
serve  till  the date of their superannuation. There  is  no
justification in treating the cases of workmen like  drivers
who are exposed to occupational diseases and disabilities on
par  with the other employees. The injustice,  inequity	 and
discrimination is writ large in such cases and is indefensi-
ble. [632F-H, 633A-D]
    4. The workmen are not denizens of an Animal Farm to  be
eliminated ruthlessly the moment they become useless to	 the
establishment.	They have not only to live for the  rest  of
their life but also to maintain the members of their  family
and  other  dependants, and to educate and  bring  up  their
children. Their liability in this respect at the
626
advanced  age at which they are thus retired  stands  multi-
plied,	They may no longer be of use to the Corporation	 for
the job for which they were employed, but the need of  their
patronage  to  others intensifies with the growth  in  their
family responsibilities. [634H, 635A-B]
    5.	No  special provision is made  and  no	compensatory
relief is provided in the service condition for the  drivers
for pre-mature incapacitation. The service conditions of the
workmen such as the drivers in the present case,  therefore,
must provide for adequate safeguards to remedy the situation
by  compensating  them is some form for the  all-round	loss
they suffer for no fault of theirs. [633C-D]
    5.1.  In view of the fact that the Corporation  took  an
unhelpful  stand  in the matter of formulating a  scheme  of
relief which is the legitimate due of the workmen and not  a
scheme	on  compassionate or charitable basis,	the  Supreme
Court  itself  evolved	a scheme for giving  relief  to	 the
workmen-drivers	 keeping  in view the points  (i)  that	 the
workmen concerned are incapacitated to work only as  drivers
and  are  not  rendered incapable of taking  any  other	 job
either in the Corporation or outside; (ii) that the  workmen
are at an advanced age of their life and it would be  diffi-
cult  for  them	 to get a  suitable  alternative  employment
outside; (iii) and that the relief made available under	 the
scheme	should	not be such as would induce the	 workmen  to
feign  disability which, in the case of disability  such  as
the  present one, viz., the development of a defective	eye-
sight, it may be easy to do, Accordingly, the Supreme  Court
directed  that the Corporation shall in addition  to  giving
each  of the retired workmen his retirement benefits,  offer
him  any  other alternative job which may be  available	 and
which he is eligible to perform and in case no such alterna-
tive  job  is available each of the workman  shall  be	paid
along with his retirement benefits an additional compensato-
ry amount proportionate to the length of service rendered by
the employees and the balance of their service. [634G, 635H,
636A-G]
    6.	The  termination of services of helper	(in  C.A.No.
1862)  was unjustified and also illegal being in  contraven-
tion of the provisions of
Section 25-F
of the Act. The	High
Court erred in treating his case on par with cases of  other
drivers. The appellant-workman will, therefore, be  entitled
to his retirement benefits as a driver from the date of	 his
employment  as a helper. He would further be entitled to  be
reinstated  in service as a helper with all arrears of	back
wages as a helper. In case he opts for receiving the compen-
satory amount under the scheme framed by this Court, he	 may
do so for the period beginning from the date from which	 his
services as a helper were terminated. [637D-F]
627
    7.	The decision of the High Court impugned in C.A.	 No.
1863 is set aside and the respondent-Corporation is directed
to  give  the concerned workman the benefit  of	 the  scheme
propounded.



JUDGMENT: