[Cites
10
, Cited by
31
]
Supreme Court of India
Smt. Kusum Lata Singhal vs Commissioner Of Income Tax ... on 16 July, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1991 AIR 236, 1990 SCR (3) 393, AIR 1991 SUPREME COURT 236, 1990 (4) SCC 98, 1990 TAX. L. R. 1022, (1990) 185 ITR 56, (1990) 3 JT 287 (SC), 1990 (3) JT 287, (1990) 51 TAXMAN 300, (1990) 86 CURTAXREP 173
Author:
Sabyasachi  Mukharji
Bench:
Sabyasachi  Mukharji
,
K. Ramaswamy
PETITIONER:
SMT. KUSUM LATA SINGHAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX RAJASTHAN,JAIPUR AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT16/07/1990

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (CJ)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (CJ)
RAMASWAMY, K.

CITATION:
 1991 AIR  236		  1990 SCR  (3) 393
 1990 SCC  (4)	98	  JT 1990 (3)	287
 1990 SCALE  (2)121


ACT:
Income  Tax	 Act, 1961
/Income Tax Rules,  1962:
Section
132(5)
, (7)/Rule  112A--Search and seizure by I.T.  authori-
ties--Assessee whether entitled to return of valuables.



HEADNOTE:
    The petitioner was carrying on business as a stockist of
Baba  Brand  Tobacco. The petitioner's husband,	 who  was  a
sub-dealer of the product, was living with her at all  mate-
rial times.
    A  search  under
section 132
of the Income Tax  Act	 was
conducted at their house and valuables and books of  account
seized.	 A  notice under rule 112A of the Income  Tax  Rules
read  with  sub-section (5) of
section 132
of  the  Act	 was
served on the petitioner.
The petitioner filed an application in the High Court  under
Article	 226
of the Constitution claiming return of  account
books and other
 valuables  to	her. On the other hand, in  the	 proceedings
under
Section	132(5)
of the Act against  the	petitioner's
husband,  he had claimed that the ornaments belonged to	 him
and  that  the	same could be treated  as  representing	 his
undisclosed income.
    The High Court came to the conclusion that the  authori-
sation	for search under
section 132(1)
of the	Act  against
the  petitioner was not in accordance with law	and,  there-
fore,  the seizure of the assets could not be said  to	have
been  in accordance with law. The High Court  however  noted
that  in view of the order made under
section 132(5)
of	 the
Act against the husband, the valuables could not be  ordered
to be returned to the petitioner.
    Before  this  Court, it was contended on behalf  of	 the
petitioner  that  if search and seizure	 were  illegal,	 the
items of jewellery were liable to be returned- On behalf  of
the  Revenue,  it was contended that in	 a  situation  where
there was a dispute as to who was the owner of the jewellery
and  ornaments, the decision of the High Court declining  to
direct their return to the petitioner could not be faulted.
394
Dismissing the special leave petition, the Court,
    HELD: (1) A dispute as to the ownership of jewellery  in
question cannot be resolved in proceedings under
Article 226
of  the Constitution in the manner sought for by  the  peti-
tioner. [397F]
    (2)	 In  the instant controversy the Court is  not	con-
cerned	whether	 the proceedings against the  husband  under
section 132(5)
of the Act are valid or not, but irrespective
of the validity of the proceedings, the evidence or testimo-
ny wherein the husband has asserted the ornaments and jewel-
lery  to  be his, cannot be wiped out and  does	 not  become
non-existent.  The aforesaid being the factual	matrix,	 the
High  Court  was  pre-eminently justified  in  declining  to
direct return of these items of jewellery and other items to
the  wife. If that is the position, then it cannot  be	said
that  the  High Court has committed any error in  law  which
required  rectification by this Court under
Article  136
of
the Constitution. [397E-G]
    Assainer  & Anr. v. Income Tax Officer, Calicut,  [1975]
101  ITR  854; J.R. Malhotra & Anr. v.	Additional  Sessions
Judge,	Jullunder,  [1976]  2 SCR 993  and  Commissioner  of
Commercial  Taxes,  Board of Revenue, Madras  v.  Ramkishnan
Shrikishan Jhaver, AIR 1968 SC 59, distinguished.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Special  Leave  Petition
(Civil) No. 15327 of 1989.
From  the  Judgment and Order dated 18.7.  1989  of	 the
Rajasthan High Court in D.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 2161 of
1988.
C.S. Agarwal, H.R. Parekh, S.K. Jain for the Petitioner.
    O.P.  Vaish,  S. Rajappa and Ms. A. Subhashini  for	 the
Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SABYASACHI	MUKHARJI, CJ. This is a special leave  peti-
tion  directed	against the judgment and order of  the	High
Court  of Rajasthan, dated 18th July, 1989.  The  petitioner
herein	i.e.  Smt.  Kusum Lata Singhal carried	on,  at	 all
relevant  times, business under the name and style  of	M/s.
Lata  & Company and she claims to be an authorised  stockist
of Baba Brand Tobacco manufactured by M/s.
495
Dharampal Premchand Ltd., New Delhi. Mr. R.K. Singhal is the
husband of the petitioner. In the judgment under appeal,  it
has been stated that Mr. R.K. Singhal owns a house No. E117,
Shastri	 Nagar in Jaipur and the petitioner lived  with	 her
husband at all material times. Mr. Singhal was a partner  in
Lata  Sales  Centre and is said to be a sub-dealer  of	M/s.
Lata & Company.
A  search  under
section 134
of  the  Income  Tax	Act,
(hereinafter  called  'the Act') was conducted at  the	said
premises  on  25/26th  November, 1987.	During	the  search,
valuables  and books of accounts were seized on 26th  Novem-
ber,  1987, and a notice under rule 112A of the	 Income	 Tax
Rules,	1962 (hereinafter referred to as 'the  Rules')	read
with sub-section (5) of
Section 132
of the Act was issued to
the  petitioner	 by the Income Tax Officer. The	 notice	 was
served on the husband of the petitioner.
In the application under
Article 226
of the Constitution
of India filed before the High Court, the petitioner claimed
return	of  account  books and other  valuables	 which	were
seized	on 26th November, 1987. The return was	claimed	 be-
cause,	according  to the petitioner, the retention  of	 the
books  and valuables was in violation of the  provisions  of
section 132
of the Act. The High Court in the judgment under
appeal	came  to the conclusion that the  authorisation	 for
search	in the instant case under
section 132(1)
of the	 Act
was not valid or legal. Therefore, the High Court held	that
search	was bad. At the time of search the silver  and	gold
ornaments worth about Rs.4,58,1089 were found and some other
silver and gold ornaments were also found but these were not
seized. The High Court had directed return of account  books
to  the petitioner on furnishing photostat  copies  thereof.
The High Court came to the conclusion that the authorisation
under
section 132(1)
of the Act was not in accordance	with
law  and,  therefore, the search and seizure of	 the  assets
could  not be said to have been in accordance with law.	 The
High Court noted that in view of the fact that by virtue  of
the  power  under
section 132(7)
and the  order	 made  under
section	 132(5)
of the Act against the husband of the  peti-
tioner,	 the valuables etc. could not be ordered to  be	 re-
turned to the petitioner.
Aggrieved thereby, the petitioner seeks to challenge the
said  order under
Article 136
of the Constitution of  India.
Mr.  C.S.  Agarwal appearing for the  petitioner,  contended
before	us that if search and seizure were illegal then	 the
evidence  obtained by such search and seizure could be	uti-
lised in subsequent proceedings, but the items of
386
jewellery   and	  goods	 worth,	 according  to	 him,	over
Rs.2,97,000  were  liable to be returned. We  are,  however,
unable	to  entertain this appeal. In the instant  case	 the
husband of the wife stayed in the same premises. The author-
isation	 of search and seizure in respect of  account  books
and goods which were seized was against the wife but in	 the
proceedings under
section 132(5)
of the Act the husband	 Mr.
Singhal	 has  contended and claimed that  the  ornaments  in
question or the jewellery belonged to him.
Mr.	 Vaish, learned counsel appearing for  the  revenue,
has  drawn our attention to an authorisation issued  against
the husband Mr. Singhal under sub-section (5) of
section 132
of  the	 Act. Indeed, Mr. R.K. Singhal has  stated  on	oath
before the authorised officer at the time of search that the
same  belonged	to  him and he has claimed the	same  to  be
treated	 as  representing his undisclosed income.  Mr.	R.K.
Singhal,  the husband, as his evidence has recorded  in	 the
proceedings against him, has disclosed the same and  surren-
dered  a total sum of over Rs.4,00,000 consisting of  undis-
closed	cash of Rs. 1,16,550 and excessive  jewellery  worth
Rs.2,97,750  received from his possession as his income	 for
the  purpose of income-tax assessment for the current  year,
which he claims to have earned from his business. Therefore,
it  appears that there is dispute as to who is the owner  of
the  jewellery and ornaments or in other words, to  whom  do
these  belong.	If in such a situation the  High  Court	 has
declined  to direct return of items of jewellery  and  orna-
ments,	such  decision cannot be faulted.  Even	 though	 the
search	and seizure has been declared illegal, it cannot  be
illegal	 and  the question of, dispute about the  items	 not
being  urged before the High Court, we cannot say  that	 the
High  Court  has committed any error in	 this  case  thereby
requiring  interference by this Court, or, in  other  words,
that injustice has been caused to any party.
It is well-settled that the dispute as to the  ownership
of  jewellery in question cannot be reserved in	 proceedings
under
Article 226
of the Constitution in the manner  sought
for by the petitioner. Mr. Agarwal drew our attention to the
decision in
Assaina & Anr. v. Income Tax Officer, Calicut  &
Ors.
,  [1975] 101 ITR 854 wherein the Kerala High Court	 has
observed  that the goods which were seized from the  custody
of  a particular person, should normally be returned to	 the
person	from  whose custody the same had  been	seized.	 The
aforesaid  may be the position where there is no dispute  as
to the ownership of the goods in question. In such a  situa-
tion,  return of the goods to the person from whose  custody
the  same are seized, may be possible but
the said  decision
or the observations therein would be no authority in support
of  the	 petitioner's contention in the instant	 case  where
there is a dispute.
397
Our attention was also drawn to certain observations  of
this Court in J.R. Malhotra & Anr. v. Addl. Sessions  Judge,
Jullundur & Ors., [1976] 2 SCR 993 in support of the  propo-
sition	that  revenue could not indirectly  keep  the  money
seized on the plea that there would be a demand and that the
money may be kept by revenue where surrender and seizure was
wrong. We are afraid that the aforesaid observations of this
Court  are also of no avail in the light of the	 perspective
that  we have mentioned hereinbefore. The said	observations
were made entirely in a different context.
Our attention was also drawn to the observations of this
Court in
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Board of Revenue,
Madras & Anr. v. Ramkishan Shrikishan Jhaver
etc., AIR	1968
SC  59 in support of the proposition that when a search	 was
found illegal, the goods should be returned. Normally speak-
ing, that would be so. This proposition is unexceptional but
in the light of the controversy as we have perceived in this
case,  we  are clearly of the opinion that  this  submission
will not be of any assistance in doing justice in this case.
    Mr.	 Agarwal further contended that if  the	 proceedings
under
Section 132(5)
for the original search were held to be
invalid	 then  all proceedings thereafter would	 be  invalid
and,  therefore,  the proceedings initiated as a  result  of
that  search even against the husband, would be invalid	 and
such a statement of the husband recorded, cannot be utilised
any further. In the instant controversy we are not concerned
whether	 the proceedings against the husband  under
section
132(5)
of the Act are valid or not but irrespective of	 the
validity  of the proceedings, the evidence or  testimony  as
mentioned  hereinbefore, wherein he has asserted  the  orna-
ments and jewellery to be his, cannot be wiped out and	does
not  become non-existent. After all, we are  concerned	with
the contention of the husband that the jewellery in question
belongs to him, in this case. The aforesaid being the factu-
al matrix, the High Court, in our opinion, was pre-eminently
justified  in declining to direct return of these  identical
jewellery and other items to the wife. If that is the  posi-
tion then it cannot be said that the High Court has  commit-
ted  any error in law which requires rectification  by	this
Court.	This application for leave under
Article 136
of	 the
Constitution  is certainly not entertainable. In  the  prem-
ises,  this application must be dismissed without any  order
as to costs. Interim orders, if any, are vacated.
R.S.S.					      Petition	dis-
missed.
398