[Cites
5
, Cited by
41
]
Supreme Court of India
Laminated Packings (P) Ltd vs Collector Of Central Excise, Guntur on 6 August, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1990 SCR (3) 630, 1990 SCC (4) 51, AIRONLINE 1990 SC 235
Author:
Sabyasachi  Mukharji
Bench:
Sabyasachi  Mukharji
,
K.N.  Saikia
PETITIONER:
LAMINATED PACKINGS (P) LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COLLECTOR OF CENTRAL EXCISE, GUNTUR

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/08/1990

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (CJ)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (CJ)
SAIKIA, K.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1990 SCR  (3) 630	  1990 SCC  (4)	 51
 JT 1990 (3)   493	  1990 SCALE  (2)272


ACT:
Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944
:
Section 2(F)
--"Manu-
facture" --Lamination of duty paid kraft paper with polyeth-
ylene--Resultant  product whether "manufactured" and  dutia-
ble--Criteria--Market parlance --Goods with distinct,  sepa-
rate and identifiable function--Coming into being.
Words and Phrases: "Manufacture"--Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
    To	a  question whether lamination of  duty	 paid  kraft
paper with polyethylene resulting in 'polyethylene laminated
paper'	would  amount to 'manufacture' and  excisable  under
Excise	Law, the Collector of Central Excise  (Appeals)	 an-
swered	in  the negative, and held that	 the  appellant	 was
eligible  to  claim refund of duty paid by it.	In  reaching
this  finding he followed the decision in  Standard  Packag-
ings, Nellore v. Union of India, [1984] ECR 2635 AP.
    Against the said order, the Collector of Central  Excise
preferred  an appeal before the Customs, Central Excise	 and
Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal. The Tribunal reversed the
order of the Collector (Appeals) and held that the appellant
was liable to duty.
    Aggrieved, the appellant has preferred this appeal under
Section	 35-L(b)
of the Central Excises and Salt Act,  1944.
It  was contended that duty was already paid on kraft  paper
and  there was no change in the essential characteristic  or
the  user of the paper after lamination, and that  both	 the
goods belong to the same entry.
Dismissing the appeal,
    HELD: 1.1. By process of lamination of kraft paper	with
polyethylene  different	 goods come  into  being.  Laminated
kraft  paper  is distinct, separate and different  from	 the
kraft  paper. Lamination, indisputably by  the	well-settled
principles of excise law, amounts to manufacture. [632C-D]
631
    1.2. 'Manufacture' is bringing into being goods as known
in  the	 excise laws, that is to say, known  in	 the  market
having distinct, separate and identifiable function. [632F]
    1.3.  Even	if the goods belong to the same	 entry,	 the
goods are different identifiable goods, known as such in the
market.	 If that is so, manufacture occurs, and if  manufac-
ture takes place, it is dutiable. [632F]
    Empire Industries Ltd. & Ors. v. Union of India &  Ors.,
[1985] 3 SCC 314 and Collector of Central Excise, Kanpur  v.
Krishna Carbon Paper Co., [1988] 37 ELT 480, relied on.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2335  of
1989.
From Order No. 766/88-C dated 24.10.1988 of the  Customs
Excise	and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi  in
Appeal No. B/847/85-C.
V.  Sreedharan, N.M. Poppli and V.J. Francis for the  Appel-
lant.
Ashok H. Desai, Solicitor General, Ms.  Randharangaswami
and P. Parmeswaran for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SABYASACHI	MUKHARJI,  CJ. This is an  appeal  from	 the
order  of  the Customs, Excise &  Gold	(Control)  Appellate
Tribunal  (hereinafter called 'the CEGAT') dated 24th  Octo-
ber,  1988  under
section 35-L(b)
of the Central  Excises  &
Salt Act, 1944 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act').
    The appeal which the CEGAT disposed of had been filed by
the Collector of Central Excise, Guntur against the order of
the Collector of Central Excise (Appeals), Madras dated	 6th
February,  1985.  The short question which  arises  in	this
appeal	is whether the lamination of duty paid	kraft  paper
with polyethylene resulting in 'polyethylene laminated kraft
paper' would amount to 'manufacture' and excisable under law
or not. It appears that the Collector (Appeals) in his order
following  his	earlier order in respect  of  the  appellant
herein	had  taken the view that polyethylene  laminated  or
coated	kraft paper obtained from duty paid kraft  paper  is
not liable to duty again.
632
The	 Collector of Central Excise, (Appeals), Madras	 had
followed  the decision of the Division Bench of Andhra	Pra-
desh High Court in the case of
Standard Packagings,  Nellore
v.  Union  of India
, [1984] ECR 2635 (AP) for  reaching	 the
aforesaid  finding  and	 held that the	appellant  would  be
eligible  to claim refund of duty paid by them in  this	 re-
gard.
Lamination, indisputably by the well settled  principles
of  excise law, amounts to 'manufacture'. This question,  in
our  opinion,  is settled by the decisions  of	this  Court.
Reference  may	be  made to the decision of  this  Court  in
Empire	Industries  Ltd. & Ors. v. Union of  India  &  Ors.
,
[1985] 3 SCC 314.
Reference may also be made to the decision
of  this  Court in
Collector of Central	 Excise,  Kanpur  v.
Krishna Carbon Paper Co.
, [1988] 37 ELT 480. We are,  there-
fore, of the opinion that by process of lamination of  kraft
paper  with  polyethylene different goods come	into  being.
Laminated  kraft paper is distinct, separate  and  different
goods known in the market as such from the kraft paper.
    Counsel  for  the appellant sought to contend  that	 the
kraft  paper was duty paid goods and there was no change  in
the essential characteristic or the user of the paper  after
lamination.  The  fact that the duty has been  paid  on	 the
kraft  paper  is irrelevant for consideration of  the  issue
before us. If duty has been paid, then benefit of credit for
the duty paid would be available to the appellant under rule
56-A of the Central Excise Rules, 1944.
The further contention urged on behalf of the  appellant
that the goods belong to the same entry is also not relevant
because	 even  if the goods belong to the  same	 entry,	 the
goods are different identifiable goods, known as such in the
market.	 If that is so, the manufacture occurs and if  manu-
facture	 takes	places,	 it is	dutiable.  'Manufacture'  is
bringing into being goods as known in the excise laws,	that
is to say, known in the market having distinct, separate and
identifiable function. On this score, in our opinion,  there
is  sufficient evidence. If that is the position,  then	 the
appellant was liable to pay duty. We are, therefore, clearly
of the opinion that the order of the CEGAT impugned in	this
appeal	does not contain any error. The	 appeal,  therefore,
fails and is accordingly dismissed.
There will, however, no order as to costs.
G.N.					      Appeal	dis-
missed.
633