[Cites
4
, Cited by
94
]
Supreme Court of India
A.M. Mathur vs Pramod Kumar Gupta on 22 March, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1990 AIR 1737, 1990 SCR (2) 110, AIR 1990 SUPREME COURT 1737, 1990 (2) SCC 533, 1990 UJ(SC) 1 595, 1990 ALL CJ 636, (1990) 41 DLT 17, (1990) 1 JT 545 (SC), (1990) JAB LJ 340
Author:
K.J.  Shetty
Bench:
K.J.  Shetty
,
R.M.  Sahai
PETITIONER:
A.M. MATHUR

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PRAMOD KUMAR GUPTA

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/03/1990

BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
SAHAI, R.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1990 AIR 1737		  1990 SCR  (2) 110
 1990 SCC  (2) 533	  JT 1990 (1)	545
 1990 SCALE  (1)527


ACT:
    Practice   and   Procedure:	  Judicial   restraint--Need
for--High Court Judge making derogatory remarks	 criticising
counsel,  parties or witnesses--Such remark not to  be	made
unless absolutely necessary for deciding the case.



HEADNOTE:
    While allowing a writ petition, one of the Judges deliv-
ered  the  main Judgment invalidating the  decision  of	 the
Government on the ground that it violated
Article 14
of	 the
Constitution.  The  other Judge delivered  a  separate,	 but
concurring  opinion which contained highly  disparaging	 re-
marks  attributing mala fides and underhand dealing  on	 the
part  of  the State Government. Several appeals	 were  filed
against	 the  said decision before this	 Court.	 This  Court
allowed the appeals and observed that the strictures  passed
in  the	 concurring Judgment were  totally  unjustified	 and
unwarranted. State of M.P. v. Nandial Jaiswal & Ors., [1987]
1 SCR 1.
    Thereafter an Advocate who had no connection  whatsoever
with the litigation filed a review petition before the	High
Court.	It was alleged that the State  Government  committed
fraud and procured the judgment from this Court. The  matter
was listed before a Division Bench on 29th October 1988, and
one  of	 the  Judges dismissed the review  petition  as	 not
maintainable. Meanwhile, another application for review	 was
filed  stating that the Vidhan Sabha proceedings would	lend
credence  to the claim that the State Government  had  prac-
tised  fraud on the Court. On 6th February, 1989  the  other
Judge,(who  had passed strictures against the Government  in
the  Writ Petition) dismissed the review position, for	want
of jurisdiction, with an observation that had the  appellant
acted  bona  fide in briefing the then Chief  Minister,	 the
fraud  on the Court, as also the misleading press  statement
by the then Chief Minister, would have been avoided. It	 was
further	 observed that the appellant did not  act  befitting
the  status of the high office of the Advocate	General	 and
that  he did not have the courage to face the  situation  in
the Court later.
Before this Court. the appellant contended that he had no
111
opportunity to meet the allegations in the review petitions.
He had also contended that earlier he entered appearance  as
Advocate  General on behalf of the State, and that when	 the
review	petitions  were heard neither he  was  the  Advocate
General nor did he wish to enter appearance since he thought
that the review petitions deserved to be dismissed as  there
were no valid grounds.
Allowing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD: 1. Judicial restraint and discipline are as neces-
sary to the orderly administration of justice as they are to
the  effectiveness of the army. The duty of restraint,	this
humility  of  function	should be a constant  theme  of	 our
judges. This quality in decision making is as much necessary
for judges to command respect as to protect the independence
of  the judiciary..Judicial restraint in this  regard  might
better	be called judicial respect; that is, respect by	 the
judiciary.  Respect  to those who come before the  Court  as
well to other co-ordinate branches of the State, the  Execu-
tive and the Legislature. There must be mutual respect. When
these  qualities fail or when litigants and  public  believe
that  the  judge has failed in these qualities, it  will  be
neither	 good  for the judge nor for the  judicial  process.
[117C-E]
    2.	 The  Judges Bench is a seat of power. Not  only  do
judges have power to make binding decisions, their decisions
legitimate  the use of power by other officials. The  Judges
have  the absolute and unchallengeable control of the  Court
domain. But they cannot misuse their authority by  intemper-
ate  comments, undignified banter or scathing  criticism  of
counsel,  parties or witnesses. The Court has  the  inherent
power  to act freely upon its own conviction on	 any  matter
coming before it for adjudication but it is a general  prin-
ciple of the highest importance to the proper administration
of  justice  that derogatory remarks ought not	to  be	made
against	 persons  or authorities whose	conduct	 comes	into
consideration  unless  it is absolutely	 necessary  for	 the
decision of the case to animadvert on their conduct.  [117F-
G]
    R.K. Lakshmanan v.A.K. Srinivasan, [1976] 1 SCR 204	 and
Niranjan  Patnaik  v. Sashibhushan Kar, [1986]	2  SCC	567,
relied on.
    3. No doubt each Judge is independent to form an opinion
of  his own in deciding cases or in any phase of  the  deci-
sional	function. But the facts of the present case  against
the background of the views expressed by this Court  apropos
to  the	 earlier strictures against the	 Government,  should
have  warned  the Judge no matter how clear he	was  in	 his
mind,
112
not  to criticise the appellant. The avoidance of  even	 the
appearance of bitterness, so important in a Judge,  required
him  not to cast aspersions on the professional	 conduct  of
the  appellant, especially when he held that the High  Court
had  no jurisdiction to entertain the review  petition.	 The
observations made are not only without jurisdiction, but are
also  wholly  and utterly unjustified and  unwarranted,	 and
hence expunged. [116C-1); 118B]
    The Nature of the Judicial Process by Benjamin N. Cardo-
zo, p. 168-169; Some Observations of Felix Frankfurter,	 J.,
on  the Nature of Judicial Process of Supreme Court  Litiga-
tion,  98  Proceedings AM Phil Society 233  (1954)  and	 The
Judiciary  and Constitutional Politics-Views from the  Bench
by  Mark W. Cannon and David M.O. 's Brien, p. 27,  referred
to.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1537  of
1990
From the Judgment and Order dated 6.2.1989 of the Madhya
Pradesh High Court in M.C.C. No. 213 of 1988.
    K. Parasaran, P.P. Rao, Sushil Kumar Jain, Mrs. Pratibha
Jain and Sudhanshu Alreya for the Appellant.
    M.L.  Chansoria,  R.K.  Gupta,  K.K.  Gupta,  Dr.	A.M.
Singhvi, Ashok Mathur and N. Waziri for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
K. JAGANNATHA SHETTY, J. Special leave granted.
    Mr. B.M. Lal, J. of the Madhya Pradesh High Court  while
dismissing an apparently unsustainable review petition	has,
however,  made certain derogatory remarks against  Mr.	A.M.
Mathur, senior Advocate and also the Ex-Advocate General  of
the State. Mr. Mathur has appealed to this Court for setting
aside that order.
This  matter  pertains to a case which has	come  to  be
known  as M.P. Liquor case. It was with regard to the  grant
for construction of new distillaries by the policy  decision
of  the	 State	Government of Madhya  Pradesh.	That  policy
decision was challenged before the High Court by way of writ
petitions.  The Writ Petitions were allowed by the  Division
Bench consisting of the Acting Chief Justice Mr. J.S.  Verma
(as  he then was) and Justice B.M. Lal. In those writ  peti-
tions,
113
Mr.  Mathur as Advocate-General appeared and argued for	 the
State Government. Learned Acting Chief Justice delivered the
main  judgment in the writ petitions invalidating the  deci-
sion of the Government on the ground that it violated  Arti-
cle  14	 of the Constitution. Justice B.M. Lal	delivered  a
separate concurring opinion in which he made highly  dispar-
aging  remarks attributing mala fides and underhand  dealing
to  the State Government. Against the judgment of  the	High
Court, several appeals including one by the State of  Madhya
Pradesh	 were filed before this Court. The appeal  preferred
by  the	 State was argued by the then  Attorney	 General  of
India  assisted	 by the appellant. This Court.	allowed	 the
appeals	 and set aside the judgment of the High	 Court.
The
decision of this Court has since been reported in 1987 1 SCR
1 (
State of M.P. v. Nandlal Jaiswal & Ors.
,).
    Bhagwati, CJ., speaking for the Court
in that case
while
expressing strong disapproval of the strictures made by B.M.
Lal, J. observed (at p. 66):
"We  may  observe in conclusion that Judges should  not	 use
strong and carping language while criticising the conduct of
parties	 of  their witnesses. They must act  with  sobriety,
moderation  and	 restraint. They must have the	humility  to
recognise  that	 they are not infallible and any  harsh	 and
disparaging strictures passed by them against any party	 may
be mistaken and unjustified and if so, they may do consider-
able harm and mischief and result in injustice. Here, in the
present case, the observations made and strictures passed by
B.M.  Lal, J. were totally unjustified and  unwarranted	 and
they ought not to have been made."
On or about 3rd June 1988 i.e. after a delay of 738 days Mr.
Promod Kumar Gupta, Advocate who had no connection whatsoev-
er  with  the earlier litigation in the	 writ  petitions  or
appeals,  filed a review petition before the High Court.  He
was  represented  by Mr. S. Dixit, Advocate. In	 the  review
petition it was inter alia alleged that the State Government
by  committing	fraud  has procured the	 judgment  from	 the
Supreme Court, thereby vitiating the most solemn proceedings
of the Apex Court of the Nation. He has also filed an appli-
cation No. 3858 of 1988 for interim findings on the question
of fraud.
On 29 October, 1988, the matter was listed for admission
before a Bench consisting of learned Judges Mr. C.P. Sen and
Mr.  B.M. Lal. After arguments, C.P. Sen, J., seems to	have
dictated his order in the
114
open Court dismissing the review petition. He expressed	 the
view  that  the petitioner has no locus standi to  file	 the
petition and the economically well-to-do parties to the writ
petitions  who	lost their case before this  Court  did	 not
choose	to file any review petition. He also held  that	 the
petition  for  review was not maintainable before  the	High
Court  since the decision of the High Court was reversed  by
this  Court.  The petition was also held  to  be  hopelessly
barred	by limitation and there was no sufficient cause	 for
condoning the inordinate delay.
B.M. Lal, J. did not pass any order on 29 October, 1988.
He pronounced his order on 6th February 1989. In this inter-
regnum	there was another application from Mr. Gupta. On  25
January	 1989,	he  filed an application  in  the  aforesaid
review petition requesting the Court to take judicial notice
of some extract of the Vidhan Sabha proceedings and to	pass
appropriate  strictures against the appellant. According  to
him,  that  extract of the proceedings of the  Vidhan  Sabha
would  lend  credence to his contention that the  State	 has
practised  fraud  on  the Court. That  application  was	 not
served on the appellant nor the Court gave him any  opportu-
nity  to  file	his counter. It may be	mentioned  that	 Mr.
Mathur	has tendered his resignation as Advocate General  on
25  January 1989. On 6 February 1989, the  said	 application
was taken on record along with the documents annexed  there-
by.  On the same day B.M. Lal, J. pronounced his order	dis-
missing the review petition.
The relevant portion of that order is as under:
"While	briefing about the application for amendment of	 the
return to the Chief Minister Shri Arjun Singh, had Shri A.M.
Matbut,	 Advocate-General  acted  in bona  fide	 and  honest
manner,	 the fraud on the Court would have been avoided.  So
also the misleading press statement by the Chief Minister to
the  Blitz would have been on true facts and this  situation
would not have arisen; putting the Courts in an embarrassing
position."
Continued:
"It  is the moral duty of a lawyer, much less  the  Advocate
General,  to act faithfully for the cause of his client	 and
to  furnish information about the Court's  proceedings	cor-
rectly.	 In  the  past the chair  of  Advocate	General	 was
adorned by glorious and eminent lawyers who never showed any
sycophancy and never suffered from mosaifi. As such, the
115
action	on the part of the Advocate General, was not  befit-
ting to the status of the High Office."
Added:
"It  appears that this was the reason that Shri A.M.  Mathur
avoided filing reply to the petition and skilfully succeeded
in  his	 attempt to abstain himself from  the  case  on28.8.
1988, presumably, he had no courage to face the situation."
Finally, rounded off the conclusion:
"As  far as exercise of jurisdiction of this Court  is	con-
cerned,	 observing the judicial discipline  envisaged  under
Article	 141
of the Constitution and has been merged in	 the
decision of the Supreme Court particularly when the decision
of this Court in
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Nandial Jaiswal
,
case,  it  is for the petitioner, if he is  so	advised,  to
vindicate his grievances before the Apex Court.
	  Learned  counsel further pointed out that  one  of
the distiller's application for modification of the order is
sub  judice before the Apex Court.
As such, in view  of	 the
observations made in A.R. Antulay's, case [1988] SCC II	 602
the  petitioner, if so advised, may approach the Apex  Court
for getting redress."
From  the  foregoing  order it will	 be  seen  that	 the
learned	 Judge	seems  to have formed an  opinion  that	 the
appellant did not act honestly and bona fide in briefing the
then Chief Minister Mr. Arjun Singh and if he had acted bona
fide and in honest manner, the fraud on the Court would have
been  avoided and the Chief Minister would not have given  a
misleading  press statement. He has also remarked  that	 the
appellant did not act befitting with the status of the	High
Office	of  the	 Advocate General and he did  not  have	 the
courage	 to  face the situation in the Court. Such  are	 his
conclusions,  or surmises in the review petition  which	 was
not  disposed  of on the merits but dismissed  for  want  of
jurisdiction.
The	 appellant's complaint before us is that he  had  no
opportunity to meet the allegations in the review  petition,
much less as against averments in the subsequent application
dated  25 January, 1989. He made it clear to the High  Court
on 6 October 1988 and also
116
on  29 October 1988 that he entered appearance pursuance  to
service	 of  a copy of the review petition as per  the	High
Court  rules, on the Advocate General's office. He  has	 not
entered	 appearance as such on behalf of the State or  other
respondents.  He has, further, made it clear that there	 was
no ground for review and it deserved to be dismissed and  so
he did not wish to enter appearance at that stage before the
admission  of the review petition. The appellant appears  to
be  correct in these statements and they are found  recorded
in the Court proceedings dated 6 October, 1988.
    It	may be noted that C.P. Sen, J. dismissed the  review
petition  on the ground of maintainability,  limitation	 and
locus  standi of the petitioner. Thereafter the	 application
was  filed to pass strictures against the appellant  in	 the
light of the Vidhan Sabha proceedings. B.M. Lal, J. seems to
have  acceded to that request. No doubt each Judge is  inde-
pendent	 to form an opinion of his own in deciding cases  or
in  any phase of the decisional function. But the  facts  of
the  present  case against the background of the  views	 ex-
pressed	 by  this Court apropos to  the	 earlier  strictures
against the Government, should have warned B.M. Lal, J.,  no
matter	how clear he was in his mind, not to  criticise	 the
appellant. The avoidance of even the appearances of  bitter-
ness,  so  important  in a Judge required him  not  to	cast
aspersions on the professional conduct of the appellant.
Justice Cardozo of course said:
"The great tides and currents which engulf the rest of	men,
do  not turn aside in their course, and pass judges  by.  We
like  to  figure to ourselves the processes  of	 justice  as
coldly objective and impersonal. The law, conceived of as  a
real  existence, dwelling apart and alone,  speaks,  through
the  voices of priests and ministers, the words	 which	they
have  no choice except to utter. That is an ideal of  objec-
tive  truth  toward  which  every  system  of  jurisprudence
tends	.....  It has a lofty sound; it is well	 and  finely
said; but it can never be more than partly true. "(1)
Justice Felix Frankfurter, put it with a different emphasis:
"Judges are men, not disembodied spirits. Of course a  Judge
is not free from preferences or, if you will, biases. "(2)
(1) The Nature of the Judicial Process by Benjamin N. Cardo-
zo p. 168-169.
(2) Some observations of Felix Frankfurter, J., on	 the
Nature	of Judicial Process of Supreme Court  Litigation  98
Proceedings AM Phil Society 233 (1954).
117
It	is true that the judges are flesh and blood  mortals
with individual personalities and with normal human  traits.
Still  what  remains  essential in  judging,  Justice  Felix
Frankfurter said:
"First	and foremost, humility and an understanding  of	 the
range of the problems and (one's) own inadequacy in  dealing
with them, disinterestedness  .....  and allegiance to noth-
ing except the effort to find (that) pass through precedent,
through	 policy, through history, through (one's) own  gifts
of insights to the best judgment that a poor fallible  crea-
ture can arrive at in that most difficult of all tasks,	 the
adjudication  between  man and man, between man	 and  state,
through reason called law.(3)
    Judicial  restraint and discipline are as  necessary  to
the  orderly  administration of justice as they are  to	 the
effectiveness  of  the	army. The duty	of  restraint,	this
humility  of  function	should be a constant  theme  of	 our
judges. This quality in decision making is as much necessary
for judges to command respect as to protect the independence
of  the judiciary. Judicial restraint in this  regard  might
better	be called judicial respect; that is, respect by	 the
judiciary.  Respect  to those who come before the  Court  as
well to other co-ordinate branches of the State, the  Execu-
tive  and  Legislature. There must be mutual  respect.	When
these  qualities fail or when litigants and  public  believe
that  the  judge has failed in these qualities, it  will  be
neither good for the judge nor for the judicial process.
    The Judges Bench is a seat of power. Not only do  judges
have power to make binding decisions, their decisions legit-
imate  the use of power by other officials. The Judges	have
the  absolute and unchallenged control of the Court  domain.
But  they cannot misuse their authority by intemperate	com-
ments, undignified banter or scathing criticism of  counsel,
parties	 or  witnesses. We concede that the  Court  has	 the
inherent power to act freely upon its own conviction on	 any
matter coming before it for adjudication, but it is a gener-
al principle of the highest importance to the proper  admin-
istration of justice that derogatory remarks ought not to be
made against persons or authorities whose conduct comes into
consideration  unless  it is absolutely	 necessary  for	 the
decision  of the case to animadvert on their  conduct.	(See
(i) R.K. Lakshmanan v.A.K. Srinivasan, [1976] I SCR 204	 and
(
ii) Niranjan Patnaik v. Sashibhushan Kar
, [1986] 2 SCC	 567
at 576.
(3)  The Judiciary and  Constitutional  Politics--Views
from  the Bench by Mark W. Cannon and David M.O.'s Brien  p.
27.
118
Learned  Judge  having held that the High Court  has  no
jurisdiction  to entertain the review petition ought not  to
have commented on the professional conduct of the  appellant
and  that too without an opportunity for him. We  regret  to
note  that the observations made and aspersions cast on	 the
professional  conduct of the appellant are not only  without
jurisdiction, but also they are wholly and utterly  unjusti-
fied and unwarranted.
We	therefore,  allow  the appeal and  expunge  all	 the
remarks	 made by B.M. Lal, J. against the appellant  in	 the
impugned order.
Normally, we would have awarded heavy costs against	 the
respondent but since the respondent is also an Advocate,  we
refrain from making any order as to costs.
G.N.					    Appeal allowed.
119