[Cites
15
, Cited by
13
]
Supreme Court of India
Northern Corporation vs Union Of India And Ors on 6 August, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1990 AIR 764, 1990 SCR (3) 621, AIR 1991 SUPREME COURT 764, 1990 (4) SCC 239, (1990) 49 ELT 332, 1990 (2) UJ (SC) 517, 1990 UJ(SC) 2 517, (1990) 3 JT 699 (SC), (1990) SC CR R 669, (1990) 2 CURLJ(CCR) 643
Author:
Sabyasachi  Mukharji
Bench:
Sabyasachi  Mukharji
,
K.N.  Saikia
PETITIONER:
NORTHERN CORPORATION

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/08/1990

BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (CJ)
BENCH:
MUKHARJI, SABYASACHI (CJ)
SAIKIA, K.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1990 AIR  764		  1990 SCR  (3) 621
 1990 SCC  (4) 239	  JT 1990 (3)	699
 1990 SCALE  (2)279


ACT:
Customs    Act,    1962
:
Section	   15(1)(b)
--Customs
duty--Determination  of	 rate--Goods imported could  not  be
cleared due to ban imposed by income tax authorities--Wheth-
er importer liable to may at the enhanced rate prevailing at
the time of clearance.
    Constitution   of	India,	 1950:
Article   32--
Scope
of--Excise duty-Liability to pay particular  duty--Dependent
on  interpretation of law ,and determination  of  facts--En-
forcement  of  provisions  of the Act-Whether  a  breach  of
fundamental  right--Whether  permissible to move  the  Court
without	 seeking relief within the procedure  prescribed  by
the Act.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 petitioner-Corporation imported certain goods.	 The
goods were bounded. and could not be got released due to the
ban  imposed  by the Income Tax authorities,  under
Section
132(1)
of the Income Tax Act. 1961. Subsequently after	 the
ban  was lifted, the petitioner approached  the	 authorities
for  clearance	of the goods, but  the	customs	 authorities
demanded payment of customs duty at the enhanced rate  which
was prevailing at the time of clearance. Hence the petition-
er  filed a Writ Petition before this Court challenging	 the
demand as arbitrary. illegal and unconstitutional.
    It was contended that though the petitioner was  willing
to clear the goods on payment of the then prevailing  custom
duty,  the goods could not be cleared due  to  circumstances
beyond its control, by the order of the Income Tax  authori-
ties  and,  therefore, the authorities could not  claim	 en-
hanced duty.
    On	behalf of the respondents it was contended  that  in
view of
Section 15(1)(b)
of the Customs Act, especially	 the
expression "actually removed" used therein, the liability of
the  petitioner to pay the duty was the duty at the time  of
clearance of the goods.
Disposing of the Writ Petition, this Court,
622
    HELD:  1.
Section	15(1)(b)
of the	 Customs  Act,	1962
clearly requires that the rate of duty, rate of exchange and
tariff	applicable to any imported goods shall be  the	rate
and valuation in force on the date on which goods are  actu-
ally  removed from the warehouse. Therefore, in view of	 the
language  used in
Section 15(1)(b)
of the Act, specially  in
the light of the expression 'actually removed' the petition-
er was liable to pay excise duty at enhanced rate prevailing
on the date the goods were cleared. The prohibitory  orders,
arbitrary or not, would postpone the date of clearance,	 and
as such would postpone the determination of the duty. [626F;
627C]
    Prakash Cotton Mills (P) Ltd. v. B. Sen & Ors., [1979] 2
SCR 1142, relied on.
    2.1	 Recourse to
Art. 32
of the Constitution can be	 had
if there is a breach of the fundamental rights, provided the
other  conditions are satisfied. BUt in a matter  where	 li-
ability	 of  a citizen to pay a particular duty	 depends  on
interpretation	of  law and determination of facts  and	 the
provision  of  a  particular statute,  for  which  elaborate
procedure  is prescribed, enforcing of those  provisions  of
the  Act  would not breach fundamental	right  and,  without
taking	any resort to the provisions of the Act, it  is	 not
permissible to move this Court on the theoretical basis that
there  is  breach of fundamental right.	 Whenever  a  person
complains  and claims that there is a violation of  law,  it
does  not  involve breach of fundamental right for  the	 en-
forcement  of  which alone
Art. 32
of  the  Constitution  is
attracted. [627E; 628A-D]
    Smt.  Ujjam Bai v. State of Uttar Pradesh, [1963] 1	 SCR
778, relied on.
    2.2	 In a particular situation whether customs  duty  is
payable	 at the rate prevalent on a particular date  or	 not
has  to be determined under the four corners of the
Customs
Act, 1962
. [627F]
    In	the instant case, the petitioner has no	 fundamental
right as such to clear any goods imported without payment of
duties	in accordance with the law. There is procedure	pro-
vided  by  law for determination of the payment	 of  customs
duty. The revenue has proceeded on that basis. The petition-
er  cannot seek to remove the goods without payment at	that
rate  or without having the matter determined by the  proce-
dure  envisaged and enjoined by the law for that  determina-
tion.  The  petitioner, without seeking to take	 any  relief
within the procedure envisaged under the Act, had moved this
Court for breach of funda-
623
mental	right. This is not permissible and should  never  be
entertained. [627F-H]
    Relief  under
Article 32
of the Constitution  is  there-
fore, wholly inappropriate in the facts and circumstances of
the instant case. [628B]



JUDGMENT:
ORIGINAL JURISDICTION: Civil Writ Petition No. 443 of 1988.
(Under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India).
Rajiv K. Garg and N.D. Garg for the Petitioner.
    Soli  J. Sorabjee, Attorney General, M.  Chandrasekharan
and P. Parmeswaran for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SABYASACHI	MUKHARJI, CJ. This is an  application  under
Article 32
of the Constitution. Northern Corporation is	 the
petitioner  in	the  instant application and  the  Union  of
India, the Collector of Customs and the Assistant  Collector
of Customs (Bond Department) are the respondents.
    On 11th May, 1983, the licensing authority issued import
licence	 No.  2959845  for Rs.20, 12,729 in  favour  of	 M/s
Industrial  Cable  India Ltd., Rajpura. The  licence  holder
transferred  the same in favour of M/s Metalic metal  Indus-
tries.	The  transferee-licence holder issued  a  letter  of
authority in favour of the petitioner for the import of MSCR
defective  sheets  or  coils. The letter  of  authority	 was
issued on 21st May, 1984.
The petitioner herein placed order on M/s Sayani  Enter-
prises Pvt. Ltd., Singapore for the supply of MSCR defective
sheets	or  coils on 30th May, 1984.  The  foreign  supplier
shipped	 the  material in three consignments and  the  goods
arrived at the Bombay Port on 12th June, 1984. The  clearing
agent  of the petitioner filed bills of entry on 30th  July,
1984  for warehousing under
section 59
of the  Customs	Act.
1962  (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'), and  the	same
was allowed. The goods were bounded on 7th August, 1984.  It
may be mentioned that the rate of duty on the day was 60%  +
40%  + Rs.650 per M.T. and 10% C.V.D. The total duty on	 the
consignment was assessed as Rs.26,20,109.55.
624
On	21th August, 1984, the petitioner's  clearing  agent
filed six bills of entry for ex bond clearance. However, the
bills  of entry were returned with the remark  that  "please
obtain no objection from the income tax". This was  endorsed
on 24th August, 1984. The petitioner states that  thereafter
he came to know that the income tax authorities had  imposed
ban  under
section 132(1)
of the Income Tax Act,  1961.	 The
petitioner  asserted  that he was ever	ready  and  willing,
rather	was anxious, to get the material on payment  of	 the
then prevailing customs duty. However, due to  circumstances
beyond the control of the petitioner, that it to say, by the
order  of the Income Tax Authorities the goods could not  be
released.  This factor was not of the  petitioner's  making,
according to the petitioner.			   '
    On	30th March, 1988, the Income Tax  Department  issued
the  necessary	no objection certificate, thus	lifting	 the
ban.  On 4th April, 1988, the petitioner's  agent  contacted
the  customs authority for clearance of the goods. The	duty
as  is prevalent now is Rs.5,000 per M.T. + addl.  duty	 45%
and C.V.D. at Rs.325 per M.T. The total duty came to a	very
large sum of money. The demand, according to the petitioner,
was arbitrary, illegal and unconstitutional.
    The	 instant  writ	was filed under
Article	 32
of	 the
Constitution  on 16th April, 1988 and on 22nd  April,  1988,
this Court passed the following order:
"Pending  notice, there will be limited stay to	 the  extent
that  the  goods name, "MSCR defective	sheets/coils"  which
have arrived at Bombay Port per S.S. "SEA PRIMROSE" will  be
released forthwith on petitioner's paying customs and  other
duties	as  leviable on 21.8.84. In addition  to  the  above
payment	 the petitioner will deposit Rs.5 lakhs and for	 the
balance	 amount	 petitioner will furnish surety	 (which	 may
consist	   of	 ITC   bond    but    excluding	   cash/bank
guarantee/NSC/FDR)  to the satisfaction of the Collector  of
Customs."
We  directed that the notice should be given to the  revenue
authority to appear before us. Learned Attorney General	 had
appeared  pursuant to the notice on behalf of  the  respond-
ents. It is contended on behalf of the respondents that	 for
the payment of duty, the liability of the petitioner to	 pay
the duty is the duty at the time of clearance of the  goods.
Our attention was drawn to
section 15(1)(b)
of the Act which
postulates  that the rate of duty and tariff  valuation,  if
any, applicable
625
to  any imported goods, shall be the rate and  valuation  in
force, in case the goods are cleared from a warehouse  under
section	 68
,  on the date on which the	goods  are  actually
removed	 from the warehouse.
Section 15
of the Act reads  as
under:
"S.  15. Date for determination of rate of duty	 and  tariff
valuation of imported goods.
(1) The rate of duty and tariff valuation, if any,  applica-
ble  to any imported goods, shall be the rate and  valuation
in force--
(a)  in the case of goods entered for	 home	con-
sumption  under
section 46
, on the date on which a  bill  of
entry  in  respect  of such goods is  presented	 under	that
section;
(b) in the case of goods cleared from a  warehouse
under
section 68
, on the date on which the goods are actual-
ly removed from the warehouse;
(c) in the case of any other goods, on the date of
payment of duty:
Provided that if a bill of entry has been present-
ed  before the date of entry inwards of the vessel by  which
the goods are imported, the bill of entry shall be deemed to
have been presented on the date of such entry inwards.
(2)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to	bag-
gage and goods imported by post."
Learned Attorney General laid emphasis on the expression
"actually  removed"  in clause (b) of
section 15(1)
of	 the
Act.  Our attention was also drawn to
section 16
of the	 Act
which reads as under:
"S.  16. Date for determination of rate of duty	 and  tariff
valuation of export goods.
(1) The rate of duty and tariff valuation, if any,  applica-
ble to any export goods, shall be the rate and valuation  in
force--
(a) in the case of goods entered for export under
626
section 50
, on the date"on which the proper officer makes an
order  permitting  clearance and loading of  the  goods	 for
exportation under
section 51
;
(b) in the case of any other goods, on the date of
payment of duty.
(2)  The  provisions  of this section shall  not  apply,  to
baggage and goods exported by post."
It	was contended on behalf of the revenue that in	view
of the aforesaid, it would not be possible for the petition-
er  to clear the goods on payment of duty on the  date	when
the  petitioner	 was  actualling  expressed  willingness  to
remove the goods. Our attention was drawn to the decision of
this  Court  in
Prakash Cotton Mills (P) Ltd. v.  B.  Sen  &
Ors.
,  [1979] 2 SCR 1142. In that case,the appellant  stored
on December 22, 1965 in the Customs warehouse, goods import-
ed by him under a licence, and cleared them on various dates
between	 September  1,	1966 and February  20,	1967.  Under
protest,  they	paid customs duty at the enhanced  rates  in
accordance with the amended provisions. Later, they  claimed
rebate	alleging  that since the consignments had  been	 re-
ceived, stored and assessed to duty much before the  promul-
gation of the Ordinance, they were liable to pay duty at the
rate  prevailing on the date of warehousing.  Their  appeals
and  revision were unsuccessful. In appeal to this Court  it
was  contended that the material change in
s. 15
being	only
the substitution of the words "the rate of duty" the customs
authorities  were not entitled to take into account the	 new
rate  of  exchange at the appreciated value of	currency  in
respect of the consignments stored in the warehouse prior to
the  coming  into  force of the	 Ordinance.  Dismissing	 the
appeal,	 this Court held that the customs  authorities	were
right intaking the view that the rate of duty applicable  to
the imported goods should be determined according to the law
prevalent  on the date they were actually removed  from	 the
warehouse.
Section 15(1)(b)
clearly requires that the	rate
of  duty,  rate	 of exchange and tariff	 applicable  to	 any
imported  goods shall be the rate and valuation in force  on
the date on which goods are actually removed from the  ware-
house.	Under
s. 49
and importer may apply to the  Assistant
Collector  of Customs for permission to store  the  imported
goods  in a warehouse pending their clearance and he may  be
permitted  to do so; and
s. 68
provides that an importer  of
any  warehoused	 goods	may clear them if  the	import	duty
leviable  on them has been paid. In that case, it was  found
that as the goods were removed from the warehouse after	 the
amending Ordinance had come
627
into force, the customs authorities and the Central  Govern-
ment  were  right in taking the view that the rate  of	duty
applicable  to the imported goods should be  determined	 ac-
cording	 the law prevalent on the date these  were  actually
removed from the warehouse.
Mr.	 Garg,	appearing for the petitioner, on  the  other
hand contended before us that his client was willing  indeed
to  pay the duty when the goods crossed the customs  barrier
and  were in the process of being cleared, but could not  be
cleared because of the prohibitory orders of the Income	 Tax
Department  under
section 102
of the Customs Act.  In	that
light,	it  was not possible, Mr. Garg	contended,  for	 the
Income	Tax Department to claim enhanced duty due  to  facts
which  were not for the fault of the petitioner. In view  of
the  language  used in
section 15(1)(b)
of the	Act,  it  is
difficult  to accept this contention specially in the  light
of  the expression used 'actually removed'. It must  be	 ac-
cepted that the prohibitory orders, arbitrary or not,  would
postpone  the date of clearance and as such  would  postpone
the determination of the duty. Therefore, it is difficult to
accept Mr. Garg's contention.
However, there is a far more serious objection in enter-
taining	 this application under
Article 32
of the  Constitu-
tion.
Article 32
of the Constitution guarantees the right to
move  the  Supreme  Court  for	enforcement  of	 fundamental
rights.	 If there is breach of the fundamental	rights,	 the
petitioner can certainly have recourse to
Article 32
of	 the
Constitution provided other conditions are satisfied. But we
must,  in  all such cases, be circumventive of what  is	 the
right  claimed. In this case, the petitioner as such has  no
fundamental fight to clear the goods imported except in	 due
process	 of law. Now in the facts of this case, such  clear-
ance can only be made on payment of duty as enjoined by	 the
Customs Act
. In a particular situation whether customs	duty
is payable at the rate prevalent on a particular date or not
has  to be determined under the four corners of the
Customs
Act,  1962
. The petitioner has no fundamental right as	such
to  clear  any goods imported without payment of  duties  in
accordance with the law. There is procedure provided by	 law
for determination of the payment of customs duty. The  reve-
nue  has  proceeded on that basis. The	petitioner  contends
that  duty  at a particular rate prevalent at  a  particular
date  was not payable. The petitioner cannot seek to  remove
the goods without payment at that rate or without having the
matter determined by the procedure envisaged and enjoined by
the  law  for  that determination.  The	 petitioner  without
seeking	 to take any relief within the	procedure  envisaged
under the Act had moved this Court for breach of fundamental
right. This is not permissible and should never be
628
entertained. In a matter of this nature where liability of a
citizen	 to pay a particular duty depends on  interpretation
of  law	 and determination of facts and the provision  of  a
particular  statute  for which elaborate procedure  is	pre-
scribed,  it cannot conceivably be contended that  enforcing
of  those  provisions of the Act  would	 breach	 fundamental
right which entitle a citizen to seek recourse to
Article 32
of  the	 Constitution.	We are, therefore,  clearly  of	 the
opinion that relief under
Article 32
of the Constitution  is
wholly	inappropriate in the facts and the circumstances  of
this case. It has further to be reiterated that for enforce-
ment of fundamental right which is dependent upon  adjudica-
tion  or determination of questions of law as well as  ques-
tion of fact without taking any resort to the provisions  of
the  Act,  it is not permissible to move this Court  on	 the
theoretical  basis that there is breach of  the	 fundamental
right. Whenever a person complains and claims that there  is
a violation of law, it does not automatically involve breach
of  fundamental	 right for the enforcement  of	which  alone
Article 32
of the Constitution is attracted. It appears that
the facts of this nature require elaborate procedural inves-
tigation  and this Court should not be moved and should	 not
entertain  on these averments of the
Article 32
of the	Con-
stitution. This position is clearly well settled, but  some-
times  we  are	persuaded to accept that  an  allegation  of
breach	of law is an action in breach of fundamental  right.
In this connection, reference may be made to the decision of
this  Court  in
Smt. Ujjam Bai v. State	 of  Uttar  Pradesh
,
[1963] 1 SCR 778, where this Court observed at p. 842 of the
report as under:
"In  my	 opinion, the correct answer to	 the  two  questions
which have been referred to this larger Bench must be in the
negative. An order of assessment made by an authority  under
a  taxing statute which is intra vires and in the  undoubted
exercise  of  its jurisdiction cannot be challenged  on	 the
sole  ground that it is ,passed ,on a misconstruction  of  a
provision of the Act or of a notification issued thereunder.
Nor  can  the validity of such an order be questioned  in  a
petition  under
Art.  32
of the  Constitution.	 The  proper
remedy	for correcting an error in such an order is to	pro-
ceed by way of appeal, or if the error is an error  apparent
on the face of the record, they by an application under
Art.
226
of	 the Constitution. It is necessary to  observe	here
that
Art. 32
of the Constitution does not give this Court an
appellate  jurisdiction	 Such. as is given by Arts.  132  to
136.
Article  32
guarantees the right to  a  constitutional
remedy	and  relates only to the enforcement of	 the  rights
conferred
629
by  Part 111 of the Constitution. Unless a question  of	 the
enforcement of a fundamental right arises,
Art. 32
does	 not
apply.	There  can be no question of the  enforcement  of  a
fundamental  fight  if the order challenged is a  valid	 and
legal  order, in spite of the allegation that it is  errone-
ous.  I	 have,	therefore, come to the	conclusion  that  no
question of the enforcement of a fundamental fight arises in
this case and the writ petition is not maintainable."
In	the aforesaid view of the matter, we are clearly  of
the  opinion that
Article 32
of the Constitution should	 not
have  been  resorted to and this application  does  not	 lie
under
Article 32
of the Constitution.
However, it appears that this Court has passed an  order
on 22nd April, as indicated hereinbefore. It is stated	that
the  goods  have been cleared pursuant to  that	 order.	 The
revenue	 would be at liberty to take appropriate  action  in
accordance with law for the recovery of the dues.
This writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
N.P.V.					   Petition disposed
of.
630