[Cites
6
, Cited by
30
]
Supreme Court of India
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd vs Yashwant Gajanan Joshi And Ors on 5 December, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1991 AIR 933, 1990 SCR SUPL. (3) 434, AIR 1991 SUPREME COURT 933, 1991 AIR SCW 208, 1991 (1) UJ (SC) 259, 1991 (2) SCC(SUPP) 592, 1991 UJ(SC) 1 259, 1991 SCC (SUPP) 2 592, (1991) 1 COMLJ 382, (1991) 1 JT 38 (SC)
Bench:
N.M.  Kasliwal
,
S.C.  Agrawal
PETITIONER:
HINDUSTAN PETROLEUM CORPORATION LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
YASHWANT GAJANAN JOSHI AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/12/1990

BENCH:
RANGNATHAN, S.
BENCH:
RANGNATHAN, S.
KASLIWAL, N.M. (J)
AGRAWAL, S.C. (J)

CITATION:
 1991 AIR  933		  1990 SCR  Supl. (3) 434
 1991 SCC  Supl.  (2) 592 JT 1991 (1)	 38
 1990 SCALE  (2)1208


ACT:
Petroleum and Minerals Pipeline (Acquisition of Right of
User In Land) Act,  1962
--
Sections 2(a)
,
7
to
10-
-'Competent
Authority'  employee of contesting parties--Whether fit	 for
appointment--Whether  violative	 of  principles	 of  natural
justice.



HEADNOTE:
    The appellant corporation took steps under the Petroleum
and Minerals Pipeline (Acquisition of Right of User in land)
Act, 1962 for laying down pipelines for a project called the
Bombay--Pune Pipeline Project. One Mrs. A.R. Gadre,  Special
Land  Officer in the office of Competent Authority  was	 ap-
pointed	 as competent authority by the Government of  India.
One  of the duties of the Competent Authority was to  deter-
mine the compensation which would be payable to those  whose
proprietary rights were affected by laying down of pipes  by
the Corporation.
    The	 respondent  who was claiming compensation  filed  a
petition in the High Court under
Article 226
of the  Consti-
tution	challenging the appointment of Mrs. Gadre as  compe-
tent authority on the ground that the principles of  natural
justice required a feeling in both the parties that  justice
would  be done as between them. The High Court	allowed	 the
writ  petition	and directed the Union of India	 to  appoint
another competent authority who shall not be an employee  of
the corporation.
    Two	 special  leave	 petitions were	 flied	against	 the
judgment  of the High Court, one by the Corporation and	 the
other by the Union of India.
    Before  this  Court it was contended  that	the  special
leave  petition	 filed by the Union of India was  barred  by
limitation, and that the special leave petition flied by the
Corporation  was not maintainable,stood	 dismissed,  because
Union of India alone was the interested party.
On merits it was contended that (i) there was no question of
the
435
violation of any principle of natural justice nor there	 was
any  question. of bias in case any employee of the  corpora-
tion  was  appointed as competent authority under  the	Act;
(ii)  that there was no personal interest of  the  Competent
Authority in the subject matter of the litigation, namely in
the determination of compensation, and as such the principle
that  no  person could be a judge in his own cause  was	 not
applicable  in	the  present case;  (iii)  determination  of
compensation  by  the Competent Authority in the  first	 in-
stance was purely an administrative act by which the  rights
of the parties were not determined by the competent authori-
ty;  and (iv) the provisions in this Act were  analogous  to
those under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
in which case the
amount of compensation payable by the Government was, in the
first instance, determined by the Officer of the  Government
itself.
    On	behalf of the respondent it was contended  that	 (i)
the determination of compensation by the competent authority
was a quasijudicial act and not an administrative act;	(ii)
the  persons  or authorities appointed under  various  other
Acts  were appointed by virtue of their holding some  office
or  post  and  their orders were appealable  to	 the  higher
authorities;  (iii)  where  a discretion was  given  to	 the
Central	 Government for appointing the competent  authority,
then such discretion should not be exercised by appointing a
person	or  authority who  may be in the employment  of	 the
body or authority for whose benefit the pipelines were laid;
(iv) while determining the question of bias the test was not
whether in fact bias had affected the judgment but the test
always	was and must be whether a litigant could  reasonably
apprehend  that	 a  bias might operate against	him  in	 the
decision of the subject matter of the dispute.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD:  (1) In view of the fact that the High  Court	 had
removed Mrs. Gadre from acting as competent authority on the
ground	that  she  was an employee of  the  corporation	 and
further given direction that any suitable person be appoint-
ed as competent authority but not an employee of the  corpo-
ration,	 there was an independent cause of grievance to	 the
corporation, and therefore the special leave petition  could
be filed by the corporation. [438D]
    (2)	 No one shah be a judge in his own cause only  means
that  he should not have personal interest in the  cause  he
has to adjudicate. [441F]
(3) There is no provision in the Act prohibiting the Central
436
Government  to	make an appointment of an  employee  of	 the
Corporation as competent authority. [444G]
    (4) The scheme of the Act shows that a competent author-
ity  has to discharge various and diverse duties  under	 the
Act. Such person becomes a better qualified and	 experienced
person	equipped  with	a proper background  to	 decide	 the
amount of compensation also. [444H-445B]
    (5)	 A  party is entitled to raise the  ground  of	bias
against	 the appointment of an individual officer as  compe-
tent  authority on sufficient material placed on  record  in
this regard, but not merely because such competent authority
was an employee of the Corporation. [445F]
    (6)	 It would be too broad a proposition to	 extend	 the
theory	of  bias  to exclude a person only  because  such  a
person	draws salary from the bodies like a public  corpora-
tion,  State  Government  or Central  Government.  It  would
altogether  be	a  different matter if it was a	 case  of  a
private employer and his employees. [445G-H]
    Metropolitan  Properties  Co. Ltd. v. Lannon  and  Ors.,
[1968] 3 All England Reports 304; G. Sarana v. University of
Lucknow	 &  Ors., [1977] 1 SCR	64;  International  Airports
Authority of India v. K.D. & Anr., [1988] 2 SCC 360, distin-
guished.
    (7) In this case, compensation was decided by the  Addi-
tional District Judge in favour of the respondent. Mrs. A.R.
Gadre in her own name flied a writ petition challenging	 the
legality  of  the award passed by  the	Additional  District
Judge.
    (8) Taking in view the entire facts and circumstances of
the  case, the respondent was right in contending that	Mrs.
A.R.  Gadre  may have bias while determining the  amount  of
compensation  as she herself is a litigating party  in	this
very  matter  in the High Court against the  respondent.  An
apprehension  thus  in the mind of the	respondent  is	well
rounded	 and  on this ground there is  no  justification  to
interfere with the order of the High Court holding that	 the
appointment  of Mrs. Gadre was not valid. However,  it	does
not  mean an agreement with the general proposition  of	 the
High  Court  that an officer of the  corporation  cannot  be
appointed  as  a  'competent authority' because	 he  may  be
biased in favour of the corporation by reason of his employ-
ment. [446C, E-G]



JUDGMENT: