[Cites
6
, Cited by
16
]
Supreme Court of India
Marine Times Publications Pvt. Ltd vs Shiriram Transport And Finance Co. Ltd. ... on 26 October, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1991 AIR 626, 1990 SCR SUPL. (2) 466, AIR 1991 SUPREME COURT 626, 1991 (1) SCC 469, 1991 AIR SCW 74, 1990 (2) UJ (SC) 732, 1991 ( ) CO-OP TJ 473, 1990 UJ(SC) 2 732, (1990) 4 JT 332 (SC), 1990 (4) JT 332, (1991) MAH LJ 347, (1991) 2 MAHLR 772, (1991) BANKJ 495, (1991) 2 BANKCLR 18, 1991 ( ) BOM LR 6
Author:
M.H. Kania
Bench:
M.H. Kania
,
R.M.  Sahai
PETITIONER:
MARINE TIMES PUBLICATIONS PVT. LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SHIRIRAM TRANSPORT AND FINANCE CO. LTD. AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT26/10/1990

BENCH:
KANIA, M.H.
BENCH:
KANIA, M.H.
SAHAI, R.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1991 AIR  626		  1990 SCR  Supl. (2) 466
 1991 SCC  (1) 469	  JT 1990 (4)	332
 1990 SCALE  (2)854


ACT:
Maharashtra Cooperative Societies Act,  1960
:
Section
91
Cooperative Society--Agreement to sell office premises in
a  building   owned by the Society between a  member  and  a
non-member--Agreement subject to approval of the Cooperative
Society--Refusal   of	permission   by	  the	 Cooperative
Society--Reference  of dispute by non-member to	 Cooperative
Court praying specific performance of agreement and a direc-
tion  to  the Society for approval  of	agreement--Claim  of
nonmember  whether  a claim against the	 Society  through  a
member-Dispute	  "whether   touching	the   business	  of
society"--Cooperative  court whether has  jurisdiction	over
the dispute.



HEADNOTE:
    The appellant company, a member of Cooperative  Society,
respondent No. 2, was having its office premises in a build-
ing owned by respondent No. 2. It entered into an  agreement
to sell the said premises to respondent No. 1, a  non-member
subject	 to  the approval of the  Cooperative  Society.	 The
Cooperative Society declined to grant permission for  trans-
fer  of	 the  premises. Respondent No.	1  filed  a  dispute
against	 the  appellant	 and respondent	 No.  2	 Cooperative
Society	 in  the Cooperative Court under
section 91
of	 the
Maharashtra  Cooperative Societies Act, 1960 praying  for  a
decree of specific performance of the contract and a  direc-
tion  to the Cooperative Society to approve the said  agree-
ment.
    The Cooperative Court dismissed the dispute for want  of
jurisdiction. On appeal by respondent No. 1, the Maharashtra
Cooperative  Appellate	Court  set aside the  order  of	 the
Cooperative  Court.  Against the order	of  the	 Cooperative
Appellate Court, the appellant filed a writ petition in	 the
High  Court which was dismissed by holding that the  dispute
was governed by
Section 91
of the Act.
    In the appeal to this Court against the Judgment of	 the
High Court, it was contended on behalf of the appellant that
the dispute between the parties was not governed by
Section
91
since it was neither a dispute "touching the business  of
the society" nor was it a dispute between a person  claiming
through a member against the society.
467
    Allowing  the appeal and setting aside the	judgment  of
the High Court, this Court,
    HELD: 1. Before a dispute can be referred to a  Coopera-
tive Court under the provision of
section 91(1)
of the	said
Act it is not only essential that the dispute should be of a
kind  described in sub-section (1) of
section 91
but  it  is
also  essential	 that the parties to the said  dispute	must
belong to any of the categories specified in clauses (a)  to
(e) of subsection (1) of the said section. [473B]
    2. In the instant case the main claim of Respondent	 No.
1 a nonmember, was for a decree for specific performance  of
the  agreement. The prayer for an order that respondent	 No.
2-Society  should be directed to give their approval to	 the
said  agreement was merely an ancillary prayer made  with  a
view  to  complete the relief of specific  performance.	 The
main  claim  to have the  agreement  specifically  performed
cannot	be said to be a claim made by a person	(non-member)
against the Society. The claim against the society cannot be
said to be made through a member, the appellant, because  it
is only when a decree for performance of the said  agreement
is passed against the appellant, that it could be  contended
that  the  other relief namely, for an order  directing	 re-
spondent  No.  2 to approve the said  agreement	 is  claimed
against	 the  society through a	 member.  Consequently,	 the
dispute	 cannot be said to fall within the scope of
section
91(1)(b)
of the Act. Therefore, the High Court committed  an
error  in coming to the conclusion that both the parties  to
the dispute belonged to the categories covered under
section
91(1)(b)
of the Act. [473E-H; 474A]
    Deccan Merchants Cooperative Bank Ltd. v. M/s  Dalichand
Jugraj	Jain  and Ors., [1969] 1 S.C.R. 887; M/s  Leong	 and
Anr.  v.  Smt. Jinabhai G. Gulrajami and Ors.,	A.I.R.	1981
Bom. 244 and Sanwarmal Kejriwal v. Vishwa Cooperative  Hous-
ing Society Ltd. and Ors., [1990] 2 SCC 288, distinguished.
    O.N. Bhatnagar v. Smt. Rukibai Narsindas & Ors.,  [1982]
3 S.C.R. 681, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 4979  of
1990.
From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  25.8.1989  of	 the
Bombay High Court in W.P. No. 6058 of 1986.
468
V.M. Tarkunde, D.R. Poddar and V.B. Joshi for the Appellant.
    K.P.  Parasaran (N.P.), Rama Subramaniam, A.K.  Ganguli,
R.P. Bhat, K. Swamy and A.S. Bhasme for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
KANIA, J. Leave granted. Counsel heard.
This is an appeal from the judgment of a learned  Single
judge of the Bombay High Court dismissing Writ Petition	 No.
6058 of 1986 filed by the appellant on the Appellate Side of
that Court. The appellant and respondent No. 1 are companies
incorporated under the
Indian Companies Act
. ReSpOndent	 No.
2 is a Cooperative Society registered under the
Maharashtra
Cooperative Societies Act, 1961
(hereinafter referred to  as
"the said Act"). Appellant is a member of respondent No.  2-
Cooperative  Society  and  has its office  premises  in	 the
building  owned	 by  respondent No. 2. Some  time  prior  to
September  10, 1985 the appellant entered into an  agreement
to sell the said office premises to respondent No. 1 subject
to  the approval of respondent No. 2. The terms of the	said
agreement were incorporated in a letter dated September	 10,
1985 addressed by the appellant to the Vice-Chairman and the
president  of respondent No. 1: It was set out in  the	said
letter that the price for the said premises was to be calcu-
lated  at the rate of Rs. 2,000 per square feet. The  letter
further stated:
"We  are agreeable to sell you the same subject to  approval
of the Cooperative Society owning the building.
We  shall  provide you vacant possession and hand  over	 the
same  free  of all incumbrances only after we  are  able  to
obtain alternate accommodation for our company	.....  ".
A  sum of Rs. 50,000 was paid by a demand draft  by	 re-
spondent No. 1 to the appellant under the said agreement. By
a  letter dated November 15, 1985 the appellant	 sought	 the
approval  of  respondent No. 2 to the transfer of  the	said
office	premises  to respondent No. 1. By its  letter  dated
November 18, 1985 addressed to the appellant, respondent No.
2 stated that the appellant was requested to offer to trans-
fer  of	 the said. premises to the existing members  of	 the
society	 as a first preference as per the established  prac-
tice  of  the society. It further stated that  in  case	 the
existing members of respondent No. 2 were not willing to buy
the said premises, the premises could be given for trans-
469
fer  to an outside transferee. By its letter dated  November
22, 1985, addressed to respondent No. 1 the appellant point-
ed  out that respondent No. 2 had declined to grant  permis-
sion for transfer unless the premises were first offered  to
the existing members of the society by Way of a first  pref-
erence. The said letter then stated that it was not possible
to  continue negotiations any further. Along with  the	said
letter	the demand draft of Rs.50,000 referred to above	 was
returned  by the appellant. Without any further	 correspond-
ence  respondent  no. 1 filed a dispute in  the	 Cooperative
Court No. 17 Bombay against the appellant and respondent No.
1  by statement of claim which can be conveniently  referred
to as a plaint.
In the plaint respondent No. 1 inter alia stated that on
the  promises and representations made by the  appellant  to
respondent  No.	 1 it had paid a sum of Rs.2,60,000  to	 one
I.M.  Choksey  representing himself as the Chairman  of	 the
appellant and one S. Ramakrishnan, claiming to be the repre-
sentative  of his wife who was a Director of the  appellant.
Respondent No. 1 further claimed that it had paid a  further
sum  of	 Rs.40,000 in cash to the appellant  without  taking
a  .receipt. Respondent No. 1 urged that but for the  assur-
ance  given by Choksey and Ramakrishnan acting on behalf  of
the  appellant and one Col. G.D. Hadep, acting on behalf  of
respondent  No. 2 that the appellant would be in a  position
to  transfer the said premises by the end of  November	1985
and  respondent	 No. 2 would not object	 to  such  transfer,
respondent  No. 1 would not have paid such a huge amount  to
the  appellant.	 Respondent No. 1 further  stated  that	 the
appellant and respondent No. 2 had promised respondent No. 1
that they would complete the formalities of transfer of	 the
said premises within a few days and there would be no objec-
tion or obstruction whatever in the said transfer.  Respond-
ent  No.  1 went on to say that it was given  to  understand
that  the appellant and respondent No. 2 were conspiring  to
sell the said premises to a third party for a larger amount.
Respondent  No. 1 was ready and willing to perform its	part
of  the contract and prayed for an order for  specific	per-
formance of the contract. The relevant portion of  paragraph
10  of the plaint, which deals with jurisdiction,  sets	 out
that respondent No. 2 is a cooperative society and is vital-
ly interested in the transfer and sale of the said  premises
and to ensure that the transfer is done under the provisions
of its bye-laws, the said Act and the rules. Respondent	 No.
2 had taken active part in the transaction entered into	 be-
tween respondent No. 1 and the appellant who _is a member of
respondent No. 2, and that respondent No. 1 was claiming his
rights through the appellant who was a member and hence, the
subject	 matter	 of  the dispute fell within  the  ambit  of
section
470
91
of the said Act. Respondent No. 1 prayed for a  declara-
tion that the aforesaid dispute was a dispute falling  under
section 91
of the said Act and prayed that the appellant and
respondent No. 2 should be directed to specifically  perform
the  agreement recorded in the letter of September 10,	1985
and transfer the said premises to respondent No. 1. The rest
of  the	 prayers in the plaint are immaterial for  our	pur-
poses.
Pursuant to certain orders made by the Bombay High Court
the  Cooperative Court framed an issue as to whether it	 had
jurisdiction  to entertain the dispute. The  Court  recorded
evidence  led  by respondent No. 1 off this issue  and	dis-
missed the dispute for want of jurisdiction. This order	 was
set  aside by the Maharashtra Cooperative  Appellate  Court,
Bombay, by its order dated September 9, 1986. The  appellant
herein filed a writ petition in the High Court to  challenge
the said order. The learned Single Judge who heard the	said
writ petition dismissed the same and held that the case	 was
governed  by the provisions of
section 91
of the said  Act.;
It is this decision which is sought to be challenged  before
us by the appellant.
It is submitted by Mr. Tarkunde, learned counsel for the
appellant that the agreement to sell the said premises	with
which we are concerned, was entered into between the  appel-
lant,  a member of respondent No. 2, a	Cooperative  Society
and  respondent No. 1, a nonmember. The said  agreement	 was
for  transfer  of  premises belonging to  the  appellant  to
respondent  No.	 1,  a non-member, in a	 building  owned  by
respondent  No. 2, a cooperative society. The claim  in	 the
dispute	 was for obtaining the specific performance  of	 the
said agreement and the prayer for directing respondent No. 2
to approve the said agreement was in the nature of an ancil-
lary prayer to complete the relief. The main relief was	 for
specific performance of the said agreement. It was submitted
by  him that such a dispute cannot be said to be  a  dispute
"touching  the management or business of a society" as	con-
templated  in sub-section (1) of
section 91
of the said	 Act
nor  can it be said that respondent No. 1, a non-member	 was
making	a claim against respondent No. 2-society  through  a
member,	 namely, the appellant. The main relief	 sought	 was
for specific performance of an agreement by a member to sell
the  premises  in the society building to a non	 member	 and
such a claim can never be said to be made against the socie-
ty through a member.
In	order  to  appreciate the submissions  made,  it  is
desirable  to set out the material portion of
Section 91
of
the said Act which runs as follows:
471
"91(1)	Notwithstanding anything contained in any other	 law
for  the time being in force, any dispute touching the	con-
struction, elections of the office beares. conduct of gener-
al  meetings, management or business of a society  shall  be
referred  by  any  of the parties to the dispute,  or  by  a
federal	 society to which the society is affiliated or by  a
creditor of the society to the Cooperative Court if both the
parties thereto are one or other of the following:
(a) x	   x	  x	 x	x      x      x
(b)  a	member, past member or a person claiming  through  a