[Cites
4
, Cited by
83
]
Supreme Court of India
Ramesh Chandra vs Randhir Singh And Ors.(Vice Versa) on 3 May, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1990 SCR (3) 1, 1990 SCC (3) 723, AIRONLINE 1990 SC 179
Author:
M.M. Punchhi
Bench:
M.M. Punchhi
,
L.M.  Sharma
PETITIONER:
RAMESH CHANDRA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
RANDHIR SINGH AND ORS.(VICE VERSA)

DATE OF JUDGMENT03/05/1990

BENCH:
PUNCHHI, M.M.
BENCH:
PUNCHHI, M.M.
SHARMA, L.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1990 SCR  (3)	 1	  1990 SCC  (3) 723
 JT 1990 (2)   579	  1990 SCALE  (1)53


ACT:
Motor  Vehicles Act,  1939
:
Section	 110-B
--Motor  Acci-
dent  Claim--Award  of	compensation  under  separate	head
"general  damages for pain, suffering and loss of  enjoyment
of  life"  in  addition to compensation	 for  impairment  of
capacity to earn--Whether justified.
Section 110-
CC--Award of interest on amount of  compen-
sation-Whether dependent on pleading by claimant.



HEADNOTE:
    In	a  claim for damages for  the  permanent  disability
suffered by the claimant, the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal
awarded	 compensation under different beads, viz., (a)	com-
pensation  for permanent disability (b) expenses  of  treat-
ment,  and (c) general damages for pain, suffering and	loss
of enjoyment of life, against the Insurance Company and	 the
truck owner.
    On Separate appeals by the claimant, truck owner and the
Insurance  Company,  the High Court, not only  affirmed	 the
award  but  also improved it by granting interest at  6	 per
cent  per annum on the amount of compensation from the	date
the  claim  petition was filed upto the date of	 payment  of
compensation.
    The	 truck	owner  filed an appeal,	 by  special  leave,
before this Court on several grounds including that when the
claimant  had not claimed interest in the  application,	 and
the  Tribunal  had not awarded any, the High  Court  was  in
error in granting interest under
Section 110-CC
of the Motor
Vehicles  Act, where the power of the Court of the  Tribunal
was discretionary, and that the grant of damages on  account
of  mental agony, pain and suffering etc. was arbitrary	 and
ought  to have been taken to be covered by the	compensation
granted	 on  account of loss of earning. The  claimant	also
filed an appeal, by special leave praying for more compensa-
tion, interest etc. on each account.
Dismissing the appeals, this Court,
2
    HELD: 1.1 The question of award of interest is dependent
on the claim being allowed. Should the claim be not allowed.
the  question of grant of interest would not arise.  and  if
awardable, it is in addition to the amount of  compensation.
The Court of Tribunal, in these circumstances, should deter-
mine,  in the first instance, claim for compensation and  in
the  event  of its being allowed can  further  exercise	 the
discretion to grant simple interest in terms thereof, but as
an additive to the amount of compensation. So, the  addition
of interest to the compensation, by judicial discretion,  is
sequential  in the eye of law and no claim in  that  regard,
specifically  need  be laid in so many words  in  the  claim
petition.  The	grant of interest, is not dependent  on	 any
pleading in that regard and can even be orally asked if	 the
contingency arises. [5B-D]
    In	these  circumstances, there is no substance  in	 the
attack to the grant of interest. [5D]
    1.2	 The incapacity or disability to earn  a  livelihood
would  have to be viewed not only in presenti but in  futuro
on reasonable expectancies and taking into account  deprival
of earnings of a conceivable period. This head being totally
different cannot overlap the grant of compensation under the
head  of pain, suffering and loss of enjoyment of life.	 One
head  relates  to the impairment of a person's	capacity  to
earn,  the other relates to the pain and suffering and	loss
of enjoyment of life by the person himself. [5F-G]
    In the instant case, the pain and suffering and loss  of
enjoyment  of life is a resultant and permanent	 fact  occa-
sioned	by the nature of injuries received by  the  claimant
and the ordeal he had to undergo. This, on the face of it is
a  distinct  head, quite apart from the	 inability  to	earn
livelihood on the basis of incapacity or disability which is
quite  different.  If  money be any  solace,  the  grant  of
Rs.20,000  to  the claimant represents	that  solace.  Money
solace	is  the answer discovered by the Law  of  Torts.  No
substitute  has	 yet been found to replace  the	 element  of
money. [5E-F]
    1.3	 In the facts and circumstances of this case,  there
is  no	scope for further enhancement  of  compensation	 and
further enhancement of interest. [6A]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1188  of
1977.
From the Judgment and Order dated 7.12.1976 of the Allahabad
3
High Court in F.A.O. No. 444 of 1975.
AND
Special Leave Petition (C) No. 5344 of 1977.
    From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  7.12.1976  of	 the
Allahabad High Court in F.A. (F.O.) No. 458 of 1975.
    Praveen Swarup, Pramod Swarup, B.D. Sharma, Smt.  Sushma
Suri, and Jitender Sharma for the appearing parties.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    PUNCHHI,  J. This appeal and special leave petition	 are
cross cases in nature and are directed against the  judgment
and order dated December 7, 1976 passed by a Division  Bench
of  the High Court of Allahabad At Allahabad in	 F.A.O.	 No.
444 of 1976.
The	 facts established before the Motor Accident  Claims
Tribunal, Bulandshahr and re-oriented before the High  Court
were that Randhir Singh while driving a tempo on October 10,
1972  on a road leading from Bulandshahr to Sikandrabad	 was
hit head-on by a speeded truck owned by Ramesh Chandra, as a
result	of  which his tempo was thrown into a  nearby  ditch
whereby	 he  sustained	injuries on both his  legs  and	 his
several	 bones were fractured as well. This was followed  by
lodging	 of  a	report at Police  Station,  Sikandrabad	 and
putting the injured at District Hospital, Bulandshahr where-
from  he was removed to Safdarjung Hospital, New  Delhi	 for
final treatment. The permanent result was that a part of the
right foot of Randhir Singh had to be amputated as his	toes
had become gangrenous.
Randhir Singh moved the Motor Accident Claims  Tribunal,
Bulandshahr  seeking damages to the tune of Rs.1  lakh.	 The
contestants being Ramesh Chandra the owner of the truck, its
driver	and the Insurance Company took various	defences  to
negative  the claim. The matter was focussed by	 the  issues
framed. The Tribunal by an elaborate and well reasoned order
fixed  negligence on the truck driver and held	the  injured
entitled  to  compensation. In the measurement	thereof	 the
Tribunal took note of the age of the claimant to be 22 years
and his expected income as a driver of a motor vehicle at  a
minimum	 rate of Rs.300 p.m., expected-to be earned  for  at
least 22 years in the coming. The figure thus arrived was at
Rs.79,200 and that
4
being  lumpsum payment determined a sum of Rs.55,000  to  be
adequate compensation for the permanent disability  suffered
by  the claimant. Besides the Tribunal granted	Rs.3,000  on
account of expenses of treatment. Under the head of  general
damages	 for pain, suffering and loss of enjoyment  of	life
the  Tribunal  awarded a sum of Rs.20,000  as  compensation.
Thus  a total award of Rs.78,000 was made in favour  of	 the
claimant. Rs.50,000 was ordered to be paid by the  Insurance
Company	 as  its liability was found to be limited  to	that
extent.	 The remaining Rs.28,000 was ordered to be  paid  by
the owner. The claimant also got 3/4th of his costs.
    Three separate appeals were filed before the High Court;
one  by	 the dissatisfied claimant; the second	by  the	 ag-
grieved truck owner and the third by the aggrieved Insurance
Company.  The  High  Court dealt with the  matter  in  equal
elaboration. It affirmed the view of the Tribunal in  grant-
ing  compensation  under  the  three  heads  aforementioned.
However,  the  award  was improved to the  extent  that	 the
claimant  also	got interest at the rate of 6 per  cent	 per
annum  on  the amount of compensation from  11.11.1972,	 the
date on which the claim petition was filed upto the date  of
the  payment thereof; subject of course to suitable  adjust-
ments  in the event of any payment having already been	made
to the claimant.
In Civil Appeal No. 1188 of 1977, preferred by the owner
of the truck, leave was granted limited to grounds II &	 XIX
of the Special Leave Petition. In Ground No. II the question
raised	was that when the claimant had not claimed  interest
in  the application, and the Tribunal had not  awarded	any,
the  High  Court  was in error in  granting  interest  under
Section 110-CC
of the Motor Vehicles Act where the power  of
the  Court of the Tribunal was discretionary. In Ground	 No.
XIX  the  question  raised was that a sum  of  Rs.20,000  on
account	 of mental agony, pain and suffering etc. was  arbi-
trarily	 granted,  and thus ought to have been taken  to  be
covered up by the compensation granted on account of loss of
earning.  In  Special Leave Petition No. 5344  of  1977	 the
claimant  has asked for more compensation, interest  etc  on
each count.
We	have heard learned counsel for the parties and	have
perused	 the  appeal  papers, in particular  regard  of	 the
limited nature of appeal of the truck owner. Section 110-CC,
as it stood on the date of the accident, provided that where
any Court or Claims Tribunal allows a claim for compensation
made  under the Act, such Court or Tribunal may direct	that
in addition to the amount of compensation simple
5
interest shall also be paid at such rate and from such	date
not  earlier  than the date of making the claim	 as  it	 may
specify	 in  this behalf. The caption of  the  provision  is
"Award of interest where any claim is allowed". The question
of  award  of interest is dependent on the claim  being	 al-
lowed.	Should	the claim be not allowed,  the	question  of
grant  of interest would not arise, and if awardable, it  is
in  addition  to the amount of compensation.  The  Court  of
Tribunal,  in these circumstances, should determine, in	 the
first  instance, claim for compensation and in the event  of
its  being  allowed can further exercise the  discretion  to
grant  simple interest in terms thereof, but as an  additive
to  the amount of compensation. So the addition of  interest
to  the compensation, by judicial discretion, is  sequential
in the eye of law and no claim in that regard, in our  view,
specifically  need  be laid in so many words  in  the  claim
petition. The grant of interest in our view, is not  depend-
ent  on any pleading in that regard and can even  be  orally
asked if the contingency arises. Thus, in our view, there is
no substance in Ground No. II of the Special Leave  Petition
and the attack to the grant of interest is negatived.
    With regard to Ground No. XIX covering the question that
the sum awarded for pain, suffering and loss of enjoyment of
life  etc. termed as general damages should be taken  to  be
covered by damages granted for loss of earnings is concerned
that  too is mis-placed and without any basis. The pain	 and
suffering and loss of enjoyment of life which is a resultant
and  permanent	fact occasioned by the	nature	of  injuries
received  by the claimant and the ordeal he had to  undergo.
If money be any solace, the grant of Rs.20,000 to the claim-
ant  represents	 that  solace. Money solace  is	 the  answer
discovered  by the Law of Torts. No substitute has yet	been
found to replace the element of money. This, on the face  of
it  appeals to us as a distinct head, quite apart  from	 the
inability  to earn livelihood on the basis of incapacity  or
disability  which  is  quite different.	 The  incapacity  or
disability to earn a livelihood would have to be viewed	 not
only  in presenti but in futuro on  reasonable	expectancies
and taking into account deprival of earnings of a  conceiva-
ble period.: This head being totally different cannot in our
view  overlap, the grant of compensation under the  head  of
pain,  suffering  and loss of enjoyment of  life.  One	head
relates	 to the impairment of a person's capacity  to  earn,
the  other  relates to the pain and suffering  and  loss  of
enjoyment of life by the person himself. For these  reasons,
we are of the considered view that the contentions raised by
the  truck-owner appellant in that behalf must be  negatived
and we hereby negative them.
6
With  regard to further enhancement of compensation	 and
further	 enhancement of interest, as claimed in the  special
leave  petition	 by the claimant, we find in the  facts	 and
circumstances of this case, no scope in that regard.
    As a result of the afore-discussion, both these  matters
are without merit and are accordingly dismissed. Parties  to
bear their own costs.
N.P.V.					       Appeals	dis-
missed.
7