[Cites
5
, Cited by
31
]
Supreme Court of India
Sadhu Singh Ghuman vs Food Corporation Of India & Ors on 14 February, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1990 AIR 893, 1990 SCR (1) 353, AIR 1990 SUPREME COURT 893, 1990 (2) SCC 68, 1990 UJ(SC) 1 627, 1990 BLJR 2 1268, (1990) 1 PUN LR 693, (1990) 1 LANDLR 570, (1990) 16 ALL LR 343, (1990) 1 APLJ 74, (1990) 1 LJR 678, (1990) 1 CURLJ(CCR) 599, (1990) 1 ARBILR 140, (1990) 1 APLJ 65.1, (1990) 1 CURCC 570, (1990) 1 GUJ LH 512, (1990) 1 JT 300 (SC), (1990) 2 PAT LJR 20
Author:
K.J.  Shetty
Bench:
K.J.  Shetty
,
R.M.  Sahai
PETITIONER:
SADHU SINGH GHUMAN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
FOOD CORPORATION OF INDIA & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT14/02/1990

BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
SAHAI, R.M. (J)

CITATION:
 1990 AIR  893		  1990 SCR  (1) 353
 1990 SCC  (2)	68	  JT 1990 (1)	300
 1990 SCALE  (1)236


ACT:
Arbitration	 Act, 1940
:
Section 34
"A step in the	pro-
ceeding "What is--Interpretation thereof.



HEADNOTE:
    In	a  suit filed by the Respondent for  recovery  of  a
certain amount from the appellants and others, on the  basis
of  an	agreement  between the	parties,  appellant  entered
appearance  and prayed for the production of original  docu-
ments, since photostat copies were not clear, so that  writ-
ten statement may be filed.
    Thereafter	the appellant moved the Court under
Section
34
of the Arbitration Act, 1940 for stay of the suit on	 the
ground	that  there was an arbitration clause  in  the	suit
agreement  covering  the matter in dispute. Though  the	 Re-
spondent  Corporation  admitted	 the  existence	 of  such  a
clause, it opposed the prayer for stay of the proceedings on
the plea that the appellant had taken steps in the  proceed-
ings  of  the  suit, in that an adjournment  was  taken	 for
filing written statement. Staying the proceedings, the trial
court  observed that there was no prayer for adjournment  of
the case for filing the written statement.
    On	appeal	by  the	 Respondent-Corporation,  the  First
Appellate  Court vacated the stay order passed by the  trial
court.	The  Revision petition filed by	 the  appellant	 was
dismissed by the High Court.
This  appeal, by special leave, is against the High  Court's
order.
Allowing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD:  1.1	The expression "a step	in  the	 proceeding"
which  would disentitle the defendant from invoking
section
34
of the Arbitration Act is not every step taken by him  in
the  suit. It should be a step to abandon the right to	have
the suit stayed. It should be a step in aid of the  progress
of the suit. The step must have been consciously taken	with
a  view to submit to the jurisdiction of the Court  for	 the
purpose of adjudicating the controversy on merits. [356C-D]
354
    1.2 Before the trial court, the defendants only sought a
direction to the plaintiff to produce the original agreement
and other documents so that they may file written statement.
It  was not stated that they would file the  written  state-
ment.  They  never  took any other step	 submitting  to the
jurisdiction of the court to decide the case on merits.	 The
right  to have the dispute settled by arbitration  has	been
conferred by agreement of parties and that right should	 not
be  deprived of by technical pleas. The Court must  go	into
the  circumstances  and intention of the party in  the	step
taken.	The court must examine whether the party  has  aban-
doned  his right under the agreement. In the light of  these
principles  and looking to the substance of the	 application
dated  January 4, 1985, one cannot form an opinion that	 the
defendants  have  abandoned  their right to  have  the	suit
stayed	and  took  a step in the suit to  file	the  written
statement. [357B-D]
    State  of U.P. v. Janki Saran Kailash Chandra, [1974]  1
SCR 31; Food Corporation of India v. Yadav Engineer,  [1983]
1  SCR 95 and General Electric Co. v. Renusagar	 Power	Co.,
[1987] 4 SCC 137, relied on.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1201  of
1990
From  the Judgment and Order dated 5.6.87 of the  Punjab
and Haryana High Court in C.R. No. 556/87.
Mukul Mudgal for the Appellant.
S.S.  Javali,  Y.P.	 Rao and Raju Ramachandran  for	 the
Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
K. JAGANNATHA SHETTY, J. Special leave granted.
    Food  Corporation of India filed a suit for recovery  of
Rs.2  lacs against the appellant and respondents 2 to  7  on
the basis of an agreement between the parties. After service
of notice, the appellant entered appearance on December	 10,
1984. On January 4, 1985, the appellant filed an application
stating as follows:
"That the photostat copy of the original agreement and other
documents which have been produced by the plaintiff
355
in their evidence are not visible and clear, and it is	very
difficult for the defendants to inspect and give the written
statement.
3.  That it is very essential to get the original  documents
produced in the court which are in possession of the  plain-
tiff so that the defendants may file the written statement.
4. It is, therefore, respectfully prayed that the  plaintiff
may kindly be ordered to produce the original agreement	 and
other documents which has been filed with the plaint."
On January 21, 1985, the appellant moved the Court under
Section 34
of the Arbitration Act for stay of the proceeding
of  the suit on the ground that there exists an	 arbitration
clause in the suit agreement covering the matter in dispute.
The  Food Corporation of India contended that the  appellant
had  taken  steps in the proceedings of the  suit  since  an
adjournment  was taken for filing written statement. It	 was
however, admitted the existence of the arbitration agreement
covering the matter in dispute in the suit. The Trial  Court
accepted  the request of the appellant and stayed  the	suit
inter-alia observing:
".....	 This  application did not contain  any	 prayer	 for
adjournment  of the case for filing the	 written  statement.
The prayer contained in this application was that the plain-
tiff be directed to produce the original agreement and other
documents so that the defendants may file the written state-
ment  .....
In the present case, the prayer of the defendants that
the plaintiff be directed to file the original agreement and
other  documents  in the court before they  could  file	 the
written	 statement cannot be said to be a step in  the	pro-
ceedings because it was not a prayer for adjournment of	 the
case for filing written statement."
But	 the Additional District Judge, in the	appeal	pre-
ferred	by  the Food Corporation of India has  reversed	 the
order of the trial court. He was of the view that a  written
request	 made by the defendants by their  application  dated
January	 4, 1985 for an adjournment to enable them  to	file
the written statement was a step in the proceedings and	 the
trial  court was not justified in staying the suit.  Accord-
ingly, he accepted the
356
appeal	and  vacated the stay order and directed  the  trial
court to proceed with the suit in accordance with law.
    The	 High Court of Punjab and Haryana has dismissed	 the
revision petition of the appellant. The High Court has	also
observed  that the defendants having moved  the	 application
dated  January 4, 1985 for production of original  documents
and  seeking  an adjournment of the suit to enable  them  to
file  written  statement would certainly be construed  as  a
step taken in the proceedings.
Section  34
of  the Arbitration Act  has  received	 the
consideration  of  this Court in
State of Uttar	 Pradesh  v.
Janki  Saran  Kailash Chandra
, [1974] 1
SCR  31,  (ii)	Food
Corporation of India v. Yadav Engineer
, [1983]	1 SCR 95 and
more  recently	in
General Electric Co. v.  Renusagar  Power
Co.
,  [1987] 4 SCC 137. It may be noted that the  expression
"a  step in the proceeding" which would disentitle  the	 de-
fendant	 from invoking
section 34
of the Arbitration Act  is
not every step taken by him in the suit. It should be a step
to abandon the right to have the suit stayed. It should be a
step in aid of the progress of the suit. The step must	have
been  consciously taken with a view to submit to the  juris-
diction	 of  the Court for the purpose of  adjudicating	 the
controversy  on the merits.
In
General Electric Co.
's	case
this Court after considering the previous decisions observed
(at 155-56):
....	thus  a step in the proceeding	which  would
disentitle  the	 defendant from invoking
Section 34
of	 the
Arbitration  Act should be a step in aid of the progress  of
the suit or submission to the jurisdiction of the court	 for
the purpose of adjudication of the merits of the controversy
in the suit. The step must be such as to manifest the inten-
tion  of the party unequivocally to abandon the right  under
the  arbitration  agreement and instead to opt to  have	 the
dispute	 resolved  on merits in the suit. The step  must  be
such as to indicate an election or affirmation in favour  of
the  suit in the place of the arbitration. The	election  or
affirmation may be by express choice or by necessary  impli-
cation	by  acquiescence. The broad and general right  of  a
person to seek redressal of his grievances in a court of law
is subject to the right of the parties to have the  disputes
settled by a forum of mutual choice. Neither right is insub-
stantial nor the right can be allowed to be defeated by	 any
manner of technicality. The right to have the dispute  adju-
dicated by a civil court cannot be allowed to be defeated by
vague
357
or  amorphouse mis-called agreements to refer  to  'arbitra-
tion'.	On  the	 other hand, if the agreement  to  refer  to
arbitration  is established, the right to have	the  dispute
settled	 by arbitration cannot be allowed to be defeated  on
technical grounds."
In the application filed by the defendants in this case,
they only sought a direction to the plaintiff to produce the
original agreement and other documents so that they may file
written	 statement. It was not stated that they	 would	file
the  written statement. They never took any other step	sub-
mitting to the jurisdiction of the court to decide the	case
on merits. The right to have the dispute settled by arbitra-
tion  has  been conferred by agreement of parties  and	that
right  should  not be deprived of by  technical	 pleas.	 The
Court  must go into the circumstances and intention  of	 the
party in the step taken. The Court must examine whether	 the
party  has abandoned his right under the agreement.  In	 the
light  of these principles and looking to the  substance  of
the  application  dated January 4, 1985, we cannot  form  an
opinion	 that the defendants have abandoned their  right  to
have the suit stayed and took a step in the suit to file the
written statement.
In the result the appeal is allowed in setting aside the
order of the High Court and restoring the order of the	High
Court.
In the circumstances of the case, we make no order as to
costs.
G.N.						Appeal
allowed.
358