[Cites
3
, Cited by
371
]
Supreme Court of India
G.B. Mahajan And Ors vs Jalgaon Municipal Council And Ors on 13 September, 1990
Equivalent citations: 1991 AIR 1153, 1990 SCR SUPL. (3) 20, AIR 1991 SUPREME COURT 1153, 1991 (3) SCC 91, (1991) 1 JT 605 (SC), (1991) 3 BOM CR 139
Author:
N.D.  Ojha
Bench:
N.D.  Ojha
PETITIONER:
G.B. MAHAJAN AND ORS.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
JALGAON MUNICIPAL COUNCIL AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT13/09/1990

BENCH:
VENKATACHALLIAH, M.N. (J)
BENCH:
VENKATACHALLIAH, M.N. (J)
OJHA, N.D. (J)

CITATION:
 1991 AIR 1153		  1990 SCR  Supl. (3)  20
 1991 SCC  (3)	91	  1991 SCALE  (1)378


ACT:
    Constitution of India, 1950:
Articles 14
and
298--
State
Instrumentality--Municipal  Council entering  into  contract
with  private developer for construction of Commercial	Com-
plex on self financing basis--Adoption of such an  unconven-
tional technique as a policy option--Validity of.
Article   226--
Resort  to--Contractual  transaction	  of
Government  or	its  instrumentality--Presence	public	 law
element--Essential for invoking Judicial Review.
    Municipalities:  Maharashtra Municipalities	 Act,  1965:
Sections 92 & 272(1)--Municipal Market--Disposal of occupan-
cy  rights-Construction of Commercial  Complex--Private	 de-
veloper to undertake on self financing basis--Giving  admin-
istrative building to Municipal Council free of	 cost--Shops
to be given to allottees--Liberty to dispose of the  remain-
ing  accommodation  to cover financial outlays	and  project
---Whether valid.
    Administrative     Law:	Judicial      Review--Policy
decision--Government or its instrumentality--Whether free to
evolve and adopt any method for executing of a Project--Such
decisions--whether open to Judicial Review.
    Test of 'Reasonableness'--To distinguish between  proper
use  and  improper use of power--Applicability of  the	test
depends upon context.
    Delegation of power----Statutory function under  Section
272  of the Maharashtra Municipalities Act, 1965   Occupancy
rights--Powers	to substitute occupiers in its own place  by
developer--Whether permissible.
    Interpretation  of Statutes: Use of same word/phrase  or
concept	 in  different	laws--Distinction  in  meaning	 and
usage--Need for.
    Words    &	  Phrases.'    'Reasonableness'--'Reasonable
man'--Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
21
    The respondent Municipal Council received by way of gift
certain	 lands from one 'L' and the said lands were used  by
the Agricultural Produce Market Committee as a cotton market
and  wholesale fruit and vegetables market.  The  Respondent
Council,  in  order  to put the land to a  better  and	more
profitable  use, persuaded the Market Committee to yield  up
possession.  However,  since  the  gift	 stipulated  certain
conditions  regarding the user, the Respondent	Council	 ap-
proached  the heirs of the donor for amending the  terms  of
the gift, and the heirs bargained for and secured a  benefit
that  five shops be given to them free of cost in  the	pro-
posed commercial complex. The entire project of constructing
the  Administrative  building,	an  adjacent  structure	 for
vegetable market and a commercial complex was to be executed
by  a developer at his own expense. The	 estimated/financial
outlay was about Rs.11 crores. It was contemplated that	 the
developer was to hand over the Administrative building	free
of cost to the Municipality and the vegetable market to	 the
allottees  and the five shops to the heirs of the  donee  of
the  land.  Thereafter the developer would  be	entitled  to
dispose	 of the occupancy rights in respect of the  rest  of
the  accommodation in the commercial complex and retain	 the
promia received therefrom to cover the financial outlays and
profit	thereon. The occupiers to whom allotments were	made
as also the occupiers inducted by the developer were to	 pay
rents to the Respondent Council for 50 years.
    Tenders were issued for the project, and after  scrutiny
of  the tenders submitted by five developers, the tender  of
Respondent No. 6 was accepted by the Respondent-Council, and
a formal agreement was entered into between the Council	 and
Respondent No. 6.
    The appellants, residents of the area petitioned to	 the
Collector  to suspend the Resolutions of the Council  under-
taking	the  said  project and the  agreement  entered	with
Respondent No. 6, on the grounds that the proposed  transac-
tion  amounted to a lease for 50 years which was  prohibited
under  Section	92 of the  Maharashtra	Municipalities	Act,
1956;  that sanction of the Development Department  was	 not
obtained; that an impermissible encumbrance would be created
on the Councils property in favour of the developer and that
the  intended user violated the original terms of the  gift.
On the said petition, the Collector passed orders suspending
the Resolutions. On revision, the Minister stayed the opera-
tion of the Collector's order.
    Meanwhile,	a  Writ Petition was filed before  the	High
Court, assailing the said Resolutions. Another Writ Petition
was  filed  challenging the Minister's	orders	staying	 the
order of the Collector. Both the
22
Writ  Petitions were heard together. The main contention  of
the Writ Petitioners was that the financial estimates of the
project	 were  made grossly  under-estimating  the  probable
receipts by way of premia for the grant of occupancy  rights
with  the  intention  of giving an  opportunity	 for  unjust
enrichment to Respondent No. 6. The High Court directed that
occupancy  rights in regard to the shops at the disposal  of
the developer tenders be called from the public, so that the
difference between what was taken into account in the  esti-
mate  and what was actually secured might go to the  benefit
of the Municipality. Accordingly, advertisement were issued,
but  it did not evoke any favourable response from the	pub-
lic.  The matter was listed again before the High Court.  It
was held that the High Court's earlier order was self-execu-
tory, and the Writ Petitions were dismissed. Review Petition
was  also dismissed. Another Writ Petition  challenging	 the
advertisement issued pursuant to High Court's earlier  order
was also dismissed.
    The Special Leave Petitions fried against the above-said
orders of the High Court, were dismissed by this Court	with
the observations that it was open to the petitioners to move
the  Minister  for  final disposal and	the  Minister  would
expeditiously  dispose of the matter taking into  considera-
tion whether the scheme was in conformity with the statutory
provisions.  The Minister disposed of the Revision  Applica-
tion  recording his findings against the appellants.  There-
upon, the appellants filed a fresh Writ Petition before	 the
High Court challenging the Minister's orders. The High Court
declined to interfere. Aggrieved by the High Court's  order,
appellate preferred the present appeal by special leave.
    It	was contended on behalf of the appellants  that	 the
scheme	of  financing the project was not, as  a  matter  of
policy,	 open and permissible to a  Governmental  authority;
that the Municipal authority could have put up the construc-
tion  itself departmentally or awarded the execution of	 the
whole  project to a building contractor; that the method  of
financing  and the execution of the project are, beyond	 the
powers	of the Municipal authority under the Act;  that	 the
terms of the agreement with the developer that the latter be
at liberty to dispose of the occupancy rights in the commer-
cial  complex  in such manner and on such terms	 as  it	 may
choose	would amount to an impermissible delegation  of	 the
statutory functions of the Municipal Council, under  Section
272 of the Maharashtra Municipalities Act; that the project,
in effect amounted to disposal of Municipal property by	 way
of a long term lease with rights of sub-letting in favour of
the developer and hence violative of Section 92 of the	Act;
and  that the scheme was arbitrary, unreasonable and  viola-
tive of
Article 14
of the Constitution. It was further con-
23
tended that the project was patently intended to provide for
an unjust enrichment of Respondent No. 6 at public expense.
    On	behalf of the Respondent it was contended  that	 the
increasing  revenue expenditure and other financial  commit-
ments  rendered it impossible for the Municipal	 Council  to
set  apart  the financial inputs required for  the  project;
that in the management of the transaction regarding disposal
of  occupancy rights and prompt mobilisation of	 funds,	 the
deficiencies  and limitations of the bureaucratic  machinery
should not be ignored in assessing the value and utility  of
the alternatives; that all the said Resolutions in regard to
the  Project were passed unanimously which lend credance  to
the propriety and wisdom of the measure and its	 reasonable-
ness;  that  the  estimates and calculations  on  which	 the
scheme	was worked out by the Respondent Council would	show
that the developer had no opportunity of making any run-away
profits or exploitative gains.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD: 1. A project, otherwise legal, does not become any
the less permissible by reason alone that the local authori-
ty,  instead  of executing the project itself,	had  entered
into  an  agreement with a developer for its  financing	 and
execution. The question is not whether it is un-conventional
by  the standard of the extant practices, but whether  there
was  something	in the law rendering  it  impermissible.  No
doubt  there  is a degree of public  accountability  in	 all
governmental  enterprises. But, the present question is	 one
of  the extent and scope of judicial review over  such	mat-
ters.  With  the expansion of the State's presence  in.	 the
field of trade and commerce and of the range of economic and
commercial enterprises of government and its  instrumentali-
ties  there is an increasing dimension to governmental	con-
cern  for  stimulating efficiency, keeping costs  down,	 im-
proved	management  methods,  prevention of  time  and	cost
over-runs  in  projects, balancing of  costs  against  time-
scales, quality-control, cost-benefit ratios. etc. In search
of these values it might become necessary to adopt appropri-
ate  techniques of management of projects with	concommitant
economic  expediencies.	 There are  essentially	 matters  of
economic  policy with lack adjudicative disposition,  unless
they violate constitutional or legal limits on power or have
demonstrable  pejorative environmental implications,  or  if
they  amount  to  clear abuse of power. This  again  is	 the
judicial  recognition of administrator's right to trial	 and
error,	as  long as both trial and error are bona  fide	 and
within the limits of authority. [35C-G]
24
    Forward  Construction  Co.	& Ors.	v.  Prabhat  Mandal,
[1986] 1 SCC 100; relied on.
    Ramana Dayanand Shetty v. International Airport Authori-
ty, [1979] 3 SCR 1014; Kasturilal Laxmi Reddy v. State of  J
JUDGMENT:
New State Ice Company v. Ernest A. Liebmann, 285 US	 262
Dissenting  opinion  of Brandeis J; Education  Secretary  v.
Tameside B.C., [1977] AC 1014; referred to,
    "The Purpose and Scope of Judicial Review" by Sir Garard
Brennan is "Judicial Review of Administrative Action in	 the
1980s", Oxford University Press; referred to.
2.	In the ever increasing tempo of urban life  and	 the
emerging  stresses  and strains of planning, wide  range  of
policy	options not inconsistent with the objectives of	 the
statute	 should be held permissible. In the context  of	 ex-
panding	 exigencies of urban planning it will  be  difficult
for  the  court to say that a particular policy	 option	 was
better	than another. The project is not ultra vires of	 the
powers	of  the	 Municipal Council, and hence  there  is  no
justification  for quashing the Resolution of the  Municipal
Council. [36G]
    Policy making Paradigms in Administrative Law" by  Colin
S. Diver in Harward Law Review, vol. 95 p. 393; referred to.
3. In the instant case, it is possible to fit the  power
exercised by the Municipal authority into Section 272(1)  of
the  Maharashtra  Municipalities Act and hence there  is  no
reason why the provision be interpreted unduly restrictively
to exclude such enterprise. [40E]
4.	It has not been established that the essential	ele-
ments of the transaction are such that Section 92 of the Act
is  violated. It would, indeed be unduly restrictive of	 the
statutory  powers  of  the local authority  if	a  provision
enabling the establishment of markets and disposal of  occu-
pancy-rights therein are hedged in by restrictions not found
in  the statute. The developer who was authorised to  induct
occupiers  in respect of the area earmarked for	 him  merely
exercised, with the consent of the Municipal Council a power
to  substitute	an Occupier in his own place.  This  is	 not
impermissible  when  it is with the express consent  of	 the
Municipal Council. [40H; 41A-B]
25
5.1	 Some phrases which pass from one branch of  law  to
another--as  did the expression 'void' and  'voidable'	from
private	 law areas to public law situations-carry over	with
them meanings that may be inapposite in the changed context.
Some  such  thing has happened to  the	words  "Reasonable",
"Reasonableness" etc. Different contexts in which the opera-
tion  of "Reasonableness" as test of validity must  be	kept
distinguished.	The administrative law test of	'reasonable-
ness'  as the touch-stone of validity of the  Resolution  in
the instant case is different from the test of the 'reasona-
ble  man'  familiar to the law of torts,  whom	English	 Law
figuratively identifies as the "man on the clapham omnibus".
In the latter case the standards of the 'reasonable-man', to
the extent such a 'reasonable man' is court's creation, is a
mere transferred epithet. Yet another area of reasonableness
which must be distinguished is the constitutional  standards
of  'reasonableness' of the restrictions on the	 fundamental
rights of which the Court of Judicial Review is the arbiter.
[42F-G; 43A-B]
    5.2.  The  'reasonableness' in administrative  law	must
distinguish between proper and improper use of power. [44D]
    Davis Contractors v. Fareham U.D.C., [1956] 2 AH ER 145;
Associated  Provincial	Picture Houses	Ltd.  v.  Fednesbury
Corporations, [1948] 1 KB 223; Nottinghamshire County  Coun-
cil  v. Secretary of State for Environment, [1986]  AC	240;
Tiller v. Atlantic Coast Line Rail Road Company, 318 US	 54;
Chief Constable v. Evans, [1982] 3 All ER 141; referred to.
    Administrative  Law, by H.W.R. Wade, 6th Edn., pp.	407,
408;  Legal Control of Government, by Bernard  Sehwartz	 and
H.W.R. Wade, p. 253; referred to.
6.	While it is true that principles of judicial  review
apply to the exercise by a government body of its contractu-
al  powers,  the inherent limitations on the  scope  of	 the
inquiry	 are  themselves a part of those  principles.  In  a
matter	even as between the parties, there must be  shown  a
public law element to the contractual decision before  judi-
cial  review  is invoked. In the present case  the  material
placed	before	the Court fails far short of  what  the	 law
requires to justify interference. [46F]
7. There is no merit in the contention that the  Project
Scheme	was tailored to suit Respondent No. 6 alone or	that
the  project  as put to tender did not admit of	 tenders  on
fixed comparable parameters. No
26
other  tenderer	 expressed any grievance. The  tenders	were
such  that the tenderer could identify the terms which	form
the  basis  of comparative evaluation. The charge  of  arbi-
trariness cannot be upheld. [46G-H; 47A]
8. To condemn the Municipal authority's decision, other-
wise valid, on the ground alone that the developer is likely
to  resort to transactions of unaccounted money would, as  a
judicial remedy, be plainly unthinkable. [47E]



&