[Cites
5
, Cited by
35
]
Supreme Court of India
Martand Dairy & Farm vs The Union Of India & Ors on 23 April, 1975
Equivalent citations: 1975 AIR 1492, 1975 SCR 265, AIR 1975 SUPREME COURT 1492, 1975 4 SCC 313, 1975 TAX. L. R. 1773, 1975 2 SCWR 165, 1975 35 STC 629, 1975 SCC (TAX) 305, 1975 UPTC 417
Author:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
Bench:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
,
Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
,
A.C. Gupta
PETITIONER:
MARTAND DAIRY & FARM

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
THE UNION OF INDIA & ORS

DATE OF JUDGMENT23/04/1975

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
GUPTA, A.C.

CITATION:
 1975 AIR 1492		  1975 SCR  265
 1975 SCC  (4) 313
 CITATOR INFO :
 F	    1989 SC 611	 (7)
 RF	    1992 SC 224	 (11)


ACT:
Central Sales Tax Act
1956-"Sealed Container"-Meaning of.



HEADNOTE:
A notification issued under the
Central Sales Tax Act,	1956
allowed	 exemption  to, among others,  cream  but  excluding
"products  sold in sealed containers".	The appellant  sends
cream  to  Calcutta  in	 sealed	 container&  The  sales	 tax
authorities  held  that the sales were of cream,  that	they
were interstate sales but that the exemption extended by the
notification  could not be enjoyed by the assessee since  he
fell within the area of exclusion contained in the exemption
notification.
The High Court rejected the writ petition of the  appellant.
On appeal to this Court it was contended that the containers
were used for bulk mission, that sealing was for  preventing
abuse on the way or to avoid pilferage and that the emphasis
should be on the "cream" and the container had no  relevance
in the context.
Dismissing the appeal,
HELD: It is not forthe	Court to launch on  obscure  fiscal
astrology but merely to construe whathas  been	expressed
in plain words. "Sealed container" merely means acontainer
which  is  "so	closed	that  access  to  the  contents	  is
impossible  without breaking the fastening.  The  expression
seal in this context does not involve affixture of the	seal
of  the seller such as impressing a signet in wax  etc.,  as
evidence  or guarantee of authenticity.	 An article  may  be
regarded  as  put  in  sealed containers  if  it  is  closed
securely in any vessel or container by any kind of fastening
or  covering  that  must  be broken  before  access  can  be
obtained  to  what is packed inside.  This is  the  popular,
perhaps the literal, meaning of the expressions used in	 the
notification.	 Maybe	 the  State  thought   that   sealed
containers would be used only by big manufacturers who	were
able  to  bear	the  burden  of	 tax;  maybe  administrative
convenience in assessing quantities sold induced this  step.
[269B-D]
Commissioner  of  Sales Tax, U.P., v. G. G.  Industries;  21
S.T.C. 63 followed.
Govindram  Ramprasad  v. Assessing Authority (Sales  Tax)  8
S.T.C. 407, held inapplicable.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeals Nos. 1623	 and
1624 of 1971.
From the Judgment add Order dated the 13th October, 1970  of
the Allahabad High Court in O.M. Writ Petition No. 55 and 56
of 1970.
S.  T.	 Desai,	 Naunit Lal and Miss Lalita  Kohli  for	 the
appellant.
G.  L.	Sanghi,	    Girish Chandra and R.  N.  Sachthey	 for
respondent No. 1.
S.   C. Manchanda and O. P. Rana for Respondents Nos. 2-4.
266
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA IYER, J.-Mr. S. T. Desai, counsel for the appellants
in both the appeals, correctly assured us that the facts are
not  in	 dispute, although the legal  inference	 bearing  on
taxability is very much in controversy.
The appellant, who has arrived in this Court by	 certificate
under
Art. 133(1) (a)
of the Constitution, urges before  us
that  he is not liable to sales tax under the
Central  Sales
Tax Act, 1956
(LXXIV of 1956) (for short, the Act) sought to
be  levied from him: Admittedly the appellant is  a  leading
dairy of Benaras and has been sending cream to Calcutta	 for
being  converted  into	butter or ghee.	  The  long  journey
involved   and	 the  considerable   quantities	  despatched
necessarily   called  for  protective	receptacles   during
transport.   So	 the  cream used to  be	 carefully  sent  in
canisters  whose  lids	were  sealed  by  the  seller.	 The
Calcutta  buyers received the cream and paid for it  on	 the
basis of the ghee/butter recovered from the cream  supplied.
Although  there	 was  some controversy even  on	 the  facts,
counsel	 on  both sides proceeded on  the  factual  findings
recorded  by the Judge (Revisions) who held that  the  sales
were  of cream, that they we're inter-State sales  and	that
the exemption extended by Government notification under	 the
Act  for  cream could not be enjoyed by the assessee  as  he
fell within the area of exclusion contained in the exemption
notification.  It is appropriate at this stage to  reproduce
the  notification,  dated  May 10,  1956,  under  which	 the
exemption is claimed.  It reads :
"No.  ST-3506/X			  D/10-5-56
	 Exemption has been allowed to
	      Milk  and Milk products such as Chhena,  Dahi,
	      kha,  Butter  and	 Cream	but  excluding	 (i)
	      products sold in sealed containers (ii) sweet-
	      meats and (iii) ghee."
This  in  general terms cream is exempted  from	 payment  of
Central	 Sales	Tax by virtue of this  notification  but  it
carves out an exception to the exemption.  If the cream were
'sold in sealed containers' the seller could not come within
the  exemption	notification.	We  need  not  go  into	 the
technique of sealing adopted in this case since it is common
ground	now that the cream is put in containers	 whose	lids
are properly soldered.	The short question is whether  cream
sold  in  soldered containers in the circumstances  set	 out
above  can be described appropriately as 'products  sold  in
sealed containers'.
Fascinated   we	 were  by  the	imaginative  and   realistic
picturisation  of  the expression 'products sold  in  sealed
containers'  projected by Shri S. T. Desai, counsel for	 the
assessee-appellant  but,  on further reflection,  we  veered
round  to the view presented by Sri Sanghi, for	 the  State,
that  after  all  law  is  not	always	logic  and  taxation
considerations	may stem from administrative experience	 and
other factors of life and not artistic visualisation or neat
logic and so the literal, though pedestrian,  interpretation
must prevail.
267
The  High Court has negatived the plea of the  assessee	 and
since  we  are	inclined to agree  with	 its  reasoning,  we
express	 our  grounds  only briefly,  although	we  may,  in
passing,  make reference to two decisions cited, before	 us,
viz.,
Govindram Ramprasad v. Assessing Authority (Sales Tax
)
(
1)   and  Commissioner	 of  Sales  Tax,  U.P.	v.   G.	  G.
Industries
(2).	 Govindram(1)-a decision of the Madhya	Pra-
desh  High  Court-is  not germane to  the  question  we	 are
dealing	 with  and therefore we need not  discuss  it.	 The
latter-The  Commissioner  of Sates  Tax,  U.P.(2)--We  shall
discuss as it in some measure, governs the issue before us.
The assessee's main contention is that cream sold in  sealed
containers  must bear a 'market' meaning, if we may say	 so,
and not be, taken literally.  What Shri Desai urges is	that
there  are  many  articles which the consumers	buy  on	 the
strength of the image projected before them in their  packed
state.	For instance, a well-secured box of chocolates, car-
ton  of dried fruits or a tin of coffee put out	 with  well-
known makings, a sealed bottle of whisky gold in such manner
that  its  quality,  quantity  and  genuineness	 are  easily
acceptable--these, going by the consumers' habit of  looking
for  articles  properly	 packed or tinned  and	acquiring  a
special	  value	 as  a	unit  of  consumer  commodity,	 may
legitimately   be  described  as  items	 'sold	 in   sealed
containers'.   If we consult our housewives or	our  village
vendors,  there is no doubt that these illustrations may  be
borne  out as apt and may even be supplement  by  other like
instances.   A thing is bought loose for a price by a  buyer
on  certain assumptions.  But a securely packed or  properly
sealed	commodity  sold	 by  a	well-known  manufacturer  is
purchased  by  the  consumer based on a	 sort  of  flavoured
considerations.	  The assessee's case is that here no  cream
in  sealed  containers as a unit with  an  individuality  is
sold.	On the other hand cream qua cream is  bargained	 for
and despatched.	 The canister is used because, ex necessitae
large  quantities  of  cream  cannot  be  transported	over
distances  without  being  put in  some	 container  and	 its
leakage	 and spoilage can be prevented only by soldering  or
scaling.   Items sold in containers are usually so sold	 for
two  reasons  :	 (i)  for easy	consumption  by	 the  retail
consumer  who,	by mere sight, is able	to  distinguish	 the
particular  'patented brand, and picks it off the counter  ;
(ii) to prevent adulteration or mixing with spurious  stuff.
In  the	 instant  case	the containers	used  are  for	bulk
transmission--like tea chests-and scaling is for  preventing
abuse  on  the way or pilferage.  And soldering	 is  a	sure
method	of sealing.  Further, if the item were not a  liquid
like  cream,  but a solid, it could be transported  even  in
gunny bags-merely stitched and d without any seal.  If	this
view be sound, certainly the Benaras cream dealer is out  of
the  liability	zone.	We  do not  examine  the  impact  on
taxability  had the receptacles been returned by  the  buyer
since it does not arise on the evidence.
Shri  Desai further drew our attention to the fact that	 the
containers  had no particular design nor did they  bear	 any
special	 marks	or  have a uniform size.   Thus	 the  sealed
container bad no connection with
(1) 8 S.T.C. 407.
(2)  21 S.T.C. 63.
268
the  bargain  or the stuff sold.  The emphasis	was  on	 the
cream  and the container had no pertinence in  the  context.
In  this  connection, he also referred to
s. 8
of  the	 Act
which  refers to containers and packing material.  There  is
force  in  the	argument,  certainly.	But,  as  indicated,
judicial  adventure  in interpretation-particularly  in	 tax
matters,-is  severely  circumscribed, Mr.  Desai  posed	 the
question  whether  sale	 in loose  quantities  and  unsealed
containers (in this very case, cream also been sold in	milk
cans  which  were  not	sealed	and  had  been	granted	 tax
exemption)  made  any difference from similar sates  in	 old
kerosene  tins, the soldering being  no sin  which  attached
tax  guilt.  Not that we are oblivious to the force of	this
argument,  but we are influenced by the words  whose  normal
meaning	 should ordinarily guide interpretation.   All	that
the  notification  states is that products  sold  in  sealed
containers  must sail out of the harbour of exemption.	 The
simple question is this : Was the sale, of cream ? Yes.	 Was
it,  when sold, packaged in containers which were  sealed  ?
Yes.   On these two affirmative answers the  exclusion	from
the exemption operates.	 Such is the contention put  forward
on  behalf of the taxing authority by Shri  Sanghi,  learned
counsel.
In  this connection, he drew our attention to
Commissioner
of  Sales  Tax, U.P.
(supra).  Sikri, J. (as he	 then  was),
speaking  for  the  Court,  considered	a  somewhat  similar
question  of  exemption where sales,-tax dealers  in  cooked
food 'other than cooked food sold in sealed containers' were
conferred  exemption, on certain conditions.  The  commodity
there  was confectionery sold in sealed containers  and	 the
High Court upheld the assessee's case with these words
	      In   commercial	world	in   such   trades,,
	      particularly   where   food   materials	 are
	      concerned, it would be seen that the name	 and
	      reputation of the manufacturer by itself is  a
	      sufficient   evidence  or	 guarantee  of	 the
	      quality of the contents.	The most usual	form
	      or method for furnishing such evidence or gua-
	      rantee  of  the quality and  quantity  of	 the
	      contents is by way of putting its seal 'by the
	      manufacturer  in order to secure the goods  in
	      the  container  in such manner  that  to	have
	      access  to the contents of the  container	 the
	      seal  so	put has to be destroyed	 or  broken.
For  if  it were not so done neither  the	 re-
tailer nor the purchaser would be sure whether
	      the  goods  inside the container as  to  their
	      quality	and   quantity	are  the   same	  as
	      represented   and	 have  not  been   otherwise
	      adulterated or mixed up by extraneous elements
	      is  hardly necessary to mention that a  dealer
	      carrying on the business of selling sweetmeats
	      and  confectionery on a comparatively  smaller
	      scale would find it uneconomical	commercially
	      to put the stuff sold or to be sold in  sealed
	      containers;   it	 is  only  a   large   scale
	      manufacturer who manufactures and exports	 the
	      confectionery, who would need selling the same
	      in a container, In our opinion, therefore,  it
	      is only that class of dealers carrying on	 the
	      business	of sale of confectionery  in  sealed
	      containers  as  explained above who  were	 not
	      intended to be exempted," from the  liability
	      to pay sales tax on their turnover.
269
On  appeal, this Court,. after noticing the plausibility  of
the  opposite  point  of  view	and  guessing  the  possible
administrative	and  other reasons for	the  exclusion	from
exemption, held :
"Be  that	 as  it may, in the  context  it  is
	      difficult	 to give to the	 expression  'scaled
	      contained	  a  meaning  different	  from	 the
	      ordinary dictionary meaning.'
"Sealed	 container"  merely means a container which  is	 "so
closed	that access 'to the contents' is impossible  without
breaking  the  fastening".  The expression  'seal'  in	this
context	 does  not involve an affixture of the seal  of	 the
seller such as impressing a signet in wax etc., as  evidence
or guarantee of authenticity.  An article may be regarded as
put  in	 sealed containers if it is closed securely  in	 any
vessel	or  container by any kind of fastening	or  covering
that must be broken before access can be obtained to what is
packed	inside.	 This is the popular, perhaps  the  literal,
meaning of the expressions used in the notification.   Maybe
the State thought that sealed containers would be used	only
by  big	 manufacturers who were able to bear the  burden  of
tax;  maybe administrative convenience in assessing  quanti-
ties  sold  induced this step.	It is not for the  Court  to
launch	on obscure fiscal astrology but merely	to  construe
what has been expressed in plain words.	 We should have been
happier if the State had furnished the reasons prompting the
exclusion  from the exemption.	An intelligent	appreciation
of the reason of the rule is an aid to judicial construction
but  the  State has not been as alert on this  score  as  we
might  have wished.  Why should a sale, if generally  exempt
from  tax, being a milk product, forfeit it  merely  because
the  wholesome step of sealing the container and  insulating
the  food  article  from  contamination,  is  taken   during
transit?   But	counsel	 for the  State	 has  expressed	 his
inability  to throw light on this aspect or on	the  reasons
for the policy.	 Had the State's counter-affidavit been more
illuminating  on these questions, it would have performed  a
service	 to  this Court and to the public and  rendered	 the
task of judicial construction simpler.
With  these observations, we dismiss the appeals  but  there
will be no order as to costs in this Court.
P.B.R.				      Appeal dismissed.
270