[Cites
5
, Cited by
9
]
Supreme Court of India
Surya Kant Roy vs Imamul Hai Khan on 12 March, 1975
Equivalent citations: 1975 AIR 1053, 1975 SCR (3) 909, AIR 1975 SUPREME COURT 1053, 1975 (1) SCC 531, 1976 SCJ 549, 1975 2 SERVLR 1, 1976 PATLJR 41, 1975 3 SCR 909, ILR 1975 54 PAT 410
Author:
A. Alagiriswami
Bench:
A. Alagiriswami
,
N.L. Untwalia
PETITIONER:
SURYA KANT ROY

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
IMAMUL HAI KHAN

DATE OF JUDGMENT12/03/1975

BENCH:
ALAGIRISWAMI, A.
BENCH:
ALAGIRISWAMI, A.
UNTWALIA, N.L.

CITATION:
 1975 AIR 1053		  1975 SCR  (3) 909
 1975 SCC  (1) 531
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1985 SC  89	 (20)
 R	    1985 SC 211	 (16)


ACT:
Representation of the People Act, 1951
--Holding an office of
profit--Tests  for  determination--Chairman of	a  statutory
body--Whether an office of profit under Government.
Allegations  of	 corrupt practice should  be  proved  beyond
reasonable doubt.



HEADNOTE:
Under  the  Bihar and Orissa Mining Settlement Act,  1920  a
Board called the Mines Board of Health may be established to
provide	 for  the control and sanitation of any	 area.	 The
Board  consists of members who are elected by  mine  owners,
non-officials  selected by the State Government and  persons
nominated  by  Government.   The Chairman of  the  Board  is
appointed by the State Government from among the members  of
the  Board.  The Board is a body corporate.  A	fund  called
"The  Mining Settlement Fund" is created consisting of	sums
charged by the Board under the Act from land-owners as	also
sums  allotted	from  the State revenues  as  well  as	sums
borrowed by the Board under the
Local Authorities Loans Act
,
grants	received  from local Authorities,  associations	 and
private	 persons.   The	 respondent  was  appointed  by	 the
Government as Chairman of the Jharia Mines Board of  Health.
The respondent was elected as a member of the State Assembly
in  the	 general elections.  The election  petition  of	 the
appellant   (the   unsuccessful	  candidate)   against	 the
respondent was dismissed by the High Court.
On  appeal to this Court it was argued that  the  respondent
was  disqualified,from standing for the election as he	held
an office of profit under the State Government.
Dismissing the appeal,
HELD  : (1) The mere fact that the respondent was  appointed
as  Chairman of the Board by the Government Would  not	make
him  a person holding an office under the State	 Government.
The  fact  that the Government and other  local	 authorities
might  make  grants to the Board did not mean that  all	 the
funds  of  the	Board were Government  funds  or  Government
property.   The	 provisions  '	of the	Act  are  enough  to
establish  that the Board is a 'local authority' within	 the
meaning of that expression as defined in cl. (31) of
s. 3
of
the General Clauses Act, 1897. [911 C; B]
(2) In determining whether a person is holding an office  of
profit	under  the Government the tests laid  down  by	this
Court were (1) Whether the Government makes the appointment;
(2)  Whether  the  Government has the  right  to  remove  or
dismiss	 the  holder; (3) Whether the  Government  pays	 the
remuneration;  (4)  What are the functions  of	the  holder?
Does  he perform them for the Government, and (5)  Does	 the
Government  exercise control over the performance  of  those
functions? [911 G]
In the instant case the Government did not pay	remuneration
to  therespondent nor did he perform his functions  for	 the
Government.   The office held by him was held under a  local
authority.  The holding of an office of profit in it did not
bring about a disqualification, even if the local  authority
be,  under  the	 control of  the  Government.	The  control
exercised by the Government did not make the Board an  organ
of  the Government nor did it make the respondent  a  person
holding an office under the Government. [912 E-F]
Maulana Abdul Shakur v. Rikhabchand & Anr. [1958] S.C.R. 387
at  394	 and Shivmurthy Swami v.  Agadi	 Sanganna  Andanappa
[1971] 3 S.C.C. 870, followed.
910
Gurushantappa v. Abdul Khaddus A.I.R. 1969 S.C. 744-[1969] 3
S.C.R. 425, referred to.
(3)  An allegation of corrupt practice being a serious	one,
leading not merely  to	the consequence of the	election  of
the  successful candidate being set aside, but also  of	 his
being  disqualified  to	 stand for election  for  a  certain
period,	 should	 be proved beyond  reasonable  doubt.	Such
proof is lacking in this case. [913 C]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  1116  of
1973.
From the judgment and order dated the 22nd January, 1973  of
the Patna High Court in Election Petition No. 21 of 1972.
J. P. Goyal and Y. C. Parashar, for the appellant.
D. Goburdhan, for the respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
ALAGIRISWAMI,  J.-This	appeal by one  of  the	unsuccessful
candidates in the election held to the Legislative  Assembly
of Bihar State from the Baghmara constituency is against the
dismissal   of	 his  election	petition   questioning	 the
respondent's election by the High Court at Patna.
Only  two  questions  were argued before  us  (1)  that	 the
respondent was disqualified for standing for the election as
he  held an office of profit under the Government of  Bihar,
and (2) that he obtained the services of a Sub-Inspector  of
Police for the furtherance of the prospects of his election.
The  facts relating to the first question are these :  Under
the  Bihar  and Orissa Mining Settlement Act, 1920  a  Board
called	the  Mines  Board of Health may	 be  established  to
provide	 for the control and sanitation of any	area  within
which  persons	employed  in  a	 mine  reside  and  for	 the
prevention  therein of the out break and spread of  epidemic
diseases.   Before  the	 area is declared  to  be  a  mining
settlement  for the purposes of the Act	 certain  prescribed
formalities  like  receiving  objections  etc.	have  to  be
observed.   The Board is a body corporate  having  prepetual
succession and a common seal with power to hold and  acquire
property.   It consists of not less than seven and not	more
than  eleven members of whom not less than two and not	more
than  four are elected by owners of mines within the  mining
settlement,  three  non-officials  selected  by	 the   State
Government  and two or more members but not  exceeding	four
nominated  by  the State Government.  The  Chairman  of	 the
Board is to be appointed by the State Government from  among
the  members  of  the  Board.  A  fund	called	"The  Mining
Settlement  Fund" is formed for every mining settlement	 and
the fund vests in the Board. charged by the Board under	 the
Act  from sums allotted to the Board from the State  by	 the
Board  under the Local Authorities from	 Local	Authorities,
associations  and Board appoints Health Officers as well  as
Board	  can  impose taxes like latrine tax and  also	make
yearly assessment.  There  are certain powers  conferred  on
the State Government  The fund consists of sums land  owners
etc.  as  also	revenues; sums borrowed	 Loans	Act;  grants
received private persons etc.  The Sanitary inspectors.	 The
Board can impose taxes like latrine tax and also make yearly
assessment.   There   are  certain  powers  on	 the   State
Government.
911
under the Act but they are no more than powers conferred  on
State  Governments in respect of various local bodies.	 The
respondent  was appointed by the Government as the  Chairman
of the Jharia Mines Board of Health.
We agree with the learned Judge of the High Court that it is
difficult  to accept the argument that the Board  is  wholly
under  the  control  of	 the State  Government	in  all	 its
functions.  The Board levies taxes and other assessments and
has,  got  its own funds, The fact that the  Government	 and
other local authorities might make grants to the Board	does
not  mean  that all the funds of the  Board  are  Government
funds  or Government property.	The provisions we  have	 set
out above are enough to establish that the Board is a 'local
authority' within the meaning of that expression as  defined
in  clause  (31) of
section 3
of the  General  Clauses	Act,
1897.	Indeed	this  position does not seem  to  have	been
disputed  by  the petitioner before the High  Court  in	 the
course	of his argument.  We do not, therefore,	 think	that
the mere fact that the respondent was appointed as  Chairman
of  the	 Board	by the Government would make  him  a  person
holding an office under the State Government.
We may in this connection refer to certain decisions of this
Court. In Maulana Abdul Shakur v. Rikhabchand & Anr.(1) this
Court held :
"The  power  of the Government  to  appoint  a
	      person  to an office of profit or to  continue
	      him  in that office or revoke his	 appointment
	      at  their discertion and payment from  out  of
	      Government  revenues are important factors  in
	      determining whether that person is holding  an
	      office of profit under the Government."
We  have already pointed out that in this case the  payments
to  the	 respondent  are  not from  out	 of  the  Government
revenues.
In  Shivamurthy	 Swami v. Agadi Sanganna  Andanappa(2)	this
Court pointed out
	      "....  the office in question must  have	been
	      held under a Government and to that some	pay,
	      salary, emoluments or allowance is attached...
	      This Court in several decisions had laid	down
	      the tests for finding out whether an office in
	      question	is an office under a Government	 and
	      whether  it  is an office	 of  profit.   Those
	      tests  are : (1) Whether the Government  makes
	      the  appointment; (2) Whether  the  Government
	      has right to remove or dismiss the holder; (3)
	      Whether the Government pays the  remuneration;
	      (4)  What	 are the functions  of	the  holder?
Does  he perform	then for the Government	 and
	      (5)  Does the Government exercise any  control
	      over the performance of those functions ?"
Here again it is to be pointed out that the Government	does
not  pay  the remuneration nor does the holder	perform	 his
functions for the Government.  To hold otherwise would be to
hold that local
(1) [1938] S.C.R. 387 at 394.
(2) [1971] 3 S.C.R. 870.
912
bodies	like Municipal Councils perform their functions	 for
the  Government	 though	 in one	 sense	the  functions	they
perform are governmental functions.
The  decision  of  this	 Court	in
Gurushantappa  v.  Abdul
Khaddus
(1),  which was also relied upon by the	High  Court,
may be usefully referred to. It was there observed:
"Thus, in the case of election as President or
	      Vice-President,  the  disqualification  arises
	      even if the candidate is holding an office  of
	      profit  under  local or  any  other  authority
	      under the control of the Central Government or
	      the State Government, whereas, in the case  of
	      a candidate for election as a Member of any of
	      the Legislatures, no such disqualification  is
laid down by
the Constitution if the office of
	      profit  is  held under a local  or  any  other
	      authority under the control of the
	      Government  and not directly under any of	 the
	      Governments.   This clearly indicates that  in
	      the  case	 of eligibility for  election  as  a
	      member  of  a Legislature, the holding  of  an
	      office of profit under a corporate body like a
	      local   authority	  does	 not   bring   about
	      disqualification even if that local  authority
	      be  under	 the  control  of  the	 Government,
	      The  mere control of the Government  over	 the
	      authority	  having  the  power   to   appoint,
	      dismiss, or control the working of the officer
	      employed by such authority does not disqualify
	      that  officer  from  being  a  candidate	 for
	      election as a member of the Legislature in the
	      manner  in which such  disqualification  comes
	      into  existence  for  being  elected  as	 the
	      President or the Vice-President."
The  office  held by the respondent is held  under  a  local
authority.   The holding of an office of profit in  it	does
not  bring  about  a disqualification  even  if	 that  local
authority be under the control of the Government.  The	mere
control of Government over the authority having the power to
appoint,  dismiss,  or control the working  of	the  officer
employed by such authority does not disqualify that  officer
from  being  a	candidate for election as a  member  of	 the
Legislature.   Therefore,  the	control	 exercised  by	 the
Government  over  the Board in this case does not  make	 the
Board  an  organ  of the Government nor	 does  it  make	 the
respondent a person holding an office under the	 Government.
It  is,	 therefore,  unnecessary to  go	 into  the  question
whether	 the office held by the respondent was an office  of
profit,	 though	 we  may  indicate  that  on  the   evidence
available  in this case we have come to the conclusion	that
it  is not an office of profit.	 We are not setting out	 the
evidence  at length only because it is unnecessary  for	 the
purpose of this case.
As regards the 2nd question the allegation of the  appellant
was that the respondent taking advantage of his position  as
a former Cabinet Minister of the State of Bihar had procured
the services of the Officer-in-charge of Chas police station
in  arranging  and  holding his	 election  meeting  on	20th
February,  1972	 within	 the premises  of  the	Chas  police
station	 and this was a corrupt practice within the  meaning
of sub-s. (7)
(1) A.I.R. 1969 S.C. 744-[1969] 3 S.C.R. 425.
913
of  s.	123  of	 the
Representation  of  the  People	Act
.
According to the respondent the election meeting was held in
the  vacant space on the southern side of the compound	wall
of  the	 police station.  The evidence relied  upon  by	 the
appellant for providing his charge were his own and that  of
two of his co-villagers.   The appellant wasnot	  an	eye
witness	  of  this  meeting  and  his  evidence	  was	pure
hearsay.The person who is said to have informed him was	 not
examined.The evidence of P. Ws. 1 and 2 was not accepted  by
the  High  Court.  The police  officer	concerned,  who	 was
examined as R.W. 8, as wellas  the respondent  (R.W.  10)
have denied the allegation.  After a careful examination  of
all the evidence the High Court held this charge not proved.
We  have  gone	through the evidence and see  no  reason  to
differ from the High Court on this point.
An allegation of corupt practice being a serious one leading
not  merely  to	 the  consequence of  the  election  of	 the
successful  candidate being set aside but also of his  being
disqualified  to  stand for election for  a  certain  period
should	be proved beyond reasonable doubt and we  find	such
proof lacking in this case,
The appeal is dismissed with costs.
P. B . R.	  Appeal dismissed.
914