[Cites
4
, Cited by
242
]
Supreme Court of India
Hukam Chand Shyam Lal vs Union Of India And Ors on 17 December, 1975
Equivalent citations: 1976 AIR 789, 1976 SCR (2)1060, AIR 1976 SUPREME COURT 789, 1976 (1) SCC 630, 1976 2 ALL LR 70, 1976 2 SCC 128, 1976 2 SCR 1060, 1976 2 SCR 924
Author:
Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
Bench:
Ranjit Singh Sarkaria
,
A.N.  Ray
,
M. Hameedullah Beg
,
P.N. Shingal
PETITIONER:
HUKAM CHAND SHYAM LAL

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/12/1975

BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
BENCH:
SARKARIA, RANJIT SINGH
RAY, A.N. (CJ)
BEG, M. HAMEEDULLAH
SHINGAL, P.N.

CITATION:
 1976 AIR  789		  1976 SCR  (2)1060
 1976 SCC  (2) 128


ACT:
Indias Telegraphs	Act, 1895
-
S. 5(1)
-Read with Rule 422
of  the	 Indian	 Telegraphs  Rules,  1951-Whether  statutory
notice is  mandatory-"Economic Emergency" does not amount to
"public emergency"  within the	meaning of s 5- Scope of the
words "Any  emergency"	in  Rule  422  vis-a-vis  the  words
"public emergency"  in s.  5-Exercise of  power of a drastic
nature in  a mode  other than the one provided, is violative
of the fundamental principles of natural justice.



HEADNOTE:
     The appellants'  telephones were disconnected and taken
temporary possession  of by  the Superintendent	 of  Police,
North  District	  and  the   General   Manager,	  Telephones
respectively on	 various dates acting under the instructions
of the	Administrator, Delhi,  who was	personally satisfied
that  illegal	forward	 trading   (satta)  in	agricultural
commodities was	 being practised  on a	large scale  by them
through their  telephones. The	Orders were purportedly made
under
s.  5(1)
of  the Indian Telegraphs Act, 1895, and Rule
422 of	the Indian Telegraphs Rules, 1951. These orders were
assailed by the appellants by a writ petition under
Art. 226
of the	Constitution which  was allowed by a single Judge of
the High  Court, resulting  in a special appeal by the Union
of India, which was accepted.
     Negativing the contention of the appellants/respondents
viz.;  that   the  impugned   action  of  disconnection	 and
temporary taking over of the telephones was bad because:-
     (a) No  statutory notice  was ever	 given	as  required
under Rules 421 and 422.
     (b) The  Divisional Engineer did not apply his mind and
record his  own satisfaction  about the	 existence  of	"any
emergency" and	as such	 there was  a contravention of Rules
421 and 422 which had to be read together.
     (c) The  reason given  in the  order to the effect that
the appellants	were making  illegal and improper use of the
telephones  by	transmitting  messages	and  information  in
regard	to   Satta  business  which  had  been	banned,	 was
irrelevant and extraneous to Rule 422.
     (d) The  emergency contemplated  by Rule 422 is not the
same as	 "public emergency"  declared under  s. 5,  but "any
emergency", the	 existence of which was to be established to
the satisfaction  of the  Divisional Engineer  and  not	 any
extraneous authority,  the appellate Bench of the High Court
held, (i) that, the requirement of notice could be dispensed
with under Rule 422 by the General Manager Telephones, if he
was satisfied  that the	 telephones were  being used  by the
subscribers for	 illegal forward trading (ii) that, such use
was contrary  to public interest in view of the existence of
"economic" emergency  (iii) that  the words " any emergency"
in Rule	 422 includes an "economic emergency" and (iv) that,
on the	basis of  the certificate in regard to the existence
of  an	'economic  emergency"  the  Divisional	Manager	 was
competent to  pass the	impugned order	in exercise  of	 his
powers under Rule 422.
     While allowing the appeals by special leave the Court,
^
     HELD :  (1)
S. 5(1)
of the Indian Telegraphs Act, 1895,
if properly construed does not confer unguided and unbridled
power on  the Central  Government/State Government/Specially
Authorised Officer  to take  possession	 of  any  telegraph.
[1065 C]
1061
     (2) Conditions  pre-requisite for the exercise of power
under this section and Rule 422 are:
     (a) the  occurrence of  a "public	emergency"  not	 any
other kind of emergency.
     (b) recording  of its  satisfaction as to the existence
of such	 an emergency  by the  Government or  the  Authority
concerned on  grounds germane  to an  action under  the rule
[1065 C-D]
     (3) The  expression "public  emergency"  has  not	been
defined in  the statute.  Read as a whole, s.5, with the two
phrases in  sub-section (i)  viz. "occurrence  of any public
emergency" and	"or  in	 the  interest	of  public  safety",
clarifies   that    a	"public	  emergency",	within	 the
contemplation of  that section, is one which raises problems
concerning the	interest of  public safety", the sovereignty
and integrity  of India, the security of the State, friendly
relations with	foreign	 States	 or  public  order,  or	 the
prevention of incitement to the commission of an offence. It
is in  the context  of these  matters that  the	 appropriate
authority  has	to  form  an  opinion  with  regard  to	 the
occurrence of  a "public  emergency" with  a view  to taking
further action under
s. 5
. [1065 D-F]
     (4) "Economic  Emergency" is  not one  of these matters
expressly  mentioned   in  the	 statute.   Mere   "economic
emergency"  may	  not  necessarily   amount  to	  a  "public
emergency" and	justify action	under
s.  5
unless it raises
problems relating to the matters indicated therein. [1065 F-
G]
     (5) Notice under Rule 421 cannot be dispensed with. The
scope of the words "any emergency" in Rule 422 is wider than
the expression "public emergency" under
s. 5
. The subjective
satisfaction as	 to the	 existence of  "any emergency" under
Rule 422  is that  of the Divisional Engineer, on a rational
basis on relevant material which may include any certificate
or report of the appropriate Government as to the occurrence
of a  "public emergency".  The requirement of recording such
satisfaction  by   the	Divisional   Engineer  with  reasons
therefor, is  implicit in  the Rule.  That will be a minimal
safeguard against  arbitrary exercise  of the drastic power.
[1066 A, C-D]
     (6)  The  ground  for  disconnection  and	taking	over
temporary possession  of the  telephones viz., 'that illegal
forward trading (satta) in agricultural commodities is being
practised" amounts to "improper or illegal use of telegraphs
and is	not a  relevant consideration  under Rule  422.	 The
appropriate course  to be  followed was that laid down in R.
427 read  with Rr.  416 and 421, after giving an opportunity
to explain  their conduct, in consonance with the principles
of natural justice. [1066 F-G]
     (6) It  is well-settled  that where a power is required
to be  exercised by a certain authority in a certain way, it
should be  exercised in that manner or not at all, and other
modes of  performance are  necessarily forbidden.  It is all
the more  necessary to	observe this rule where the power is
of a  drastic nature  and, its exercise in a mode other than
the one	 provided, will	 be  violative	of  the	 fundamental
principle of  natural justice.	Resort to the wrong and more
drastic course	provided in  rule 422, on a ground which was
not germane  to an  action  under  that	 rule  violates	 the
impugned order,	 particularly when  it is  manifest, in	 the
instant case  that the authority was influenced more by this
ground and  less, if  at all,  by the  existence of  "public
emergency" certified by the State [1066 H, 1067 A-B]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE  JURISDICTION: Civil  Appeals Nos. 1848
and 1849 of 1974.
Appeals by	 Special Leave	from the Judgment and Orders
dated the  27-11-1973 &	 23-5-74 of  the Delhi High Court in
L.P.A.	No.   172/73  and   Civil  Writ	  No.  237  of	1974
respectively.
Hardyal Hardy,  S. K.  Mehta, K.  R. Nagaraja and P. N.
Puri for the Appellants.
1062
Mrs. Shyamla  Pappu and  Girish Chandra for Respondents
1-3.
R. N. Sachthey for Respondents 4-5.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SARKARIA, J.  This judgment will govern the disposal of
these two  appeals which  arise out  of a common judgment of
the High  Court of Delhi dismissing the writ petitions filed
by the	appellants and	others, under
Article	226
of	 the
Constitution.
On November  27, 1972, the Administrator of Delhi, made
an order  under
s. 5
of the Indian Telegraphs Act. 1885 (for
short, the  Act) authorising  the Superintendent  of Police,
North District,	 to take temporary possession "until further
orders" of  certain specified  telephones installed in rooms
and cabins  of	the  building  known  as  Coronation  Hotel,
Fatehpuri, Delhi. The order reads as under:
"Whereas the	Administrator of  Delhi is satisfied
     that illegal  forward trading  (satta) in	agricultural
     commodities is being practised on a large scale through
     the following  telephones installed in the rooms/cabins
     in the  premises of  the Coronation  Hotel,  Fatehpuri,
     Delhi, thereby  affecting adversely  the price  of	 the
     supply essential to the life of the community.
Whereas   public    emergency	  exists   and	 the
     Administrator, Delhi is satisfied that the continuation
     of	 satta	 at  the   aforesaid  premises	through	 the
     telephones	 given	 above	is   prejudicial  to  public
     interest and  as such it is necessary to take temporary
     possession of  all the  aforesaid telephones  from	 the
     premises in question."
Another order  in similar terms was made on December 4,
1972 by	 the Administrator  for taking	over  certain  other
telephones.
Four subscribers,	who were  affected by  these  orders
challenged their  validity by  writ petitions  in  the	High
Court. A Bench of the High Court allowed those petitions and
quashed the  orders in	question on  the ground	 that resort
cannot be  had to  s. 5(1)  of the  Act for taking temporary
possession of the subscribers' telephones.
The  General  Manager,  Telephones,  Delhi	 also,	made
orders on November 28, 1972 and December 5, 1972, purporting
to act	under Rule 422 of the Indian Telegraphs Rules, 1951,
(for short,  the Rules) for disconnecting the telephones and
non-exchange lines.  One of those orders, dated November 28,
1972, may be extracted as a specimen:
"The Delhi Administration has certified vide order
     No.  F5/20/72/C-HG	  dated	  27-11-1972   that   public
     emergency exists  and that	 continuation of  "satta' at
     the premises  of Coronation Hotel Fatehpuri through the
     telephones is pre judicial to public interest.
1063
The  undersigned   in	 exercise   of	the   powers
     conferred under  rule 422	of Indian  Telegraphs Rules,
     1951 hereby  orders to  disconnect the  telephones	 and
     Non-exchange Lines	 mentioned in  the list	 supplied by
     Delhi Administration (copy attached)."
Thereupon the  appellants filed C.W. 470 of 1973 in the
High Court  praying for	 a writ to quash these orders of the
General Manager	 and  for  restoration	of  their  telephone
connections. This  writ petition  was  heard  by  a  learned
Single Judge  of the  High Court  who allowed  the same	 and
quashed the  impugned orders  and further  directed that the
telephones be restored to the appellants.
Aggrieved, the  Union of  India and  other	 respondents
carried a  special appeal to the appellate Bench of the High
Court. Before  the appellate Bench it was contended that the
impugned action	 was bad  because: (a)	no prior  notice  in
regard to  the same  was given	to the	appellants; (b)	 the
Divisional Engineer  did not  apply his	 mind and record his
own satisfaction about the existence of any emergency and as
such there  was a  contravention of  Rules 421 and 422 which
had to	be read	 together;  (c)	 the  reason  given  in	 the
impugned order,	 to the	 effect, that  the  appellants	were
making illegal and improper use of their telephones inasmuch
as they were transmitting messages and information in regard
to satta  business which had been banned, was irrelevant and
extraneous to  Rule 422	 under which the impugned action has
been purportedly  taken; (d)  the emergency  contemplated by
Rule 422  is not  the same  as a 'public emergency' declared
under
s.5
,  but is an emergency arising out of the breakdown
of the	telecommunications due to a technical defect, labour
trouble, vis major, fire or the like, the existence of which
was to	be established to the satisfaction of the Divisional
Engineer and  not any extraneous authority. Stress was laid,
in this connection, on the fact that the word "emergency" in
Rule 422  is not  qualified by the prefix "public", instead,
the words used are "any emergency".
The High  Court negatived	these  contentions.  In	 its
opinion, the  requirement of  notice could be dispensed with
under  r.  422	if  the	 General  Manager,  Telephones,	 was
satisfied  that	 the  telephones  were	being  used  by	 the
subscribers for	 illegal forward  trading and  that such use
was contrary  to public interest in view of the existence of
"economic" emergency.  It further  held that  the words "any
emergency" in  Rule 422 include an 'economic emergency', and
on the	basis of  the certificate in regard to the existence
of an  "economic emergency"  issued under
s. 5
, by the Delhi
Administration. The  Divisional	 Manager  was  competent  in
exercise of  his powers	 under Rule 422 to pass the impugned
orders. In  the result,	 it set	 aside the  decision of	 the
learned Single	Judge and  dismissed the  writ petition with
the observation that "the telephone authorities should treat
these disconnections  as temporary and allow the petitioners
to get	back their  connections, if  the General  Manager is
satisfied that	the emergency  caused  by  the	shortage  in
supply of  the commodities  on which the forward trading was
banned, was over".
1064
Hence these appeals.
The contentions  canvassed before	the High  Court have
been repeated  before us.  Before dealing  with the same, it
will be	 worthwhile to have a look at the relevant statutory
provisions.
Section 5
of the Act provides:
"(1) On the occurrence of any public emergency, or
	       in the  interest of  the public	safety,	 the
	       Central Government or State Government or any
	       officer specially  authorised in	 this behalf
	       by  the	 Central  Government   or  a   State
	       Government  may,	 if  satisfied	that  it  is
	       necessary  or   expedient  so   to  do,	take
	       temporary possession  (for  so  long  as	 the
	       public emergency	 exists or  the interest  of
	       the public safety requires the taking of such
	       action)	 of   any   telegraph	established,
	       maintained or  worked by	 any person licensed
	       under this Act.
(2)  On the  occurrence of any public emergency or
	       in the  interest of  the public	safety,	 the
	       Central Government  or a	 State Government or
	       any  officer  specially	authorised  in	this
	       behalf by  the Central  Government or a State
	       Government  may,	 if  satisfied	that  it  is
	       necessary  or  expedient	 so  to	 do  in	 the
	       interest of  the sovereignty and integrity of
	       India, the  security of	the State,  friendly
	       relations with foreign States or public order
	       or   for	  preventing   incitement   to	 the
	       commission of  an offence,  for reasons to be
	       recorded in  writing, by	 order, direct	that
	       any message  or class  of messages to or from
	       any person or class of persons or relating to
	       any   particular	   subject,   brought	 for
	       transmission by or transmitted or received by
	       any telegraph,  shall not  be transmitted, or
	       shall be intercepted or detained, or shall be
	       disclosed to  the Government making the order
	       or an officer thereof mentioned in the order:
Provided  that   press  messages  intended  to  be
     published in  India of correspondents accredited to the
     Central Government	 or a  State Government shall not be
     intercepted or  detained, unless their transmission has
     been prohibited under this sub-section."
The material rules are these:
"421.	 Disconnection	 of  telephones.-Where	 the
     Divisional Engineer  is satisfied	for  reasons  to  be
     recorded in  writing that	it is necessary to do so, he
     may, after	 giving the  subscriber a  notice in writing
     for a  period which  shall not except in emergent cases
     be less  than 7  days, disconnect the telephone, and in
     such case,	 the subscriber	 shall be entitled to refund
     of rent  for the  unexpired portion  of the  period for
     which the connection or service was given.
1065
422.	Right  of  disconnection  in  emergency.-The
     Divisional Engineer may, in the event of any emergency,
     disconnect any  subscriber, with  or without notice. In
     case such disconnection exceeds a period of seven days,
     the  subscriber  shall  be	 entitled  to  proportionate
     refund of rent.
427. Illegal	or  improper  use  of  telephones.-A
     subscriber shall  be personally responsible for the use
     of his telephone. No telephone shall be used to disturb
     or irritate  any person  or for the transmission of any
     message or	 communication which  is of  an indecent  or
     obscene nature  or is calculated to annoy any person or
     to disrupt the maintenance of public order in any other
     manner contrary to any provision of law."
Section 5(1)
,  if properly	 construed, does  not confer
unguided and unbridled power on the Central Government/State
Government/Specially Authorised	 Officer to  take possession
of any	telegraph. Firstly,  the  occurrence  of  a  'public
emergency' is  the sine	 qua non  for the  exercise of power
under this section. As a preliminary step to the exercise of
further jurisdiction  under this  section the  Government or
the authority  concerned must  record its satisfaction as to
the existence  of such	an emergency. Further, the existence
of the	emergency which	 is a pre-requisite for the exercise
of power  under this  section, must  be a 'public emergency'
and not	 any other kind of emergency. The expression 'public
emergency' has not been defined in the statute, but contours
broadly delineating  its scope	and features are discernible
from the  section which	 has to	 read as  a whole.  In	sub-
section (1)  the phrase 'occurrence of any public emergency'
is connected  with and is immediately followed by the phrase
"or in	the interests  of  the	public	safety".  These	 two
phrases appear	to take colour from each other. In the first
part  of  sub-s.  (2)  these  two  phrases  again  occur  in
association  with   each  other,  and  the  context  further
clarifies, with	 amplification, that  a	 'public  emergency'
within the contemplation of this section is one which raises
problems concerning  the interest  of the public safety, the
sovereignty and	 integrity of  India, the  security  of	 the
State, friendly	 relations with	 foreign  States  or  public
order or  the prevention  of incitement to the commission of
an offence.  It is  in the context of these matters that the
appropriate authority  has to form an opinion with regard to
the occurrence of a 'public emergency' with a view to taking
further action under this section. Economic emergency is not
one of	those matters  expressly mentioned  in the  statute.
Mere 'economic emergency'-as the High Court calls it-may not
necessarily amount  to	a  'public  emergency'	and  justify
action under this section unless it raises problems relating
to the matters indicated in the section.
Rules 421 and 422 occur in serial order in a section of
Part V	under the  group caption, "Telephone connections and
other services".  Rule 421  requires the Divisional Engineer
to record  his satisfaction,  supported by  reasons, for the
proposed disconnection of the telephone. It further requires
that  authority	  to  give   a	notice	in  writing  to	 the
subscriber. Such notice shall ordinarily be of not less than
seven
1066
days. In  emergent cases,  the period  of this notice can be
less than  seven days. But even in emergent cases under this
Rule, the notice cannot be dispensed with altogether.
Rule 422 empowers the Divisional Engineer to disconnect
any subscriber	'in the	 event of  any	emergency'  with  or
without notice.	 The existence	of "any	 emergency"  to	 the
satisfaction of	 the Divisional	 Engineer, appears  to be  a
necessary pre-requisite	 to the	 exercise of the power under
this rule.  It is  significant that while
s. 5
speaks of the
occurrence of a 'public emergency', satisfaction with regard
to  the	 existence  of	which  is  to  be  recorded  by	 the
appropriate authority  mentioned in  that section,  Rule 422
purports to  empower the  Divisional Engineer to take action
thereunder in the event of "any emergency". The scope of the
words "any  emergency" in  Rule 422 is apparently wider than
the expression	"public emergency"  used in
s. 5
. It follows
that the  satisfaction is  regard to  the existence  of "any
emergency" under  Rule	422  is	 to  be	 of  the  Divisional
Engineer. He  has to  arrive at such satisfaction rationally
on relevant  material which  may include  any certificate or
report of the appropriate Government as to the occurrence of
a 'public  emergency'. The  requirement	 of  recording	such
satisfaction  by   the	Divisional  Engineer,  with  reasons
therefor, is  implicit in  the Rule.  That will be a minimal
safeguard against  arbitrary exercise of this drastic power.
In this	 connection, it	 will not be out of place to mention
here,  that   sub-section  (2)	 of  s.	 5  which  made	 the
Certificate of the Central/State Government conclusive proof
as to  the existence  of a 'public emergency', stood deleted
and replaced  by a different provision, at the time when the
impugned  action   was	taken  in  this	 case.	That  is  an
additional reason  for holding	that it	 was the  Divisional
Engineer who had to form his own opinion as to the existence
of an emergency, before taking action under r. 422.
Having heard  the Counsel	on both	 sides,	 we  are  of
opinion, that  the impugned  Order suffers at least from one
apparent defect of jurisdiction.
Assuming that the General Manager was competent to make
an order under Rule 422, the power has been exercised mainly
on a ground which is not a relevant consideration under this
Rule. This  ground as  recited in  the Delhi  Administration
Notification of	 December 4,  1972  and	 reproduced  in	 the
impugned order	of the	General Manager, Telephones, is that
illegal forward	 trading (satta) in agricultural commodities
is being  practised in	a large scale through the telephones
in question  at the premises of Coronation Hotel, Fatehpuri.
In other  words, the  impugned action has been taken chiefly
on the	ground that the appellants have been making improper
or illegal use of these telephones. This being the position,
the appropriate	 course to be followed was that laid down in
Rule 427 read with Rules 416 and 421. But this was not done.
It is well settled that where a power is required to be
exercised by a certain authority in a certain way, it should
be exercised  in that  manner or  not at  all, and all other
modes of  performances are  necessarily forbidden. It is all
the more necessary to observe this rule
1067
where power  is of  a drastic  nature and  its exercise in a
mode other  than the  one provided, will be violative of the
fundamental principles	of  natural  justice.  Now,  in	 the
present case, if the telephones of the appellants were to be
disconnected on the ground of misuse, then they had to give,
in  consonance	with  the  principles  of  natural  justice,
opportunity to	the  appellants	 to  explain  their  conduct
before taking  action under Rule 427 read with Rules 416 and
421. Resort to the wrong and more drastic course provided in
Rule 422,  on a	 ground which  was not	germane to an action
under that  Rule, vitiates  the impugned order, particularly
when it	 is manifest  that in making the impugned order, the
General Manager was influenced more by this ground and less,
if at  all, by the existence of 'public emergency' certified
by the Delhi Administration.
For the  foregoing reasons	 we  accept  these  appeals,
allow the  writ petitions,  quash the  impugned	 orders	 and
direct the  respondents to restore the telephone connections
to each of these appellants. However in the circumstances of
the cases we make no order as to costs.
S.R.					    Appeals allowed.
1