[Cites
5
, Cited by
7
]
Supreme Court of India
Mohammad Abdul Salam Khan vs Sarfaraz Ahmad Khan & Others on 5 March, 1975
Equivalent citations: 1975 AIR 1064, 1975 SCR (3) 860, AIR 1975 SUPREME COURT 1064, 1975 (1) SCC 669, 1975 LAB. I. C. 661, 1975 ALL. L. J. 319, (1975) 1 SERV L R 565, 1975 3 SCR 860, 1975 (1) ALL LR 230
Author:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
Bench:
V.R. Krishnaiyer
,
A.N.  Ray
,
Kuttyil Kurien Mathew
,
A.C. Gupta
PETITIONER:
MOHAMMAD ABDUL SALAM KHAN

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
SARFARAZ AHMAD KHAN & OTHERS

DATE OF JUDGMENT05/03/1975

BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
BENCH:
KRISHNAIYER, V.R.
RAY, A.N. (CJ)
MATHEW, KUTTYIL KURIEN
GUPTA, A.C.

CITATION:
 1975 AIR 1064		  1975 SCR  (3) 860
 1975 SCC  (1) 669


ACT:
U.P. Town Areas Act, (II of 1914) s. 6K--Scope of--Dismissed
Government servant--If could be elected as Chairman of	Town
Area Committee--Dismissal--Meaning of.
Punjab Police Rules--Rule 16(2)(iii)--Scope  of--Publication
of dismissal in Police Gazette--Effect of.



HEADNOTE:
Section	 6-K  of  the U.P. Town Areas Act  provides  that  a
person	I  notwithstanding that he is  otherwise  qualified,
shall  be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being  a
member	or  Chairman  of a Committee if he  is	a  dismissed
servant	  of  a	 local	authority,  the	 State	or   Central
Government and is debarred from re-employment therein.	Rule
16(2)  (iii)  of  the Punjab Police Rules,  which  apply  to
respondent  No. 1 at the relevant time, states that  when  a
police	,officer is convicted judicially and  dismissed.  or
dismissed  as  a  result  of  a	 departmental  enquiry,	 the
conviction and dismissal and its cause shall be published in
the Police Gazette.  In other cases of dismissal when it  is
desired	 to ensure that the officer dismissed shall  not  be
re-employed   elsewhere,  a  full  descriptive	roll.	with
particulars   of   the	punishments.  shall  be	  sent	 for
publication in the Police Gazette
The  first  respondent, a dismissed  police  constable.	 was
elected	 as  Chairman  ,of the	Town  Area  Committee.	 The
appellant.  who	 was the defeated  candidate,  assailed	 the
election   of	the  respondent.   The	 Election   Tribunal
constituted  under  the U.P. Town Areas Act  set  aside	 the
election  and declared the appellant as the Chairman.  In  a
writ  petition	under
Art. 226
, a single Judge of  the	High
Court  affirmed	 the order of the Tribunal  as	regards	 the
election  of  the respondent No. 1 but in  relation  to	 the
relief directed against the declaration of the appellant  as
Chairman.
A  Division  Bench of the High Court allowed the  appeal  of
respondent   No.  1  holding  that  s.	6-K  spoke  of	 two
components,  namely,  (a) dismissal and (b)  being  debarred
from  re-employment and since the second ingredient was	 not
present	 in the order of termination against the  constable,
the formula for disQualification was not fulfilled.
Allowing the appeal,
HELD  : (1) There is no escape from the conclusion that	 the
first  respondent was punished under the former part  of  r.
16(2)  (iii)  and  incurred the extreme	 wrath	of  the	 law
including disbarment from re-employment.  Logically.  there-
fore.  he suffered disqualification under s. 6-K of the	 Act
and  the Tribunal. in removing him from Chairmanship,  acted
legally. [866 F]
Section 7
of the Police Act speaks of dismissal as 'a single
category  of  punishment,  not as two twigs  from  the	same
branch, that is, dismissal  without and with embargo on	 re-
entry  into  State service.  When
s. 7
uses  the  expression
'dismissal', it must be deemed to have conveyed the official
semantics attached to that expression, namely, removal	from
service	 plus a ban on reemployment by the State.  The	non-
enumeration  of 'removal' as a distinct form  of  punishment
does  not divest the appointing authority  from	 exercising,
subject	 to  legal restrictions, the power  to	remove	from
service	 without inflicting the more serious  punishment  of
dismissal. [864 C; F]
861
(2)  The   words   'dismissals	and   'removal'	  have	 one
distinction,  namely,  that  the  former  disqualifies	from
future	employment  while the latter does  not.	  Therefore,
dismissal is removal with a prohibition super-added. [864 H;
865 D],
Khem  Chand v. Union of India [1958] S.C.R. 1080,  1089	 and
Shyamlal's case, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 369, 374, refer-red to.
(3)  (a)  "Dismissal"  removes the man from his	 office	 and
super-adds  debarment  from re-employment.  Such  being	 its
meaning	 in the Indian Constitution, in the  relevant  rules
which  have been in force in this country over the  decades;
"dismissal" has to be understood, as punishment imposed upon
the constable in this case, as one which embodies the latent
penalty of disability from being. re-employed. [866 B]
(b)  Rule  16(2)  (iii) does not state "in  other  cases  of
dismissal" the bat against re-employment operates only where
there  is publication in the Police Gazette to that  effect.
Dismissal, as such, carries with it this additional  penalty
in  both classes of cases but in the first category  covered
by  the rule, publication is a duty cast upon the  authority
while in the second category the authority is left with	 the
option	to  publish or not to publish.	 If  the  dismissing
authority  desires  to ensure itself that  unwittingly	some
other  department may not employ the dismissed official,  it
may,  by way of abundant caution, resort to  publication  of
the punishment in the Police Gazette.  The language is clear
that  to ensure that the officer dismissed shall not be	 re-
employed the concerned authority shall send for	 publication
the relevant particulars.  Not that without such publication
a right to re-employment inheres in the dismissed  official,
but  that  to make sure that any unknowing slip may  not  be
committed by another department. the dismissing officer	 may
take  care  to	forward the particulars	 of  punishment	 for
proper	 publication.	It  is	enabling,  so  far  as	 the
dismissing   authority	 is  concerned,	  and	is   legally
unnecessary   to   spell  the  two-in-one   punishment	 of'
dismissal. [866 C-E.]
ARGUMENTS
For the Appellant :
From a plain reading of s. 6-K of the U.P. Town Areas Act it
is clear that if a man is dismissed from service of a  local
authority, Central Government or State Government by way  of
punishment and is debarred from re-employment thereunder, he
cannot	contest	 the election for the Chairman of  the	Town
Area  Committee.  From a plain reading of s. 6-K it  becomes
clear that the intention of the legislature in enacting this
law  was  that	the persons who	 have  been  dismissed	from
service	 by  way  of punishment will not  be  qualified	 for
election  to,  the post of Chairman.  Town  Area  Committee.
This  section contemplates only such dismissed servants	 who
have  been dismissed from service by way of  Punishment	 for
misconduct. and Indiscipline.
For Respondent Vol.  I
Respondent no.	1 was removed from the Delhi Police  Service
and was not a dismissed servant within the meaning of s. 6-K
of  the U.P. Town Area Act.  The words	'dismissed  servant'
used in s. 6-K in that Act were used in a broader sense	 and
meant  a servant whose services were terminated.  The  words
'and  is  debarred from re-employment therein used  in	that
section	 clearly indicate that the election petitioner	will
have  to  prove that the services of respondent No.  1	were
terminated and he was debarred from re-employment.   Section
7 of the, Indian Police Act and r. 16(2)(iii) of the  Punjab
Police Rules were applicable to Delhi.
If  a Police Officer is convicted by a Court of law  and  is
dismissed  as  a  result  of  the  departmental	 enquiry  in
consequence of corrupt practices, such dismissal would	ipso
facto mean dismissal by way of punishment.  However. if	 the
termination  of service was on account of any other  reason,
then  if die authority terminating the services desires.  to
ensure	that the officer dismissed shall not be	 re-employed
elsewhere,  a full descriptive roll with particulars of	 the
punishment  hall  be  sent for	publication  in	 the  Police
Gazette in the present case the ser-
862
vices	of  the	 respondent  no.   1  were   terminated	  in
departmental inquiries, the dismissal was not on account  of
corrupt	 practice  failing  under  the	first  part  of	  r.
16(2)(iii)  of the Punjab Police Rules.	 Secondly there	 was
no publication in the	 Police Gazette.  It must  therefore
follow that it was a case of removal and not dismissal.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  1200  of
1974.
Appeal	by special leave from the judgment and	order  dated
the  4th April, 1973 of the Allahabad High Court in  Special
Appeal No. 34 of 1973.
R.   K. Jain, N. R. Choudhary, Rajesh Prasad Singh and K. K.
Mohan,	  for the appellant.
J.   P. Goyal and G. S. Chatterjee for respondent No. 1.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
KRISHNA	 IYER,	J.A single legal issue presents	 itself	 for
,solution in this appeal.  The question is whether a  public
servant dismissed for misconduct is not ipso jure  disbarred
from  employment  under	 the  State.   If  'yes',  the	 1st
respondent   is	 ineligible  for  the  public.	 office	  of
Chairmanship  of Town Area Bugirasi from where, he has	been
removed on the ground of dismissal from government  service,
resulting  in  the eruption of this  election  dispute.	  If
'no', restoration to the lost office inevitably follows.
The   appellant	  and  1st  respondent	 were	rivals	 for
Chairmanship  of  Town Area Bugrasi in U.P.  The  latter,  a
dismissed  police constable, was returned by the  electorate
and  the  former,  chagrined  by  the  defeat,	successfully
petitioned the Election Tribunal.
The Ground
The  appellant and the 1st respondent were two of the  three
candidates  for	 Chairmanship of the Town Area	of  Bugrasi.
The  1st respondent secured the highest number of votes	 and
was  declared elected by the Returning	Officer.   Thereupon
the  appellant moved the statutory tribunal by	an  election
petition which was allowed on the seore of  disqualification
for being chosen as Chairman by virtue of S. 6 K of the U.P.
Town  Areas  Act  (Act II of  1914).   The  disqualification
stemmed	 from dismissal of the 1st respondent  on  September
26,  1963  from the Delhi Police Force.	 When  the  Election
Tribunal  set  aside  the  1st	respondent's  election	 and
declared  the  appellant  as  the  Chairman,  the   unseated
candidate  invoked the writ jurisdiction of the High  Court.
The learned Single Judge who heard the petition affirmed the
order  of the Tribunal substantially but in relation to	 the
relief directed against the declaration of the appellant  as
Chairman, the order was vacated.  That question was left  to
be  decided afresh in the light of certain  observations  of
the learned Judge.  Dissatisfied' by the result, of both the
appellant and the 1st respondent filed Writ Appeals before a
Division  Bench	 of  the  High	Court  which  ended  in	 the
allowance, of the claim of the 1st respondent to be Chairman
and consequential dismissal of the appeal of the other.	 The
aggrieved appellant has, therefore, come up to this Court by
special	 leave for relief based on the construction  of	 two
slightly ambiguous rules having some impact on this  village
election.
863
Before	opening	 a political chapter, respondent No.  1	 had
ended	his  official  career  as  police  constable   under
dismissal order dated September 26, 1963
	      "Constable  No.  3048 Sarfraz  Ahmad  Khaa  is
	      dismissed	 from the forenoon of  25-9-1963  of
	      having  been  in illicit	relation  with	Mrs.
	      Chatterjee  and her daughter.  The conduct  of
	      the    constable	 is   most    reprehensible,
	      adulterous  and unworthy of a  Police  Officer
	      who  is supposed to protect the  Society	from
	      such vices."
He  ran	 for Panchayat Chairmanship and won,  defeating	 the
appellant  and	the  2nd  respondent.	The  disability	 for
election in the present instance is said to spring from	 the
dismissal  of the 1st respondent from government service  as
aforesaid.
Let us examine the relevant legal texts.  The pertinent part
of   6-K,   relied   on	  by   the   appellant	 as    fatal
disqualification, reads
	      "6-K.    Disqualification	 for   members	 and
	      Chairman-
A person notwithstanding that he is  otherwise
	      qualified,  shall	 be disqualified  for  being
	      chosen as, and for being, a member or Chairman
	      of a Committee, if he-
(a)   is	a  dismissed  servant  of  a   local
	      authority, the State or Central Government and
	      is debarred from re-employment therein,
Is  the	 contesting respondent 'a dismissed servant  of	 the
State	Government  and	 is  debarred	from   re-employment
therein'?   That  is the question.  The statute is  of	1914
vintage,  but  amended	from time to time, and	we  have  to
interpret   it	in  the	 light	of  legal   provisions	 and
constitutional developments.  Does 'dismissal' automatically
spell, 'disbarment from re-employment'?	 The argument  which
weighed	 with  the High Court is that s. 6-K speaks  of	 two
components  (a)	 dismissal;  (b)  and  being  debarred	from
reemployment.	The second ingredient is not present in	 the
terminal order against the constable and so the formula	 for
disqualification is not fulfilled.
We  are	 not  impressed	 with  this  dualism.  If  dismissal
simpliciter carries within it the ban on re-employment as  a
necessaryjural incident then both the elements are  present
implicitly in theorder.	 It  is not as if  the	interdict
against re-employment should beseparately  sated in  the
rule  or order if by force of law an effective bar  in	that
behalf can be read into the order cashiering the  constable.
So we are thrown back on the order itself which, admittedly,
is silent on prohibition of reemployment.
Counsel	 for the contestant, Shri Goyal, strenuously  argued
that  he
Police  Act
and the	relevant  rules	 bearing  on
disciplinary  action  ire  telling and must  be	 treated  as
decisive.  Brushing aside the ripples of confusion raised in
the  course  of	 arguments about the  source  of  power	 for
framing these rules-no party, at any stage, has challenged
864
the vires of the rules-we may reproduce r. 16(2)(iii)  which
governs	  the situation.  Before that, a glance at
s.  7
of
the Police Act :
Subject  to the provisions of
Article  311
of
	      the  Constitution	 and to such  rules  as	 the
	      State  Government may from time to  time	make
	      under this Act, the Inspector General,  Deputy
	      Inspectors-General,   Assistant	 Inspectors-
	      General	and  District  Superintendents,	  of
	      Police  may  at any time dismiss,	 suspend  or
	      reduce  any police-officer of the	 subordinate
	      ranks   whom  they  shall	 think	 remiss	  or
	      negligent	 in  the discharge of  his  duty  or
	      unfit for the same."
It  is	clear  that
s. 7
speaks of  dismissal  as  a  single
category  of  punishment,  not as two twigs  from  the	same
branch i.e., dismissal without and with embargo on  re-entry
into State service.  It may, however, be noticed that  there
is  no	specific  reference  to	 removal  from	service,   a
recognised form of punishment sanctified by the Constitution
Acts,  including
Art. 311.
Since
s. 7
expressly  subjects
itself	to  the	 paramount law of  the	Constitution  it  is
obvious that the power to remove is not eroded and vests  in
the  appointing authority apart from the power	to  dismiss.
Indeed, the Central and State rules regulating	disciplinary
control, all over the country, have, for a long period, made
distinction  between  dismissal	 and  removal,	the   former
carrying the more injurious incident of removal plus refusal
of    future   re-employment.	 Anyone	  conversant	with
disciplinary  control of government servants in	 India	will
agree that this fundamental difference between mere  removal
and  dismissal	exists.
Art. 311
enumerates  dismissal	 and
removal as two different punishments, one more serious	than
the  other.  It is perfectly plain that, understood in	this
environment   of  legal	 control  of   government   servants
prevalent  historically in this country, s. 7 of the
Police
Act
, when it uses the expression 'dismissal, must be  deemed
to  have  conveyed the official semantics attached  to	that
expression,  viz., removal from set-vice plus a ban  on	 re-
employment  by the State.  The non-enumeration of  ,removal'
as  a  distinct	 form  of punishment  does  not	 divest	 the
appointing  authority  from  exercising,  subject  to  legal
restrictions  the  power  to  remove  from  service  without
inflicting the more serious Punishment of dismissal.
The expressions 'dismissal' and 'removal' look alike for the
laity  but  in	law they have  acquired	 technical  meanings
sanctified  by long usage, in Service Rules.
In
Khem  Chand
v. Union of India
(1) this Court observed :
".. the expressions 'dismissed', 'removed' and
	      'reduced'	 in rank' are technical words  taken
	      from the service rules where they, are used to
	      denote   the   three   major   categories	  of
	      punishment'."
As  been rightly pointed out in a recent book(2), the  words
'dismissal'  and 'removal' have one distinction, viz.,	that
the former dis-
(1)  [1958] S.C.R. 1080,1089.
(2)  The Civil Servant under the Law and the Constitution-by
Dr.  N.	 Narayanan Nair-The Academy of	Legal  Publications,
Trivandrum-1, Kerala (1973).
865
qualifies from future employment while the latter does	not.
Likewise,   there  is  reference  to  this  distinction	  in
Shyamlal's Case(1) wherein it was said:
"The  position, therefore, is that both  under
	      the rules and according to the last  mentioned
	      decision of the Judicial Committee (I.M. Lal's
	      Case: AIR 1948 PC 121) there is no distinction
	      between a dismissal and a removal except	that
	      the former disqualifies from future employment
	      while  the  latter does not... and it  may  be
	      safely  be  taken, for reasons  stated  above,
	      that....	removal and dismissal stand  on	 the
	      same  footing except as to future	 employment.
	      In  this	sense removal is but  a	 species  of
	      dismissal."
Rule  49  of the Civil Services (Classification,  Control  &
Appeal) Rules,.1930 provides inter alia :
"Removal is termination of service which	does
	      not   disqualify	 from	future	 employment.
	      Dismissal	 is  ;removal  from  service   which
	      ordinarily  disqualifies from  future  employ-
	      ment."
It  follows that 'dismissal' is 'removal with a	 prohibition
super-added'.
Against	 this  background,  here is r. 16(2)  (iii)  of	 the
Punjab	Police Rules which applied during the relevant	time
to the 1st respondent:
"16(2)(iii).    When  a  Police	Officer	  is
	      convicted	  judicially   and   dismissed,	  or
	      dismissed	 as  a	result	of  a	departmental
	      enquiry,	in consequence of corrupt  practice,
	      the  conviction  and dismissal and  its  cause
	      shall be published in the Police Gazette.	  In
	      other  cases of dismissal, when it is  desired
	      to ensure that the Officer dismissed shall not
	      be  re-employed elsewhere, a full	 descriptive
	      roll,  with  particulars of  the	punishments,
	      shall  be sent for publication in	 the  Police
	      Gazette".
The submission made with some attractiveness, by Shri  Goyal
receives  verbal  support  from the text of  the  rule.	  It
speaks of a police officer being dismissed in consequence of
'corrupt  practice' in which case there is a mandate to	 the
State  Government that 'its cause shall be published in	 the
Police	 Gazette'.   'In  other	 cases	of  dismissal'	 the
provision   for	 publication  in  the  Police	Gazette	  is
facultative.   Counsel	spins out the argument that  if	 'in
other  cases of dismissal' the authority intends to  inflict
the  additional penalty of non-reemployment, it should	also
publish	 the  punishment  in the  Police  Gazette.   In	 the
present case there is no indication of any such	 publication
and  so the dismissal does not carry with it the  forbidding
factor	regarding  re-employment.  Read with s.	 6-K,  which
refers	to  dismissal  together	 with  debarment  from	 re-
employment,  the conclusion is sought to be drawn  that	 the
1st respondent's case does not attract the  disqualification
in s. 6-K.
(1) A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 369, 374.
866
We do not agree.The  reasons  are two-fold.  As	 earlier
explained,every 'dismissal' hasa   double    consequence
understood in its contextual connotation.It removes  the
man   from   his  office  and	superadds   debarment	from
reemployment.	Such  being  its  meaning  in	the   Indian
Constitution, in the relevant rules which have been in force
in  the country over the decades and indeed has become	part
of  our officialese, we have to understand the dismissal  as
punishment  imposed upon the constable in this case  as	 one
which  embodies the latent penalty of disability from  being
re-employed.
Secondly, even r. 16(2) (iii) carefully scanned, refuses  to
yield the helpful inference drawn from it by counsel for the
1st respondent.	 That rule does not state 'in other cases of
dismissal' the bar against re-employment operatesonly where
there is publication in the Police gazette to that effect. Dismiss
al,
as such, carries with it this additional penalty inboth
classes	 of cases but in the first category covered  by	 the
rule,publication  is  a duty cast  upon	 the  authority
while in the second type of cases the authority is lift with
the option to publish or not to publish.  If the  dismissing
authority  desires  to ensure itself that  unwittingly	some
other  department may not employ the dismissed official,  he
may,  by way of abundant caution,-resort to  publication  of
the punishment in the Police Gazette.  The language is clear
that to ensurethat  the	 officer  dismissed  shall  not	 be
reemployed the concernedauthority     shall    send	for
publication the relevant particulars.Not   that	  without
such  publication  a right to re-employment inheres  in	 the
dismissed official, but that to make sure that any unknowing
slip  may  not	be  committed  by  another  department,	 the
dismissing officer may take care to forward the	 particulars
of punishment for proper publication.  It is enabling so far
as  the	 dismissing authority is concerned  and	 is  legally
unnecessary to spell the two-in-one punishment of dismissal.
In  this  view	of the matter there is no  escape  from	 the
conclusion  that the 1st respondent was punished  under	 the
former	part  of r. 16 (2) (iii) and  incurred	the  extreme
wrath  of the law including disbarment	from  re-employment.
Logically therefore he suffered disqualification under
s. 6-
K
of  the  Act	 and the  Tribunal,  in	 removing  him	from
Chairmanship, acted legally.
No  other  point has been urged before us and  therefore  we
allow  the  appeal  and affirm the  learned  Single  Judge's
judgment.   In the circumstances of the case we direct	that
the parties will bear their costs in this Court.  The  costs
of the appellant in the courts below will be paid by the 1st
respondent.
P.B.R.
Appeal allowed.
867