[Cites
12
, Cited by
15
]
Supreme Court of India
S. Kalawati vs Durga Prasad & Anr on 2 May, 1975
Equivalent citations: 1975 AIR 1272, AIR 1975 SUPREME COURT 1272, 1976 (1) SCC 696, 30 FACLR 383, 1975 (1) SCWR 657, 1975 ALL LR 319, ILR 1975 2 ALL 726
Author:
A. Alagiriswami
Bench:
A. Alagiriswami
,
P.N. Bhagwati
,
P.K. Goswami
PETITIONER:
S. KALAWATI

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
DURGA PRASAD & ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT02/05/1975

BENCH:
ALAGIRISWAMI, A.
BENCH:
ALAGIRISWAMI, A.
BHAGWATI, P.N.
GOSWAMI, P.K.

CITATION:
 1975 AIR 1272


ACT:
Constitution of India, 1950--
Art. 226--
Petition dismissed in
limine	  but	 a   certificate    granted    under
Art.
133(1)(a)--
Validity of certificate.



HEADNOTE:
The  appellant filed a writ petition before the	 High  Court
under
Art. 226
of the Constitution impugning the  order  of
the  Deputy  Director  of  Consolidation.   The	 High  Court
dismissed  he petition in limine but granted  a	 certificate
under
Art. 133(1)(a)
on the basis of valuation.
On appeal to this Court, the respondent raised a preliminary
objection that the certificate granted was not valid because
the  judgment  of  the	High Court  was	 one  affirming	 the
judgment of the Deputy Director, Consolidation.
Setting aside the order of the High Court,
HELD   :The  certificate  granted  by  the  High  Court	  is
competent.   An order of a High Court under
Art. 226
or	 227
is  an	order in a civil proceeding of a High Court  and  so
falls under
Art. 133.
But it cannot be said that such cases
a  party is exercising any right of appeal conferred on	 him
by any statute nor is the High Court exercising any power of
appeal.	  Whatever might be the position even in respect  of
petitions  under Arts. 226 or 227 of the Constitution  where
the Court goes into the merits of the question, it cannot be
doubted that where it dismisses such a petition in limine it
simply	refuse,,; to exercise its powers under
Art.  226
or
227  and such an order cannot be said to be an order  passed
on  appeal  or	as  affirming the  decision  of	 the  Court.
immediately  below.  Therefore, the order of the High  Court
in the present case is not a judgment of affirmance.  [427F,
427AB]
Abdul  Majid  v. Jawahar Lal, [1904] I.L.R.  36,  All.	350,
Karsondas Dharamsey v. Gangabhai. [1907] I.L.R. 32 Bom. 108,
Sunder	Koer v. Chandishwar Prasad Singh I.L.R. 30 Cal.	 679
Promotho  Nath	Roy  v. W. A. Lee,  [1919]  33	C.L.J.	128,
Ramaswmi Udayar v. Sevu Aru Ramanathan Chettiar A.I.R.	1942
Mad'. 357.  Purnendu Nath Tagore v. Kanailal Ghoshal  [1948]
2 Col. 202, Ganesh Prasad v. Mr. Makhna A.I.R. 1948 All. 375
and Gululabchand v. Kudilal  A.I.R. 1952 M.B. 149,  referred
to.
(2)  The  order of the Deputy Director of  Consolidation  is
not clear and since the High Court dismissed the  appellants
petition  in limine the reasons which led the High Court  to
dismiss are not known.	Hence it is necessary that the	High
Court should deal with the petition before it and dispose of
it by a proper order. [427 GH]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE  JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal  No.  1641  of
1969.
From  the  Judgment and decree dated 13-9-1967 of  the	High
Court of Allahabad in Civil Writ Petition No. 2334 of 1963,
R.   H.	 Dhebur,  D.  V.  Desai and  P.	 C.  Kapur  for	 the
appellant.
G.   N. Dixit, Uma Mehta, S. Bagga and Raj Kumar Mehta,	 for
the Respondent.
425
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
ALAGIRISWAMI,  J.-The appellants is the widow of one  Gover-
dhandass.   The	 1st respondent is  her	 husband's  brother.
Goverdhandass  and  the 1st respondent are the sons  of	 one
Bhojraj.  The appellant claimed 11 plots in Khata No. 97  as
land  in which she was entitled to be a joint  tenant  along
with the 1st respondent.  She claimed certain other plots on
the ground that they were acquired by Bhojraj and  therefore
it  was joint Hindu family property and she was entitled  to
inherit	 those	shares also as a co-tenant  along  with	 1st
respondent.   She  succeeded in respect of the 11  plots  in
Khata No. 97 but failed in respect of the either plots.
The  matter first came up before the  Consolidation  Officer
and  thereafter on appeal before the Settlement Officer	 and
finally	  before  the  Deputy  Director,  Consolidation	  in
revision.   Against  the  order	 of  the  Deputy   Director,
Consolidation she filed a petition before the High Court  of
Allahabad  under
Article 226.
The High, Court dismissed  it
in liminine but granted a certificate under
Article 133	 (1)
(a) of the Constitution.
A  preliminary	objection was raised on behalf	of  the	 1st
respondent  that  the  certificate  granted  was  not  valid
because the judgment of the High Court was one affirming the
judgment of the Deputy Director, Consolidation.	 One of	 the
questions on which the decision of this question depends  is
whether	 the Deputy Director, Consolidation as well  as	 the
other	two  officers  exercising  power  under	  the
U.P.
Consolidation of Holdings Act, 1953
are Courts.	 However, in
the  view we take of the decision of the High Court that  it
is  not	 a  judgment of affirmance this	 question  does	 not
arise.	 The  High  Court dismissed  the  writ	petition  in
limine.	 It did not go into the merits of the case or decide
it even within the limited scope of its powers under
Article
226
or	 227 of the Constitution even if not as a  Court  of
Appeal exercising its powers under section 96 or 100
of	 the
Code of Civil Procedure
.  It simply refused to exercise	 its
powers under those Articles of the Constitution.  Unless the
Court	had  applied  its  mind	 to  the  case	 and   after
consideration affirmed it the order cannot be said to be one
of affirmance.
It  may	 be  useful to consider earlier	 decisions  in	this
connection.
In
Abdul Majid v. Jawahar Lal
(1904 ILR 36	All.
350)  the question of the starting point of  limitation	 for
the  execution	of  a  decree had to  be  decided  and	that
question  depended upon the effect of an order of the  Privy
Council	 dismissing an appeal for want of  prosecution.	  In
that connection the Privy Council observed :
"The  order dismissing the appeal for-want  of
	      prosecution  did not deal judicially with	 the
	      matter  of the suit and could in no  sense  be
	      regarded	as an order adopting  or  confirming
	      the   decision  appealed	from.	 It   merely
	      recognised authoritatively that the  appellant
	      had  not	complied with the  conditions  under
	      which  the  appeal was open to  him  and	that
	      therefore	 'he was in the same position as  if
	      he had not appealed at all."
426
A,   In
Karsondas Dharanuey v. Gangabai
(1907 ILR  32	Bom.
108) an order of the High Court refusing, to admit an appeal
after  the period of limitation had expired was held  to  be
not  a "decree passed on appeal by the High Court" under  s.
595  of the Civil Procedure Code and it was held that  there
was  therefore	no  jurisdiction to grant  leave  to  appeal
therefrom  to  the  Privy  Council under  cl.  (a)  of	that
section.   The meaning of the words "Passed on appeal"	were
specifically considered and it was observed :
"The  meaning  of the  expression	 "passed  on
	      appeal"	has  been  settled  by	a  line	  of
	      authorities, which it is right that we  should
	      follow: see Sunder Koer v. Chandishwar  Prosad
	      Singh  (ILR 30 Cal. 679) and the	cases  there
	      cited.   And applying that  interpretation  to
	      the  circumstances of the case, it cannot	 (in
	      my  opinion)  be	said that there	 is  here  a
	      decree passed on appeal by a High Court."
This Bombay decision was noticed in
Promotho Nath Roy v.  W.
A. Lee
(1919 (33) CLJ 128).  But that decision differed from
the Bombay decision because
in that case
the appeal had been
admitted  and  dismissed  whereas in the  Bombay  case-	 the
appeal was not admitted at all.
In
Ramaswami Udayar v. Sevu
Aru Ramanathan Chettiar
(AIR 1942 Mad. 357) it was held by a
Division  Bench	 of  the Madras High  Court  that  where  an
application to excuse delay, by deducting The time taken  in
other proceedings in computing the time for the	 application
for  rehearing of an appeal, was dismissed and	consequently
no  order  was passed on the application for  rehearing	 the
appeal,	 these were not orders on appeal within the  meaning
of  s. 109 (a)
of the Code of Civil Procedure
and  hence  no
leave  could be granted.
These decisions were	followed  in
Purnendu  Nath	Tagore v. Kanailal Ghoshal  (1948  (2)	Cal.
202).
In
Ganesh Prasad v. Mt.	 Makhna
(AIR 1948 All. 375)  however
an  order dismissing appeal for default on account  of	non-
prosecution  was  held to be a decision which  affirmed	 the
decision of the Court below.
In  Gulabchand	v. Kudilal (AIR 1952 M.B. 149) it  was	held
that the order of the Court dismissing the Special Appeal on
the ground that no appeal lay under
s. 25
of the Act was not
an order which affirmed the decision of the Court below	 and
it was observed that expression "affirms the decision of the
Court  immediately below" implies that the Court  had  dealt
judicially  with the decision of the Court below and  upheld
it and Where the Court holds that it has no jurisdiction  to
entertain an appeal from the decision of the Court below and
rejects	 the appeal, it cannot be held that the decision  of
the  Court  below  is  affirmed	 by  the  rejection  of	 the
incompetent appeal.
The principle behind the majority of the decision is thus to
the  effect  that  where  an  appeal  is  dismissed  on	 the
preliminary  ground  that it was not competent or  for	non-
prosecution  or	 for  any other reason	the  appeal  is	 not
entertained,  the decision cannot be said to be a  "decision
on  appeal" nor of affirmance.	It is only where the  appeal
is beard and the judgment delivered thereafter the
427
judgment can be said to be a judgment of affirmance.   Where
a  party applies to the Court to exercise its  powers  under
Article	 226
or 227 of the Constitution it cannot  be	said
that  the party is exercising any right of appeal  conferred
on  him by any statute nor is the High Court exercising	 any
power  of  appeal.  Whatever might be the position  even  in
respect	 of  petitions	under
Article 226
or	227  of	 the
Constitution  where  the Court goes into the merits  of	 the
question, it cannot be doubted that where it dismisses	such
a  petition  in limine It simply refuses  'to  exercise	 its
powers under
Article 226
or 227 Such an order cannot be said
to be an order passed on appeal or as affirming the decision
of the Court immediately below.
In  'this connection it may be noticed that under  s.109
of
the Code of Civil Procedure
appeals lie to the Supreme Court
from  any  judgment, decree or final order of a	 High  Court
where  it is passed on appeal.	A proceeding  under
Article
226
or 227 of the Constitution is not an appeal. it is	true
that   the-   right  conferred	by
Article   133
of	 the
Constitution,  cannot  in  any	way  be	 curtailed  by	 the
provisions
of the Code of Civil Procedure
and
Article	 133
does not speak of judgment, decree or final order passed  on
appeal by the High Court.  All the earlier decisions of	 the
various	  Courts  referred  to	above  are  based   on	 the
interpretation	of  ss.	 109 and-110
of the  Code  of  Civil
Procedure
.   An order of a High Court in a  petition  tinder
Article	 226
or 227 would be an order in a civil  proceeding
of a High Court and so fall under
Article 133.
Where a High
Court  refuses	to  entertain such  a  proceeding  the	same
considerations that were applied in the earlier cases  where
an  appeal  was not judicially considered  should  Tic	held
applicable also on principle.
We  are	 therefore of opinion that an order  in	 a  petition
under
Article 226
or 227 dismissed in limine is not a  final
order in a proceeding for the purpose of
Article 133 (1) (a)
of  the	 Constitution  and is not therefore  a	judgment  of
affirmance  under
Article  133(1) (a)
,	 and  therefore	 the
certificate granted by the High Court is competent.
As  regards the appeal itself we must say that we  have	 not
been able to understand the order of the Deputy Director  of
Constitution which was sought to be quashed by means of	 the
writ  petition.	 We were invited by the respondent  to	look
into  the  orders  of  the  Consolidation  Officer  and	 the
Settlement  Officer in order to understand the order of	 the
Deputy Director of Consolidation.  As the order sought to be
quashed was that of the Deputy Director Consolidation we  do
not feel called upon to do so.	We are therefore in the dark
as  to	the reasons which might have led the High  Court  to
dismiss the appellant's petition in limine.  We consider  it
necessary and proper therefore to set aside the order of the
High Court and direct that the petition be dealt with by  it
and disposed of by a proper order.  The High Court will bear
the  matter  afresh and dispose it of by a  reasoned  order.
There will be no order as to costs.
P.B.R.
 Case remanded.
428