[Cites
8
, Cited by
24
]
Supreme Court of India
Sahu Minerals & Properties Ltd vs Presiding Officer, Labour Court & Ors on 6 August, 1975
Equivalent citations: 1975 AIR 1745, 1976 SCR (1) 263, AIR 1975 SUPREME COURT 1745, 1976 3 SCC 93, 1975 LAB. I. C. 1224, 1976 (1) SCR 263, 1976 (1) SCJ 513, 1975 2 LABLJ 341, 48 FJR 21, 31 FACLR 162
Author:
A. Alagiriswami
Bench:
A. Alagiriswami
,
P.K. Goswami
,
N.L. Untwalia
PETITIONER:
SAHU MINERALS & PROPERTIES LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PRESIDING OFFICER, LABOUR COURT & ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/08/1975

BENCH:
ALAGIRISWAMI, A.
BENCH:
ALAGIRISWAMI, A.
GOSWAMI, P.K.
UNTWALIA, N.L.

CITATION:
 1975 AIR 1745		  1976 SCR  (1) 263
 1976 SCC  (3)	93
 CITATOR INFO :
 R	    1978 SC 275	 (5)


ACT:
Industrial Disputes  Act, 1947
,
Sections 25F
proviso to
see. 25FFF(1)  and
section  33C(2)
-Labour  Court  asked  so
decide	retrenchment   compensation  pay   able	 to  workmen
question of  retrenchment or  the closure  of factory beyond
control of employer if could be decided by Labour Court-Item
10 to Third Schedule, if attracted.



HEADNOTE:
     The Government of Bihar sent to the Labour Court, Chota
Nagpur	Division,  Ranchi,  application	 in  respect  of  73
workers of  the appellant  for decision under
sec. 33C(2)
of
the Industrial	Disputes Act  for retrenchment compensation.
The contention	of the	appellant was  that it was a case of
closer for  reasons beyond  its control and that, therefore,
the workmen  were entitled to compensation under the proviso
to sub-section	(1) of
sec. 25FFF
of the  Act and  not  to
retrenchment compensation.  The workers	 contended that they
were entitled  to retrenchment	compensation under
sec. 25F
.
The Labour  Court held	that it	 was a case of retrenchment.
The writ  petitions filed  by the employer in the High Court
has failed  and these  appeals have  been preferred  to this
Court on  the basis of the certificate of fitness granted by
the High Court.
     Dismissing the appeals,
^
     HELD :  (i) It  was competent  to the  Labour Court  to
decade whether the case before it was a case of retrenchment
compensation or the proviso to sub-sec. (1) of
section 25FFF
was attracted  on closure  of the  establishment.  Even	 the
employer does  not dispute  that the workmen are entitled to
compensation. It  only says  that the compensation should be
calculated on a particular basis different from the basis on
which the  workmen claim. The claim also falls under
Chapter
VA of the Act
. [266H; 267B-C]
     Central Bank  of India Ltd. v. P. S. Rajagopalan [1964]
3 S.C.R. 140 relied on.
     U.P. Electric  Company v.	R. K. Shukla [1970] 1 S.C.R.
507 and South Arcot Elect. Co. v. N. K. Khan [1969] 2 S.C.R.
902, referred to.
     (ii) Item	No. 10 of the
Third Schedule to the Act
does
not say	 that all  questions arising  out of retrenchment of
workmen and  closure of	 establishment have to be decided by
Industrial Tribunal.  This entry  refers to  cases where the
right to  retrench workers  or to  lose an  establishment is
disputed and  that question  is referred for adjudication to
the Industrial	Tribunal. In  that case the Tribunal will be
competent to  decide whether the closure or retrenchment was
justified and  whether the  retrenchment workmen  should  be
reinstated or  the workers in the establishment purported to
have been  closed should  be continued	to be  paid on basis
that the  so-called closure  was no  closure at	 all. In the
present case  the workmen do not ask for reinstatement. They
accept	the   termination  of	the  services  and  ask	 for
compensation. The  only dispute	 is about  the	compensation
whether it  is to  be paid under
s. 25F
or 25FFF. Item 10 of
Third schedule will not cover such a  case. [267D-G]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeals Nos. 1266 &
1267 of 1969.
From the  Judgment and  order dated the 29th July, 1968
of the	Patna High Court in Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.
61 of 1967
     H. K. Puri and K. K. Mohan, for the appellant
264
D. Goburdhan,  for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 (In both the
appear) Respondent  No. 21  (In C.A.  No. 1266/69)  and	 for
respondent No. 60 (in C.A. No. 1267/69).
A. K.  Nag, for  respondent  Nos.	3-19  (In  C.A.	 No.
1266/69) and  for respondent  Nos, 4,  S, 7-9, 11-32, 35-42,
44-52, 54-58 (In C.A. No. 1267/69).
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     ALAGIRISWAMI, J. By two notifications dated 22-6-65 and
28-8-65 the  Government of  Bihar sent	to the Labour Court,
Chota Nagpur Division, Ranchi, applications in respect of 73
workers of the appellant for decision under
s. 33C(2)
of the
Industrial disputes  Act for  retrenchment compensation. The
employer contended that it was a case of closure for reasons
beyond its  control and	 that  therefore  the  workmen	were
entitled to compensation under the proviso to subsection (1)
of
s.  25FFF
of the Act and not to retrenchment compensation
workers contended,  however,  that  they  were	entitled  to
retrenchment compensation under
s.25F
. The Labour Court held
that it was a case of retrenchment. Two writ petitions filed
by the	employer before	 the High  Court of Patna failed and
these appeals  have been filed in pursuance of a certificate
of fitness granted by the High Court.
The argument  on behalf  of the appellant is that where
there is  a dispute  before the	 Labour Court considering an
application under  s. 33C(2)  as to  whether the workmen had
been retrenched	 or the	 factory had been closed for reasons
beyond the  control of	the employer,  it was  not a  matter
which the  Labour Court	 was competent to decide and that it
was a matter which only an Industrial Tribunal considering a
reference under	 s. 10 is competent to decide. In particular
Item 10	 of the
Third Schedule to the Act
is relied upon to
show that the matter relating to retrenchment and closure is
one which  only	 an  Industrial	 Tribunal  is  competent  to
decide. Reliance  is placed upon a decision of this Court in
U.P. Elect.
Co. v.  R. K.  Shukla
(1) where it was held that
the  power   of	 the   Labour  Court   is  to  complete	 the
compensation claimed  to be  payable to	 the workmen  on the
footing that  there has	 been retrenchment  of the  workmen,
that where  retrenchment is  conceded and the only matter in
dispute is  that by  virtue of
s. 25FFF
no liability to pay
compensation has  arisen the  Labour Court will be competent
to decide  the question, that in such a case the question is
one  of	  computation  and  not	 of  determination,  of	 the
conditions precedent  to the  accrual of liability, and that
where the  dispute is  whether workmen	have been retrenched
and computation	 of the	 amount is subsidiary or incidental,
the Labour  Curt will have no authority to trespass upon the
powers	of   the  Tribunal  with  which	 it  is	 statutorily
invested.
In the
U.P. Electric  Company
case  (supra) the  facts
were somewhat  different. The  Court
in that case
noticed at
page 513 of the report that-
"The company	had expressly  raised  a  contention
     that they	had not	 retrenched the workmen and that the
     workmen had
265
voluntarily abandoned  the Company's service by seeking
     employment with  the  Board  even	before	the  company
     closed its undertaking".
This Court emphasised at page 5l7 of the report that-
	  If the  liability arises from an award, settlement
     or under  the provisions  of Ch.  V-A or by virtue of a
     statute or a scheme made thereunder, mere denial by the
     employer may  not be  sufficient to  negative the claim
     under
s. 33C(2)
before the Labour Court".
We, therefore,	do not	see how	 the decision  in  the
U.P.
Electric Company
's  case (supra)  can come to the aid of the
appellant  in	this  case.   The  said	  case	is   clearly
distinguishable on the peculiar facts as noticed above.
In
Central	 Bank of  India Ltd  v. P. S. Rajagopalan
(1)
this Court considered the scope of
s. 33C(2)
elaborately and
it would  be necessary	to quote  at some  length from	that
decision. In  that case it was urged by the employer that
s.
33C(2)
can  be invoked	by a  workman  who  is	entitled  to
receive from  the employer  the benefit there specified, but
the right  of the  workman to  receive the benefit has to be
admitted and  could not	 be a  matter of dispute between the
parties and  that the  only point which the labour Court can
determine is  one in  relation to computation of the benefit
ill terms of money. This Court observed:
"We are  not impressed  by this  argument. In	 our
     opinion on a fair and reasonable construction of sub-s.
     (2) it  is clear  that if	a workman's right to receive
     the benefit is disputed, that may have to be determined
     by the  Labour Court.  Before proceeding to compute the
     benefit in	 terms of  money the Labour Court inevitably
     has to deal with the question as to whether the workman
     has a  right to receive that benefit. If the said right
     is not  disputed, nothing more needs to be done and the
     labour Court  can proceed	to compute  the value of the
     benefit in	 terms of  money; but  if the  said right is
     disputed the  Labour Court must deal with that question
     and decide whether workman has the right to receive the
     benefit as	 alleged by him and it is only if the Labour
     Court answers  this point in favour of the workman that
     the next  question of  making necessary computation can
     arise. It seems to us that the opening clause of sub-s.
     (2) docs  not admit  of the  construction for which the
     appellant contends	 unless we  add some  words in	that
     clause. The  clause "Where	 any workman  is entitled to
     receive from  the employer	 any benefit"  does not mean
     "where such  workman is  admittedly, or admitted to be.
entitled to  receive  such	 benefit."  The	 appellant's
     constructional would necessarily introduce the addition
     of the  words "admittedly,	 or admitted  to be" in that
     clause, and  that clearly	is not permissible. Besides,
     if seems  to us that is the appellant's construction is
     accepted it would necessarily mean that
266
it would  be at the option of the employer to allow the
     workman to avail himself of the remedy provided by sub-
     s. (2),  because he has merely to raise an objection on
     the ground that the right claimed by the workman is not
     admitted to  oust the  jurisdiction of the Labour Court
     to entertain the workman's application. The claim under
     s. 33C(2)	clearly postulates that the determination of
     the question  about computing  the benefit	 in terms of
     money may,	 in some  cases, have  to be  preceded by an
     enquiry into  the existence  of the  right and  such an
     enquiry must  be held  to be  incidental  to  the	main
     determination which  has been  assigned to	 the  Labour
     Court by  sub-s.(2). As  Maxwell in  Interpretation  of
     Statutes, p.  350, has observed 'where an Act confers a
     jurisdiction, it  impliedly also  grants the  power  of
     doing all	such acts,  or employing  such means, as are
     essentially  necessary   to  its	execution;  we	must
     accordingly  hold	that  s.  33C(2)  takes	 within	 its
     purview case of workmen who claimed that the benefit to
     which they	 are entitled should be computed in terms of
     money, even  though the  right to	the benefit on which
     their claim  is based  is disputed	 by their employers.
     Incidentally, it  may be  relevant to add that it would
     be somewhat  odd that under sub-s (3), the Labour Court
     should have  been authorised  to delegate	the work  of
     computing	the  money  value  of  the  benefit  to	 the
     Commissioner if  the determination of the said question
     was the  only task	 assigned to  the Labour Court under
     sub-s.  (2).  On  the  other  hand,  sub-s.(3)  becomes
     intelligible if it is held that what can be assigned to
     the Commissioner includes only a part of the assignment
     of the  Labour of	Court under  sub-s. (2)". Further on
     this Court observed:
"It is thus clear that claims made under
s.33C(1)
,
     by	 itself	  can  be   only  claims  referable  to	 the
     settlement,  award,   or  the  relevant  provisions  of
     Chapter VA.  These words  of limitations  are not to be
     found in  s.33C(2) and  to that extent, the scope of
s.
     33C(2)
is	undoubtedly wider  than that of
s. 33C(1)
...
     It is  unnecessary in  the present	 appeals  either  to
     state exhaustively	 or even  to indicate  broadly	what
     other categories  of claims  can fall  under
s. 33C(2)
.
     There is  no doubt	 that the three categories of claims
     mentioned in  s. 33C  (1) fall  under
s.  33C(2)
and in
     that sense, s. 33C(2) can itself be deemed to be a kind
     of execution proceeding, but it is possible that claims
     not based	on settlements,	 awards or  made  under	 the
     provisions of  Chapter VA,	 may also be competent under
     s. 33C(2) and that may illustrate its wider scope."
This Court	 then went  on to discuss some of the claims
which would  not fall  under
s.33C(2)
,	which  is  not	very
relevant for  the purposes  of this  case. The	present case
stand on  an even  stronger footing.  Even the employer does
not dispute  that the  workmen are entitled to compensation.
It only says that the compensation should be calculated on a
particular basis  different from  the  basis  on  which	 the
workmen claim. The claim also falls under Chapter VA.
267
In the  decision in  South Arcot,	Elect.
Co.  v. N. K.
Khan
(1) where  a right	had  been  claimed  by	the  various
workmen in  their applications	under
s. 33C(2)
, it was held
that it	 was a	right which  accured to them under
s.25FF
of
the Act	 and was  an existing  right at	 the time when these
applications were  made, that  the Labour  Court clearly had
jurisdiction to	 decide whether	 such a right did or did not
exist  when   dealing  with   the  application	 under	that
provision, and	that the  mere denial of that by the company
could not take away its jurisdiction.
We hold  that in  this case  it was  competent  to	 the
Labour Court to decide whether the case before it was a case
of retrenchment compensation or the proviso to sub-s. (1) of
s. 25FFF
was attracted on closure of the establishment. The
question even according to the employer falls under
s. 25FFF
and therefore in deciding that question the Labour Court has
necessarily  to	  decide  whether   the	 proviso   has	been
satisfied.
We do not consider that the reference to item No. 10 of
the
Third  Schedule to the Act
can decide the matter one way
or the other. The item reads as follows:
"10.	Retrenchment   of  workmen  and	 closure  of
     establishment
It  does   not	say   that  all	 questions  arising  out  of
retrenchment of	 workmen and  closure of establishments have
to be  decided by  Industrial  Tribunal.  Logically  if	 the
contentions is	to be  accepted, even  if  the	question  of
retrenchment is	 not disputed  the Labour  Court will not be
competent to  decide the question of compensation payable in
a case	of retrenchment	 because it  raises  a	question  of
jurisdiction. This  entry should  therefore be held to refer
to cases  where the right to retrench workers or to close an
establishment is  disputed and that question is referred for
adjudication to	 the Industrial	 Tribunal. In  that case the
Tribunal will  be competent to decide whether the closure or
retrenchment  was   justified  and  whether  the  retrenched
workmen	 should	  be  reinstated   or  the  workers  in	 the
establishment  purported  to  have  been  closed  should  be
continued to be paid on the basis that the so-called closure
was to	closure at  all. In  the present case the workmen do
not ask	 for reinstatement.  They accept  the termination of
their services and ask for compensation. The only dispute is
about the  compensation whether it is to be paid under
s.25F
or 25FFF.  Item 10  of Third  Schedule will not cover such a
case.
We therefore  uphold the decision of the High Court and
dismiss these appeals with costs.
V.M.K.					  Appeals dismissed.
268