[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Abhishek Singh vs Ajay Kumar on 5 June, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
2025 INSC 807




                                                                    NON-REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                  OF 2025
                                        (Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.480/2025)



                            ABHISHEK SINGH                      … APPELLANT(S)


                                                           Versus


                            AJAY KUMAR & ORS.                  … RESPONDENT(S)




                                                       JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL, J.
Leave Granted.
Signature Not Verified
2.     The appellant, Abhishek Singh, is the complainant and
Digitally signed by
NAVEEN D
Date: 2025.06.06
16:09:11 IST
has approached this Court aggrieved by the judgment and order
Reason:
Crl.A@ SLP(Crl) No. 480/2025                      Page 1 of 11
dated 12th November, 2024, passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Patna in Criminal Miscellaneous No.67884 of
2023, whereby the respondents’ application under
Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19731 was allowed and the
First Information Report dated 7th September 2023 filed by him
under
Sections 420
,
406
and
34
of the Indian Penal Code,
18602, being Mithanpura P.S. Case No.393 of 2023, was
quashed.
3.            The brief facts that gave rise to this appeal, as set out by
the Courts below, are that the appellant, being a businessman by
vocation, was in need of certain funds which he secured by way
of a loan from the Bank of India, Motijhil Branch. Having
pledged 254 grams of 22 carat gold ornaments by way of
security, a loan of ₹ 7,70,000 was made in his favour, on 22nd
July, 2020. The dispute arises when it comes to the repayment
of this loan. According to the appellant, upon receipt of notice
dated 7th October, 2022 from the bank asking him to pay a sum
of ₹ 8,01,383.59, which included interest, he repaid the same as
on 31st March, 2023. Unbeknownst to him, the bank conducted
a revaluation of the gold pledged by him and, to that end,
deducted ₹ 1500 towards fees. His applications for returning the
pledged gold fell on deaf years. On the other hand, according to
1
Cr.P.C
.
2
IPC
Crl.A@ SLP(Crl) No. 480/2025                                  Page 2 of 11
the bank, he did not pay the loan, because of which the gold
became an asset of the bank. In order to realise the money
involved in the transaction, the said gold was revalued and
found to be counterfeit when it was allegedly reported by a
valuer, different from the one who had originally valued the
appellant’s gold when the loan was made, that the material
pledged was not gold in actuality but gold plated on top of other
metals. One FIR was registered under
sections 420
and
379
IPC
against the appellant on 22nd May, 2023. Another FIR, subject
matter of this appeal, was registered subsequently after an
application was made by the appellant to the competent
authority under
Section 156(3)
of the Cr.P.C. Respondent No.1,
the Accused therein, was the Branch and Credit Manager at the
time of the revaluation of the appellant's gold.
4.     Having completed its investigation into the appellant’s
allegations, the investigating authorities filed a chargesheet
before the Judicial Magistrate, 1st Class (East) Mithanpura,
having the particulars as Final Report/Chargesheet No.371/24,
dated 30th September, 2024. While the investigation was still
underway, the respondents filed an application seeking quashing
of the FIR on 5th October, 2023. It is in this application that the
impugned judgment came to be passed.
5.     The High Court, having perused the material on record,
came to the following conclusions :
Crl.A@ SLP(Crl) No. 480/2025                          Page 3 of 11
a) this FIR is “a mere counterblast” to the FIR lodged by the
           bank;
b) the same has been lodged with the intention of causing
           wrongful loss to the bank and wrongful gain to himself;
c) to this end, the respondent before the High Court, the
           appellant herein, had obtained a loan from the bank for
           pledging spurious gold ornaments;
d) the institution of the FIR was “with an ulterior motive
           and also as an afterthought”;
e) even if the contents of the complaint are taken at face
           value, no offence is made out.
f) The Court relied upon paragraphs 29 to 31 of
Priyanka
           Srivastava v. State of UP3
to hold that since the appellant
           had not affixed any affidavit as mandated by this
           judgment, the FIR was unsustainable;
g) Continuation of criminal proceedings against the
           respondents herein would amount to an abuse of process
           of the Court, given that the complaint made by the
           appellant herein was “malicious”.
6.         In that view of the matter, the FIR was quashed, and the
appellant carried the matter to this Court.
3
(2015) 6 SCC 287
Crl.A@ SLP(Crl) No. 480/2025                              Page 4 of 11
7.     We have heard the learned Senior counsel appearing for
the parties and have gone through the record in detail. It is
sought to be contended by the appellant, inter alia, that :
a) the High Court failed to appreciate that as on 31 st
          March, 2023, there was no outstanding loan, against
          which the process of recovery could have been
          initiated;
b) in the impugned judgment, reliance was placed on
          documents other than the FIR/complaint which would
          be outside its scope. Other documents, which may be
          of the nature of defence of the party against whom
          allegations have been made in the FIR, cannot be
          looked into;
c) the revaluation of the appellant’s pledged gold was
          done behind his back and contrary to the terms of the
          loan agreement. The possibility of tampering with or
          replacing the ornaments with those of questionable
          quality cannot be ruled out;
d) the complaint made under
section 156 (3)
Cr.P.C. dated
          24th May, 2023 did have an affidavit attached to it, and
          therefore, the findings made in Paras 33 to 35, are
          erroneous;
Crl.A@ SLP(Crl) No. 480/2025                           Page 5 of 11
e) the non-lodging of FIR against the 1st valuer, which,
          according to the respondents, was entirely incorrect,
          raises suspicion;
f) the charge on the appellant’s account without consent
          or prior notice amounts to fraud and cheating.
Per contra, the respondents canvassed, amongst others,
the following aspects :
a) the gold loan account of the appellant had been
          declared a non-performing asset firstly on 1st of May,
          2021 but then upon payment, the same was again
          upgraded to standard. Subsequent non-payment led to
          its declaration as an NPA once again on 30th April,
          2022.
b) The amount deposited by the appellant on issuance of a
          recall notice was not sufficient for the account to be
          upgraded again and, as such, the gold pledged by the
          appellant was revalued.
c) Upon finding that the 1st gold valuer had possibly
          committed fraud, his de-empanelment was made.
d) At the time of granting of loan to the appellant the
          respondents herein were not posted at the relevant
          location but were only present at the time of
          revaluation.
Crl.A@ SLP(Crl) No. 480/2025                          Page 6 of 11
e) The appellant deliberately allowed the loan to become
              an NPA, since he knew that the ornaments alleged were
              fake.
f) In the 1st recall notice dated 30th July, 2022 issued to
              the appellant, it had been clearly stated that if he failed
              to deposit the dues within 15 days, the bank would take
              steps to auction the gold jewellery. The appellant did
              not respond. This shows the clear intention on the part
              of the appellant to cheat.
8.         We have given our consideration to the multifarious
arguments advanced at the bar.
9.         The scope of the Court’s power to quash and set aside
proceedings is well-settled to warrant any restatement. While
the arguments advanced have the potential to raise many issues
for consideration, we must first satisfy ourselves as to the
propriety of the exercise of such power by the High Court. The
task of the High Court, when called upon to adjudicate an
application seeking to quash the proceedings, is to see whether,
prima facie, an offence is made out or not. It is not to examine
whether the charges may hold up in the Court. In doing so, the
area of action is circumscribed.
In
Rajeev Kourav v.
Baisahab4
, it was held :
4
(2020) 3 SCC 317
Crl.A@ SLP(Crl) No. 480/2025                                Page 7 of 11
“8. It is no more res integra that exercise of power
               under
Section 482
CrPC to quash a criminal proceeding
               is only when an allegation made in the FIR or the
               charge-sheet constitutes the ingredients of the
               offence/offences alleged. Interference by the High
               Court under
Section 482
CrPC is to prevent the abuse
               of process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends
               of justice. It is settled law that the evidence produced
               by the accused in his defence cannot be looked into by
               the court, except in very exceptional circumstances, at
               the initial stage of the criminal proceedings. It is trite
               law that the High Court cannot embark upon the
               appreciation of evidence while considering the petition
               filed under
Section 482
CrPC for quashing criminal
               proceedings. It is clear from the law
laid down by
this
               Court that if a prima facie case is made out disclosing
               the ingredients of the offence alleged against the
               accused, the Court cannot quash a criminal
               proceeding.”
10.        A reference may also be made to the recent decision of
this Court in
Naresh Aneja v. State of U.P.5
, where it was held
that :
“18. It is well settled that when considering an
               application under Section 482CrPC, the court cannot
               conduct a mini-trial but instead is to be satisfied that
               prima facie the offences as alleged are made out. To put
               it differently, it is to be seen, without undertaking a
               minute examination of the record, that there is some
               substance in the allegations made which could meet the
               threshold of statutory language.”
5
(2025) 2 SCC 604
Crl.A@ SLP(Crl) No. 480/2025                                      Page 8 of 11
11.    In the present case, the Court has not only taken note of
the fraud (prevention and detection) risk management policy of
the bank but has also factored in the removal of the 1st valuer to
come to the conclusion that there is an absence of malafides on
the part of the bank. It has also come to the findings on merits
that the appellant undertook the entire process of securing a
loan from the bank with ill intention. We are at a loss to
understand as to how such a conclusion was arrived at, for the
settled position is that for determining intention, evidence has to
be taken into account.         In a similar vein, how the Court
concluded that the appellant had an ulterior motive, is unclear.
12.    That apart, even though the account of the appellant was
declared as NPA in April and despite the deposition of some
amount it could not be upgraded to a standard account, the path
available to the bank to auction off the gold was admittedly not
taken. The first recall notice was not answered. The second
recall notice was issued. The time granted was 15 days, but the
payment was made much thereafter, on 22nd November. The
revaluation report is of February, 2023, i.e., much after the
payment had been made and the loan stood settled. Both letters
addressed by the appellant to the officials of the bank seeking
return of the pledged gold were subsequent to the full and final
payment, i.e., on 3rd April, 2023 and 25th April, 2023.
Crl.A@ SLP(Crl) No. 480/2025                           Page 9 of 11
13.    It is true that the appellant repaid the amount, but with
substantial delay.      However, once the loan is settled, it is
difficult to understand as to why the gold was revalued and
auctioned.
14.    Still further, the discussion made by the High Court in
quashing the FIR in no way addresses the possibility of the
respondents’ possible involvement in the misappropriation of
the gold pledged. There was no third-party verification
undertaken by the bank to corroborate the findings returned by
the 2nd valuer, so it cannot be positively ruled out, without
appreciating the evidence, that all the persons involved from the
bank or outside (valuers) did not commit any act affecting
appellant’s pledged gold. In any event, at all times the appellant
had no access to the gold which, after its initial valuation, was
always kept in the safe custody of the bankers. Fraud, if any,
whether perpetrated at the first instance of valuation, or later, is
a matter which could be unearthed only after a trial based on the
evidence led by the parties.          But, as of now, in no
circumstances, it can be said that no prima facie case regarding
commission of an offence, as alleged in the FIR, is made out
from its perusal.
15.    In that view of the matter, we hold that the High Court
had improperly quashed the proceedings initiated by the
appellant. It stands clarified that we have not expressed any
Crl.A@ SLP(Crl) No. 480/2025                           Page 10 of 11
opinion on the matter, and the guilt or innocence of the
respondents has to be established in the trial, in accordance with
the law. The proceedings out of the subject FIR, mentioned in
paragraph 2 are revived and restored to the file of the concerned
Court.
16.      The appeal is allowed. The Registry is directed to
communicate a copy of this order to the learned Registrar
General, High Court of Judicature at Patna, who shall send
forthwith a copy of this order to the concerned Court for
necessary action.
Pending applications, if any, shall stand closed.
……………….J.
                                                    (Sanjay Karol)



                                                   ……………….J.
                                                    (Manoj Misra)
5th June, 2025;
New Delhi.
Crl.A@ SLP(Crl) No. 480/2025                             Page 11 of 11