[Cites
20
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rahil vs State(Govt. Of Nct Of Delhi) on 25 June, 2025
2025 INSC 858                                                            Reportable

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1856 OF 2014


                            Rahil & Anr.                           .…   Appellant(s)

                                                      Versus


                            State (Govt. of N.C.T. of Delhi)       …. Respondent(s)



                                                  JUDGMENT
Joymalya Bagchi, J
1.              By the impugned judgment the High Court had reversed an

                            acquittal passed by the trial court and convicted the

                            appellants for commission of offence under
Section 302
of

                            the Indian Penal Code, 18601 and sentenced them to life

                            imprisonment.
2.              Prosecution case in brief is as follows:-
Co-accused Suraiya had entered into a sale agreement with

                            the deceased Shakeel ur Rehman for purchase of property

                            number 15/1 Jaipur Estate, Nizamuddin, New Delhi. Prior

                            to the sale deed being executed, on 6.04.2003 Shakeel ur
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2025.07.16
16:59:15 IST
Reason:
Rehman started raising a boundary wall in the property.
            1 Hereinafter ‘
IPC
’.
Page 1 of 21
Suraiya and her associates resisted and a quarrel ensued.
Suraiya threatened to kill Shakeel ur Rehman. Matter was

     reported to the police and amicably settled. At 7.30 pm,

     Suraiya made a phone call to deceased on the landline and

     called him to her residence. Thereafter, deceased went

     missing. Despite efforts deceased could not be traced.
3.   As a consequence, Aniq ur Rehman (PW3) lodged missing

     DD entry No. 27A (Ex. PW3/B) at 7.15 AM on 7.04.2003 at

     Police Station, Hazrat Nizamuddin. On the same day at 5:30

     pm, a written complaint was filed by Aniq ur Rehman (PW3)

     which was treated as First Information Report under
Section 365
/
34
IPC against Suraiya, Mohd. Fazal her

     brother, and the appellants, namely Rahil and Noor Ahmed

     who are her son and husband, respectively.
4.   During the investigation, Fazal and one Mohan Seth were

     arrested on 13.04.2003. On their disclosure statements

     decomposed body of deceased was recovered near Haridwar.

     Dr. Pradeep Kumar, Postmortem Doctor (PW9) opined that

     the death was due to asphyxia as a result of strangulation

     and had occurred 3 to 5 days ago.
5.   In course of trial, charges were framed against Suraiya,

     Mohd. Fazal, Mohan Seth and the appellants under
Page 2 of 21
Sections 120B
and
302
/
34
read with 120B
IPC
. Mohd.
Fazal and Mohan Seth were also charged under
sections

      201
/
34
IPC.
6.   During trial, prosecution examined 25 witnesses and

      exhibited a number of documents. In conclusion of trial, the

      trial judge while convicting Suraiya and Mohd. Fazal under
Section 302
/
34
IPC acquitted the appellants of the charges

      levelled against them. Mohd. Fazal and Mohan Seth were

      also convicted under
Section 201
/
34
IPC.
7.   Suraiya, Mohd. Fazal and Mohan Seth preferred appeals

      against their conviction while the State challenged the

      acquittal of appellants before High Court.
8.   By a common order, High Court while upholding the

      conviction of Suraiya reversed the acquittal of the appellants

      and held them guilty under
Section 302
/
34
IPC along with

      Suraiya. Mohd. Fazal was acquitted of the charge of murder

      but his conviction along with Mohan Seth under
Section

      201
IPC was upheld. Appellants as well as Suraiya appealed

      against their conviction. We are informed that Suraiya has

      died   in   the   meantime   and      her   appeal   has   abated.

      Accordingly, the appellants' appeal is taken up for hearing.
9.    Mr. Mohd. Irshad Hanif, ld. counsel for Appellants argued

      that High Court erred in reversing a well-reasoned acquittal
Page 3 of 21
on the basis of vague surmises and inferences. He

    contended mere suspicion howsoever high cannot take the

     place of proof.
10. On the other hand, Mr. Rajan Kumar Chourasia, ld. counsel

   for Respondent-State argued that findings of trial court were

   wholly perverse and against the weight of evidence on record.

   PW-3, 4 and 6 unequivocally deposed that appellant had

   received a phone call and gone to the house of Suraiya.

   Appellants are son and husband of Suraiya, their presence at

   the place of occurrence was most natural. No plea of alibi

   was taken by the appellants to probabilise their absence.

   CDRs show active phone calls between Rahil and Mohd.

   Fazal in the night of 6.04.2003. Tower location of Rahil’s

   phone probabilises his presence at Nizamuddin.
11. Prosecution case is based on circumstantial evidence. The

    incriminating circumstances proposed by the prosecution

    are as follows:-
(i)  Suraiya had entered into a sale agreement with the

         deceased Shakeel ur Rehman.       On the fateful day,

         before sale deed could be executed Shakeel ur Rehman

         started constructing a boundary wall on the property.
Page 4 of 21
This resulted in a skirmish between Shakeel ur

           Rehman and Suraiya and her associates.
(ii)   The matter was reported to the police and amicably

           resolved.
(iii)    In the evening of the same day, Shakeel ur Rehman

           received a phone call from Suraiya and stated to his

           relations, PW-3,4 and 6 that he was going to Suraiya’s

           residence.
(iv)   Thereafter Shakeel ur Rehman went missing. On

           7.04.2003, PW-3 lodged missing diary at 7:15 am

           being DD No.27A-Ex.PW 3/B and at 5:30 pm he lodged

           FIR against Suraiya, Fazal and the appellants.
(v)    On the disclosure statements of Mohd. Fazal and

           Mohan Seth dead body was recovered.
(vi)   Postmortem Doctor PW9 opined that the cause of

          death was asphyxia due to strangulation.
12. Trial Court analysed the evidence on record and acquitted

    the appellants holding as follows:-
Noor Ahmed
       “There was a property transaction between the
       accused's wife Suraiya and the deceased; litigation in
       that regard is going on; a quarrel between accused, his
       wife & other accused on one side and the deceased
       and his brother on the other side on the issue of
       construction of boundary wall had taken place on
       6.4.03 wife Suraiya had called deceased to their
       house; deceased had come to Suraiya's house.
Besides this, no further evidence except his own
       disclosure and disclosure statements of co-accused,
Page 5 of 21
(which are inadmissible in evidence against the
      accused) has come on record against the accused;
      Thus, there is no material on record to establish that
      the accused had concerted and conspired with other
      co-accused and had participated in the commission of
      the crime i.e. murder of the deceased. In view of the
      above, accused Noor Ahmed is acquitted of charges
      U/s 302/ r/w 120B
IPC
”

      Rahil
      “Accused is the son of the accused Noor Ahmed and
      Suraiya. His concern regarding old property dispute of
      his mother was there to the extent as would that be of
      a son; His presence and participation in the quarrel on
      6.4.03 is also substantiated. Beyond that, the only
      other evidence which has been placed on record
      against the accused is the recovery of deceased's
      purse from accused's residence, at his instance. The
      recovery of deceased's purse at the instance of
      accused has not been proved beyond reasonable
      doubt. Besides above material, prosecution has placed
      on record the phone call details of accused Rahil which
      show that accused Rahil made and received phone
      calls from accused Suraiya and Fazal. The said calls
      no doubt reflect that the accused Rahil was
      associating with accused Suraiya and Fazal. Except
      that no other evidence has come on record against the
      accused. Except for his own disclosure and that of his
      co-accused admitting to his complicity in murdering
      the deceased, no other evidence has been led by
      prosecution linking accused Rahil to the commission of
      murder. The accused Rahil is therefore acquitted of
      charge
u/s 302
r/w 120B
IPC
.”
13. The High Court reversed the finding of the trial court

   holding as follows:-
Page 6 of 21
“As far are Suraiya, Noor Ahmed and Rahil are
       concerned, their presence in the house at 7/7.30 PM
       when the deceased Shakeel ur Rehman was called
       and came to their residence, has been proved and
       should be accepted. Suraiya being a lady could not
       have committed the said offence alone. Presence of her
       husband and son was axiomatic and normal. We do
       not find any explanation has been given by Noor
       Ahmed or Rahil as to their absence from the place of
       occurrence. In fact, the call details of Rahil (Ex.
       PW23/B) and Mohd. Fazal (Ex. PW23/A) as noticed
       above, on 6th April, 2003 starting 7.18 PM show
       number of calls being exchanged and the presence of
       Rahil at Nizamuddin as his mobile was connected
       through tower No. 911 in Nizamuddin. The presence of
       Noor Ahmed husband of Suraiya with them, when the
       deceased was called for discussion was natural and
       normal. (ii) We do not agree with the reasoning given
       by the trial court that Suraiya and Fazal brother and
       sister had a property dispute and the same has no
       connection with Noor Ahmed and Rahil, husband and
       son of Suraiya. The said reasoning keeping in view the
       social and cultural background of the family, merits
       rejection and has to be discarded. It is not acceptable
       and ignores practical reality.”
14. It may not be out of place to note by the self-same judgment

    and order High Court acquitted Mohd. Fazal of the charge of

    murder, inter alia holding:-
“his involvement in the offence under
Section 302
IPC
       would be a matter of debate as he was certainly not in
       the premises where Rahil was present, as both of them
       were in touch on phone till at least 7.59 PM.”
Page 7 of 21
15. No appeal has been preferred against such acquittal either

     by State or the victim’s family.
16. It is trite in an appeal against acquittal, the appellate court

       would not interfere with the finding of the trial court unless

       the same finding is wholly perverse or against the weight of

       evidence on record. In the event acquittal is based on

       findings which are reasonable and plausible, appellate court

       would be slow to interfere with the same as the presumption

       of innocence stands re-enforced by the acquittal. These

       principles have been summarized by this Court after

       referring to a catena of decisions in
Guru Dutt Pathak v.

     State of Uttar Pradesh2
17. Having examined the conclusions of High Court from this

       perspective, we are unable to concur with them for the

     following reasons.
18. High Court recorded that presence of appellants in the

       house at 7-7.30 PM when the deceased Shakeel ur Rehman

       was called is proved and should be accepted. In arriving at

       such conclusion High Court had relied on the response of

       Noor Ahmed to question no.7 in his examination under 313
Cr.PC
holding:-
“In his statement under
Section 313
Cr.P.C. while
              replying to question No. 7, Noor Ahmed had
2 (2021) 6 SCC 116 (paras 15-20).
Page 8 of 21
accepted that Shakeel ur Rehman had come to
            their house after the police officers had advised
            them to patch up, though this has been denied
            and not accepted as correct by Suraiya and
            others”
19. Such finding of the High Court is incorrect as would appear
   from the nature of the question and the answer of the
   appellant therein.
“7Q. It is in evidence against you that in PS police
             officials advised both parties for patch up the
             matter and thereafter Shakeel Ur Rehman came
             to his house. What do you say?
A: It is correct.”

    From the tenor of the question it unequivocally appears that

    after the amicable settlement at the police station, Shakeel

    ur Rehman came to his house. The expression would

    naturally mean Shakeel ur Rehman came back to his own

    residence and not that of Suraiya/Noor Ahmed.        We are

    further fortified in arriving at such conclusion as the

    prosecution evidence on record, particularly that of PW-3,4

    and 6, also states that after the patch up Shakeel ur

    Rehman returned to his residence.
20. The other aspect which was overlooked by High Court is that

    there is no direct evidence that Shakeel ur Rehman had

    actually gone to Suraiya’s residence on the fateful evening.

    Prosecution relied on PW-3,4 and 6 to prove this fact. No
Page 9 of 21
doubt, these witnesses stated that after receiving a phone

       call from Suraiya in the evening around 7.30 PM on

       6.4.2003 Shakeel ur Rehman left his residence stating he is

       going to Suraiya’s house. However, the sole evidence that he

       actually went to Suraiya’s residence is an embellished

       statement of PW-3 who claims he accompanied the deceased

       to Suraiya’s residence. Such version is stated by PW-3 for

       the first time in court and is significantly absent either in

       the missing diary or in the First Information Report lodged

       by him. Such omission of a material fact by PW 3 in the FIR

       or his previous statement to police would amount to a

       contradiction3 or even otherwise would cast doubt on the

       credibility of such embellished version introduced as an

     afterthought4.
21. Conduct of these witnesses and attending circumstances

       also improbabilise the fact that Shakeel had gone to

       Suraiya’s house. Evidence has come on record that there

       was a scuffle between Shakeel ur Rehman and Suraiya in

       the morning which got settled in the police station. Given

       such animosity had Shakeel ur Rehman left for Suraiya’s


3
Tahsildar Singh v. State of UP
, 1959 SCC Online SC 17 (para 25).
4
Laxman v. State of Maharashtra
, (1974) 3 SCC 704 (para 10).
Page 10 of 21
residence in the evening of 06.04.2003, and gone missing, it

    would be most natural for these witnesses to go to Suraiya’s

    residence and enquire of his whereabouts. None of the

    witnesses stated that they either visited Suraiya’s residence

    or inquired from her about Shakeel’s whereabouts. In these

    circumstances, possibility of the witnesses implicating

    Suraiya and other family members in the crime out of mere

    suspicion cannot be ruled out.
22. Given this situation, it is difficult for us to conclude that

    there is credible and reliable evidence on record that the

    deceased actually went to the residence of Suraiya on the

    fateful evening.
23. Even if the prosecution case with regard to the deceased

    going to Suraiya’s residence is accepted, prosecution must

    prove that appellants were present in the house between

    7.30 and 9.00 PM when it is alleged that Shakeel ur

    Rehman was murdered.
24. The High Court reversed the acquittal on the specious logic

    that appellants being the son and husband of Suraiya and

    ordinarily residing with her ought to be presumed to be

    present in the house. It is nobody’s case that the incident
Page 11 of 21
occurred in the dead hours of the night when all family

     members are expected to remain in the house.
25. An incriminating fact is said to be ‘proved’ when after

       considering the matters before it, the court believes it to

       exist or considers its existence so probable that a man of

     ordinary prudence would act as if the same existed.
26. Admittedly, no direct evidence is forthcoming with regard to

       presence of the appellants at their residence when the

       murder is alleged to have occurred. High Court drew an

       inference with regard to their presence on the ground that

       being inmates of the house they would be presumed to be

     present there.
27.
In
Mulak Raj v. State of Haryana5
where the dead body was

       recovered from the house this Court refused to uphold the

       guilt of the accused merely because they were the inmates of

     the house.
28. In these circumstances, we are of the view High Court erred

       in relying on a speculative inference that all inmates must

       invariably be present in the house at all times to reverse the

    acquittal and convict the appellants.
29. Whether Suraiya, a lady could have committed the murder

       alone had not been posed to the Postmortem doctor. In

       absence of medical evidence that murder was committed by
5 (1996) 7 SCC 308 (para 22).
Page 12 of 21
a single person High Court incorrectly drew its own

    inference that Suraiya was assisted by others in committing

    the crime and roped in her family members, that is the

    appellants.
30. Against Rahil another circumstance has been relied upon.

    High Court referred to call detail records (CDRs) between

    Rahil and Mohd. Fazal and observed that as the tower

    location of Rahil’s mobile number is Nizamuddin, his

    presence at the place of occurrence is established. This

    finding is based on inadmissible evidence and even

    otherwise such conclusion on the basis of evidence on

    record is too tenuous.
31. PW23 Nodal Officer Bharti Airtel produced CDRs of the

    phones of Fazal and Rahil being Ex. PW 23/A and 23/B,

    respectively. Site details of Airtel in Delhi and NCR were

    exhibited as Ex. PW23/C. The ownership certificate was

    also produced as Ex. PW23/D. All the exhibits were

    secondary evidence being computer printouts of the data

    said to be preserved in the computers of the service provider

    concerned. During cross-examination, PW23 admitted he

    had neither signed the said documents nor were the

    documents certified.
Page 13 of 21
32. Section 65-B(4) requires issuance of a certificate by a

      person-in-charge       or    responsible    officer   in   relation   to

      operations of the relevant computer network in question

      stating as per his knowledge or belief that during the

      relevant period:-
(a) computer(s) were carrying out regular activities,

                       and were working properly; and
(b)    the relevant information was regularly fed into

                   the computer in ordinary course of business,
     as proof of the facts stated therein.
33.
In
State (NCT of Delhi) v. Navjot Sandhu6
this Court held

      computer printouts are secondary evidence and may be

      admitted on mere production. Production of certificate

      under section 65-B(4) was not mandatory for admission of

      such secondary evidence.
However, in Anvar PV v. PK

      Basheer7 this Court took a different view and held Section

      65-B laid down a special procedure for admissibility of

      electronic records which mandatorily requires production of

      certificate under 65-B(4) for admissibility of secondary

      evidence i.e. computer printouts.
This view was doubted in
Shafhi Mohammad v. State of Himachal Pradesh
8. In Sonu v.


6 (2005) 11 SCC 600.
7 (2014) 10 SCC 473.
8 (2018) 2 SCC 801.
Page 14 of 21
State of Haryana9, another bench of this Court, held the

      ratio in Anvar PV (supra) shall apply prospectively unless the

      defence during trial raised objection to admission of

      computer printouts.
Finally, the issue was settled by a

      three-judge bench in
Arjun Panditrao Khotkar v. Kailash

      Kushanrao Gorantyal10
, wherein the bench overruling
Navjot

      Sandhu
(supra) and
Shafhi Mohd.
(supra) upheld the ratio in

      Anvar PV (supra) and held issuance of certificate under

      section 65-B(4) is a condition precedent for admissibility of

      computer-generated          secondary      evidence.   It   cannot   be

     supplemented through oral evidence.
34. It would be argued that
Navjot Sandhu
(supra) which did not

      insist on production of certificate for admissibility of

      computer-generated printouts was prevailing at the time

      when the case was decided by the Trial Court and the

      Appellate Court.
The judgement in Anvar PV (supra) was

      delivered subsequently and cannot be a ground to render

      the CDRs inadmissible. It is also brought to our notice that

      issue of retrospective application of the ratio in PV Anvar

      (supra) is pending for consideration before this Court 11.

9 (2017) 8 SCC 570.
10 (2020) 7 SCC 1.
11 M.A. No. 1563/2017 in C.A. No. 4226/2012.
Page 15 of 21
35. Be that as it may, it is relevant to note the larger bench in
Khotkar
(supra) while reiterating PV Anvar (supra) did not

      hold that its ratio shall apply prospectively.
Furthermore, in
Mohd. Arif @ Ashfaq v. State (NCT of Delhi
) 12 this Court while

      hearing      a   review   petition   in   a   death   penalty   case

      retrospectively applied the ratio in Anvar PV to cases decided

      earlier and eschewed secondary electronic evidence dehors

      certificate under section 65-B(4), holding as follows:-
“23. Navjot Sandhu was decided on 4-8-2005
                  i.e. before the judgment was rendered by the
                  trial court in the instant matter. The subsequent
                  judgments of the High Court and this Court
                  were passed on 13-9-2007 and 10-8-2011
                  respectively affirming the award of death
                  sentence. These two judgments were delivered
                  prior to the decision of this Court in Anvar P.V.
                  which was given on 18-9-2014. The judgments
                  by the trial court, High Court and this Court
                  were thus well before the decision in Anvar P.V.
                  and were essentially in the backdrop of law
laid down in
Navjot Sandhu. If we go by the
                  principle accepted in para 32 of the decision
                  in Sonu, the matter may stand on a completely
                  different footing. It is for this reason that
                  reliance has been placed on certain decisions
                  of this Court to submit that the matter need not
                  be reopened on issues which were dealt with in
                  accordance with the law then prevailing.
                  However, since the instant matter pertains to
                  award of death sentence, this review petition
12 (2023) 3 SCC 654.
Page 16 of 21
must be considered in light of the decisions
                   made by this Court in Anvar P.V. and Arjun
                   Panditrao Khotkar.
24. Consequently, we must eschew, for the
                   present purposes, the electronic evidence in the
                   form of CDRs which was without any
                   appropriate certificate under
Section 65-B(4)
of
                   the Evidence Act.”


      Similar view was taken in
Sundar @ Sundarrajan v. State by

      Inspector of Police13
.
36. Though the present case does not involve death penalty, it

      is undeniable that appellants were facing a criminal trial

      and the prosecutor was required to prove a fact beyond

      reasonable doubt strictly in accordance with law. Appellants

      during trial raised objections to admissibility of the

      secondary electronic evidence relating to Rahil which was

      marked as exhibit PW23/B-D. Thereby the prosecutor was

      put on due notice and had opportunity to fill the lacuna by

      producing the requisite certificate under Section 65-B(4) but

      did not do so.
In Sonu (supra), this court held if an objection is taken to

      CDRs being marked without a certificate and the same was


13 2023 SCC Online SC 310.
Page 17 of 21
not cured by the prosecutor at relevant stage the document

      shall be inadmissible in law.
In these circumstances we are inclined to apply the ratio in

      PV Anvar and Khotkar to the case and hold that the exhibits

      are inadmissible in law being secondary evidence without

      certification.
37. Even if the CDRs and other electronic records were admitted

      in evidence they merely contain the cell tower location

      information, that is to say, which tower mobile phone was

      connected to and how long the calls lasted when it was

      connected to that tower. These data give an approximate

      area corresponding to the operational area of the cell tower

     and not the exact site where the phone is located.
38. In the present case, the CDRs show Rahil's phone was

      connected to the cell tower at Nizamuddin (Ex. PW/23 C).

      Cell towers can reach approximately a half mile to two miles

      in city location14. No evidence is led regarding the range of

      the said tower. It needs to be borne in mind that cell tower

      ranges widely vary and are dependent on a number of

      variables such as:-
14 Quinteros, Penny. (2023) Confronting NELOS: cross-examining the cellphone industry’s
secret location technology, Syracuse Law Review, 73(1) 375.
Page 18 of 21
a) how high the antenna is over the surrounding

                landscape;
b) frequency of the signal in use;
c) rated power of the transmitter;
d) directional characteristic of the antenna array on
                the site;
e) nearby buildings and vegetation absorbing and
                reflecting radio energy;
f) local geographical or regulatory factors and weather
             conditions.15
39. Cell triangulation identifies at least three towers to which
      the cell phone at a particular time is connected and
      determines the location of the phone by overlapping the
      ranges of these towers. This is a better and comparatively
      more precise method than reference to a single tower. The
      issue may be better elucidated by the diagrams (Figure 1
      and Figure 216) set out herein below.
Single Tower Range                    Cell Triangulation Range
15 Millman National Land Services, ‘What is a Cell Tower and How Does a Cell Tower
Work?’(12th May, 2020), <https://millmanland.com/knowledge/what-is-a-cell-tower-and-
how-does-a-cell-tower-work/> as cited in
Bechuram Bag v. State of West Bengal
, 2023 SCC
OnLine Cal 419, (para 52).
16 Supra note 12 at 396.
Page 19 of 21
40. Given these circumstances reference to Nizamuddin cell

     tower in CDRs would merely show that Rahil’s phone was

     within the operational range of such tower and it is

     hazardous to rely solely on this evidence to prove his

     presence at his residence beyond doubt.
41. Finally, telephonic exchanges between Rahil and Mohd.

     Fazal would not lead to an inference of conspiracy to murder

     as Mohd. Fazal has been acquitted of the charge of murder

    which has not been appealed against.
42. It is settled law in a criminal case whether based on direct

     or circumstantial evidence, the burden of proof always rests

     on the prosecution. Only when the prosecution discharges

     the initial onus, that is, proves the incriminating attending

     circumstances to establish the cause of death are within the

     ‘special knowledge’ of an accused does the onus shift and an

     adverse inference against such accused may be drawn if he

    fails to discharge such onus.
43. In the absence of reliable and convincing evidence proving

     the presence of the appellants at Suraiya’s residence when

     Shakeel ur Rehman is said to have come there, it cannot be

     said that the prosecution had discharged its initial onus
Page 20 of 21
and proved the appellants were present in the house when

    the murder occurred.
44. Such failure of the prosecution cannot be bridged by an

    inferential conclusion of presence of all inmates in the

    house to shift the onus on them to explain away the

    circumstances leading to Shakeel’s homicidal death. High

    Court failed to appreciate this lacuna in the prosecution

    case and illegally drew adverse inference against the

    appellants under
Section 106
of Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
45. Accordingly, we hold that High Court was not justified in

    reversing the findings of acquittal on the basis of mere

    surmises and the impugned judgment to the extent that it

    convicts   the   appellants   is   liable   to   be   set   aside.

    Consequently, appeal is allowed. Pending application(s), if

    any, is disposed of.
…..…………………….J.
                                                 (SANDEEP MEHTA)



                                                ………………………….J.
                                                (JOYMALYA BAGCHI)
    New Delhi,
    June 25, 2025
Page 21 of 21