[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Nagarajan vs The State Of Tamil Nadu on 4 June, 2025
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
2025 INSC 802                                                        NON-REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.2892-2893 OF 2025
                                 (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NOS.621-622 OF 2024)


                   NAGARAJAN                                        … APPELLANT

                                        VERSUS

                   STATE OF TAMIL NADU                              … RESPONDENT




                                                   JUDGMENT
NAGARATHNA, J.
Leave granted.
2. Being aggrieved by the common impugned order dated

                              29.11.2021 passed by the High Court of Judicature at

                              Madras Bench at Madurai dismissing the Criminal Appeal

                              preferred by the appellant being Crl. A. (MD) No. 137/2015

                              and allowing the suo motu revision being Crl. R.C. (MD) No.

                              248/2015 thereby convicting the appellant under
Sections

                              306
and
448
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
RAJNI MUKHI
Date: 2025.06.04
18:54:55 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 19
referred to as “
IPC
”), the present Criminal Appeals have been

  filed by the appellant (accused).
3. Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the appellant

  was the neighbour of the deceased Smt. Mariammal. On the

  night of 11.07.2003, the appellant entered the room of the

  deceased and while hugging her, attempted to outrage her

  modesty. Upon hearing the disturbance, the mother-in-law

  of the deceased intervened and scolded the appellant, who

  then fled from the premises. The next day i.e., on

  12.07.2003, at around 5:00 A.M., the mother-in-law of the

  deceased found the deceased and her infant daughter

  missing from the house. Thereafter, she searched for them

  and enquired about their whereabouts from the deceased’s

  father. It was later revealed that in the morning, the

  deceased had visited the school where her elder daughter

  was studying in Class III and attempted to take her away.

  However, due to the absence of the warden, the teachers did

  not allow the child to leave. The deceased thereafter went to

  a nearby field with her infant of one and half years and

  committed suicide by consuming oleander seeds and also
Page 2 of 19
administered poison to her child. Both the deceased and her

  child were later discovered by a passerby who was grazing

  cattle nearby, who then alerted the village watchman.

  Although the child was still alive when found, she was

  declared dead when she was taken to the hospital.
4. Based on the complaint lodged by the watchman, FIR No.

  239/2003 was registered with Kannivadi Police Station

  under
Section 306
of IPC against the appellant. Upon

  completion of the investigation, a charge-sheet was filed on

  30.10.2003 against the appellant under
Section 306
of IPC.

  The case was committed to the Mahila Court, Fast Track

  Court, Dindigul as S.C. No. 54 of 2007. The Trial Court

  altered the charges to
Sections 354
and
448
of IPC and on

  29.05.2015, the Trial Court acquitted the appellant of the

  charge under
Section 306
of IPC. The appellant was

  convicted under
Sections 354
and
448
of IPC and sentenced

  to undergo simple imprisonment for three years and one

  month and to pay a fine of Rs. 25,000/- and in default

  whereof to undergo simple imprisonment for three months

  for the offence under
Section 354
of IPC and a further
Page 3 of 19
sentence simple imprisonment for three months for the

  offence under
Section 448
of IPC. The Trial Court observed

  that the evidence on record reveals that the appellant

  trespassed into the house of deceased at midnight and

  hugged her. Accordingly, the Trial Court convicted the

  appellant under
Sections 354
and
448
of IPC. Insofar as
Section 306
of IPC was concerned, the Trial Court observed

  that the actions of the appellant did not constitute abetment

  of suicide as the appellant did not instigate the deceased to

  commit suicide. Hence, the Trial Court acquitted the

  appellant under
Section 306
of IPC.
5. Being aggrieved by the conviction under
Sections 354
and
448
of IPC, the appellant filed Criminal Appeal before the

  High Court being Crl. A. (MD) No. 137/2015. While

  admitting the appeal and entertaining the appellant’s

  application for suspension of sentence, the High Court,

  upon a prima facie appraisal of the Trial Court’s reasoning,

  formed the view that the appellant’s acquittal under
Section

  306
of IPC may require further examination. Observing that

  the evidence relating to abetment of suicide was not duly
Page 4 of 19
appreciated and noting that the State had not filed an

  appeal against the acquittal, the High Court by order dated

  08.06.2015, suo motu directed the registration of a criminal

  revision case to examine the propriety of the acquittal. This

  came to be registered as Crl. R.C.(MD) No. 248 of 2015. This

  was during the pendency of accused appeal before the High

  Court.
6. In order to exercise of suo motu revisional powers of the High

  Court, appointed an Amicus Curiae to assist the Court. The

  Amicus was further tasked to examine the Trial Court’s

  findings in acquitting the Appellant accused under
Section

  306
of IPC.
7. By common impugned judgment dated 29.11.2021, the High

  Court asserted that it has the inherent power to initiate suo

  motu revision under
Section 401
of the Code of Criminal

  Procedure, 1973 (for short, “
CrPC
”). The High Court

  dismissed the Criminal Appeal filed by the appellant and

  allowed the suo motu Criminal Revision Petition, thereby

  convicting the appellant under
Sections 306
and
448
of IPC

  and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
Page 5 of 19
five years and to pay a fine of Rs. 5,000/- and in default, to

  undergo simple imprisonment for three months for the

  offence under
Section 306
of IPC and sentenced him to

  undergo simple imprisonment for three months for the

  offence committed under
Section 448
of IPC. The High Court

  observed that the appellant has played an active role in

  tarnishing the self-esteem of the deceased by outraging her

  modesty and thereby instigated her to commit suicide.

  Hence, the offence under
Section 306
of IPC was made out.
8. Being aggrieved, the appellant has filed the present Criminal

  Appeals.
9. We have heard learned counsel for the respective parties and

  perused the material on record. This appeal is being

  disposed of by following the judgment of this Court in

  Sachin vs. State of Maharashtra, Criminal Appeal

  Nos.2073-2075 of 2025 dated 21.04.2025. The relevant

  paragraphs of the said judgment read as under:
“23. The question for consideration in this case is,
 whether, in an appeal against conviction, the appellate
 court could have directed enhancement of the sentence in
 an appeal filed by the accused. Under clause (b) of
Section 386
CrPC, firstly, the appellate court can no
Page 6 of 19
doubt alter the findings and sentence and acquit or
discharge the accused or order him to be retried by a
Court of competent jurisdiction subordinate to such
appellate court or committed for trial. Secondly, the
appellate court can also alter the findings but maintain
the sentence. Thirdly, the appellate court can, in an
appeal from a conviction, with or without altering the
finding, alter the nature or the extent, or the nature and
extent, of the sentence but not so as to enhance the
same. A plain reading of this would imply that in an
appeal against conviction which is obviously filed by the
accused, the challenge could be two-fold: firstly, it could
be against the conviction itself in which case there is a
challenge to the sentence also; and secondly, the
challenge could be only to the sentence while accepting
the conviction. In other words, the challenge would also
be only for reduction of the sentence. The question is,
whether, in an appeal challenging the conviction and
sentence, the appellate court could, while affirming the
conviction enhance the sentence imposed by the trial
court by directing that the same had to be with reference
to other statutory provisions. There is no doubt that the
appellate court while maintaining the conviction can
reduce the sentence and grant partial relief to an accused
but in an appeal filed by the appellant-accused, can the
appellate court not only affirm the conviction but go a
step further and seek to enhance the sentence than what
has been imposed by the Trial Court. It cannot be lost
sight of that in an appeal filed by the accused, the
appellant-accused is, at best, seeking a reversal of the
conviction as well as setting aside of the sentence and the
least that the appellant-accused can expect is even while
the conviction is affirmed, the sentence could be
maintained, if not reduced.
24.    Thus, in an appeal filed by the appellant-accused
against the judgment of the conviction and sentence, can
the accused be left worse-off while the conviction is
affirmed by the appellate court exercising appellate
jurisdiction by enhancing the sentence? In such an
Page 7 of 19
event, the appellant-accused would be better off, if he
      either withdraws his appeal or, not to file an appeal at all.
But an appeal is not only a valuable statutory right but
      also a constitutional right in criminal cases.”
10.    That a right of appeal is an invaluable right, particularly for

an accused who cannot be condemned eternally by a trial judge,

without having a right to seek a re-look of the Trial Court’s

judgment by a superior or appellate court. The right to prefer an

appeal is not only a statutory right but also a constitutional right

in the case of an accused. This is because an accused has a right

to not only challenge a judgment on its merits, namely, with

respect to the conviction and sentence being imposed on him, but

also on the procedural aspects of the trial. An accused can

question procedural flaws, impropriety and lapses that may have

been committed by the Trial Court in arriving at the judgment of

conviction and imposition of sentence in an appeal filed against

the same. It then becomes the duty of the appellate court to

consider the appeal from the perspective of the accused-appellant

therein to see if he has a good case on merits, and to set aside the

judgment of the Trial Court and acquit the accused, or to remand

the matter for a re-trial in accordance with law, or to reduce the
Page 8 of 19
sentence while maintaining the conviction or, in the alternative, to

dismiss the appeal. In our considered view, the appellate court in

an appeal filed by the accused cannot while maintaining the

conviction enhance the sentence. While exercising its appellate

jurisdiction, the High Court cannot act as a revisional court,

particularly, when no appeal or revision has been filed either by

the State, victim or complainant for seeking enhancement of

sentence against accused. In the aforesaid judgement, we have

analysed
Section 386
of CrPC which deals with the right of a

party including an accused to file an appeal, we may peruse
Section 401
of CrPC which deals with the revisional powers of the

High Court and which is extracted as under:
“401. High Court's powers of revision.—(1) In the case
    of any proceeding the record of which has been called for
    by itself or which otherwise comes to its knowledge, the
    High Court may, in its discretion, exercise any of the
    powers conferred on a Court of Appeal by
sections 386
,
389
,
390
and
391
or on a Court of Session by
section
    307
, and, when the Judges composing the Court of
    Revision are equally divided in opinion, the case shall be
    disposed of in the manner provided by
section 392
.
    (2) No order under this section shall be made to the
    prejudice of the accused or other person unless he has
    had an opportunity of being heard either personally or by
    pleader in his own defence.
Page 9 of 19
(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a
      High Court to convert a finding of acquittal into one
      conviction.
(4) Where under this Code an appeal lies and no appeal is
      brought, no proceeding by way of revision shall be
      entertained at the instance of the party who could have
      appealed.
(5) Where under this Code an appeal lies but an
      application for revision has been made to the High Court
      by any person and the High Court is satisfied that such
      application was made under the erroneous belief that no
      appeal lies thereto and that it is necessary in the
      interests of Justice so to do, the High Court may treat the
      application for revision as a petition of appeal and deal
      with the same accordingly.”
11.    Sub-section (4) of
Section 401
of CrPC states that where

under the
CrPC
an appeal could have been filed and has not been

filed, then no proceeding by way of revision could be entertained

at the instance of the party who could have appealed. This means

if a State, complainant or the victim who have the right to file an

appeal do not opt to do so, then the High Court cannot entertain a

revision at its behest. Also, if an appeal lies under the
CrPC
but

an application for revision has been made to the High Court by

any person under an erroneous belief, then the High Court can

treat the application for revision as petition of appeal and deal

with the same accordingly. What is pertinent is that under
Page 10 of 19
Section 401
of CrPC, the High Court is not authorised to convert

the findings of acquittal into one of conviction by exercise of

revisional jurisdiction. This salutary principle can be extended to

also mean that the High Court cannot enhance the sentence

imposed by a Trial Court on conviction in an appeal filed by the

accused/convict. Thus, in sum and substance, it can be observed

that in an appeal filed by the accused seeking setting aside of the

conviction of sentence, the High Court cannot exercise its

revisional powers and while affirming the conviction direct for

enhancement of sentence, when actually appeal could have been

filed by the State, complainant or the victim and has not been

filed. Therefore, where an appeal has been filed by the accused

challenging the conviction and the sentence, the revisional

jurisdiction cannot be exercised by the High Court so as to

remand the matter to the Trial Court for the purpose of

enhancement of the sentence. However, in this case, our focus of

attention is whether, in the absence of any appeal or revision filed

by the State, a complainant or a victim in a particular case and

when the appeal has been filed only by the accused/ convict

assailing the judgment of conviction and sentence, the High Court
Page 11 of 19
can exercise its revisional jurisdiction to enhance the sentence. In

other words, when an accused is seeking setting-aside of a

judgment of conviction and sentence, can the High Court, in the

absence of there being any challenge to the same from any other

quarter, suo motu exercise its revisional power and thereby

condemn the accused by awarding an enhancement in his

sentence. Even if an opportunity of hearing is given to such an

accused/convict, we do not think that the High Court can exercise

its revisional jurisdiction under
Section 401
of CrPC while

exercising its appellate jurisdiction in an appeal filed by the

accused/convict in the High Court. All that the High Court can

do is to set-aside the judgment of conviction and sentence and

acquit the accused, or while doing so, order for a retrial, or in the

alternative, while maintaining the conviction, reduce the sentence.

In other words, in an appeal filed only by the accused/convict, the

High Court cannot suo motu exercise its revisional jurisdiction

and enhance the sentence against the accused while maintaining

the conviction.   In this regard, we find that the expression “but

not so as to enhance the same” in sub-clause (iii) of clause (b) of
Page 12 of 19
Section 386
of CrPC throws some light on the view we have taken,

which reads as under:
“386. Powers of the Appellate Court.—

                                  xxx
(b)   in an appeal from a conviction—

                                  xxx
(iii) with or without altering the finding, alter the nature
      or the extent, or the nature and extent, of the sentence,
      but not so as to enhance the same”


      Although the said expression “but not so as to enhance the

same” is in the context of sub-clause (iii) of clause (b) of
Section

386
of CrPC, the spirit of the said provision must be understood,

inasmuch as while maintaining the finding of conviction, the High

Court cannot exercise its revisional jurisdiction under
Section 401
of CrPC and enhance sentence awarded to the accused/appellant.
12.    In this context, we also observe that the Trial Court should

also be very careful while passing an order of sentence inasmuch

as the sentence imposed must be concomitant with the charge(s)

framed and the findings arrived at while arriving at a judgment of

conviction. If the charges are proved beyond reasonable doubt

against an accused, then the sentence following a finding and
Page 13 of 19
judgment of conviction must be appropriate to the nature of the

charge(s) which are proved by the prosecution.
13.   In this regard, it must be noted that for exercise of powers of

the appellate court for enhancement of sentence in an appeal filed

either by the State or the complainant or the victim, the
CrPC
provides that the appellate court can reverse the finding and

sentence and acquit or discharge the accused, or order him to be

re-tried by a court competent to try the offence, or alter the

finding by maintaining the sentence, or with or without altering

the finding, alter the nature or the extent, of the sentence so as to

enhance or reduce the same. Thus, the power to enhance the

sentence can be exercised by the appellate court only in an appeal

filed by the State, victim or complainant, provided the accused

has   had   an   opportunity   of   showing   cause   against   such

enhancement. It is further provided that the appellate court shall

not inflict greater punishment for the offence which in its opinion

the accused has committed, than might have been inflicted for

that offence by the court passing the order of sentence under

appeal. Therefore, in an appeal for enhancement of sentence filed

by the State etc., unless the conditions prescribed in the form of
Page 14 of 19
provisos to
Section 386
of CrPC are complied with by the appellate

court, there cannot be an enhancement of sentence. Obviously in

such an appeal for enhancement of sentence, the convict or the

accused is the respondent and therefore there cannot be

enhancement of sentence unless the accused or convict has been

heard.
However, under the scheme of
Section 386
of CrPC vis-à-

vis in an appeal for enhancement of sentence, there can also be

an acquittal of the accused as per sub-clause (i) of clause (c) of
Section 386
of CrPC. But, on the other hand, in an appeal from a

conviction, it has been expressly stated that there cannot be

enhancement of the sentence. Therefore, while in an appeal for

enhancement of sentence filed by the State, the accused can make

out a case for acquittal or discharge or retrial, in the case of an

appeal from conviction, the respondent in such an appeal, namely

the State or the victim or the complainant, cannot seek

enhancement of the sentence than what has been awarded by the

Trial Court in the absence of filing any appeal or revision. The

above distinction can be explained by way of a latin maxim which

has been discussed by Ujjal Bhuyan, J., while in Bombay High
Page 15 of 19
Court, in
Jyoti Plastic Works Pvt. Ltd. vs. Union of India and

Ors.
, 2020 OnLine Bom 2276, in the following words:
“40. In this connection we may refer to the maxim
      reformatio in peius. It is a latin phrase meaning a change
      towards the worse i.e., a change for the worse. As a legal
      expression it means that a lower court judgment is
      amended by a higher court into a worse one for those
      appealing it. In many jurisdictions, this practice is
      forbidden ensuring that an appellant cannot be placed in
      a worse position as a result of filing an appeal. When the
      above phrase is prefixed by the words ‘no’ or ‘prohibition’,
      which would render the maxim as no reformatio in peius
      or prohibition of reformatio in peius, it would denote a
      principle of procedure as per which using a remedy
      available in law should not aggravate the situation of the
      person who avails the remedy. In other words, a person
      should not be placed in a worse position as a result of
      filing an appeal. No reformatio in peius or prohibition of
      reformatio in peius is a part of fair procedure and thus by
      extension can also be construed as part of natural
      justice. It is not only a procedural guarantee but is also a
      principle of equity.”
                                              (underlining by us)
14.    The rationale of the above can be explained in simple

language by stating that no appellant by filing an appeal can be

worse-off than what he was. That is exactly what we are seeking

to reiterate in our judgment having regard to the facts of the

present case.
15.    In the instant case, we find that the appellant/accused

herein had filed the appeal against the conviction and sentence
Page 16 of 19
imposed by the Trial Court for the offences punishable under
Sections 354
and
448
of IPC. Insofar as
Section 306
of IPC is

concerned, the Trial Court had acquitted the appellant. Being

aggrieved by the said conviction under
Sections 354
and
448
of

IPC, the appellant had filed the appeal before the High Court.

Neither the State, nor the victim or complainant had sought for

enhancement of sentence, or sought for conviction and sentence

under
Section 306
of IPC before the High Court when the

appellant had filed his appeal seeking setting aside of his

conviction and sentence. The High Court, instead of considering

the said appeal filed by the appellant on merits, sought to

exercise suo motu revisional powers for convicting the appellant

under
Section 306
of IPC also and thereby sentencing the

accused to undergo rigorous imprisonment for five years and to

pay a fine of Rs. 5,000/- and in default, to undergo simple

imprisonment for three months. The sentences were to run

concurrently. Thus, a conviction awarded for offences under
Sections 354
and
448
of IPC has also resulted in a conviction

under
Section 306
of IPC and an enhanced sentence, that too, in

an appeal filed by none other than the appellant.
Page 17 of 19
16.   We are of the view that in an appeal filed by the

accused/convict and in the absence of any appeal filed by the

victim, complainant or the State, the High Court cannot exercise

suo motu revision either to enhance the sentence or to convict the

appellant on any other charge. The reasons for coming to such a

conclusion have been discussed above.
17.   In the circumstances, we set-aside the conviction and

sentence of the appellant under
Section 306
of IPC and confirm

the judgment of the Sessions Court as affirmed by the High Court

qua the offences punishable under
Sections 354
and
448
IPC.

Consequently, the appellant is directed to undergo the sentence

and to pay the fine as imposed by the Sessions Court.
In the event the accused has not yet completed the sentence

imposed by the Trial Court, he is directed to surrender before the

jurisdictional Chief Judicial Magistrate or before the concerned

Police Station for being lodged in the jail to suffer the remainder

of the sentence. In case of failure on the part of the accused to

surrender, appropriate action shall be taken up by the concerned

Police Station to arrest the accused for being lodged in the jail.
Page 18 of 19
The appeals are allowed in part in the aforesaid terms.
……………………………………….J.
                               (B.V. NAGARATHNA)




                               ……………………………………….J.
                               (SATISH CHANDRA SHARMA)
NEW DELHI;
JUNE 04, 2025.
Page 19 of 19