[Cites
11
, Cited by
3
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Mumtaz Yarud Dowla Waqf on 21 April, 1998
Equivalent citations: (1999)153CTR(AP)149
JUDGMENT
 

Ms. S. V. Maruthi, J.
The following two questions are referred at the instance of the revenue:
"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the assessee is entitled to exemption under
section 11
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal is correct in law in holding that the entire interest of Rs. 1,38,368 was not liable to be taxed in the assessment of 1971-72 ?"
2. The facts in brief are as follows:
The assessee is a waqf. The assessment year is 1971-72 for which the previous year ended by 31-3- 1971. The claim of the assessee is that it is running an educational institution and it derived income therefrom in the accounting year relevant to the assessment year 1971-72 and the said income was exempt from income-tax under
section 10(22)
of the Income Tax Act. This contention was not accepted in the original assessment. The assessee filed an appeal against the said assessment before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner. The Appellate Assistant Commissioner by his order dated 31-1-1977, set aside the original assessment with a direction to redo the same. During the fresh assessment proceedings, the assessee by its letter dated 20-1-1979, gave up its claim for exemption under
section 10(22)
of the Act but pressed its claim for exemption under
section 11
of the Income Tax Act. It was contended that by its letter dated 17-10-1978, the surplus income of each year had been set apart, accumulated and invested in banks in the year in which they were surplus, that the members of the trust had already passed a resolution ratifying the accumulation which has been invested in banks and that the trustee had also given notice under
section 11(2)
in the prescribed manner indicating the purpose or purposes for which the income was accumulated. The attention of the Income Tax Officer was also invited to the provisions of
section 11(2)
of the Income Tax Act which did not lay down any time limit to give notice on accumulation. It was argued before the Income Tax Officer that rule 17 of the Income Tax Rules was ultra vires
section 11(2)
and the rule-making authority exceeded its limit while prescribing the time limit under rule 17 of the Income Tax Rules. The Income Tax Officer rejected the contention of the assessee. On appeal, the Commissioner (Appeals) held against the assessee on the ground that in the absence of notice under
section 11(2)
within the prescribed time limit the surplus income must be brought to tax in accordance with the Act. On further appeal to the Tribunal, it held that the income accrued is not includible in the income of the assessee for the assessment year 1971-72. At the instance of the revenue, the first question was referred by the Tribunal for the opinion of this court.
3. From the facts narrated above, the following position emerges :
The due date for the purpose of filing the return is 30-9-1971. On 30-5-1975, the return was filed. On 17-10-1978, Form No. 10 was filed. On 20-1-1979, the assessment was completed. The original assessment dated 31-1-1971, was set aside.
The question, therefore, is whether the notice issued on 17-10- 1978, in Form No. 10 will enure to the benefit of the assessee so as to enable him to claim the exemption under
section 11
of the Income Tax Act.
Section 11(2)
of the Act reads as follows:
"(2) Where seventy-five per cent of the income referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) read with the Explanation to that sub-section is not applied, or is not deemed to have been applied, to charitable or religious purposes in India during the previous year but is accumulated or set apart, either in whole or in part, for application to such purposes in India, such income so accumulated or set apart shall not be included in the total income of the previous year of the person in receipt of the income, provided the following conditions are complied with, namely :-
(a) such person specifies, by notice in writing given to the Income Tax Officer in the prescribed manner, the purpose for which the income is being accumulated or set apart and the period for which the income is to be accumulated or set apart, which shall in no case exceed ten years;
(b) the money so accumulated or set apart is . . . ."
Rule 17 of the Rules which prescribes the time limit reads as follows:
"17. Notice for accumulation of income by charitable or religious trusts.-The notice to be given to the Income Tax Officer under sub-section (2) of
section 11
shall be in Form No. 10 and shall be delivered to him before the expiry of the time allowed under sub-section (1), or sub-section (2), of
section 139
, whether fixed originally or on extension, for furnishing the return of income."
4. From the reading of rule 17 of the Income Tax Rules, it is clear that the notice contemplated under
section 11(2)(a)
is to be issued within the time limit prescribed under
section 139(1)
and (2).
Admittedly, in this case the notice was not issued within the time limit prescribed under
section 139(1)
and (2) of the
Income Tax Act
. The question, therefore, is whether the assessee is entitled to the benefit of
section 11
of the Income Tax Act.
As pointed out in the earlier para, rule 17 prescribes the time limit within which the notice is to be issued under
section 11(2)(a)
of the Act and not the section. It is not necessary for us to consider whether the said rule is ultra vires the provisions of the Act or whether it is valid, in the light of the view which we propose to take. In our view,
section 11
of the Income Tax Act gives exemption from the payment of tax on the income accumulated over a period of ten years provided it is set apart for a charitable or religious purpose. The period prescribed under rule 17, in our view, is directory and not a mandatory provision. As long as the assessee issues the notice under rule 17 before the assessment is made he would be entitled to the benefit of
section 11
. Rule 17 is only a procedural provision and, therefore, it cannot be said that it is mandatory. If it is construed as a mandatory provision it would result in penal consequences depriving the assessee of the benefit conferred under a substantive provision of this Act which is not the intention of the Legislature. Had the intention of the Legislature been to make rule 17 mandatory, it would have, prescribed it in the section itself. Since the period of limitation is not prescribed in the section the intention of the Legislature is that the rule should be treated as directory and not mandatory. If it is so, then even if the notice is not issued within the period prescribed under rule 17 the assessee would be entitled to the benefit of
section 11
of the Income Tax Act provided the notice is issued before the assessment is made. The reason why we are saying that the notice should be issued before the assessment is made is that the Income Tax Officer should be posted with the knowledge that the assessee is claiming the benefit under
section 11(2)
of the Income Tax Act.
On the facts of the present case it is not disputed that the notice was issued under
section 11(2)(a)
read with rule 17 before the assessment is made. Therefore, as long as the notice was issued before the assessment is made the assessee is entitled to the benefit of
section 11
of the Income Tax Act and the income itself accumulated is exempted from the payment of tax. In the light of the above, we answer the first question in the affirmative and against the revenue.
5. As regards the second question a sum of Rs. 1,38,368 which is the interest on enhanced compensation awarded by the court to the assessee, the Income Tax Officer brought the entire amount to tax in the year of assessment. The Commissioner relying on the judgment of this court in
CIT v. Smt. Sankari Manickyamma
(1976) 105 ITR 172 (AP), held against the assessee. On an appeal to the Tribunal, the Tribunal held in favour of the assessee. Aggrieved by the same, the revenue sought the reference of question No. 2 as
referred to above
.
The second issue is covered by a judgment of the Supreme Court in
Rama Bai v. CIT
(1990) 181 ITR 400 (SC), in which it was held as follows (headnote) :
"Interest on enhanced compensation for land compulsorily acquired under the
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
, awarded by the court on a reference under
section 18
of the Act or on further appeal has to be taken to have accrued not on the date of the order of the court granting enhanced compensation but as having accrued year after year from the date of delivery of possession of the land till the date of such order, and such interest cannot be assessed to income-tax in one lump sum in the year in which the order is made."
6. Following the above, we answer question No. 2 against the revenue and in the affirmative.
The above two questions are answered accordingly.