[Cites
25
, Cited by
14
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Abbayolla M. Subba Reddy vs Padmamma on 27 July, 1998
Equivalent citations: 1998(5)ALD465, 1998(5)ALT152, I(2000)DMC266, AIR 1999 ANDHRA PRADESH 19, 1999 A I H C 352, (1998) 2 LS 170, (1999) 2 CIVLJ 874, (1998) 5 ANDH LT 152, (1999) 1 APLJ 1, (2000) 1 DMC 266, (1999) 2 EASTCRIC 27, (1998) 3 CIVILCOURTC 426, (1999) 1 HINDULR 68, (1999) 1 MARRILJ 33, (1999) MATLR 16, (1998) 5 ANDHLD 465, (1998) 4 RECCIVR 314, (1999) 1 ICC 753
Author:
P. Venkatarama Reddi
Bench:
P. Venkatarama Reddi
ORDER
A. Hanumanthu, J
1. The legal point involved in this appeal is 
whether a Hindu Woman who is married, after 
coming into force the
Hindu Marriage Act, 
1955
(hereinafter called as 'Act'), to a Hindu 
male having a living lawfully wedded wife, 
can maintain a claim for maintenance under
Section 18
of the Hindu Adoption and 
Maintenance Act, 1956 (hereinafter called as 
'Maintenance Act1).
2. Having disagreed with the 
view expressed by a single Judge of this Court in
C. 
Obuta Konda Reddy v. Pedda Venkala 
Lakshmamma
, , that 
the 'Hindu wife' contemplated by Section 18 of 
the Maintenance Act means, a Hindu wife 
whose marriage is solemnized, though void under the
Hindu Marriage Act
, she is entitled to claim 
maintenance from the husband, our learned brother 
Ramesh Madhav Bapat-i made this reference to 
lay down the correct position of law to the Division 
Bench/Full Bench/Larger Bench. This is how this 
appeal has come up before this Full Bench.
3. In the reference order, our 
learned brother has narrated the facts leading to 
filing of this appeal and briefly stated, they are as 
under :
The appellant herein is the 
defendant and the respondent herein is the plaintiff in 
O.S. No.131 of 1987 on the file of the 
Principal Subordinate Judge, Chittoor. The 
respondent-plaintiff filed the said suit informa 
pauperis claiming maintenance from the appellant at 
the rate of Rs.1,000/- per month and 
Rs.13,000/- towards the cost of gold 
chain and other ornaments gifted to her by her 
father at the time of her marriage with the appellant 
herein, and also to create a charge over the 
'B' schedule property for the amount that may be 
decreed against the appellant-defendant. The case of 
the respondent-plaintiff is that the appellant married 
her according to Hindu rites and customs on 1-7-
1984 in Kasi Vishwanada Svvami 
Devasthanam, Palamaner, that the marriage 
was also registered before the Sub-Registrar, 
Palamaner on 7-11-1984, that after 
consummation of the marriage in the plaintiffs 
parents' house, she was taken by the appellant to 
his village and there she came to know that the 
appellant was already married to one 
Parvathamma who begot two daughters 
through him and the said two daughters were 
already married and that the first wife 
Parvathamma was residing in the appellant's house 
in the village. It was also her case that during the 
negotiations for her marriage, the appellant did not 
inform the respondent and her parents that he was 
already married and his first wife was living and 
that the plaintiff was made to believe as if it 
was his first marriage. It was also the case of 
the plaintiff that she reconciled herself on the advice 
of the elders and lived with him 
discharging her conjugal responsibilities till the 
middle of 1985 and that differences arose 
between the plaintiff and the defendant's first wife 
Parvathamma and on the instigation of the 
first wife, the appellant began to ill-treat her and 
neglected to maintain her and beat her on two or 
three occasions and drove her out of the house on 
30-12-1985 after snatching away gold chain 
worth Rs. 13,0007- which was presented to her 
at the time of her marriage by her father, and that the 
plaintiff returned to her parents and since then she is 
residing with them. It is also the case of the 
plaintiff that she would not have agreed to 
marry the appellant if he had divulged the fact that he 
was a married man having his first wife living. 
The plaintiff filed the said suit for the reliefs stated 
supra. The plaintiff also contended that the appellant 
gets an annual income of Rs.20,000/- from 
his agricultural lands, that he has money lending 
business and that the plaintiff does not have separate 
property or any independent source of income and 
that the plaintiff is entitled to get maintenance from 
the defendant who is her husband.
4. The appellant-defendant resisted the 
claim of the respondent-plaintiff. He 
categorically disputed the allegation that he married 
the plaintiff. He also pleaded that his first wife 
was living and that he has got two married daughters 
and that he has no reason to marry the plaintiff. He 
also denied the income as alleged in the plaint. The 
defendant also pleaded that the plaintiff is living in 
adultery and that she is not entitled to claim 
maintenance.
5. The trial Court settled the necessary 
issues and allowed the parties to lead the 
evidence. The respondent-plaintiff examined 
PWs.l to 5 and marked Exs. A-l A-2, A-
2(a) and A-2(b). The appellant-defendant 
examined DWs.l to 3, but no documents were 
marked on his behalf. The first wife of the 
defendant was examined as DW-2 and she 
deposed with regard to her marriage with 
defendant and begetting two daughters through 
him. She also denied the marriage of the plaintiff 
with the defendant. The trial Judge on a 
consideration of the oral and documentary 
evidence placed before him, held that the 
solemnization of the marriage of the plaintiff with the 
defendant has been established, and as such, she is 
the legally wedded wife of the defendant and that 
the defendant neglected to maintain her without any 
reason and that the defendant snatched away the 
gold chain, and other ornaments of the plaintiff. The 
learned trial Judge relying on the decision in , held that the plaintiff is 
entitled to claim maintenance under Section 
18(2) of Maintenance Act. Hence, the plaintiff's 
suit has been decreed as prayed for, but without 
costs. Aggrieved of that judgment and 
decree, the defendant has preferred the 
appeal.
6. It may be stated here, as a fact, that 
the plaintiff examined as PW-1 stated in her cross-
examination thus:
"It is true that I became 
pregnant about one and half years after 
I filed this suit. The defendant used to visit 
my house. It is not true to suggest that I 
did not (sic) become pregnant through 
somebody else."
The father of the plaintiff examined as PW2 
stated in his cross-examination thus:
"The defendant used to 
visit our house for about 6 months now 
and then after he drove away PW1. He 
was coming even for one year after he 
drove away PW1."
This evidence of PWs.1 and 2 is also 
relevant in the light of the plea taken by the 
defendant that the plaintiff is living in 
adultery. The trial Judge has not considered this 
aspect.
7. The learned Counsel Sri S. 
Ramamitrthy Reddy appearing for the 
appellant-defendant raised the sole contention that 
the alleged marriage of the appellant with the 
respondent even if it is admitted to have been 
solemnized, is null and void in view of the 
provisions of
Section 5
read with
Section 11
of 
the Hindu Marriage Act and such a marriage, 
therefore, cannot confer status of a wife on the 
respondent-plaintiff which would entitle her 
to make a claim for maintenance under 
Section 18 of the Maintenance Act. He further 
elaborates that in order that a woman is 
entitled to claim maintenance under the said 
provision, she must satisfy the Court that she is 
the 'legally wedded wife' and a woman whose 
marriage contravenes the provisions of
Section 5
read with Section II of the Hindu Marriage 
Act cannot claim the status of a 'wife' and 
the mere fact that necessary ceremonies 
of a marriage under the customary Hindu Law 
have been gone into, cannot confer on her the status 
of a "legally wedded wife" which is a condition 
precedent for claiming maintenance under 
Section 18 of the Maintenance Act. The 
learned Counsel further submitted that a 
marriage if void ab initio does not alter or 
affect the status of parties and does not 
create between them any rights and obligations 
which must normally arise from a valid 
marriage.
8. On the other hand, Sri C. 
Pattahhi Rama Rao, appearing for the 
respondent-wife raised the following 
contentions:
(i) The Maintenance Act does 
not define "Hindu Wife" and sub-
section (1) of
Section 18
says that a 
"Hindu Wife" married either before or 
after the commencement of the Act 
shall be maintained by her husband and 
subsection (2)(d) of
Section 18
says 
that a "Hindu wife" shall be entitled to 
live separately from her husband 
without forfeiting her claim for 
maintenance if he has any other wife living 
and reading of the two subsections 
together, a "Hindu wife" whether 
married cither before or after the 
commencement of the Act is entitled to live 
separately from her husband without 
forfeiting her claim for maintenance if 
he has any other wife living and as the 
first wife of the appellant-defendant 
is living, the respondent-plaintiff is entitled 
to live separately and claim maintenance 
from her husband, the appellant herein.
(ii) Section 18 of the Maintenance 
Act confers a statutory right of maintenance 
on every wife irrespective of her 
marriage being legal or void and there is no 
valid reason to restrict the application of such right 
only to a legally wedded wife.
(iii) All that a wife has to establish in such a case is that 
her marriage was performed after going through 
the necessary ceremonies as per the customary 
Hindu Law and once that is established, it would not 
make any difference whether her marriage with 
the appellant contravenes
Sections 5
and
11
of 
the Hindu Marriage Act.
(iv) The marriage of the respondent with the 
appellant is a voidable marriage under
Section 
12
of the Marriage Act as the appellant suppressed 
the feet that he was already married and his first 
wife is living and suppression amounts to playing fraud on the 
respondent and her father and if that feet had been 
divulged by the appellant to the respondent, the 
latter would not have agreed to marry him and 
therefore, the marriage is voidable under
Section 12
of the Act and as no steps were taken either by the 
appellant or respondent to annul that voidable marriage, it 
remains valid and continues to subsist for all 
purposes unless a decree is passed by a Court annulling the 
same. Hence, the marriage of the respondent with the 
appellant is subsisting and by virtue of her status as wife 
of the appellant, she is entitled for maintenance.
(v) The Maintenance Act is a piece of beneficial 
and social legislation, it must be liberally construed in the 
context of present social changes and the intention of the 
Legislature to confer additional rights on women 
and children. Therefore, even if the marriage is void ab 
initio, the respondent is entitled for maintenance 
as she continued to lead conjugal life with the 
appellant as a married wife.
(vi)
Section 25
of die
Hindu Marriage Act
confers 
jurisdiction on the Court to grant permanent alimony 
and maintenance to a wife or a husband 
while passing any decree for restitution of 
conjugal rights, judicial separation, dissolution of 
the marriage by divorce, etc. and that even 
a woman, whose marriage is declared, to be 
null and void under
Section 11
of that 
Act, is entitled to get alimony and 
maintenance and therefore, it has to be 
inferred that Legislature intended to confer 
statutory right for maintenance and 
alimony even in cases where her 
marriage contravenes the conditions 
prescribed under
Section 5
and is declared to 
be null and void under
Section 11
of that 
Act.
9. It is not in dispute that the parties to 
the proceedings arc Hindus and they are being 
governed by their personal laws.
The Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955
,
The Hindu Adoption and 
Maintenance Act, 1956
.
The Hindu Minority and 
Guardianship Act, 1956
and the
The Hindu 
Succession Act, 1956
are package of enactments 
being part of socio-legal scheme applicable to 
Hindus. In view of the divergent schools 
governing the personal laws of the Hindus, 
the Parliament codified the personal law relating 
to the Hindus and enacted the said four Acts.
Hindu Marriage Act
codifies the law relating to 
marriages, and the
Hindu Adoption and 
Maintenance Act, 1956
codifies the law of 
maintenance applicable to Hindus.
10. In the instant case, it is not disputed 
that the appellant had a legally wedded wife living 
with him at the time when he married the 
respondent on 01-07-1984 as per the Hindu 
rites and customs. Though the appellant had disputed 
the said marriage of the respondent with him, the 
trial Court, on an appreciation of the oral and 
documentary evidence on record, has rightly 
held that the marriage of the respondent with 
the appellant had taken place on 01-07-1984 
as per Hindu customs and the said marriage 
was also registered on 11-7-1984 as seen 
from Ex.A2. i.e. the Register of 
Marriages maintained in the office of the Sub-
Registrar, Palamaner and there is an entry with 
regard to the marriage of the appellant with the 
respondent in that Register and the same has been 
marked as Ex.A2(a) and the signature of PW4 in 
the said Register has also been marked as 
Ex.A2(b). PWs.3 and 5 have proved the said 
documents. Thus, the respondent has, factually, 
established her marriage with the appellant. It is also 
the case of the respondent-plaintiff that the appellant 
had a living wife DW2 at the time of her 
marriage. The respondent-plaintiff, both in her plaint 
as well as in her evidence as PW1 admitted that 
when she was taken to the house of the 
appellant, she found, to her surprise, that he 
had already married one Parvathamma (DW2) 
and he got two daughters through her. She has also 
not disputed the validity of the marriage of the 
appellant with his first wife Patvathamma. 
Therefore, the next aspect to be considered is 
what is the status of the respondent vis-a-
vis her marriage with the appellant and 
whether she could get the status of a legally 
wedded wife of the appellant.
11. For appreciating the status of a 
Hindu woman marrying a Hindu male having 
a spouse living, some of the provisions of the
Hindu 
Marriage Act, 1955
have to be examined.
Section 5
of the Act lays down conditions for 
a Hindu Marriage solemnized after the 
commencement of the Act. Clause (I) of that 
Section lays down the necessary condition 
that "neither party has a spouse living at the time of 
the marriage".
Section 11
of the Act declares such 
a marriage solemnized in contravention of clause (i) 
as null and void in the following terms:
"
Section 11
.
Voidmarriages :-Anymaniage solemnized after 
the commencement of this Act shall be null and 
void and may, on a petition presented by either 
party thereto against the other party be so 
declared by a decree of nullity if it 
contravenes any of the conditions specified in 
clauses (i), (iv) and (v)of Sections."
"
Section 17
reads thus:
Section 17
. Punishment 
of bigamy .--Any marriage between two 
Hindus solemnized after the commencement of 
this Act is void if at the date of such marriage 
either party had a husband or wife living; 
and the provisions of
Sections 494
and
495
of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 
of 1860), shall appiy accordingly,"
Thus,
Section 17
not only, declares 
such a marriage as void, but the parties to 
that marriage are also liable for bigamy.
Section 12
of the Act relates to voidable marriages and it reads 
as follows:
"
Sec. 12
, Voidable 
marriages :--(1) Any Marriage solemnized, 
whether before or after the commencement of 
this Act, shall be voidable and may be 
annulled by a decree- of nullity on any of the 
following grounds, namely:
(a) that the marriage 
has not been consummated owing to the 
impotence of the respondent; or
(b) that the marriage is in contravention of the 
condition specified in clause (ii) of
Section 5
;
or
(c) that the consent of the petitioner, 
or where the consent of the guardian 
in marriage of the petitioner (was required 
under Section 5 as it stood immediately 
before the commencement of the Child 
Marriage Restraint (Amendment) 
Act, 1978) the consent of such guardian 
was obtained by force (or by fraud as to the 
nature of the ceremony or as to any 
material fact or circumstance 
concerning the respondent); or
(d) that the respondent was at the time of the 
marriage pregnant by some person other 
then the petitioner.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section (1) no petition for annulling a 
marriage
(a) on the ground specified in 
clause (c) of sub-section (1) shall be entertained if
(i) the petition is 
presented more than one year after the 
force had ceased to operate or, as the case 
may be,  the fraud  had been discovered; 
or
(ii) the petitioner has, with his or her 
full consent, lived with the other party to 
the marriage as husband or wife after the 
force had ceased to operate or, as the case 
may be, the fraud had been discovered;
(b) on the ground specified in clause (b) of 
sub-section (1) shall be entertained unless the 
Court is satisfied;--
(i) that the petitioner was at the time 
of the marriage ignorant of the facts 
alleged;
(ii) that proceedings have been instituted in the case 
of a marriage solemnized before the 
commencement of this Act within one 
year of such commencement within one year 
from the date of the marriage; and
(iii) that marital intercourse with the 
consent of the petitioner has not taken 
place since the discovery by the petitioner of 
the existence of the said ground."
Provisions under
Section 18
of the Hindu 
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 may also 
be extracted as the respondent herein is claiming 
maintenance under the said Act. It reads thus :
"
Section 18-
Maintenance of wife ;-(1) Subject to the 
provisions of this Section, a Hindu Wife, 
whether married before or after the 
commencement of this Act, shall be entitled to be 
maintained by her husband during her life-
time.
(2) A Hindu wife shall be entitled to live 
separately from her husband without 
forfeiting her claim to maintenance
(a) (b) (c) not relevant.
(d) if he has any other wife living;
(3) A Hindu wife shall not be entitled to 
separate residence and maintenance from her 
husband if she is unchaste or ceases to be a Hindu by 
conversion to other religion.".
(c), (f), (g) not relevant.
12.
Section 5(i)
of the Hindu Marriage 
Act which lays down that the marriage will be solemnized between 
any two Hindus if neither party has a spouse living at the 
time of the marriage, introduces monogamy in the Hindu Law. 
The word 'spouse'' used in this Section means, a 
"lawfully married husband or wife". Therefore, before a valid 
marriage can be solemnized after the commencement of the Act, 
it must be shown that the parties to the marriage must be either 
single or divorcee or a widow or widower and then only, 
they are competent to enter into a valid marriage. If at the 
performance of the marriage rites and ceremonies, one 
or other had a spouse living and the earlier marriage 
had not already been set aside, the later marriage is no 
marriage at all and being in contravention of the condition
laid 
down in
Section 5(i)
of the said Act, it is void ab initio.
Section 11
of the Act as quoted earlier, lays down that any 
marriage solemnized after the commencement of this Act 
is null and void if it contravenes conditions specified under
Section 5(i)
and may, on a petition presented by either 
party thereto, so be declared by a decree of nullity. It has been 
consistently held by this Court and various other High 
Courts and Supreme Court that under the provisions of 
the
Hindu Marriage Act
, a second marriage contracted while the first 
marriage is subsisting, is void.
13. The learned Counsel appearing for 
the respondent submitted that the marriage of the 
respondent with the appellant, in the instant case, comes 
under "voidable'' marriage described under
Section 12
of 
the Act as the respondent was not informed about the 
appellant's earlier marriage when she was married 
to him and thus, the appellant obtained her 
consent by playing fraud on her, and that till the 
marriage is annulled, that marriage is a valid 
one and the respondent gets all the rights as 
a wife under a valid marriage. We are 
unable to accept this contention of the 
learned Counsel for the respondent.
14.
Sections 11
and
12
of the 
Act as quoted earlier, deal with cases where a 
marriage is void and cases where a marriage is 
voidable at the option of either of the party to 
the marriage respectively. In
Section 11
, 
the expression used is "null and void" while the word 
"voidable" is used in
Section 12
. This indicates the 
intention of the Parliament that they wanted to make 
a distinction between a void marriage and a voidable 
marriage. The distinction is further indicated by
Section 17
which makes the parties to void 
marriage criminally liable, while there is no such 
penalty for the parties to a voidable marriage. 
Of course, both
Sections 11
and
12
speak 
of a decree of nullity; but
Section 11
speaks of only declaration of the marriage as null 
and void by such a decree, while
Section 12
speaks 
of the annulment of a voidable marriage by a decree. 
As a void marriage is non-existent in the eye of law, 
only a declaration is sufficient, but an annulment 
of a voidable marriage is necessary because 
such a marriage shall be deemed to be valid 
until it is annulled by a decree of nullity. Further, 
the marriage which is null and void for contravening 
the provisions of
Section 5(i)
ofthe said Act cannot 
be treated as voidable under
Section 12
. We get 
support for this view from the decision of 
Supreme Court in
Smt. Yamunabai Anant Rao 
Adhav v. Ananta Rao Shivram Adhav and 
another
, . It is also held in 
the same decision that the fact that the wife 
was not informed about the husband's earlier 
marriage when she married him would be of no 
avail and the wife cannot rely on the principle 
of estoppel so as to defeat the provisions of the Act. 
Thus, there can be no doubt that the words 
"void" and "voidable" have been used in the Act in 
two distinct senses. The argument that after 
solemnisation of marriage, the appellant treated 
her as his wife is again of no avail as the issue 
lias to be settled under the provisions of the Act, 
It is the intention of the Legislature as could be seen 
from the provisions of the Act which is relevant and 
not the attitude of the party.
15. A Hindu is under an 
obligation to maintain his wife, his minor 
sons, unmarried daughters and aged Parents. The 
obligation is personal. It arises from the very 
nature of the relationship and exists whether he 
possesses any property or not. The Maintenance 
Act gives statutory form to that obligation. The right 
of a Hindu wife for maintenance is an incident of 
the status of matrimony. Subsection (1) of
Section 18
of the Act substantially 
reiterates that right and lays down the 
general rule that a Hindu wife whether 
married either before or after the 
commencement of the Act is entitled to be 
maintained by her husband during her life time. The 
rule
laid down in
this Section is subject to the 
exceptions stated in sub-section (3) which lays 
down that she cannot claim separate 
residence and maintenance if she is unchaste or 
ceases to be a Hindu by conversion to 
another religion. Under sub-section (2) of
Section 18
wife is entitled to live separately from 
her husband without forfeiting her claim for 
maintenance, in the circumstances stated in clauses
(a) to (g) mentioned in that subsection. 
Under clause (d), wife is entitled for separate 
residence without forfeiting her claim for 
maintenance if her husband has any other wife 
living. The claim for maintenance is 
maintainable under this Section irrespective of the 
fact that the marriage had taken place after 
or before the marriage of the applicant wife, provided 
the other wife is living. The ground
laid down in
this 
Section can, obviously exist only in case of any 
marriage solemnized before the
Hindu 
Marriage Act
came into operation. It is 
obviously for the reason that the
Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955
laid down monogamy as a rule of 
law and Hindu husband cannot marry another 
wife after the commencement of that Act. 
A bigamous marriage contracted after the coming 
into force of that Act, would be null and void 
and no question of having another wife can 
arise. Therefore, the word "Hindu wife" in
Section 18(1)
connotes only a legally wedded 
wife of Hindu and such wife alone is entitled 
to claim maintenance from her husband under this 
Section. If her marriage is void ab initio, she is not 
entitled to claim maintenance under this Section.
"Hindu wife" in this Section, we reiterate, 
only means a wife whose marriage is valid 
under the provisions of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 
1955
. The wife whose marriage has been 
solemnized, but is void on the ground that the 
first wife of the husband is living at the time of the 
marriage is not entitled to claim maintenance under 
this provision.
16. The expression " any other wife" in
Section 18(2)(d)
of the Act came up for 
consideration before Karnataka High Court in 
Subbe Gowda v. Hanamma, , and it is held by that Court 
that:
'The expression 'any other 
wife .' in
Section 18(2)(d)
means, any 
other legally wedded wife. Therefore, even 
if the husband is living with another 
woman treating her as his wife, it 
cannot be said that he has any other wife 
living within the meaning of
Section 18(2)
(d)."
While the personal law governing the parties 
prohibits bigamous marriage, on a parity of 
reasoning, it. can also be stated that the 
expression 'Hindu wife' in
Section 18
means 
only a legally wedded wife and not a wife 
whose marriage is void under the provisions of the
Hindu Marriage Act
. The second 
marriage/bigamous marriage being void cannot 
create a legal statute of "husband" and "wife" 
between the parties. That marriage is void ab initio 
and the woman cannot get the status of a wife nor 
the male gets the status of husband to her. 
Therefore, she cannot get a right to claim 
maintenance under
Section 18
of the 
Act.
17. It is also significant to note 
that no attempt was made to amend or 
make provision in the Act to include the case of a 
woman whose marriage is void by reason of 
provision of
Section 5(i)
of the Hindu 
Marriage Act, for claiming maintenance against a 
person with., whom she underwent illegal marriage. 
Even though the Parliament in its anxiety to protect 
the legitimacy of the paternity of the child born 
out of that void marriage made a provision in
Section 16
of Marriage Laws (Amendment) 
Act, 1976, it has not extended similar 
protection in respect of the mother of that child. 
Further, in our considered opinion it does not appear 
to be the intention of the Act while such 
marriage is rendered void, nevertheless, the 
bigamous relationship should be recognised for 
purpose of maintenance.
18. It is no doubt true that 
Maintenance Act is a piece of beneficial 
legislation conferring additional rights on 
women and children. But, it cannot be 
construed as conferring maintenance rights 
on a woman whose marriage is void under
Hindu 
Marriage Act
. While a legislative enactment may be 
liberally construed, the liberality cannot overstep the 
legislative limits of interpretation, putting to the 
legislation something which is not there. If it is 
felt that a particular enactment causes 
hardship or inconvenience, it is for the 
Legislature to redress it, but, it is not open 
to the Court to ignore the legislative 
injunction.
19. Now, we will refer to some 
of the decided cases on the point. In Bami 
Dharjha v. Chabbi Chalterji, AIR 1967 
Pat. 217, Division Bench of Patna High 
Court white dealing with the claim of a 
woman for maintenance under
Section 
125
Cr.PC and such a woman being 
married to a married man whose wife was living 
at the time of her marriage, held that if the petitioner 
on the date of marriage with the claimant-
woman had already wedded wife, his 
marriage with the claimant woman is void under
Section 11
of the Hindu Marriage Act and a 
marriage void ab initio does not alter or affect the 
status of parties nor docs it create between 
them any rights   and obligations which must 
normally arise from valid marriage and a void 
marriage  is non-existent in the eye of law.
20. In Pothula Manika Reddy 
and Another v. Govt of A.P, rep. by 
the Special Tahsildhar, l&nd Reforms, 
Ranga Reddy, 1978 (1) APLJ 360.
a learned single Judge of our High Court, while 
considering the status of a second wife who was 
married to a person while his first wife was 
living, held that a woman who is married to 
a party who has already living spouse cannot be 
treated as his spouse in the legal sense and such 
a second marriage is null and void and it docs not 
create any rights and obligations.
21. While considering the scope 
of
Section 11
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 
the Division Bench of Patna High Court in AIR 
1967 Patna 277 (supra) held thus:
"A marriage which 
contravenes the conditions referred to in
Section 5
is in law no marriage at all being void 
ipsojure and it is open to the party to the 
marriage even without recourse to the Court to 
treat it as a nullity. Neither party is under 
any obligation to seek the declaration of nullity 
under this Section though such a declaration 
may be asked for the purpose of pre-caution or 
record."
22. At page 687 of Mulla's Hindu 
Law 14th Edition a passage reads thus:
"The person, an innocent 
party to a bigamous marriage, may go to a 
Court for declaration that a bigamous 
marriage is null and void. That would 
be for the purpose of precaution or record or 
evidence. That the bigamous marriage is 
a nonexistent and simply because there 
is no recourse to the Court, it cannot be 
said that it exists unless and until a 
decree is passed declaring it to be null and 
void."
Therefore, the mere fact that the parties 
had not approached the Court for 
declaration as contemplated under
Section 
11
does not in any way alter the conditions 
and thereby, it cannot be said that the marriage is 
a valid and subsisting one.
23. In Baji Rao Gagoba 
Thambra v. Ms. Tholan Bhai and 
another, 1980 Crl. LJ 473, a Division 
Bench of Bombay High Court white considering the 
claim of a woman whose marriage was void, 
for maintenance tinder
Section 125
Cr.PC 
held thus.
"A woman whose 
marriage was void cannot get the legal 
status of a wife and therefore, if the 
marriage is void by reason of contravention 
of Section 5 read with Section 11 of 
Hindu Marriage Act, she is not competent to 
make an application under Section 125 of the 
Cr.P.C That provision merely speaks of a"
Wife" and its meaning cannot be extended 
to a case of a void marriage."
24.
In
Smt. Yetmtnabai Anantha 
Rao Adhav v. Anantha Rao Shivram 
Adhav and another
, (supra) while 
considering the question whether a Hindu 
woman who is married after coming into force of 
the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
, to a Hindu male 
having a living lawfully wedded wife, can maintain 
an application for maintenance under
Section 
125
Cr.P.C. the Supreme Court held 
thus:
"
Section 5(i)
of Hindu Marriage 
Act lays down, for a lawful marriage, the 
necessary condition is that neither party should 
have a spouse living at the time of the marriage. 
A marriage in contravention of this 
condition therefore, is null and void. The plea that 
the marriage should not be treated as void 
because such a marriage was earlier recognised 
in law and customs cannot be accepted. By 
reason of the over-riding effect of the Act as 
mentioned in
Section 4
no aid can be taken 
of the earlier Hindu Law or any custom 
or usage as a part of that Law inconsistent 
with any provision of the Act, such a marriage 
also cannot be said to be voidable by 
reference to
Section 12
. So far as
Section 12
is concerned, it is confined to 
other categories of marriages, and it is not 
applicable to one solemnized in violation of
Section 5 (i)
of the Act."
It is further observed by the Supreme Court 
thus:
"It is also to be seen 
that while the Legislature has considered it 
advisable to uphold the legitimacy of the paternity 
of a child born out of a void marriage, it 
has not extended a similar protection in respect 
of the mother of the child'' 
 

 The Court further observed thus:
"For the purpose of extending the 
benefit of the Section to a divorced woman and 
to an illegitimate child, the Parliament 
considered it necessary to include in the 
Section specific provisions to that effect, but it 
has not done so with respect to woman 
not lawfully married."
The above decision of the Supreme Court will 
apply in all tours to the case on hand arising under the
Hindu Marriage Act
.
In Sayatma v. Lakshmi Bhai Alias 
Hanuma Bhai and another, , this Court while relying on the 
decision of the Supreme Court in  (supra) observed:
"When the Legislature itself 
incorporated in the
Hindu Marriage Act
that a 
second marriage contracted while the first 
marriage is subsisting is void, it cannot be 
comprehended how the second wife is 
entitled for maintenance."
25. Thus, the Supreme Court and 
various High Courts including Andhra Pradesh High 
Court had taken the view that a woman whose 
marriage is valid under the provisions of the
Hindu 
Marriage Act
alone is entitled to claim maintenance 
from her husband and the woman whose marriage 
is void ab initio cannot make any claim for 
maintenance; as such a marriage cannot create a 
legal status of husband and wife between the 
parties. We are also of the firm view that the 
words "Hindu Wife" appearing in Section 18 of 
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act has to be 
interpreted as a wife whose marriage is valid 
according to the provisions of the
Hindu 
Marriage Act
. We do not agree with the 
observations of the learned single Judge in "" (supra) that the provisions of 
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act do not 
warrant interpretation of such a Hindu wife and 
such an interpretation renders the provisions 
of Section 18 of Maintenance Actotiose.- In our 
view such an interpretation stands to reason when 
we take into consideration all these four Acts 
which were passed as a package of 
enactments being part of one Socio-legal 
scheme applicable to Hindus and codifying the 
various laws prevailing in various parts of the 
country before that codification. By 
codifying the personal laws prevailing and 
applicable to Hindus, the Parliament intended to 
have monogamy among the Hindus and 
therefore,
Hindu Marriage Act
was passed to 
prevent bigamous marriages and for that 
purpose, it is enacted that a bigamous marriage is 
void and also constituted such a marriage as a 
crime for which punishment has been 
provided. Therefore, it does not appear to be the 
intention of the Parliament that while such a 
bigamous marriage is rendered void, the 
bigamous relationship should be recognised for 
purpose of maintenance. Further, as 
observed earlier, the Parliament while passing
Marriage Laws Amendment Act, 1976
(68/
76) has considered it advisable to uphold 
the legitimacy of the paternity of children 
born out of a void marriage; it has not 
extended a similar protection in respect of 
the mother of such children. Further, if the 
bigamous relationship should be recognised for the 
purpose of maintenance of a woman, the very 
purpose of introducing the provisions in the
Hindu Marriage Act
while introducing 
monogamy among the Hindus will be 
defeated.
26.    The  learned  Counsel   for 
the respondent submitted that under
Section 25
of 
the Hindu Marriage Act, a wife whose marriage is 
void would be entitled, as of right, of relief of 
permanent maintenance once her marriage is 
annulled by a decree of nullity under
Section 
11
or passing a decree of a kind envisaged 
under
Sections 9
to
14
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 
and therefore, it allows that the
Hindu Marriage 
Act, 1955
recognizes notwithstanding the fact 
that the marriage is null and void, that the wife 
has the status atleast for limited purpose of 
applying for alimony and maintenance. This 
statutory intention, according to the learned 
Counsel for the respondent, has to be borne in 
mind in considering the claim of the respondent in 
this case to maintenance. The support of this 
contention the learned Counsel relied on the decision 
of a learned single Judge of Bombay High Court in 
Smt. Rajesh Bai and others v. Shantha Bai, AIR 
1982 Bom. 331. In that case, the first wife of 
the deceased filed a suit for partition against the 
brothers of her deceased husband and the 
2nd wife of her husband by name Rajesh Bai. 
The defendants in that suit took the plea that 
the plaintiff was divorced by her husband as 
per the caste custom and after divorce, he 
married 2nd wife Rajesh Bai. The learned 
single Judge while holding that the marriage 
of Rajesh Bai is void in view of the 
subsisting first marriage of the deceased with 
Shantha Bai, granted maintenance to 2nd wife 
Rajesh Bai relying on the part materia provisions 
of
Section 25
of the Hindu Marriage Act 
and also relying on the inherent powers of the Court 
under
Section 151
C.P.C. to meet the ends 
of justice. The learned single Judge 
observed thus:
"The rights recognised by
Section 25
of the Hindu Marriage Act 
can clearly be worked out in any civil 
proceedings subject to consideration of facts and 
circumstances so as to meet the ends of justice 
by resort to the inherent powers conferred upon 
the Courts by
Section 151
C.P.C. The 
statutory references do not indicate that 
there is any prohibition or any specific 
Provision in this regard. On the other hand, the 
principle is statutorily recognised that upon a decree 
being passed for nullifying the marriage as void de jure, 
the Court is possessed with ample power to make order 
as to alimony and maintenance. What could, 
therefore, be available in special proceedings 
cannot be said to be not available when the same 
issue is involved collaterally in competent civil 
proceeding."
The learned Judge further observed:
"Ultimately, having based the relief under
Section 151
C.P.C. with the aid of inherent powers 
and drawing upon the principle underlying
Section 25
of the Hindu Marriage Act, it is 
implicit that before maintenance is granted, the 
need to grant such must exist as well as the grantee must 
fulfil the ordinary conditions like that of chastity, 
not being married with any other person and further of not 
being in a position to maintain herself."
With due respect, we are not in a position to 
accept the said reasoning of the learned Judge. Firstly, the 
assumption that
Section 25
recognizes the right of a 
woman bigamously married to claim maintenance at 
the time when a decree of nullity is passed is not 
correct. Secondly in the absence of a proceeding under
Sections 9
to
14
such a relief cannot be granted by 
invoking Section 151. Section 151 could liave no 
application to such a situation.
27.
Section 25
of the Hindu Marriage 
Act as it now stands after amendment by Act 68/76 is 
reproduced hereunder:
"25. Permanent 
alimony and maintenance :-
(1) Any Court exercising 
jurisdiction under this Act may, at the time 
of passing any decree or any time subsequent 
thereto, on application made to it for the 
purpose of either the wife or the husband, as 
the case may be, order that the 
respondent shall pay to the applicant for 
her or his maintenance and support such 
gross sum. of such monthly or periodical 
sum for a term not exceeding the life of the 
applicant as, having regard to the respondent's 
own income and other property if any, 
the income and other property of the applicant 
(the conduct of the parties and other 
circumstances of the case), it may seem to the 
Court to be just and any such payment may be 
secured, if necessary by a charge on the 
immovable property of the respondent.
(2) If the Court is satisfied that 
there is a change in the circumstances of either 
party at any time after it has made an 
order under sub-section (1) it may at the 
instance of cither party, vary modify or rescind 
any such order in such manner as the 
Court may deem just.
(3) If the Court is satisfied that the 
party in whose favour an order has been 
made under the Section has remarried, or 
 
 

 if such party is the wife that she has 
not remained chaste, or if such party is 
the husband, that he has had sexual 
intercourse with any woman outside 
wedlock, it may, at the instance of the 
other party, vary, modify or rescind any 
such order in such manner as the Court 
may deem just."
It is clear from this provision that it confers a 
statutory right on the wife and the husband 
and confers jurisdiction on the Court to pass an 
order of maintenance and alimony in 
proceedings under
Sections 9
to
14
of the 
Hindu Marriage Act. At any time before or after the 
decree is passed in such a proceeding, therefore, the 
wife or husband could make such a claim and the 
conditions of
Section 25(1)
will have to be 
satisfied. There must be a matrimonial 
petition filed under the
Hindu Marriage Act
, 
then, on such a petition, a decree must be passed by 
the Court concerning the material status of the 
wife or husband. It is only when such a 
decree is passed that the right accrues to the 
wife or the husband and confers jurisdiction on 
the Court to grant alimony. Till then, such a right 
does not take place. Not only that the Court 
retains the jurisdiction even subsequent to 
passing of such a decree to grant permanent 
alimony when moved by an application in 
that behalf by a party entitled to, the Court further 
retains the power to change or alter the order in view 
of the changed circumstances. Thus, the whole 
exercise is within the gamut of a broken 
marriage. Thus, the Legislature while codifying the
Hindu Marriage Act
, reserved the right of permanent 
maintenance in favour of the husband or the wife as 
the case may be depending on the Court 
passing a decree of the kind as envisaged under
Section 14
of the Act. Thus,
Section 25
should not 
be construed in such a manner as to hold that 
notwithstanding the nullity of the marriage, the wife 
retains her status for purposes of applying for 
alimony and maintenance. In our view, the proper 
construction of
Section 25
would be that where a 
marriage admittedly is a nullity, this Section will have 
no application. But, where the question of nullity is in 
issue and is contentious, the Court has to proceed on 
the assumption until the contrary is proved, that the 
applicant is the wife. It is in that sense
Section 25
should be appreciated. Further, 
in the instant case, there are no proceedings 
between the parties and there is no decree of the 
kind as envisaged under
Section 14
of the Act 
disrupting the material status of the respondent with 
appellant.
Hence, the respondent is not entitled 
to invoke the provisions under
Section 25
of the 
Act. On the other hand, the respondent is 
seeking maintenance under Section 18 of 
Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act. When the 
marriage of the respondent is void ab initio, she is 
not entitled to claim maintenance under the said 
Act. Hence, it is not open to the Court to 
grant relief of maintenance under
Section 
25
of Hindu Marriage Act in the proceedings 
initiated under the provisions of Hindu Adoption and 
Maintenance Act, as held by the Apex Court in
Smt. 
Chand Dhawan v. Jawaharlal Dhawan
, 1993 
(3) Scale 1. As is evident, both these statutes are 
codified laws on the respective subjects and by 
liberality of interpretation, inter-changeability cannot 
be permitted so as to destroy the distinction on the 
subject of maintenance.
28. We are also of the opinion that 
even the principles of justice, equity and 
good conscience do not come to the rescue of the 
respondent as the subject of maintenance is covered 
by statute law and there is no scope to invoke those 
principles where the legislative enactments on the 
subject do not permit the grant of maintenance to a 
woman who was a party to a bigamous 
marriage.
29. Moreover on the facts of the 
case also, the chastity of the respondent is doubtful 
as she admits in her evidence that she became 
pregnant after she was driven out of the 
matrimonial home of her husband, the appellant 
herein. Thus, viewed from any angle, the 
respondent is not entitled to maintenance.
30. In the light of the foregoing 
discussion, we hold on the point that a Hindu 
Woman who is married after coming into force of 
the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
to a Hindu male, 
having a lawfully wedded wife cannot maintain a 
claim for maintenance under
Section 18
of 
the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 
1956. In view of this decision, the 
decision of the learned single Judge of this 
Court in  is liable to be 
over-ruled. Accordingly
,
the said decision
is over-
ruled.
31.
In view of
the above decision
taken by us, the claim of the respondent for 
maintenance, whose marriage is void ab initio, 
against the appellant is not maintainable.
Hence, the decree and judgment in O.S. No. 131
of 1987 on the file of the Principal Subordinate 
Judge, Chiltoor, is liable to be set aside.
32. In the result the appeal is 
allowed. The judgment and decree in 
O.S.No.131 of 1987 on the file of the 
Principal Subordinate Judge, Chittoor, is set 
aside and the suit O.S.No.131 of 1987 is 
dismissed. In the circumstances of this case, 
parties are directed to bear their costs through 
out.