[Cites
3
, Cited by
5
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Commissioner Of Income-Tax vs Yamuna Digital Electronics (P.) Ltd. on 17 August, 1998
Equivalent citations: [1999]238ITR717(AP)
Author:
R. Bayapu Reddy
Bench:
R. Bayapu Reddy
JUDGMENT

 

S.V. Maruthi, J.
1. The following three questions were referred by the Tribunal at the instance of the Revenue for the opinion of this court :
"(1) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the
Tribunal was right in holding that the transaction though described as
hundi is really not a hundi transaction ?
(2) Whether, on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal, is correct in law in holding that the provisions of Section 69D cannot be applied in respect of transactions where the identity is established and the loan is genuine ?
(3) Whether, on the facts and circumstances of the case despite the absence of any specific provision for the grant of any proportionate deduction under Section 35(1)(iv) read with Section 35(2) of the Act, the Income-tax Appellate Tribunal was justified in law in allowing 50 per cent. of the cost of equipment as attributable for research ?"
2. The facts in brief are as follows :
The assessee is a company. During the examination of accounts for the assessment years 1981-82 and 1982-83, some hundi transactions were noted by the Income-tax Officer. On going through the details it was found that while a sum of Rs. 70,000 was borrowed on promissory notes, another sum of Rs. 32,500 was borrowed on the documents in the form of hundis in respect of which the repayments were made by the assessee into the bank for credit to the accounts of various creditors. For the assessment year 1982-83 also, the assessee was similarly found to have borrowed on hundis and also made repayments against such borrowals. Amounts repaid by them were worked out to Rs. 1,45,000 and Rs. 8,850 as interest thereon. The assessee contended that these transactions were not hit by
Section 69D
of the Income-tax Act. The Income-tax Officer did not accept the said contention. On appeal by the assessee, the Commissioner of Income-tax also held that they are hundi transactions and are, therefore, hit by
Section 69D
of the Income-tax Act. On further appeal to the Tribunal, the Tribunal following its own judgment in R. A. No. 23/Hyd of 1985 dated December 31, 1986 in
CIT v. Instrument Techniques (P
.) Ltd., held that : "the transactions in dispute are not hundis". Aggrieved by the same, the Revenue has sought a reference of questions Nos. (1) and (2) for the opinion of this court.
3. The judgment of the Tribunal in
CIT v. Instrument Techniques (P
.)
Ltd., came up for consideration along with Dexan Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd., viz.,
CIT v. Dexan Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd.
. This court while considering whether a particular transaction is of hundi or not laid down the following tests (page 581) :
"1. There are always three parties to such a transaction. They are the drawer, the drawee and the payee. The drawer cannot himself also be the drawee. If the transaction is bilateral it is a very strong indication to show that it is not a hundi transaction.
2. A hundi is payable to satisfy a person or order but negotiable without endorsement by the payee.
3. The holder of a hundi is entitled to sue on its basis without any endorsement in his favour.
4. A hundi once accepted by the donee, could be negotiated without endorsement.
5. In the case of loss of a hundi, the owner can claim duplicate or triplicate from the drawer and present the same, to the drawee for claiming payment.
6. A hundi is normally in the oriental language as per the mercantile custom."
4. Applying those tests, the learned judges have held that the transaction in
Instrument Techniques Pvt. Ltd.
's case as well as in
Dexan Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd.
's case , is not a hundi transaction and, therefore,
Section 69D
is not applicable.
5. Since the Tribunal followed their own judgment in
Instrument Techniques Pvt. Ltd.
's case in holding that the transactions covered in the present case are not hundi and since the judgment of the Tribunal in
Instrument Techniques Pvt. Ltd.
's case was upheld by this cqurt in
Dexcan Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd.
's case , we answer questions Nos. (1) and (2) in the affirmative, in favour of the assessee and against the Revenue.
6. As regards question No. 3, the assessee claimed deduction of plant and machinery worth about Rs. 1,35,417 under
Section 35
of the Income-tax Act on the ground that the said machinery was used in the research and development division. The Income-tax Officer on the strength of the investigation and after recording the statements of the two executives of the company rejected the claim. On appeal, the Commissioner of Income-tax partly allowed the assessee's claim on the ground that the research and development in the case of the company in electronic business was a continuous process and all the research and development was the preparation for commercial production. Holding as above, he allowed 50 per cent. of the claim of the assessee. On appeal, the Tribunal confirmed the view expressed by the Commissioner of Income-tax (Appeals). However, the Tribunal referred the third question for the opinion of this court at the instance of the Revenue.
7. The main argument of learned counsel for the Revenue is that deduction cannot be allowed as the finding of the Tribunal as well as the Commissioner of Income-tax is that only plant and machinery are partly used for the purpose of research and development and as long as it is not wholly used for research and development the assessee is not entitled for deduction of the claim. It is difficult to accept the contention of the Revenue as the language used in
Section 35
of the Income-tax Act reads as follows :
"35. (1) In respect of expenditure on scientific research, the following deductions shall be allowed--. . .
(iv) in respect of any expenditure of a capital nature on scientific research related to the business carried on by the assessee, such deduction as may be admissible under the provisions of Sub-section (2). (2) For the purposes of Clause (iv) of Sub-section (1),--
(i) in a case where such capital expenditure is incurred before the 1st day of April, 1967, one fifth of the capital expenditure incurred in any previous year shall be deducted for that previous year ; and the balance of the expenditure shall be deducted in equal instalments for each of the four immediately succeeding previous years."
8. From a reading of the section, it is clear that it does not say that the expenditure should be wholly and exclusively used for research and development. In the absence of the words "wholly and exclusively used for research and development", in the section contention of the Revenue cannot be accepted. Hence, the expenditure which is of a capital nature as long as it is used for scientific research relating, to the business carried on by the assessee, the assessee is entitled for the deduction of the claim.
9. We, therefore, answer question No. 3 referred by the Tribunal in the affirmative, in favour of the assessee and against the Revenue.
10. The reference is answered accordingly.