[Cites
3
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Shrirang Yadavrao Waghmare vs The State Of Maharashtra And Ors. on 16 September, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1100, 2019 (9) SCC 144, 2019 (12) ADJ 54 NOC, (2019) 2 ORISSA LR 753, (2019) 3 SERVLJ 361, (2019) 4 ESC 957, (2019) 4 PUN LR 653, (2019) 4 SCT 451, (2020) 1 ALLMR 953
Author:
Deepak Gupta
Bench:
Aniruddha Bose
,
Deepak Gupta
1


                                                                         REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7306     OF 2019
                                (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 33818/2015)


                         SHRIRANG YADAVRAO WAGHMARE                   APPELLANT(S)

                                                   VERSUS

                         THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA AND ORS.            RESPONDENT(S)


                                            J U D G M E N T
1.     Leave granted.
2.     The appellant was a Judicial Officer. He was

                         appointed as a Judicial Magistrate on 01.03.1985.            On

                         08.02.2001, he was put under suspension and dismissed

                         from service on 15.01.2004.        The appellant challenged

                         his writ petition filed before the High Court.              The

                         same   was   dismissed.      Notice    was   issued   in    the

                         special leave petition on 14.12.2015 limited to the

                         question of quantum of punishment. The only issue to

                         be decided is whether the punishment imposed upon him

                         is justified or     a lenient view can be taken in the

                         matter.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHARANJEET KAUR
Date: 2019.09.20
10:59:58 IST
3.     Learned counsel for the appellant has drawn our
Reason:
attention     to   the     relevant   provisions      of    the
2
Maharashtra Civil Services (Discipline and Appeal)

Rules, 1979, especially Rule ‘5’ thereof.                            We are

concerned    with         the        portion    dealing       with     major

penalties, which reads as follows:
“Major Penalties -
(vii)   compulsory retirement;
(viii) removal from Service which shall
     not be a disqualification for future
     employment under Government;
(ix) dismissal from Service which shall
     ordinarily be a disqualification for
     future employment under Government:
Provided that, in every case in which the
     charge of acceptance from any person of
     any   gratification,  other   than  legal
     remuneration, as a motive or reward for
     doing or forbearing to do any official
     act is established, the penalty mentioned
     in clause (viii) or (ix) shall be
     imposed;
Provided further that, in any exceptional
     case and for special reasons recorded in
     writing any other penalty may be imposed”
4.    Emphasis       of        the     learned     counsel       for     the

appellant       is on the first proviso wherein it is

stated   that    if       an    employee          is   held    guilty     of

accepting        gratification                 other      than         legal

remuneration, as a motive or reward for doing or

forbearing      to    do       any     official    act,    the       penalty
3
mentioned in clause (viii) or (ix), i.e., removal

from    service    or     dismissal    from    service        shall   be

imposed.
5.     We are only concerned with the issue of penalty

and we need not go into the entire gamut of facts.

However, for the purpose of deciding this appeal, it

would be necessary to mention the core allegation

made against the appellant.            The allegation was that

he had a proximate             relationship with a lady lawyer

and     due   to   this    relationship       he     passed    certain

judicial orders in favour of her clients, including

her mother and brother when they were parties to

certain proceedings.             Those findings of fact have

been upheld by all courts and even                   this Court has

not interfered with         those findings and issued notice

limited to the quantum of punishment.
6.     The first and foremost quality required in a

Judge is integrity.             The need of integrity in the

judiciary is much higher than in other institutions.

The judiciary is an institution whose foundations are

based on honesty and integrity.                It is, therefore,

necessary that judicial officers should possess the

sterling quality of integrity.                This Court in
Tarak

Singh    v.   Jyoti     Basu
[(2005)   1    SCC    201]     held   as
4
follows:-
“Integrity is the hallmark of
      judicial   discipline,     apart    from
      others.     It   is   high    time   the
      judiciary took utmost care to see
      that the temple of justice does not
      crack from inside, which will lead to
      a   catastrophe   in   the     judicial-
      delivery system resulting in the
      failure of public confidence in the
      system.   It must be remembered that
      woodpekers   inside  pose     a   larger
      threat than the storm outside.”
7.    The behavior of a Judge has to of an exacting

standard, both inside and outside the Court.                       This

Court in
Daya Shankar v. High
Court of Allahabad and

Others [(1987) 3 SCC 1] held thus:
“Judicial Officers cannot have
      two standards, one in the court and
      other outside the court.   They must
      have only one standard of rectitude,
      honesty and integrity.   They cannot
      act even remotely unworthy of the
      office they occupy.”
8.    Judges are also public servants.               A Judge should

always    remember    that    he       is    there   to   serve    the

public.     A Judge is judged not only by his quality

of judgments but also by the quality and purity of

his   character.          Impeccable         integrity    should       be

reflected    both    in   public       and    personal    life    of   a
5
Judge.       One   who   stands   in     judgments   over   others

should be incorruptible.              That is the high standard

which is expected of Judges.
9.    Judges must remember that they are not merely

employees but hold high public office.
In
R. C.

Chandel v. High
Court of Madhya Pradesh [(2012) 8

SCC   58],    this   Court   held       that   the   standard   of

conduct expected of a Judge is much higher than that

of an ordinary person.            The following observations

of this Court are relevant:
“37. Judicial   service   is  not   an
      ordinary government service and the
      Judges are not employees as such.
      Judges hold the public office; their
      function is one of the essential
      functions of the State. In discharge
      of their functions and duties, the
      Judges represent the State.        The
      office that a Judge holds is an
      office of public trust. A Judge must
      be a person of impeccable integrity
      and unimpeachable independence.     He
      must be honest to the core with high
      moral values. When a litigant enters
      the courtroom, he must feel secure
      that Judge before whom his matter has
      come,     would    deliver     justice
      impartially and uninfluenced by any
      consideration.     The   standard   of
      conduct expected of a Judge is much
      higher than an ordinary man. This is
      no excuse that since the standards in
      the society have fallen, the Judges
      who are drawn from the society cannot
      be expected to have high standards
      and ethical firmness required of a
      Judge.   A Judge like Caesar’s wife,
6
must   be   above   suspicion.    The
        credibility of the judicial system is
        dependent upon the Judges who man it.
        For a democracy to thrive and rule of
        law to survive, judicial system and
        the judicial process have to be
        strong and every Judge must discharge
        his     judicial     functions   with
        integrity,        impartially     and
        intellectual honesty.”
10.    There can be no manner of doubt that a judge

must decide the case only on the basis of the facts

on record and the law applicable to the case.                  If a

judge decides a case for any extraneous reasons then

he is not performing his duty in accordance with

law.
11.    In our view the word ‘gratification’ does not

only mean monetary gratification.             Gratification can

be of various types.        It can be gratification of

money, gratification of power, gratification of lust

etc.,etc.     In   this   case       the   officer   decided    the

cases because of his proximate relationship with a

lady lawyer and not because the law required him to

do so.      This is also gratification of a different

kind.
12.    The Judicial Officer concerned did not live upto

the expectations of integrity, behavior and probity
7
expected of him.      His conduct is as such that no

leniency can be shown and he cannot be visited with

a lesser punishment.
13.   Hence, we find no merit in the appeal, which is

accordingly, dismissed.
..................J.
                                     [ DEEPAK GUPTA ]



                                ...................J.
                                  [ ANIRUDDHA BOSE ]

NEW DELHI,
SEPTEMBER 16, 2019.