[Cites
24
, Cited by
22
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs M/S Unicorn Industries on 19 September, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 4436, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1085, 2019 (10) SCC 575, (2019) 12 SCALE 684, (2019) 7 MAD LJ 594, AIR 2020 SC (CIV) 52
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
,
M. R. Shah
,
Arun Mishra
1


                                                                           REPORTABLE


                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       CIVIL APPEAL No. 7432 OF 2019
                               (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) No. 36926 of 2012)


                         UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                    .... APPELLANT(S)



                                                    VERSUS


                         M/s UNICORN INDUSTRIES                   .... RESPONDENT(S)

                                                      WITH

                                     CIVIL APPEAL No. 2345 OF 2017 and
                                       CIVIL APPEAL No. 2346 OF 2017



                                                J U D G M E N T
B.R. GAVAI, J.
Leave granted in S.L.P.(C) No. 36926 of 2012.
2.      The question of law that arises for consideration

                         in these appeals is, ‘as to whether, by invoking the

                         doctrine of promissory estoppel, can the Union of India
Signature Not Verified   be estopped from withdrawing the exemption from payment
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2019.09.19
15:55:08 IST
Reason:                  of Excise Duty in respect of certain products, which

                         exemption is granted by an earlier notification; when the
2
Union of India finds that such a withdrawal is necessary

in the public interest.
3.                Since the factual position as well as the

question of law arising in the present three appeals are

common, they are heard together and disposed of by this

common     judgment.       The     appellant,     Union     of     India,     in

exercise     of    powers        conferred   by      sub-section       (1)    of
Section 5A
of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1994)

(hereinafter referred to as the “
Central Excise Act
”)

read with sub-section (3) of
Section 3
of the Additional

Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957

(58 of 1957) and sub-section (3) of
Section 3
of the

Additional        Duties    of      Excise   (Textiles           and   Textile

Articles) Act, 1978 (40 of 1978), being satisfied that it

is necessary in the public interest, by Notification No.

71 of 2003 dated 09.09.2003, exempted the goods specified

in the
First Schedule and the Second Schedule to the

Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
(5 of 1986) other than

the   goods        specified        in    Annexure-I        to     the       said

Notification, from the payment of duties under the said

statutes. The notification provided that so much of the

duty of excise or additional duty of excise, as the case

may be, leviable thereon under any of the said Acts as

was   equivalent      to     the    amount      of   duty    paid      by    the
3
manufacturer of the said goods, other than the amount of

duty   paid   by    utilisation        of    CENVAT    credit     under    the

CENVAT Credit Rules, 2002, was exempted. This exemption

was available to the units located in Industrial Growth

Centre or Industrial Infrastructure Development Centre or

Export Promotion Industrial Park or Industrial Estate or

Industrial Area or Commercial Estate or Scheme Area, as

the case may be, in the State of Sikkim, as specified in

Annexure-II        appended   to       the     said        notification.     A

procedure was also prescribed under the said notification

for availing the benefit of exemption. Annexure-I thereto

provides the list of the products which were not entitled

for exemption. Clause 1 of the said Annexure reads thus:
“1. Tobacco   and   Tobacco  products                    including
         Cigarettes/ Cigars/ Gutkha”



         Similar notifications were issued by the Union of

India being Notification Nos. 32 of 1999-CE and 33 of

1999-CE dated 08.07.1999 insofar as the State of Assam is

concerned.
4.       By    Notification        No.        21      of    2007-CE     dated

25.04.2007, the earlier notifications issued by it were

amended. The effect of the amendment was that the product

‘pan   masala’      falling   under         Chapter    21    of   the   First
4
Schedule of the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
, the

goods falling under Chapter 24 of said First Schedule,

i.e., tobacco and manufactured tobacco substitutes and

plastic carry bags of less than 20 microns were included

in the negative list and as such were no longer entitled

for exemption from the excise duty. Being aggrieved by

the said notification, the respondent, namely, Unicorn

Industries in the Civil Appeal arising out of Special

Leave Petition (C) No. 36926 of 2012, approached the High

Court of Sikkim by way of Writ Petition (C) No. 22 of

2007. The High Court of Sikkim vide its judgment and

order dated 11.05.2012 allowed the writ petition and held

that the petitioner therein was entitled to exemption

from payment of excise duty on the manufacture of pan

masala from its unit situated in the State of Sikkim for

a period of 10 years from the date of commencement of the

commercial production, i.e., 27.06.2006.
5.      Similarly,   the respondent   in Civil   Appeal No.

2346 of 2017, namely, M/s Dharampal Satyapal Ltd., which

was a manufacturer of pan masala with tobacco and other

tobacco products, approached the Gauhati High Court by

way of a petition bearing No. PW(C) 749 of 2010. The said

petition was with regard to withdrawal of exemption in

respect of pan masala with tobacco. The Single Judge of
5
the Gauhati High Court vide judgment and order dated

10.12.2010 found no substance in the petition and as such

dismissed the petition. Being aggrieved thereby, the said

respondent filed Writ Appeal No. 81 of 2011 before the

Appellate Bench of Gauhati High Court. Vide the judgment

and order dated 20.04.2016, the Appellate Bench of the

High Court allowed the appeal; set aside the judgment and

order passed by the Single Judge dated 10.12.2010 and

quashed Notification No. 11 of 2007-CE dated 01.03.2007.
It further directed the Investment Appraisal Committee to

give an opportunity of hearing to the appellant before it

(respondent herein) so that it can prove the amount it

had actually invested in the specified items for availing

the benefits under the earlier notifications and further

directed    that   if   the   appellant    proves   that   it    had

actually invested the amount, the respondent authorities

shall refund to the appellant so much of the excise duty

to which the appellant therein would be entitled as per

the earlier notifications.
6.         The respondent in Civil Appeal No. 2345 of 2017,

namely,    M/s   Dharampal    Satyapal    Ltd.,   had   also    filed

another petition being Writ Petition (C) No. 749 of 2010

insofar as its product ‘pan masala without tobacco’, is

concerned. The same was also dismissed by the learned
6
Single Judge of the Gauhati High Court vide the common

judgment and order dated 10.12.2010. It appears that the

appeal arising from the said petition being Writ Appeal

No. 223 of 2011 was separately heard by another Appellate

Bench of the Gauhati High Court. However, noticing that

the writ appeal arising out of the order of the Single

Judge regarding the product of the appellant therein,

i.e., ‘pan masala containing tobacco’ was already allowed

by the Appellate Bench of the High Court by Order dated

20.04.2016, the said writ appeal was also allowed, by the

judgment and order dated 25.05.2016 thereby setting aside

the Order passed by the learned Single Judge in Writ

Petition (C) No. 749 of 2010 so also the Notification

dated 25.04.2007. The respondent therein was directed to

refund the excise duty component to the appellant as is

admissible under the law.
7.      Being aggrieved by the aforesaid judgments and

orders, one passed by the Sikkim High Court in the writ

petition and the other two passed by the Gauhati High

Court in the writ appeals, the Union of India is before

this Court.
8.      Mr.   Dhruv   Agrawal,   learned   senior   counsel

appearing on behalf of the appellants, submits that both,
7
the Sikkim High Court as well as the Appellate Benches of

the Gauhati High Court have grossly erred in allowing the

writ petition and the writ appeals of the assessees. It

is     submitted     that,    though      the   Union    of    India     had

specifically contended before both the High Courts that

the     2007   Notifications        were    issued      in    the   public

interest,      the   same     has   not    been   considered.       It   is

submitted that the Union of India, in exercise of its

delegated      powers,   is    always      empowered    to    modify     and

withdraw the exemptions granted by it under the earlier

notification(s). It is submitted that the Union of India,

taking into consideration the public interest, that the

consumption of pan masala with tobacco or pan masala

without tobacco is hazardous to the human health and,

therefore, for curbing its consumption, had issued the

2007     Notifications       thereby      including     pan    masala     in

Chapter 21 and all products contained in Chapter 24,

i.e., tobacco and manufactured tobacco substitutes, in

the negative list. It is submitted that, after taking

into consideration that the 2007 Notification was issued

in public interest, the Sikkim High Court ought not to

have interfered with it. He further submitted that the

reasoning given by the Sikkim High Court that pan masala

is not hazardous and, therefore, the 2007 Notification

cannot be said to be in the public interest is totally
8
erroneous. It is further submitted that while doing so,

the Sikkim High Court has assumed the role of an expert

in     the    field    and,        therefore,     travelled        beyond      its

jurisdiction.
9.            Insofar as the Gauhati High Court is concerned,

the learned senior counsel submitted that the learned

Single       Judge    of    the     Gauhati    High   Court      had     rightly

dismissed       the    writ        petitions,     finding     that       in    the

conflict between the interest of an individual and the

public interest, individual interest should give way to

the larger public interest. It is submitted that, the

Appellate Bench of the Gauhati High Court in its judgment

dated 20.04.2016 has grossly erred in interfering with

the reasoned order passed by the learned Single Judge. It

is submitted that, in the said appeal, the product that

fell for consideration before the Appellate Bench of the

High    Court    was       Zarda    scented     tobacco    and     pan     masala

containing tobacco. It is submitted that, the products

containing tobacco are indisputably hazardous to health

and,     therefore,          the     Notification         which      withdraws

exemption       granted       for    the      manufacture     of     the      said

products is undoubtedly in the larger public interest.

However, overlooking this aspect, the appeals have been

allowed. It is submitted that insofar as the other appeal
9
is concerned, the another Appellate Bench has only relied

    upon the judgment by the earlier Appellate Bench and has

    observed that the only distinction in both the matters

    was that in the earlier matter, the issue was with regard

    to pan masala containing tobacco and in the matter before

    them, the issue was with regard to pan masala without

    tobacco and with these observation allowed the appeal.
10.                The   learned   senior   counsel   relied   on   the

    following judgments of this Court in the cases of
Kasinka

    Trading vs. Union of India1
,
Darshan Oils (P) Ltd. vs.

    Union of India2
, STO vs. Shree Durga Oil Mills3,
Shrijee

    Sales Corpn. vs. Union of India4
,
State of Rajasthan vs.

    Mahaveer Oil Industries5
,
Shree Sidhbali Steels Ltd. vs.

    State of U.P.6
,
DG of Foreign Trade vs. Kanak Exports7
,
Pappu Sweets and Biscuits vs. Commr. Of Trade Tax
,
U.P.8

    and Commr. of Customs vs. Dilip Kumar & Co.9
,.
11.           Shri Balbir Singh and Shri Nakul Dewan, learned

    senior counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents,

    have supported the impugned judgments and orders. It is

1   (1995)   1   SCC   274
2   (1995)   1   SCC   345
3   (1998)   1   SCC   572
4   (1997)   3   SCC   398
5   (1999)   4   SCC   357
6   (2011)   3   SCC   193
7   (2016)   2   SCC   226
8   (1998)   7   SCC   228
9   (2018)   9   SCC   1
10
submitted that, the Sikkim High Court as well as the

Appellate Benches of the Gauhati High Court have rightly

relied     upon   the    doctrine        of    promissory      estoppel        and

allowed the appeals. It is submitted that, it is only on

account of the representation given by the Union of India

and the State Governments that the industries established

in the notified areas of Sikkim as well as Assam would be

entitled for 100% exemption from central excise, the writ

petitioners before the High Court had established the

industries in such remote areas. It is submitted that,

the exemption notifications were issued in view of the

industrial policy of the Union of India as well as the

State     Governments     that   on      account       of    backwardness       in

these areas, the industrialisation in these areas should

be promoted so that the economic development takes place.

It   is   submitted      that,   only         on    the    assurance     of    the

Central     as    well   as   the     State        Governments,     the       writ

petitioners have invested huge amount and, as such, now

the Union of India could not be permitted in law to

resile    from the       assurance given            by them     to the        writ

petitioners.       It    is   submitted        that,       considering     these

principles, the Sikkim High Court and the Appellate Bench

of the Gauhati High Court have granted relief to the writ

petitioners.
It    is   submitted            that,    this   Court       has

consistently held that, if a party changes its position
11
to its detriment, on account of a promise given by the

  other    party,        the    other      party   cannot    be    permitted    to

  resile from such a promise. It is submitted that the

  doctrine of promissory estoppel is equally applicable to

  the State and its functionaries. Reliance in this respect

  is placed on the following judgments of this Court. M/s
Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd.                     vs. State of Uttar

  Pradesh and Ors.10
,
Union of India & Ors.                        Vs.     Godfrey

  Philips India Ltd. & Ors.11
and
Pawan Alloys & Casting

  Pvt. Ltd.       vs.     U.P. State Electricity Board & Ors.12
.
12.        The issue raised in these appeals is no more res

  integra.        This    Court       in    a   catena      of    decisions    has

  considered the issue with regard to inapplicability of

  the    doctrine        of    promissory       estoppel,    when    the    larger

  public interest demands so. We will refer, in brief, to

  the earlier judgments of this Court.
13.
In    the        case   of
Kasinka   Trading
(supra),     this

  Court was considering the case of the appellant, who were

  manufacturing certain products, requiring PVC resin as

  one of the raw materials for its manufacturing process.

  By    Notification          No.    66    dated   15.03.1979      issued     under
Section 25
of the Customs Act, 1962 which is pari materia
10 (1979) 2 SCC 409
11 (1985) 4 SCC 369
12 (1997) 7 SCC 251
12
with
Section 5A
of the Central Excise Act, the PVC resin

was exempted from basic import duty. The exemption was to

be effective till 31.03.1981. However, by Notification

No. 205 dated 16.10.1980 issued under
Section 25
of the

Customs Act, the exemption granted earlier came to be

withdrawn. A challenge similar to the one which is raised

herein was raised before this Court. This Court observed

thus:
“12.   It has been settled by this Court that
        the   doctrine   of    promissory   estoppel   is
        applicable    against    the    Government   also
        particularly where it is necessary to prevent
        fraud or manifest injustice. The doctrine,
        however, cannot be pressed into aid to compel
        the Government or the public authority “to
        carry out a representation or promise which is
        contrary to law or which was outside the
        authority or power of the officer of the
        Government or of the public authority to make”.
        There is preponderance of judicial opinion that
        to invoke the doctrine of promissory estoppel
        clear, sound and positive foundation must be
        laid in the petition itself by the party
        invoking    the    doctrine    and    that   bald
        expressions, without any supporting material,
        to the effect that the doctrine is attracted
        because the party invoking the doctrine has
        altered its position relying on the assurance
        of the Government would not be sufficient to
        press into aid the doctrine. In our opinion,
        the doctrine of promissory estoppel cannot be
        invoked in the abstract and the courts are
        bound to consider all aspects including the
        results sought to be achieved and the public
        good at large, because while considering the
        applicability of the doctrine, the courts have
        to do equity and the fundamental principles of
        equity must for ever be present to the mind of
        the court, while considering the applicability
        of the doctrine. The doctrine must yield when
13
the equity so demands if it can be shown having
       regard to the facts and circumstances of the
       case that it would be inequitable to hold the
       Government or the public authority to its
       promise, assurance or representation.”
                                   (emphasis supplied)
14.       It    could        thus      be        seen    that,    this    Court     has

clearly held that the doctrine of promissory estoppel

cannot be invoked in the abstract and the courts are

bound to see all aspects including the objective to be

achieved and the public good at large. It has been held

that while considering the applicability of the doctrine,

the    courts    have        to     do       equity        and    the    fundamental

principle of equity must forever be present in the mind

of the Court while considering the applicability of the

doctrine.       It     has    been          held        that     the    doctrine     of

promissory estoppel must yield when the equity so demands

and when it can be shown having regard to the facts and

circumstances of the case, that it would be inequitable

to hold the Government or the public authority to its

promise, assurance or representation. After considering

the   earlier        judgments      on       the        issue,   which    have     been

heavily   relied       upon       by     the       assesses,      this    Court    has

observed thus:
“21.      The power to grant exemption from
      payment of duty, additional duty etc. under the
      Act,   as   already noticed,   flows  from  the
14
provisions of
Section 25(1)
of the Act. The power
      to exempt includes the power to modify or
      withdraw the same. The liability to pay customs
      duty or additional duty under the Act arises when
      the taxable event occurs. They are then subject
      to the payment of duty as prevalent on the date
      of the entry of the goods.
An exemption
      notification issued under
Section 25
of the Act
      had the effect of suspending the collection of
      customs duty. It does not make items which are
      subject to levy of customs duty etc. as items not
      leviable to such duty. It only suspends the levy
      and collection of customs duty, etc., wholly or
      partially and subject to such conditions as may
      be
laid down in
the notification by the
      Government   in   “public  interest”.   Such   an
      exemption by its very nature is susceptible of
      being revoked or modified or subjected to other
      conditions. The supersession or revocation of an
      exemption notification in the “public interest”
      is an exercise of the statutory power of the
      State under the law itself as is obvious from the
      language of
Section 25
of the Act.
Under the
      General Clauses Act
an authority which has the
      power to issue a notification has the undoubted
      power to rescind or modify the notification in a
      like manner.”
                                    (emphasis supplied)
15.       It could thus be seen that, it has been held by

this Court that an exemption notification does not make

the items which are subject to levy of customs duty etc.

as items not leviable to such duty. It only suspends the

levy and collection of customs duty etc. subject to such

conditions as may be
laid down in
the “public interest”.
It has further been held that, such an exemption by its

very nature is susceptible of being revoked or modified

or subjected to other conditions. It has been held that

the    supersession   or   revocation   of   an   exemption
15
notification in the public interest is an exercise of the

statutory power by the State under the law itself. It has

further been held that under the
General Clauses Act
an

authority which has the power to issue a notification has

the undoubted power to rescind or modify the notification

in a like manner.
16.       This Court, after considering the objections that

the exemption could not be withdrawn prior to the date

prescribed    in   the   notification   granting   exemption   has

observed thus:
“23.     The appellants appear to be under the
      impression that even if, in the altered market
      conditions the continuance of the exemption may
      not have been justified, yet, Government was
      bound to continue it to give extra profit to
      them. That certainly was not the object with
      which the notification had been issued. The
      withdrawal of exemption “in public interest” is a
      matter of policy and the courts would not bind
      the Government to its policy decisions for all
      times to come, irrespective of the satisfaction
      of the Government that a change in the policy was
      necessary in the “public interest”. The courts,
      do not interfere with the fiscal policy where the
      Government acts in “public interest” and neither
      any fraud or lack of bona fides is alleged much
      less established. The Government has to be left
      free to determine the priorities in the matter of
      utilisation of finances and to act in the public
      interest    while  issuing    or    modifying    or
      withdrawing   an  exemption   notification    under
Section 25(1)
of the Act.”
                                     (emphasis supplied)
16
17.       It    has       been    observed,    that    the     withdrawal       of

exemption in public interest is a matter of policy and

the courts would not bind the Government to its policy

decisions for all times to come, irrespective of the

satisfaction         of    the    Government    that     a    change      in   the

policy was necessary in the public interest. It has been

held that, where the Government acts in public interest

and neither any fraud or lack of bona fides is alleged

much less established, it would not be appropriate for

this Court to interfere with the same. Ultimately, this

Court came to the conclusion that the withdrawal of the

exemption      was    in    the    public     interest       and,   therefore,

refused to interfere with the order of the Delhi High

Court dismissing the petitions.
18.       In the case of Shree Durga Oil Mills (supra), the

Government      of        Orissa    had     withdrawn        the    sales      tax

exemption      which      was    granted    earlier     under       the
Orissa

Sales Tax Act, 1947
. Considering a similar challenge,

while reversing the judgment and order of the High Court,

this Court observed thus:
“21.     Moreover withdrawal of notification was
      done in public interest. The Court will not
      interfere with any action taken by the Government
      in public interest. Public interest must override
      any consideration of private loss or gain.
17
23.      In the instant case, it has been stated
      on behalf of the State that various notifications
      granting sales tax exemptions to the dealers
      resulted   in   severe    resource   crunch.   On
      reconsideration of the financial position, it was
      decided to limit the scope of the earlier
      exemption notifications issued under
Section 6
of
      the Orissa Sales Tax Act. Because of this new
      perception of the economic scenario of the State,
      the scope of the earlier notifications had to be
      restricted. They were first abrogated altogether
      on 20-5-1977. Thereafter, it was decided to grant
      exemption at a limited scale.
24.      In our opinion, the plea of change of
      policy trade on the basis of resource crunch
      should have been sufficient for dismissing the
      respondent's case based on the doctrine of
      promissory estoppel. Public interest demanded
      modification of the earlier IPR.”
19.       It could thus be seen that, it has been held that

when withdrawal of the exemption is in public interest,

the public interest must override any consideration of

private loss or gain. In the said case, the change in

policy and withdrawal of the exemption on the ground of

severe resource crunch have been found to be a valid

ground and to be in public interest.
20.       A similar issue came up for consideration before

the Bench consisting three Judges of this Court in the

case    of
Shrijee   Sales        Corporation
(supra).
The

notification which came up for consideration was similar

with the notifications that fell for consideration in the

case of
Kasinka Trading
(supra). While considering the
18
argument that when the notification prescribes a period

during which the exemption would be available, such an

exemption cannot be withdrawn till the end of the period

prescribed, this Court observed thus:
“7.       The next question is whether the fact
      that the Notification No. 66 mentioned the period
      during which it was to remain in force, would
      make any difference to the situation. In other
      words, could it be said that an exemption
      notified without specifying the period within
      which the exemption would remain in force, would
      be withdrawn in public interest but not the one
      in which a period has been so specified? Once
      public interest is accepted as the superior
      equity which can override individual equity, the
      principle should be applicable even in cases
      where a period has been indicated. The Government
      is competent to resile from a promise even if
      there is no manifest public interest involved,
      provided, of course, no one is put in any adverse
      situation which cannot be rectified. To adopt the
      line     of    reasoning    in Emmanuel    Ayodeji
      Ajayi v. Briscoe, (1964) 3 All ER 556, quoted
      in
M.P. Sugar Mills [Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills
      Co. Ltd. v. State of U.P.
, (1979) 2 SCC 409, even
      where   there   is  no   such  overriding   public
      interest, it may still be within the competence
      of the Government to resile from the promise on
      giving reasonable notice which need not be a
      formal notice, giving the promisee a reasonable
      opportunity of resuming his position, provided,
      of course, it is possible for the promisee to
      restore the status quo ante. If, however, the
      promisee cannot resume his position, the promise
      would become final and irrevocable.”
                                     (emphasis supplied)
21.       It could thus be seen that this Court observed

that   once   public   interest    is   accepted   as   a   superior

equity which can override an individual equity, the same

principle should be applicable in such cases where the

period is prescribed.
19
22.       The another three Judges Bench of this Court in

the case of
Mahavir Oil Industries
(supra) has taken a

similar view.
In the case of
Shree Sidhbali Steels Ltd.
(supra), this Court was considering the question with

regard to validity of the notification which withdrew

33.33%   of   the   hill   development   rebate,   on   the   total

amount of electricity bill, granted under the earlier

notification. This Court while considering the similar

challenge observed thus:
“33.     Normally, the doctrine of promissory
      estoppel is being applied against the Government
      and defence based on executive necessity would
      not be accepted by the court. However, if it can
      be shown by the Government that having regard to
      the facts as they have subsequently transpired,
      it would be inequitable to hold the Government to
      the promise made by it, the court would not raise
      an equity in favour of the promisee and enforce
      the promise against the Government. Where public
      interest warrants, the principles of promissory
      estoppel cannot be invoked. The Government can
      change the policy in public interest. However, it
      is well settled that taking cue from this
      doctrine, the authority cannot be compelled to do
      something which is not allowed by law or
      prohibited by law. There is no promissory
      estoppel against the settled proposition of law.
      Doctrine of promissory estoppel cannot be invoked
      for enforcement of a promise made contrary to
      law, because none can be compelled to act against
      the statute. Thus, the Government or public
      authority cannot be compelled to make a provision
      which is contrary to law.”
                                    (emphasis supplied)
20
23.        It could thus be seen that, this Court again

reiterated     the     position        that      where     public    interest

warrants, the principle of promissory estoppel cannot be

invoked. Observing the aforesaid, the said challenge, as

raised by the petitioner, came to be rejected.
24.
In the case of
Kanak Exports
(supra), this Court

again while considering the challenge for withdrawal of

incentives to the exporters of some specified items held

that, the incentive scheme in question was in the nature

of concession or incentive which was a privilege of the

Central Government. It was for the Government to take a

decision    to grant       such a       privilege or        not. Grant       of

exemption,     concession         or        incentive     and   modification

thereof are the matters in the domain of public decisions

of the Government. It further reiterated that when the

withdrawal of such incentives was shown to have been done

in public interest, the courts would not tinker with the

policy     decisions.      This    Court,        after     considering      the

materials    on    record    as    a        matter   of   fact,     held   that

withdrawal of exemption was in the public interest.
25.        It could thus be seen that, it is more than well

settled     that     the   exemption          granted,     even     when    the

notification granting exemption prescribes a particular
21
period till which it is available, can be withdrawn by

   the State, if it is found that such a withdrawal is in

   the public interest. In such a case, the larger public

   interest would outweigh the individual interest, if any.
In such a case, even the doctrine of promissory estoppel

   would not come to the rescue of the persons claiming

   exemptions and compel the State not to resile from its

   promise, if the act of the State is found to be in public

   interest to do so.
26.          A judicial notice can be taken of the fact that

   by     various         scientific          studies        on   betel     quid     and

   substitutes,           tobacco       and   their        substitutes,     i.e.,    pan

   masala with tobacco and without tobacco, these products

   have been found to be one of the main causes for oral

   cancer. A detailed study has been considered by three

   Experts,         namely,        Urmila          Nair,     Helmut     Bartsch      and

   Jagadeesan Nair in the Division of Toxicology and Cancer

   Risk      Factors,          German    Cancer       Research        Centre   (DKFZ),

   Heidelberg,          Germany.        The   research        paper    is   titled   as

   “Alert for an epidemic of oral cancer due to use of the

   betel quid substitutes gutkha and pan masala: a review of

   agents and causative mechanisms13”. After considering the

   entire material in detail and considering the various

   earlier studies, the paper observes thus:
13 Mutagenesis Vol. 19 No. 4
22
“Perspectives

    Banning of gutkha and pan masala has been
strongly advocated by oncologists as a preventive
measure to reduce oral cavity cancers. Recently,
a number of States in India have banned the
manufacture and sale of both products and this
should   reduce   the   incidence  rate.   Similar
regulations   regarding    other  health-impairing
tobacco products which have been on the market
for centuries, together with cigarettes and bidis
(an indigenous smoking product), should also be
reinforced.
However, for those who are addicted to these
products or are already affected by premalignant
lesions, educational interventions to encourage
stopping the habit are essential. Additionally,
chemopreventive interventions are being explored.
Retinoids, NSAIDS and green tea are among the
promising agents (Garewal, 1994; IUSHNCC, 1997;
Papadimitrakopoulou and Hong, 1997; Lin et al.,
2002a). Although a large percentage of lesions
did respond to treatment, recurrence after
terminating the chemopreventive regime was also
observed (Sankaranarayanan et al., 1997), perhaps
due in part to continuation of the addictive
habit.
As with all cancers, early diagnosis is
important for successful treatment of oral
cancer, as its prognosis is still very poor.
There is, nowadays, a strong drive to apply
proteomics technology to molecular diagnosis of
cancer. Expression profiling of tumour tissues,
molecular    classification   of    tumours   and
identification   of   markers  to    allow  early
detection, sensitive diagnosis and effective
treatment are now being explored for oral
cancers. Genes with significant differences in
expression levels between normal, dysplastic and
tumour samples have been reported and this should
help in better understanding the progression of
oral squamous cell carcinoma (Kuo et al., 2002;
Leethanakul et al., 2003).
DNA   aneuploidy  in  oral   leukoplakia  in
Caucasian tobacco users has been found to signal
a very high risk for subsequent development of
oral squamous cell carcinomas and associated
23
mortality (Sudbo and Reith, 2003; Sudbo et al.,
      2004). A risk assessment model to predict
      progression of premalignant lesions that includes
      histology and a score combining chromosomal
      polysomy, expression and loss of heterozygosity
      on 3p or 9p has also been described (Lee et al.,
      2000; Rosin et al., 2002). Once diagnosed, these
      premalignant lesions could be treated at a much
      earlier   stage  by   chemo   preventive  agents,
      surgery, chemotherapy and/or intense radiotherapy
      to prevent new lesions and premalignant lesions
      from progressing to invasive cancer.
Conclusions

        Gutkha and pan masala have flooded the Indian
      market as cheap and convenient BQ substitutes and
      become popular across all age groups wherever
      this habit is practised. There is sufficient
      evidence that chewing of tobacco with lime, BQ
      with tobacco, BQ without tobacco and areca nut
      are carcinogenic in humans (IARC, 1985, 2004).
      These   evaluations   in   conjunction   with   the
      available evidence on the BQ substitutes gutkha
      and   pan  masala   implicates   them   as   potent
      carcinogenic mixtures that can cause oral cancer.
      Additionally, these products are addictive and
      enhance the early appearance of OSF, especially
      so in young users who could be more susceptible
      to the disease. Although recently some curbs have
      been put on the manufacture and sale of these
      products, urgent action needs be taken to
      permanently ban gutkha and pan masala, together
      with the other well-established oral cancer-
      causing   tobacco   products.   Finally,   as   the
      consequences of these habits are significant and
      likely to intensify in the future, an emphasis on
      education aimed at reducing or eliminating the
      use of these products as well as home-made
      preparations should be accelerated.”
27.       Recently, the Department of Oral Medicines and

Radiology,    Dental   Institute,   Rajendra   Institute    of

Medical Sciences, Ranchi has through its experts, namely,

Anjani Kumar Shukla, Tanya Khaitan, Prashant Gupta and
24
Shantala        R.     Naik     conducted           a   study   on    the    subject

   “Smokeless           Tobacco           and        Its    Adverse      Effects       on

   Hematological Parameters: A Cross-Sectional Study14”. The

   study      paper       considered            the    consumption      of     smokeless

   tobacco       (SLT) in         various forms            in India     such as       pan

   (betel quid) with tobacco, zarda, pan masala, khaini,

   areca nut. After conducting an in-depth analysis, the

   paper concludes and recommends as under”

         “Conclusion and Recommendation

         SLT   use   has   severe   adverse   effects   on
         hematological parameters. The present study might
         serve as an early diagnostic tool in any systemic
         diseases and be helpful in spreading awareness on
         the deleterious effect in the populace consuming
         SLT. Timely intervention among students can
         prevent the initial experimentations with tobacco
         from developing into addiction in adulthood.
         People should be counselled to avoid all habits
         of tobacco and undergo nicotine replacement
         therapy along with antioxidants. Knowledge and
         awareness about systemic and oral ill effects of
         tobacco should be spread through tobacco control
         programs in the pursuit for a tobacco-free
         world.”
28.          It    was sought           to be       argued on      behalf of       the

   manufacturers of pan masala without tobacco, that the pan

   masala without tobacco stands on a different pedestal

   than the pan masala with tobacco. It was sought to be

   argued       that,       pan     masala           without   tobacco       cannot    be

   considered to be hazardous to health. The Department of

   Head and Neck Surgery, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai

14 Advances in Preventive Medicine 2019
25
through its experts Garg A, Chaturvedi P. Mishra A. and

   Datta S. had conducted a study on “A review on Harmful

   Effects of Pan Masala15”.                     It is to be noted that this

   study is of ‘pan masala without tobacco’. It will be

   apposite to refer to the following observations of the

   said report:
“Policy Issues Concerning Pan Masala

             Pan masala use is rampant in India by all the
         sections and age groups of the society. It has
         emerged as a major cause of oral cancer in India.
         National Family Health Survey-2 showed that 21%
         of people over 15 years of age consumed PM or
         tobacco. Study in the state of Tamil Nadu showed
         that the age at which people start consuming
         areca nut products ranges from 12 to 70 years.
         58% of the subjects chewed the products more than
         twice   a  day.   Advertising  tobacco   products
         including PM containing tobacco is banned in
         India since May 1, 2004. To bypass this ban
         tobacco companies are advertising PM ostensibly
         without tobacco, heavily in all forms of media.
         PM is surrogate for tobacco products as the money
         spent on marketing, and advertising is many times
         of the revenue generated from the sale of PM. In
         Mumbai after the ban on PM and gutka the sale has
         come down and the percentage of users quitting
         and reducing the habit was 23.53% and 55.88%
         respectively. The main reason of quitting and
         reduction in consumption was non availability of
         these products. In spite of the ban gutka was
         still available but in different forms or at
         increased cost. Strict law in the form of
         Cigarettes and other Tobacco Products Act 2003
         has been made in India, but the enforcement and
         compliance is lax. There is a need for strong
         enforcement and compliance of laws throughout the
         country. The genotoxic, carcinogenic properties
         and numerous other harmful effects of PM need
         immediate and strict action by the government on
         PM without tobacco as it has banned PM with
         tobacco. The consumers should also be made aware
15 Indian Journal of Cancer (October-December 2015) Volume 52, Issue 4
26
of the harmful effects of PM as they are under a
      false impression that it is not harmful.

      “Conclusion

        Pan masala is widely used across all the strata
      of society and is freely available in many parts
      of the country. It is carcinogenic, genotoxic,
      and has harmful effects on the oral cavity,
      liver,    kidneys   and    reproductive   organs.
      Government action is immediately required to
      restrict the consumption and to make the people
      aware about its harmful effects.”
29.       The study which has been conducted in 2004, found

that gutkha and pan masala have been one of the major

causes of oral cancer. The Oncologists as early as in

2004 had strongly advocated banning of gutkha and pan

masala. They further find that banning the manufacture

and    sale   of   these    products     would   reduce   oral    cancer

incidence rates. It is found that gutkha and pan masala

have    flooded     the    Indian    markets     and   become    popular

amongst all age groups. It is observed that pan masala

with tobacco as well as without tobacco have been found

to be having a potent carcinogenic mixtures that can

cause oral cancer. It further found that, these products

are an addictive and enhance the early appearance of oral

sub-mucous fibrosis (OSMF). It is especially so in the

young users who could be more susceptible to the disease.
30.       The report further finds that, in the National

Family Health Survey-2, it has been found that 21% of
27
people      over       15   years   of    age    consumed     pan     masala   or

tobacco.         The    report      finds     that,     though       advertising

tobacco products including pan masala containing tobacco

is banned in India since 01.05.2004, to bypass this ban,

tobacco companies are advertising pan masala ostensibly

without tobacco, heavily in all forms of media. It has

been found that, after the ban on pan masala and gutkha,

the sale has come down. The 2016 report finds that, in

Mumbai, after the ban on pan masala and gutkha, the sale

has come down and the percentage of users quitting and

reducing the habit was 23.53% and 55.88% respectively.
31.         It    could      thus   be    seen    that,   by     a   scientific

research conducted by Experts in the field, it has been

found that the consumption of pan masala with tobacco as

well as pan masala sans tobacco is hazardous to health.

It    has    further        been    found       that,   the    percentage      of

teenagers consuming the hazardous product was very high

and as such exposing a large chunk of young population of

this Country to the risk of oral cancer. Taking into

consideration this aspect, if the State has decided to

withdraw the exemption granted for manufacture of such

products, we fail to understand as to how it can be said

to be not in the public interest.
28
32.       The    Sikkim    High     Court    has   observed         that   the

appellant       herein    has     been   unable    to    establish         any

overriding public interest, which would make the doctrine

of    promissory    estoppel       inapplicable.        It    has    further

observed that, the pan masala has not been declared as

hazardous to health by any notification or order of the

Government of India or the State Government. It found

that, no material or scientific report had been placed on

record to demonstrate that the pan masala is a health

hazard. We find that the reasoning arrived at by the

Sikkim High Court is totally erroneous.
33.       Insofar as the Gauhati High Court is concerned,

the learned Single Judge by an elaborate reasoning had

found that the notifications impugned before it was in

the public interest and further observed that in view of

the    overriding        public     interest,      the       doctrine       of

promissory estoppel could not be invoked. Not only that,

but    the   learned      Single     Judge    in   the       judgment      has

specifically observed thus:
“Having regard to the background that had
      preceded the Policy 2007 and the curtailment of
      the benefits of exemption earlier granted by the
      Policy 1997 through various instruments of law in
      the form of
Section 154
of the Finance Act 2003
      read with Schedule 9 thereto as well as the
      notifications under
Section 5A
of the Central
      Excise Act and other related legislations it
29
would be in defiance of logic to conclude that
      all these notwithstanding, with the specific
      intention of excluding the industries engaged in
      the manufacture of goods under Chapter 24 and pan
      masala under Chapter 21 of the
First Schedule to
      the Tariff Act, 1985
, these would still continue
      to avail the benefits/incentives under the Policy
      1997 only because the units concerned had
      commenced commercial production on and from
      31/3/2007.”
34.       The learned Single Judge has also specifically

observed in his judgment that the vires of
Section 154
of

the Finance Act, 2003 vide which the exemption granted to

the    manufacturers   of    cigarette     was        rescinded   with

retrospective effect, has been upheld by this Court in

the case of
R.C. Tobacco (P) Ltd. and Another Vs. Union

of India and Another
, reported in 2005(7)SCC 725. We are

surprised at the approach of the Appellate Bench of the

Gauhati High Court. It is pertinent to note that the

contention of the learned A.S.G. appearing on behalf of

the Union of India to the following effect have been

specifically   recorded     by   the   Judges    of    the   Appellate

Bench of the High Court in paragraph 14 of the judgment,

which reads thus:
“that the legality of the withdrawal of the
      benefit granted to the tobacco manufacturing
      units such as the appellant under the 1997
      Industrial Policy by
Section 154
of the Finance
      Act, 2003 was already upheld the Apex Court in
R.
      C. Tobacco (P) Ltd. vs. Union of India
, (2005)7
      SCC 725.”
30
35.          The Appellate Bench of the High Court observed

that some of the notifications providing modalities for

exemption         were   issued   subsequent      to    the    enactment     of
Section 154
of the Finance Act, 2003 and, therefore,
Section 154
of the Finance Act, 2003 has no relevance in

the said case. However, the Appellate Bench does not

find    it       necessary   to   even    make    a    reference       to   the

judgment of this Court which was relied on by the learned

Single      Judge    while    dismissing    the       writ    petitions     and

which is specifically put in service by the Union of

India.       We    are   unable   to     appreciate      as     to    how   the

Appellate Bench of the Gauhati High Court finds that

withdrawal of exemption in respect of ‘pan masala with

tobacco’ is not in the public interest. The legislative

policy as reflected in
Section 154
of the Finance Act was

to withdraw the exemption granted to the manufacturers of

cigarettes as well as pan masala with tobacco and that

too with retrospective effect. Apart from the fact that,

it     is    a     common    knowledge     that       tobacco    is    highly

hazardous, the legislative intent was also unambiguous.

In these circumstances, the finding of the High Court

that the withdrawal of exemption for tobacco products was

not in the public interest, to say the least is shocking.

We find that the approach of the Appellate Bench of the

High Court was totally unsustainable.
31
36.          As     already     discussed     hereinabove,         we   have    no

hesitation to hold that the withdrawal of the exemption

to    the     pan      masala   with    tobacco     and     pan   masala      sans

tobacco is in the larger public interest. As such, the

doctrine       of      promissory      estoppel     could    not    have      been

invoked in the present matter. The State could not be

compelled         to    continue       the   exemption,      though     it     was

satisfied that it was not in the public interest to do

so.     The       larger      public     interest     would       outweigh      an

individual loss, if any. In that view of the matter we

find that the appeals deserve to be allowed.



Civil Appeal arising out of S.L.P.(C) No. 36926 of 2012:
37.          The appeal is allowed. The judgment and order

passed by the High Court of Sikkim dated 11.05.2012 is

quashed and set aside.
38.          No order as to costs.
Civil Appeal Nos. 2345 of 2017 and 2346 of 2017:
39.          The appeals are allowed. The judgments and orders

passed by the Appellate Bench of the Gauhati High Court

dated       20.04.2016      and    25.05.2016       are   quashed       and    set

aside. The Order passed by the learned Single Judge dated

10.12.2010 dismissing the writ petitions is upheld.
32
40.     No order as to costs.
...................J.
                                        [ARUN MISHRA]


                                ...................J.
                                         [M. R. SHAH]



                                ...................J.
                                         [B.R. GAVAI]
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 19, 2019.