[Cites
11
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Illoth Valappil Ambunhi (D) By Lrs. vs Kunhambu Karanavan on 19 September, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1237, (2019) 14 SCALE 408, (2019) 4 KER LJ 493, (2020) 138 ALL LR 717, (2020) 1 RECCIVR 218, (2020) 205 ALLINDCAS 92
Author:
Indira Banerjee
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
Indira Banerjee
1

                                                                                        REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1429 OF 2011



     ILLOTH VALAPPIL AMBUNHI (D) BY LRS.                                               Appellant(s)


                                                                 VERSUS

     KUNHAMBU KARANAVAN                                                             Respondent(s)



                                                      JUDGMENT
INDIRA BANERJEE J.
1.    This    Appeal    is     against     a    Judgment    dated    12th

                      March, 2009 in Second Appeal No. 229 of 1996 passed

                      by a Single Bench of the Kerala High Court, whereby

                      the High Court has set aside the concurrent decisions

                      of the Trial Court and the First Appellate Court and

                      declared        that    the     suit   property       belongs      to   the

                      Chuzhali Bhagavathi Dharmadeva Bhandaram (hereinafter

                      referred to as ‘the Bhandaram’).
2.    The High Court further declared that the deed of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NEELAM GULATI
assignment dated 31st July, 1971 executed by Raman
Date: 2019.10.14
16:23:42 IST
Reason:
Aithan Ashari in favour of the appellant in respect

                      of      the   suit     property    was      null    and   void    and   not
2
binding     on        the     respondents          and     allowed           the

respondents        to    recover        possession         of    the        suit

property for and on behalf of the                  the Bhandaram.
3.      The facts giving rise to this Appeal are very

briefly enumerated hereinafter:
Raman     Aithan      Ashari,       hereinafter         referred       to     as

Raman, executed a deed of gift of the said property

in     favour    of     the      Bhandaram.         According       to       the

appellants,      though       the    deed     of    gift       stated       that

possession had been delivered, there was no evidence

of acceptance of the gift or of the Bhandaram being

in possession.          No presumption of acceptance of the

gift    could    arise      on    the   basis      of    the    recital       of

delivery of possession in the deed of gift as the

donee was only an inanimate body and there was no

evidence of any person accepting the gift or entering

into possession on its behalf.
4.      The appellants contend that the gift did not

take effect and Raman continued in possession, paying

rent and revenue for the property in his name.                               He

later cancelled the gift by a deed of cancellation

dated 15th July, 1971 and sold the property to the

original appellant on 31st July, 1971.                         The original

appellant was given possession thereafter and he made
3
improvements to the suit property.
5.      According    to    the       appellants,    on    or   about   7th

December, 1981, long after the original appellant had

purchased the suit property, the respondents being

the family members of Raman, and members of Kizhakke

Veethil Tarwad filed the instant suit for declaration

that    the   Deed    of    Cancellation          and    the    deed   of

transfer were invalid, null and void.
6.      It was the case of the respondents that they

were owners of the Bhandaram which had come to own

the suit property by virtue of the deed of gift.

Upon execution of the deed of gift Raman had divested

himself of title to the suit property and hence was

incompetent to execute any further deed, transferring

the    suit   property     to    the       appellants    herein   and/or

their    predecessor       in    interest       being    the    original

appellant.
7.      The appellants contend that the appellants are

bonafide purchasers for value. They resisted the suit

contending that the gift had not taken effect, as the

same had not been accepted, and therefore Raman was

perfectly     justified         in     cancelling       the    gift    and

selling the property to the appellant.
8.      On behalf of the appellants, it is argued that
4
the Trial Court went into detailed analysis of the

evidence, and came to the conclusion that the gift

executed by Raman had not taken effect, as it had not

been accepted.          Accordingly the deed of cancellation

as well as the sale to the appellant were held to be

valid and the suit was dismissed.                     The findings of

the Trial Court were affirmed by the First Appellate

Court.
9.    It is true, as rightly argued by learned senior

counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, that

the High Court does not, in Second Appeal, embark

upon re-analysis of evidence and interfere with the

concurrent findings of facts.                      It is well settled

that the     condition precedent for interference under
Section     100
of    the   CPC       is    the    existence   of   a

substantial question of law.
10.   What constitutes substantial question of law has

been settled by innumerable decisions of this Court.

Reference    may    be     made   to         the   Constitution   Bench

decision in
Sir Chunilal V. Mehta
and
Sons VS. The

Century Spinning and Manufacturing Co. Ltd. Reported
in AIR 1962 SC 1314.
11.
In
Chunilal
(Supra),       a    Constitution   Bench     of

this Court held that the proper test for determining
5
whether       a   question       of    law     raised     in    the    case    is

substantial would be, whether it is of general public

importance or whether it directly and substantially

affects the rights of the parties, and if so, whether

it is an open question in the sense that it has not

finally       been      settled       by   this    Court       or    the    Privy

Council or the Federal Court, or is not free from

difficulty, or calls for discussion of alternative

views.        If the question is settled by the highest

Court,       or   the     general      principle     to      be     applied    in

determining the question are well settled and there

is    mere    question      of    applying        those      principles,       or

that the plea raised is palpably absurd, the question

would not be a substantial question of law.                                In the

aforesaid         case,    the    construction          of     the    Managing

agency agreement was not only found to be a question

of law, but also neither simple, nor free from doubt

and accordingly the High Court was held to be in

error     in       refusing       to       grant     the        appellant       a

certificate that the appeal involved a substantial

question of law.
12.     Learned         senior        counsel      appearing          for     the

Respondent has cited a very recent judgment of this

Court in Gurnam Singh (D) by LRs. and Other vs. Lehna
6
Singh (D) by LRs.          reported in 2019(7) SCC 641, where

this Court re-affirmed that the jurisdiction of the

High Court to entertain a Second Appeal under
Section

100
of the CPC after the 1976 amendment is confined

to a substantial question of law. Thus existence of a

“substantial question of law”               is a sine qua non for

the exercise of           jurisdiction under
Section 100
of

the CPC.
13.    In Gurnam Singh’s case (supra) this Court held

that in a Second Appeal under
Section 100
of the CPC,

the High Court cannot substitute its own opinion for

that of the First Appellate Court, unless it finds

that    the       conclusions      drawn     by    the     Court        were

erroneous being :
(1.) contrary to the mandatory provisions of the
       applicable law; or
       (2) contrary to the law as pronounced by this
       Court; or
       (3)    based      on   inadmissible         evidence        or     no
       evidence.
14.    It    is    now     well    settled    that       perversity       in

arriving      at    a    factual    finding       gives    rise     to     a

substantial question of law, attracting intervention

of the High Court under
Section 100
of the CPC.
15.    Learned       senior       counsel     appearing       for        the

appellants referred to the substantial questions of
7
law framed by the High Court, and in particular, the

first question which reads as under:
Whether        Exh.    A1       -gift       deed    having       been
       accepted       on    behalf          of    the    donee       could    be
       revoked by the donor unilaterally?
16.   Counsel submitted that the questions have been

framed on the patently erroneous premises that the

gift had been accepted, on behalf of the donee when,

in fact, both the Trial Court and the Appellate Court

had   concurred    in      their    finding         that       the   gift    had

never been accepted.
17.   The     other         questions,            i.e.         whether        the

cancellation deed being Ex.P11 was contrary to the

provisions of
Section 126
of the Transfer of Property

Act, 1882,     or whether the relief of declaration in

respect of the documents being Exh. P11 was barred by

limitation, or whether the appellant had perfected

title under
Section 27
of the Limitation Act, cannot

be said to be substantial questions of law, but are

questions of fact, as argued by Counsel.
18.   The first question may not have properly been

framed.     Perhaps        the    question          should       have    read-

whether the finding of the Trial Court with regard to

non   acceptance      of    the    deed      of     gift,      confirmed      in
8
appeal, was vitiated by perversity and if it was so

vitiated, whether the unilateral revocation of the

deed, by the donor, can be sustained in law.
19.    A careful reading of the judgment of the High

Court under Appeal makes it absolutely                           clear that

those are the questions which have, in effect and

substance, been addressed.                  In our view, a mere error

in    framing   a    question      of       law   would    not    render      a

judgment in         Second Appeal liable to be set aside, if

it    is    found    that   a     substantial        question         of    law

existed and such substantial question of law has in

fact been answered by the High Court as in this case.
20.    The High Court rightly took note of the recital

of    the    deed     of    gift    which         showed    delivery         of

possession to the donee.                    The recital of the deed

gift is as under:
“As described above, I hereby give possession
       of the under mentioned properties as gift for
       the expenses of the aforesaid Daiva Bhandram
       which belongs to over Tarward and in which I
       also have ownership rights.
Therefore from today onwards yourself and in
       our absence those in our Tarwad who follow
       the rites of Chuzhali Ayathan etc. shall have
       possession      of   the    properties        given       in   the
       schedule below and shall meet the expenses of
       the Dharmadaivam from the income from time to
9
time pay taxes and give me Rs.24/-towards my
      life     interest      before        30th    of   Kumbham       every
      year from 1131 (M.E.). The said amount shall
      be    given     to   me    till       my     death   and     obtain
      receipt for the same.                 I will have no other
      rights     on    the      property          mentioned      in    the
      schedule except the aforesaid life interest.”
The High Court further held :-:
“8.     In the decisions relied on by the learned
      counsel for the respondent it has been held that
      there     cannot          be     a      presumption          regarding
      acceptance of the gift, be it not onerous and
      that there must be some evidence to show that
      the gift was accepted during the life time of
      the donor but, what is stated in those decision
      is     concerning         the        presumption        as      to      the
      acceptance of the gift.                     But when the document
      itself     recited        that        the     possession        of      the
      property      was      given      to        the   donee,        then,     a
      presumption of acceptance of gift would arise in
      favour of the donee.”
21.   The proposition of law that when the document of

transfer by gift records delivery of possession, a

presumption of acceptance would arise, in the absence

of overt repudiation of the gift, by and/or on behalf

of the donee, is unexceptionable. As held by the High

Court, when the deed itself said that the possession

of the property was given to the donee, the burden of

proving, that the said recital was not correct, lay
10
on the party who asserted so.              In our view, the law

has correctly been appreciated and enunciated by the

High Court.
22.   The High Court took note of the recital to the

effect   that     Karnavan        (Malingan       Chuzhali    Ashari)

acting on behalf of the Bhandaram was to enjoy the

property from the date of the gift, which was strong

evidence of transfer of possession.
23.   The High Court rightly found that there was no

direction   in   the       gift   deed     which   made    the   gift

onerous as understood in
Section 127
of the Transfer

of Property Act.       In all fairness to the appellants,

this has not even been argued before the High court.

The gift not being onerous, there was no reason why

Malingan Chuzhali Ashari should not have accepted the

gift on behalf of the Bhandaram.
24.   The High Court held:
“It is indisputable that an idol is to be
      treated    as    a    minor    for    all    legal     purposes.
      Hence, the acceptance of the gift as per Ext. A1
      could be by any person on behalf of the donee.
      It is not disputed that Malingan Chuzhali Ashari
      was the Karnavan of the Tharawad during the time
      of Ext.A1 and that along with Malingan Chuzhali
      Ashari, the donor (Raman Aithan Ashari) was also
      a trustee of the Bhandaram.”
11
25.    As noted by the High Court, there is no dispute

that   Malingan       Chuzhali       Ashari     and    the    donor       Raman

were trustees of the Bhandaram (donee) at the time of

execution of deed of gift.                  The fact that nothing was

done by Raman or any other trustee of the Bhandaram

to repudiate the gift in itself shows that the deed

of gift was duly accepted by the Bhandaran.
26.        The High Court rightly held that the Courts

below had proceeded on the wrong assumption that even

in spite of the recitals in Exh. A1, being the deed

of    gift    and    the    admitted        facts   of      the    case,   the

burden of proof was on the respondents to show that

the gift had been accepted.                     The findings of the

Trial Courts and the First Appellate Court were based

on a wrong assumption of law regarding the possession

of    an     idol    in    the   eye   of     law     and    the    relevant

recitals in Exh. A1 (deed of gift).
27.    The High Court rightly declined to accept the

findings of the Courts below that the deed of gift

had    not    been    accepted       during     the    lifetime       of   the

donor,       in     the    absence     of     any     evidence       of    non

acceptance of the same. The deed of gift did not

provide for reversion of the suit property to the

donor in case of failure to pay maintenance to the
12
donor in terms of the deed of gift. The High Court,

therefore arrived at the conclusion that Raman was

not competent to execute the deed of cancellation or

the deed of transfer, as he had ceased to be the

owner of the suit property.
28.
In
Md. Noorul Hoda vs. Bibi Raifunnisa & Ors.
reported in (1996 (7) SCC 767), this Court held that
Article 59
of the
Limitation Act
would be applicable

if a person affected is a party to a decree or an

instrument    or     a   contract        which    was      questioned       by

initiation of a suit.
Article 59
would apply to set

aside the decrees, instruments or contracts between

the parties inter se.             However, in the case of a

person claiming title through a party to the decree

or    instrument    or    contract       who     seeks     to    avoid     the

instrument,        contract    or        decree       by     a    specific

declaration, the starting point of limitation under
Article 59
would be the date of knowledge of the

fraud    and/or     illegality      which        renders        the    decree

and/or instrument and/or other document void.
29.
In
Prem Singh & Ors. vs. Birbal & Ors. Reported
in    2006   (5)    SCC    353,     cited        on     behalf        of   the

appellant, this Court held that when a document is

valid, no question arises of its cancellation; when a
13
document       is    void,    initiating       a    decree        for   setting

aside, the same would not be necessary as the same is

nonest in the eye of law as it would be a nullity.
30.
In
Prem Singh & Ors.
(supra) this
Court                         further

held
that
Article 59
of the
Limitation Act
deals only

when    relief        is    claimed    on     the     ground       of    fraud,

coercion, undue influence, mistake, etc. to avoid a

voidable transaction.
Article 59
is attracted where

fraud, coercion, undue influence, mistake etc. have

to be proved.               It would not apply to instruments

which are presumptively invalid.
31.     The High Court held, and rightly, that
Article

59
of   the
Limitation       Act
deals        with    suits    for

cancellation          for    setting        aside     an     instrument      or

decree or for rescission of a contract and prescribes

a period of three years commencing from the time when

the     fact        entitling    the        plaintiff        to     have    the

instrument or decree cancelled or set aside or the

contract rescinded is first known to him.                           So far as

Exh. A1 being the deed of gift is concerned, the

donor had no authority to revoke the same.                               Hence,

the subsequent documents were in themselves without

authority and null and void.                        The declaration was

only incidental to the title and possession of the
14
donee and hence
Article 59
had no application.
32.
In
S.    Sarojini     Amma        vs.   Velayudhan    Pillai

Sreekumar
(2018 SCC Online SC 2200) this Court found

on    facts    that    the     gift    was     conditional      and   the

conditions had not been complied with.                     Furthermore

on facts it was found that the gift in the aforesaid

case was to take effect at a subsequent date.                         The

Judgment is distinguishable on facts.
33.    In our view, the Second Appeal has rightly been

allowed by the High Court.                 The Appeal is therefore

dismissed.
34. Needless to mention that the Appellant will be

entitled       to     initiate        such     proceedings      as    the

Appellant      may    be   advised,        against   the   vendor     for

damage and recovery of the consideration paid to him.
.............................J.
                                 (INDIRA BANERJEE)



                               .............................J.
                                 (SANJIV KHANNA)

NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER 19, 2019