[Cites
36
, Cited by
10
]
Supreme Court of India
Chandana Das(Malakar) vs The State Of West Bengal And Others on 25 September, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1129, 2019 (12) ADJ 25 NOC, (2019) 13 SCALE 28, (2019) 3 ESC 783, (2019) 4 SCT 489, (2019) 7 MAD LJ 543
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
Surya Kant
,
R. Subhash Reddy
,
R.F. Nariman
REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.2858 OF 2007

                         Chandana Das (Malakar)                         … Appellant

                                     Versus

                         The State of West Bengal & Ors.                … Respondents


                                                        WITH

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.2859 OF 2007



                                                    JUDGMENT
R.F. Nariman, J.
1.    These appeals have been referred to a Three Judge Bench

                         in view of a disagreement between T.S. Thakur, J. and R.

                         Banumathi, J., reported as
Chandana Das (Malakar) v. State of

                         West Bengal
(2015) 12 SCC 140. The facts that are necessary in

                         order to decide these appeals are set out by Thakur, J. in his
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
judgment as follows:
Date: 2019.09.25
16:19:39 IST
Reason:
“2. The appellants, it appears, were appointed as teachers
                              on temporary basis in what is known as Khalsa Girls High
1
School, Paddapukur Road, Bhowanipore, Calcutta. Their
appointment did not, however, meet the approval of the
District Inspector of Schools, Calcutta, according to whom
any such appointment could be made only on the
recommendations of the School Service Commission
established under the Rules for Management of
Recognised Non-Government Institutions (Aided and
Unaided), 1969 (hereinafter referred to as “the Rules”).
3. Aggrieved by the order passed by the District Inspector,
the appellants approached the High Court of Calcutta in
Writ Petitions Nos. 16256 and 16255 of 2003 which were
allowed by a learned Single Judge of the High Court by
his order dated 29-1-2004 holding that the Institution in
which the appellants were appointed being a linguistic
minority institution was entitled to select and appoint its
teachers. The Single Bench accordingly directed the
respondents in the writ petitions to approve the
appointment of the appellants as whole-time teachers with
effect from 28-7-1999 and release the arrears of salary
and other service benefits in their favour with effect from
the said date.
4. Aggrieved by the judgment and order of the learned
Single Judge, the State of West Bengal, Director of School
Education and District Inspector of Schools preferred
CANs Nos. 3861 and 3863 of 2004 against the order
passed by the Single Bench which appeals were allowed
and disposed of by a Division Bench of that Court by a
common        order    dated     23-9-2004    [
State    of
W.B. v. Sukhbindar Kaur
, 2004 SCC OnLine Cal 570 :
(2005) 3 CHN 604] . The High Court held that since the
Institution in which the appellants were appointed was a
recognised aided Institution, the management of the
Institution was bound to follow the mandate of Rule 28 of
the Rules aforementioned which permitted appointments
against a permanent post only if the candidate was
recommended for any such appointment by the School
Service Commission.
5. The Division
Bench further held
that the appellants
having been appointed beyond the sanctioned staff
2
strength at the relevant point of time and dehors the Rules
could not claim any approval in their favour. The Court
noted that the directions issued by the Director of School
Education, Government of West Bengal did not permit any
appointment without the prior permission of the Director.
No such permission had been, in the case at hand,
obtained from the Director. More importantly, the Division
Bench held that since the Institution had not made any
claim to its being a minority institution it was not open to
the employee writ petitioners to claim any such status on
its behalf. The Division Bench further took the view that
once a minority community applies for a special
constitution under sub-rule (3) of Rule 8 of the said Rules
it represents to the State Government that it was not
claiming the status of a minority institution. The Single
Bench had, therefore, fallen in error in holding that the
Institution where the appellants worked was a minority
institution or that the appointment made by such an
Institution would not be regulated by Rule 28 of the Rules
mentioned above. The present appeals, as noticed above,
call in question the correctness of the view taken by the
Division Bench of the High Court.
6. The short question that falls for determination is
whether Khalsa Girls High School, Poddapukur Road,
Calcutta is a minority institution, if so, whether the
Institution's right to select and appoint teachers is in any
way affected by the provisions of the Rules of
Management of Recognised Non-Government Institutions
(Aided and Unaided), 1969 framed under the provisions
of the
West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act,
1963
?
xxx xxx xxx
8. The Institution's case, on the other hand, is that the
same was and continues to be a linguistic minority
institution from its inception. The affidavit filed on behalf of
the Institution traces the history behind the establishment
of the Institution for the benefit of Punjabi-speaking Sikhs
settled in Calcutta and other parts of West Bengal. The
affidavit states that on 19-4-1976 a detailed memorandum
3
was sent by the Institution to the Secretary, West Bengal
     Board of Secondary Education asking for approval of the
     special constitution for the school in terms of Rule 33 of
     the Rules mentioned above. That prayer was according to
     the Institution made only because the school was a
     minority educational institution. The affidavit also relies
     upon recognition of the minority status of the school by the
     West Bengal Minority Commission in terms of its Order
     dated 6-10-1989. The affidavit states that minority status
     of the Institution continues despite the grant sanctioned by
     the State which cannot carry conditions that would have
     the effect of defeating or diluting the right of minority to
     establish and administer its own Institutions. It was also
     contended that Rule 33 of the Rules reserves in favour of
     the State Government the power to frame further rules for
     certain institutions to which the provisions of
Articles 26
and
30
of the Constitution apply. No such rules having
     been framed a minority can establish and run its institution
     in accordance with a special constitution that may be
     sanctioned in its favour. Rule 28 of the Rules relating to
     the appointment of teachers in minority institutions,
     therefore, does not apply in the present case.”
2.    The question posed by Thakur, J. in paragraph 6 of the

judgment was answered stating:
“21. It is unnecessary to multiply decisions on the subject
     for the legal position is well settled. Linguistic institution
     and religious are entitled to establish and administer their
     institutions. Such right of administration includes the right
     of appointing teachers of its choice but does not denude
     the State of its power to frame regulations that may
     prescribe the conditions of eligibility for appointment of
     such teachers. The regulations can also prescribe
     measures to ensure that the institution is run efficiently for
     the right to administer does not include the right to
     maladministration. While grant-in-aid is not included in the
     guarantee contained in the Constitution to linguistic and
     religious minorities for establishing and running their
     educational institutions, such grant cannot be denied to
     such institutions only because the institutions are
     established by linguistic or religious minority. Grant of aid
4
cannot, however, be made subservient to conditions
which deprive the institution of their substantive right of
administering such institutions. Suffice it to say that once
Respondent 4 Institution is held to be a minority institution
entitled to the protection of
Articles 26
and
30
of the
Constitution of India the right to appoint teachers of its
choice who satisfy the conditions of eligibility prescribed
for such appointments under the relevant rules is implicit
in their rights to administer such institutions. Such rights
cannot then be diluted by the State or its functionaries
insisting that the appointment should be made only with
the approval of the Director or by following the mechanism
generally prescribed for institutions that do not enjoy the
minority status.
22. The view taken by the Division Bench of the High
Court that appointments of the appellants were dehors the
Rules inasmuch as they were not made by the School
Service Commission hence did not qualify for approval,
does not appear to us to be sound. The mechanism
provided for making appointments under Rule 28 has no
application to minority educational institutions.
xxx xxx xxx
24. Placed in juxtaposition to Rule 33 of the Rules
extracted earlier, it is self-evident that while Rule 28
applies generally to other institutions; Rule 33 is more
specific in its application to minority educational
institutions covered by
Article 26
or 30 of the Constitution.
In the absence of any rules framed for such minority
educational institutions the minority educational institution
in the present case was entitled to select and appoint its
teachers so long as other conditions for such
appointments, namely, availability of substantive
vacancies and the eligibility of the candidates for such
appointments were duly satisfied.
25. It is not, in the instant case, disputed that the
appellants were both duly qualified for appointment as
teachers in the subject concerned. It is also not in dispute
that they have been serving for a considerable length of
5
time on a meagre salary which the institution has been
     paying to them in the absence of the State Government
     recognising the appointments and releasing grant-in-aid
     against their posts.
26. The only other question that could possibly arise in the
     matter of approval of such appointments was the absence
     of a sanctioned post as on the date the appointments were
     made. It was contended by the learned counsel for the
     appellants that vacancies had subsequently arisen
     against which the appointments of the appellants could be
     approved and the salary payable to them from the date of
     such vacancies becoming available released. If that be so,
     we see no reason why the appointments of the appellants
     should not be approved with effect from the date of such
     vacancies becoming available against which such
     appointments could be regularised. To that extent the
     relief prayed for by the appellants shall be suitably
     moulded.”
3.    Banumathi, J. delivered a separate judgment disagreeing

with these conclusions. She agreed with the Division Bench

judgment of the Calcutta High Court, which had upset the Single

Bench judgment of that Court, and held as follows:
“34. The impugned judgment [
State of W.B. v. Sukhbindar
     Kaur
, 2004 SCC OnLine Cal 570 : (2005) 3 CHN 604] of
     the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court is as under:
(
Sukhbindar Kaur
case [
State of W.B. v. Sukhbindar
     Kaur
, 2004 SCC OnLine Cal 570 : (2005) 3 CHN 604] ,
     SCC OnLine Cal para 4)
          “4. … In such view of the matter, a Constitution
          permitted under sub-rule (3) of Rule 8 of the said
          Rules cannot be in relation to minority community
          institutions. That has been amply cleared by framing
          Rule 33 in the Management Rules which specifically
          deals with institutions entitled to protection of
Articles
          26
and
30.
It authorises the State Government to
          make special rules for constitution of the Managing
6
Committee of such institutions. The moment a
          minority community applies for a special constitution
          under sub-rule (3) of Rule 8 of the said Rules it
          represents to the State Government that it is not
          claiming the status of minority community at least at
          the time when such application is made.”
     In my considered view, the above reasoning of the
     Calcutta High Court is to be affirmed for the reasons
     indicated by me herein.”
4.    The main grounds for disagreement were two. In paragraphs

36 to 40, the learned Judge found that in the absence of any order

by the competent authority under the
West Bengal Board of

Secondary Education Act
granting minority status to the

Respondent No.4 school, the said school cannot claim to be a

minority institution for the purpose of
Article 30
and is, therefore,

bound, being an aided institution, by the 1969 Rules, in particular

Rule 28 thereof. The other plank of the decision was contained in

paragraphs 43 and 51, stating that the school having accepted the

special constitution in terms of Rule 8(3) of the Rules, the school is

estopped from contending that it is a minority institution governed

by special rules to be framed by the State under Rule 33 of the

Rules.
5.    Shri   Siddharth   Bhatnagar,     learned   Senior    Advocate

appearing on behalf of the Appellants, has taken us through the

impugned High Court judgment as well as the judgments of Thakur,
7
J. and Banumathi, J. He also read Rules 6, 8(3), 28 and 33 of the

Rules together with the request dated 19th April, 1976 of the Khalsa

Girls School, stating that it was formed on behalf of the Sikh

religious and linguistic minority in the State of West Bengal and to

accord it the status of a minority institution. He then relied upon an

order dated 7th May, 1982 of the West Bengal Board of Secondary

Education, in which, despite approving of a special constitution for

future management of the school, was done in deviation of Rule 6

in recognition of the fact that it was a minority institution. He also

brought to our notice the fact that since 2008, Rule 32(c) is now

substituted as follows:
“32. Rules not to apply to certain Institutions--- Nothing
    in these rules shall apply to -
xxx xxx xxx
(c) the non-Government aided Educational Institution
    established and administered by a Minority referred to in
    clause (c) of
Section 2
of the West Bengal Minorities’
    Commission Act, 1996 (West Bengal Act XVI of 1996);
xxx xxx xxx
    Explanation :- For removal of any doubt, it is hereby
    declared that the State Government may, for the purpose
    of ensuring quality education, access and equity, on an
    application made by any non-Government aided
    Educational Institution referred to in clause (c), make rules
    under the provisions of the said Act for the composition,
    powers, functions etc of the Committee of such
    Institution;”
As a consequence, Rule 33 has been omitted.
8
6.    He then took us through
Section 2(c)
of the West Bengal

Minorities’ Commission Act, 1996, which states as follows:
“2. Definitions - In this Act, unless the context otherwise
     requires,-
xxx xxx xxx
(c) "Minority", for the purpose of this Act, means a
     community based on religion such as Muslim, Christian,
     Sikh, Buddhist, or Zoroastrian (Parsee), and includes -
(i) such other minority as the Central Government
            may notify under clause (c) of
section 2
of the
            National Commission for
Minorities Act, 1992
, or .
(ii) such other minority based on language within
            the purview of
article 29
of the Constitution of India
            (hereinafter referred to as the Constitution) as the
            State Government may, by notification, specify
            from time to time;”

On facts, he argued that it was wholly incorrect to hold that the

management of the school had given up its right to be a minority

institution. He also argued, based on several judgments, that the

fundamental right under
Article 30
of the Constitution of India

cannot be waived. He also took us through various judgments to

show that though Respondent No.4 school was an aided institution,

Rule 28 qua appointment of teachers would not be applicable to it

as it is a minority institution. He also cited judgments before us to

show that it was unnecessary to first obtain a declaration from the

competent authority that the school is a minority institution as any

such declaration would only be a recognition of a pre-existing right,
9
if the institution was, in fact, set up by the minority community for

the minority community.
7.    Shri Rana Mukherjee, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

behalf of Respondent No.4 school, broadly echoed Shri

Bhatnagar’s arguments and also took us through the letter dated

19th April, 1976 to show that Respondent No.4 school was set up

purely as a linguistic minority school in the State of West Bengal.

Hence, he supported the prayer of the teachers that they be

regularised against vacancies that have since arisen.
8.    Shri   Soumya     Chakraborty,    learned    Senior   Advocate

appearing on behalf of the State, strongly relied upon the judgment

of Banumathi, J. and, in addition, argued that
Article 350B
would

make it clear that the institution must first be declared to be a

minority institution before it can avail of the fundamental right under
Article 30.
He added that in any case the medium of instruction was

Hindi and, therefore, being the national language, the institution

could not be said to cater to the needs of the minority community.

He also made a fervent plea to refer the matter to a larger Bench,

given the fact that a Division Bench of this Court had in Shiromani

Gurudwara Prabandhak Committee v. Shail Mittal SLP (C) No.

2755/2008 by an order dated 18th November, 2010 referred a
10
similar matter to be heard along with other matters by a Constitution

Bench.
9.     Before embarking on the questions raised in these appeals,

it is important to first advert to the
West Bengal Board of Secondary

Education Act, 1963
. It is enough to state that this Act establishes

the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education and various

Committees and Regional Examination Councils and then lays

down their powers. Suffice it to say that it is no part of the powers

and duties of the Board or of any authority set up therein to declare

that a particular institution is, or is not, a minority institution.
10.    It is now necessary to advert to the Management of

Recognised Non-Government Institutions (Aided and Unaided)

Rules, 1969. Rule 6 is relevant and is set out hereinbelow as

follows:
“6. Composition of the Committee of an Institution
      other than that sponsored by the State Government:
The Committee shall consist of the following members:-
(i)     one founder to be chosen in the manner provided
      in Rule 6A;
(ii)    one Life Member, if any, to be selected or
      nominated in the manner laid down in Rule 6A;
(iii)   six guardians of whom two shall be woman in case
      of a girls school in the case of institutions having classes
      XI and XII recognized by the West Bengal Council of
      Higher Secondary Education and/or X-Class High
11
Schools and three guardians in the case of Junior High
    Schools, to be elected or nominated, as the case may be,
    in the manner laid down in sub-rule (2) of Rule 6A;
(iv)    one person interested in education (to be co-opted)
    in the manner laid down in clause (i) of sub-rule (3) of Rule
    6A;
Provided that in the case of an institution located
    within the jurisdiction of a Panchayet, one person
    interested in education shall be the nominee of the Local
    Panchayet Samity. The person so nominated shall be a
    resident of the locality within the jurisdiction of the said
    Panchayet Samity;
(v)      three teaching staff except the Head of an
    Institution and one non-teaching staff in the case of an
    institution with Higher Secondary Classes (XI and XII)
    recognised by the West Bengal Council of Higher
    Secondary Education and/or a X-Class High School and
    two members from among the teaching and non-teaching
    staff in the case of a junior High School, to be elected in
    the manner prescribed in Clause (i) of sub-rule (4) of Rule
    6A;
(vi)     one member of the Committee shall be nominated
    by the Director or by an officer authorised by him in this
    behalf;
(vii) Head of the Institution (ex-officio).
Provided that no person shall be eligible to
    represent more than one category.
Rule 8(3) is important for our purpose and states as follows:
“8. Power of Executive Committee to approve and
    Supersede Committee, to appoint Administrator or
    Ad-hoc Committee and to grant special constitution;
    xxx xxx xxx
    (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the
    Executive Committee shall have the power to approve, on
    the application of any Institution or class of Institutions, of
    the special constitution of a Committee in favour of such
12
Institution or class of Institutions and in approving the
    special constitution of a Committee, the Executive
    Committee shall pay due regard to the recommendations
    of the Director, if any. While granting special constitution
    in favour of an Institution or a class of Institution, the
    Executive Committee shall ensure that representation of
    the members of the teaching and the non-teaching staff,
    guardians and the member nominated by the Director or
    an officer authorised by him in this behalf, is made
    according to clause (iii), clause (v) and clause (vi) of Rule
    6:
Provided that if the Executive Committee is of the
    opinion that a school enjoying special constitution has not
    been functioning properly, the Executive Committee may,
    after paying due regard to the recommendations of the
    Director, if any, amend or withdraw such special
    constitution of a Committee and in that event, the
    Executive Committee may, by order, appoint an
    Administrator or an Ad-hoc Committee, as the case may
    be, to exercise the powers and perform the functions of
    the Committee for such period as may be specified in the
    order.”

Rule 28(1)(i), which is sought to be applied to Respondent No.4,

states as follows:
“28. Powers of Committee - (1) In an aided institution the
    Committee shall, subject to the provisions of any Grant-in-
    aid Scheme or Pay Revision Scheme or any order or
    direction or guide-lines issued by the State Government
    or the Director in connection therewith and in force for the
    time being, have the power –
(i)    to appoint on the recommendation of the West
    Bengal Regional School Service Commission in respect
    of the region concerned, teachers on permanent or
    temporary basis against permanent or temporary
    vacancies, if and when available, within the sanctioned
    strength of teachers and on approval by the Director or
13
any Officer authorized by him, such approval being sought
      for within a fortnight from the date of decision of the
      committee in this behalf;”

Rules 32 and 33 are also important and state as follows:
“32. Rules not to apply to certain Institutions—Nothing
      in these rules shall apply to the Institutions maintained and
      managed by the State Government, the Union
      Government or the Railway Board or the schools
      managed under the provisions of the St. Thomas’ School
      Act, 1923, (Bengal Act XII of 1923) or to any other
      Institution as may be specified by the State Government
      by order, made in this behalf from time to time.
33. Power of the State Government to frame further
      rules for certain Institutions—Nothing in these rules
      shall affect the power of the State Government to frame,
      on the application of any Institution or class of Institution
      to which the provisions of
Article 26
or
Article 30
of the
      Constitution of India may apply, further or other rules for
      the composition, powers, functions of the Managing
      Committee or Committees of such Institution or class of
      Institutions.”
11.    These Rules have since been amended by a notification

dated 29th August, 2008, as has been noticed hereinabove. And

Rule 33 has been omitted altogether.
12.    A perusal of the Rules, as they stood prior to the 2008

amendment, would show that in case the provisions of
Article 30
of

the Constitution apply, further or other rules for the composition,

powers, functions of the managing committee or committees of

such institutions or class of institutions would be framed. It is
14
admitted, as has been noticed in the judgment of Thakur, J. that no

such Rules have been framed under Rule 33.
13.    At this juncture, it may be noted that by a letter dated 19th

April, 1976, Respondent No.4 wrote to the Secretary, West Bengal

Board of Secondary Education asking that it may be declared as a

minority community institution and the special constitution for the

same may be approved on that basis. What is of importance is what

is stated in paragraph 5(a) and 5(b) of the said letter, which is set

out hereinbelow:
“5. The brief History of the said Khalsa High School is as
      follows:-
(a)       In the year 1932 this institution was started in the
      shape of a Khalsa Primary School by the Sikh Community
      living in Calcutta to impart education to their children who
      came from Punjab where they had ample opportunities to
      learn their mother tongue viz: Punjabi and to impart
      religious, ethical and moral training in soothing
      atmosphere.
(b)     Earlier to this in the year 1930, the late Reverend
      Sant Mastan Singh started a small Pathashala at 573,
      Paddopukur Road, Calcutta, with about twenty children to
      teach them Punjabi, in Gurumukh Script. In 1932, Baba
      Harnam Singh Kaunka was made in charge of that School
      which was becoming popular day by day among the Sikh
      Community. After some time he opened a new School at
      16, Paddapukur Road, Calcutta. By this time the
      population of the Sikhs was increasing in Calcutta. A large
      number of Sikh Children were facing serious difficulties in
      the absence of their own proper School. The urgent need
15
of opening a School of their own choice came to the
      forefront and it was unanimously resolved by the Sikhs in
      a congregation to start a Khalsa Primary School without
      any loss of time. The social and religious workers left no
      stone unturned to get a suitable building for this purpose.
After intense endeavours the building situated at No. 75,
      Bakul Begal Road, Calcutta was acquired on rent to start
      with. Thus, Khalsa Primary School was inaugurated on
      the 1st November, 1933, by Sardar B.R. Singh, Head of
      Eastern Railway. He donated a handsome amount to the
      School on this pious occasion. Baba Harnam Singh
      Kanuka threw his lot with this venture of the Sikh
      Community in toto.”
14.    By a letter dated 7th May, 1982 from the Secretary, West

Bengal Board of Secondary Education to the Respondent No.4, a

special constitution of the managing committee of the school was

set up as follows:
1.     Representative (s) of :-
(i) Bara Sikh Sangat                          1(one)
           (ii) Sri Guru Singh Sabha                     1(one)
           (iii)Gurudwara Sant Kutia                     1(one)

      2.     Guardians’ representative (to be elected)      4
      3.     Members of the teaching & non-teaching
             Staff (to be jointly elected)              4(3+1)
4.     P.I.E. (as per provisions of the amended rules 1
5.     Head of the institution (ex-officio)           1
6.     Departmental Nominee                           1
14
15.    It is obvious on a reading of this document that whereas Rule

6 required only one representative of the Sikh community to be on
16
the Management Board, there are three representatives appointed.

Equally, whereas Rule 6 requires that there be six guardian

representatives to be elected, only four are provided for by this

letter. Thus, it cannot be said that by acceptance of this letter,

Respondent No.4 has, in any manner, unequivocally waived its

right to be treated as a minority institution. On the contrary, the

application dated 19th April, 1976, was to recognise it as a minority

institution, and merely because Rule 8(3) of the Rules was

purportedly applied, it does not mean that the minority character of

the institution was not kept in mind while framing the special

constitution for future management of the school. On facts,

therefore, it is difficult to appreciate how the Respondent No.4 can

be said to have waived its right to be treated as a linguistic minority

institution set up by a linguistic minority, namely, the Sikhs in the

State of West Bengal.
16.    It is important at this juncture to first set out
Article 30
of the

Constitution of India.
Article 30(1)
states:
“30. Right of minorities to establish and administer
      educational institutions -
(1) All minorities, whether based on religion or language,
      shall have the right to establish and administer
      educational institutions of their choice.”
17
17.    The historical reasons for enacting
Article 30(1)
have been

set out in some detail in the judgment of Shelat, J. and Grover, J.

in
Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala
(1973) 4 SCC 225 as

follows:
“535-A - It may be recalled that as regards the minorities
      the Cabinet Mission had recognised in their report to the
      British Cabinet on May 6, 1946 only three main
      communities; general, Muslims and Sikhs. General
      community included all those who were non- Muslims or
      non-Sikhs. The Mission had recommended an Advisory
      Committee to be set up by the Constituent Assembly
      which was to frame the rights of citizens, minorities, tribals
      and excluded areas. The Cabinet Mission statement had
      actually provided for the cession of sovereignty to the
      Indian people subject only to two matters which were: (1)
      willingness to conclude a treaty with His Majesty's
      Government to cover matters arising out of transfer of
      power and (2) adequate provisions for the protection of
      the minorities. Pursuant to the above and paras 5 and 6
      of the Objectives Resolution the Constituent Assembly set
      up an Advisory Committee on January 24, 1947. The
      Committee was to consist of representatives of muslims,
      the depressed classes or the scheduled castes, the Sikhs,
      Christians, Parsis, Anglo-Indians, tribals and excluded
      areas besides the Hindus. As a historical fact it is safe to
      say that at a meeting held on May 11, 1949 a resolution
      for the abolition of all reservations for minorities other than
      the scheduled castes found whole hearted support from
      an overwhelming majority of the members of the Advisory
      Committee. So far as the scheduled castes were
      concerned it was felt that their peculiar position would
      necessitate special reservation for them for a period of ten
      years. It would not be wrong to say that the separate
      representation of minorities which had been the feature of
      the previous Constitutions and which had witnessed so
      much of communal tension and strife was given up in
      favour of joint electorates in consideration of the
      guarantee of fundamental rights and minorities’ rights
18
which it was decided to incorporate into the new
      Constitution.”
                                           (Emphasis supplied)
18.    This was further fleshed out in the judgment of Khanna, J. in

Ahmedabad St. Xavier’s
College Society v. State of Gujarat
(1975) 1 SCR 173 as follows:
“Before we deal with the contentions advanced before us
      and the scope and ambit of
Article 30
of the Constitution,
      it may be pertinent to refer to the historical background.
      India is the second-most populous country of the world.
      The people inhabiting this vast land profess different
      religions and speak different languages. Despite the
      diversity of religion and language, there runs through the
      fabric of the nation the golden thread of a basic innate
      unity. It is a mosaic of different religions, languages and
      cultures. Each of them has made a mark on the Indian
      polity and India today represents a synthesis of them all.
      The closing years of the British rule were marked by
      communal riots and dissensions. There was also a feeling
      of distrust and the demand was made by a section of the
      Muslims for a separate homeland. This ultimately resulted
      in the partition of the country. Those who led the fight for
      independence in India always laid great stress on
      communal amity and accord. They wanted the
      establishment of a secular State wherein people
      belonging to the different religions should all have a
      feeling of equality and non-discrimination. Demand had
      also been made before the partition by sections of people
      belonging to the minorities for reservation of seats and
      separate electorates. In order to bring about integration
      and fusion of the different sections of the population, the
      framers of the Constitution did away with separate
      electorates and introduced the system of joint electorates,
      so that every candidate in an election should have to look
      for support of all sections of the citizens. Special
      safeguards were guaranteed for the minorities and they
      were made a part of the fundamental rights with a view to
      instil a sense of confidence and security in the minorities.
19
Those provisions were a kind of a Charter of rights for the
      minorities so that none might have the feeling that any
      section of the population consisted of first-class citizens
      and the others of second-class citizens. The result was
      that minorities gave up their claims for reservation of
      seats.
xxx xxx xxx
      A liberal, generous and sympathetic approach is reflected
      in the Constitution in the matter of the preservation of the
      right of minorities so far as their educational institutions
      are concerned… The minorities are as much children of
      the soil as the majority and the approach has been to
      ensure that nothing should be done as might deprive the
      minorities of a sense of belonging, of a feeling of security,
      of a consciousness of equality and of the awareness that
      the conservation of their religion, culture, language and
      script as also the protection of their educational
      institutions is a fundamental right enshrined in the
      Constitution. The same generous, liberal and sympathetic
      approach should weigh with the courts in construing
Articles 29
and
30
as marked the deliberations of the
      Constitution-makers in drafting those articles and making
      them part of the fundamental rights. The safeguarding of
      the interest of the minorities amongst sections of
      population is as important as the protection of the interest
      amongst individuals of persons who are below the age of
      majority or are otherwise suffering from some kind of
      infirmity. The Constitution and the laws made by civilised
      nations, therefore, generally contain provisions for the
      protection of those interests. It can, indeed, be said to be
      an index of the level of civilisation and catholicity of a
      nation as to how far their minorities feel secure and are
      not subject to any discrimination or suppression.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)
19.    This was reiterated in the concurring judgment of Quadri, J.

in
T.M.A. Pai Foundation v. State of Karnataka
(2002) 8 SCC

481 as follows:
20
“301. …The founding fathers of the Constitution were alive
to the ground realities and the existing inequalities in
various sections of the society for historical or other
reasons and provided for protective discrimination in the
Constitution with regard to women, children, socially and
educationally backward classes of citizens, Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes by enabling the State to
make special provision for them by way of reservation as
is evident from clauses (3) and (4) of
Article 15
and
clauses (4) and (4-A) of
Article 16
of the Constitution. The
apprehensions of religious minorities and their demand for
separate electorates, were settled by providing freedom
of conscience and free profession, practise and
propagation of religion for all the citizens under
Articles
25
, 26
and
28
which take care of the religious rights of
minorities equally; by special provisions their right to
conserve a distinct language, script or culture is
guaranteed as a fundamental right in
Article 29;
further, all
minorities, whether based on religion or language, are
conferred an additional fundamental right to establish and
administer educational institutions of their choice as
enshrined in
Article 30
of the Constitution. The right under
Article 30(1)
is regarded so sacrosanct by Parliament in
its constituent capacity that when by operation of the law
of the land —
Land Acquisition Act
— compensation
awarded for acquisition of a minority educational
institution was to result in restricting or abrogating the right
guaranteed under clause (1) of
Article 30
, it by the
Constitution (Forty-fourth) Amendment Act
inserted
clause (1-A) in
Article 30.
It provides that Parliament in the
case of a Central legislation or a State Legislature in the
case of State legislation shall make a specific law to
ensure that the amount payable to the minority
educational institutions for the acquisition of their property
will not be such as will in any manner impair their
functioning. A Constitution Bench of this Court in
interpreting clause (1-A) of
Article 30
in
Society of St.
Joseph's College v. Union of India
[(2002) 1 SCC 273]
observed thus: (SCC p. 278, para 7)
  “7. Plainly, Parliament in its constituent capacity
  apprehended that minority educational institutions
  could be compelled to close down or curtail their
21
activities by the expedient of acquiring their property
        and paying them inadequate amounts in exchange. To
        obviate the violation of the right conferred by
Article 30
in this manner, Parliament introduced the safeguard
        provision in the Constitution, first in
Article 31
and then
        in Article 30.”
20.    The Nine Judge Bench in St. Xavier’s (supra), by a majority

of 7:2, held that
Section 33-A(1)(b)
of the Gujarat University Act,

1949 as amended by the
Gujarat University (Amendment) Act,

1972
, would not apply to minority institutions. Section 33-A(1)(b) of

the said Act is set out as follows:
“33-A. (1) Every college (other than a Government college
      or a college maintained by the Government) affiliated
      before the commencement of the Gujarat University
      (Amendment) Act, 1972 (hereinafter in this section
      referred to as ‘such commencement’)—

      xxx xxx xxx
(b) that for recruitment of the Principal and members of
      the teaching staff of a college there is a selection
      committee of the college which shall include—
      (1) in the case of recruitment of the Principal, a
      representative of the University nominated by the Vice-
      Chancellor, and
      (2) in the case of recruitment of a member of the teaching
      staff of the college, a representative of the University
      nominated by the Vice-Chancellor and the Head of the
      Department, if any, concerned with the subject to be
      taught by such member.”
21.    Ray, C.J. adverted to the aforesaid provision and stated that

at the core of the fundamental right of
Article 30
is the right to

administer which includes the right of the minority institutions to
22
choose its teachers (see pages 194 and 196). Having held this, the

learned Chief Justice set out the argument of the Intervenors thus:
“The provisions contained in
Section 33-A(1)(b)
of the Act
      were not challenged by the petitioners. The interveners
      challenged those provisions. The settled practice of this
      Court is that an intervener is not to raise contentions which
      are not urged by the petitioners. In view of the fact that
      notices were given to minority institutions to appear and
      those institutions appeared and made their submissions a
      special consideration arises here for expressing the views
      on
Section 33-A(1)(b)
of the Act. The provisions contained
      in
Section 33-A(1)(b)
of the Act are that for the recruitment
      of the Principal and the members of the teaching staff of
      a college there is a selection committee of the college
      which shall consist, in the case of the recruitment of a
      Principal, of a representative of the university nominated
      by the Vice-Chancellor and, in the case of recruitment of
      a member of the teaching staff of the college, of a
      representative of the university nominated by the Vice-
      Chancellor and the Head of the Department if any for
      subjects taught by such persons. The contention of the
      interveners with regard to these provisions is that there is
      no indication and guidance in the Act as to what types of
      persons could be nominated as the representative. It was
      suggested that such matters should not be left to unlimited
      power as to choice. The provisions contained in Section
      33-A(1)(b) cannot therefore apply to minority institutions.”

This argument was accepted stating that the said Section cannot,

therefore, be applied to minority institutions as it would otherwise

violate the fundamental right contained in
Article 30(1).
22.    This view was concurred in by Khanna, J. as follows:
“Another conclusion which follows from what has been
      discussed above is that a law which interferes with a
      minority's choice of qualified teachers or its disciplinary
      control over teachers and other members of the staff of
23
the institution is void as being violative of
Article 30(1).
It
    is, of course, permissible for the State and its educational
    authorities to prescribe the qualifications of teachers, but
    once the teachers possessing the requisite qualifications
    are selected by the minorities for their educational
    institutions, the State would have no right to veto the
    selection of those teachers. The selection and
    appointment of teachers for an educational institution is
    one of the essential ingredients of the right to manage an
    educational institution and the minorities can plainly be not
    denied such right of selection and appointment without
    infringing
Article 30(1).
In the case of Rev. Father W.
    Proost this Court while dealing with
Section 48-A
of the
    Bihar Universities Act observed that the said provision
    completely took away the autonomy of the governing body
    of the college and virtually vested the control of the college
    in the University Service Commission. The petitioners
in
    that case
were, therefore, held entitled to the protection of
Article 30(1)
of the Constitution. The provisions of that
    section have been referred to earlier. According to the
    section, subject to the approval of University appointment,
    dismissals, removals, termination of service or reduction
    in rank of teachers of an affiliated college not belonging to
    the State Government would have to be made by the
    governing body of the college on the recommendation of
    the University Service Commission. The section further
    provided that the said Commission would be consulted by
    the governing body of a college in all disciplinary matters
    affecting teachers of the college and no action would be
    taken against or any punishment imposed upon a teacher
    of a college otherwise than in conformity with the findings
    of the Commission.”
Likewise, Jagan Mohan Reddy, J. also held Section 33-A(1)(b)

inapplicable to minority institutions. The concurring judgment of

Mathew, J. and Chandrachud, J. agreed with the learned Chief

Justice that the aforesaid provision could not possibly apply to a

minority institution as follows:
24
“It is upon the principal and teachers of a college that the
      tone and temper of an educational institution depend. On
      them would depend its reputation, the maintenance of
      discipline and its efficiency in teaching. The right to
      choose the principal and to have the teaching conducted
      by teachers appointed by the management after an overall
      assessment of their outlook and philosophy is perhaps the
      most important facet of the right to administer an
      educational institution. We can perceive no reason why a
      representative of the University nominated by the Vice-
      Chancellor should be on the Selection Committee for
      recruiting the Principal or for the insistence of head of the
      department besides the representative of the University
      being on the Selection Committee for recruiting the
      members of the teaching staff. So long as the persons
      chosen have the qualifications prescribed by the
      University, the choice must be left to the management.
      That is part of the fundamental right of the minorities to
      administer the educational institution established by
      them.”
23.    A reading of the aforesaid judgment would leave no manner

of doubt that if Respondent No.4 is a minority institution, Rule 28 of

the Rules for Management of Recognized Non-Government

Institutions (Aided and Unaided) 1969, cannot possibly apply as

there would be a serious infraction of the right of Respondent No.4

to administer the institution with teachers of its choice.
24.    We now go to the question as to whether it is necessary that

there be a declaration as to status of the minority institutions by the

competent authority under the
West Bengal Board of Secondary

Education Act, 1963
before it can claim the status of being a

minority institution. We have already noticed that the competent
25
authorities set up by the aforesaid Act do not give any power to

recognise a minority institution. For this reason, it is difficult to agree

with the conclusion stated in paragraph 40 of judgment of

Banumathi, J. Further, the letter dated 19th April, 1976 would show

that Respondent No.4 was started as a primary school by the Sikh

community living in Kolkata to impart education to their children

who came from Punjab, so that they may learn their mother tongue

and religion, ethics etc. As a matter of fact, this aspect of the matter

is no longer res integra.
25.
In
N. Ammad v. Emjay High School
(1998) 6 SCC 674, this

Court held:
“12. Counsel for both sides conceded that there is no
      provision in the Act which enables the Government to
      declare a school as a minority school. If so, a school which
      is otherwise a minority school would continue to be so
      whether the Government declared it as such or not.
      Declaration by the Government is at best only a
      recognition of an existing fact.
Article 30(1)
of the
      Constitution reads thus:
“30. (1) All minorities, whether based on religion or
         language, shall have the right to establish and
         administer educational institutions of their choice.”
13. When the Government declared the School as a
      minority school it has recognised a factual position that the
      School was established and is being administered by a
      minority community. The declaration is only an open
      acceptance of a legal character which should necessarily
      have existed antecedent to such declaration. Therefore,
      we are unable to agree with the contention that the School
26
can claim protection only after the Government declared
    it as a minority school on 2-8-1994.”

This statement of the law was then followed by
Corporate

Educational Agency v. James Mathew
(2017) 15 SCC 595 as

follows:
“7. As far as the validity of the declaration of minority
    status is concerned, this Court in
N. Ammad v. Emjay
    High School [N. Ammad
v. Emjay High School, (1998) 6
    SCC 674 : 1 SCEC 732] has held that the certificate of the
    declaration of minority status is only a declaration of an
    existing status. Therefore, there is no question of
    availability of the status only from the date of declaration.
    What is declared is a status which was already in
    existence.
xxx xxx xxx
10. Chapter IV deals with functions and powers of the
    Commission. Under
Section 11(f)
, the Commission has
    been vested with the power rather the mandate to decide
    all questions relating to the status of any institution as a
    minority educational institution and declare its status as
    such.
Section 11
of the Act is quoted hereunder:
“11. Functions       of     Commission.—Notwithstanding
    anything contained in any other law for the time being in
    force, the Commission shall—
(a) advise the Central Government or any State
    Government on any question relating to the education of
    minorities that may be referred to it;
(b) enquire, suo motu, or on a petition presented to it by
    any minority educational institution, or any person on its
    behalf into complaints regarding deprivation or violation of
    rights of minorities to establish and administer educational
    institutions of their choice and any dispute relating to
27
affiliation to a University and report its finding to the
      appropriate Government for its implementation;
(c) intervene in any proceeding involving any deprivation
      or violation of the educational rights of the minorities
      before a court with the leave of such court;
(d) review the safeguards provided by or under the
      Constitution, or any law for the time being in force, for the
      protection of educational rights of the minorities and
      recommend measures for their effective implementation;
(e) specify measures to promote and preserve the
      minority status and character of institutions of their choice
      established by minorities;
(f) decide all questions relating to the status of any
      institution as a minority educational institution and declare
      its status as such;
(g) make recommendations to the appropriate
      Government for the effective implementation of
      programmes and schemes relating to the minority
      educational institutions; and
(h) do such other acts and things as may be necessary,
      incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any of
      the objects of the Commission.”
                                              (emphasis supplied)
11. Therefore, after the introduction of the National
      Commission for
Minority Educational Institutions Act,
      2004
, it is also within the jurisdiction and mandate of the
      National Commission to issue the certificate regarding the
      status of a minority educational institution. Once the
      Commission thus issues a certificate, it is a declaration of
      an existing status.”
26.    We have held that it cannot be said that Respondent No.4 is,

in any manner, estopped from claiming its minority status on the

facts of this case. Quite apart from this, it is settled law that the
28
fundamental right under Article 30 cannot be waived (See St.

Xavier’s (supra) at pages 260 to 262 per Mathew, J.; Olga Tellis

v. Bombay Municipal Corporation, (1985) 3 SCC 545 and 569 to
571.)
In the recent judgment in
K.S. Puttaswamy v. Union of

India
(2017) 10 SCC 1, Chandrachud, J. has echoed this sentiment

as follows:
“126.
In
Behram Khurshid Pesikaka v. State of Bombay
(1955) 1 SCR 13: AIR 1955 SC 123 : 1955 Cri LJ 215,
    Mahajan, C.J. speaking for the Constitution Bench, noted
    the link between the constitutional vision contained in the
    Preamble and the position of the fundamental rights as a
    means to facilitate its fulfilment. Through Part III embodies
    fundamental rights, this was construed to be a part of the
    wider notion of securing the vision of justice of the
    Founding Fathers and, as a matter of doctrine, the rights
    guaranteed were held not to be capable of being waived.
Mahajan C.J., observed (AIR p. 146, para 52 : SCR pp.
    653-54)
       “52. …We think that the rights described as
       fundamental rights are a necessary consequence of the
       declaration in the Preamble that the people of India
       have solemnly resolved to constitute India into a
       sovereign democratic republic and to secure to all its
       citizens justice, social, economic and political; liberty of
       thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; equality
       of status and of opportunity.
These fundamental rights have not been put in the
       Constitution merely for individual benefit, though
       ultimately they come into operation in considering
       individual rights. They have been put there as a matter
       of public policy and the doctrine of waiver can have no
       application to provisions of law which have been
       enacted as a matter of constitutional policy” ”
29
27.    This being the law
laid down by
this Court, it is clear that both

the reasons given by Banumathi, J. cannot be said to be correct,

as per the law
laid down by
this Court.
28.    Shri Chakraborty, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

behalf of the State, raised an argument based on
Article 350B.
The

said Article reads as follows:
“350B. Special Officer for Linguistic Minorities
      (1) There shall be a Special Officer for linguistic minorities
      to be appointed by the President.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Special Officer to investigate
      all matters relating to the safeguards provided for linguistic
      minorities under this Constitution and report to the
      President upon those matters at such intervals as the
      President may direct, and the President shall cause all
      such reports to be laid before each House of Parliament,
      and sent to the Governments of the States concerned.”
29.    This Article only sets up a Special Officer for linguistic

minorities, to be appointed by the President, whose duty it is to

investigate matters relating to safeguards provided for linguistic

minorities and send reports to the President of India, which reports

the President shall cause to be laid before each House of

Parliament, and send to the Governments of the States concerned.

Even a cursory reading of this Article cannot possibly lead to the

conclusion that absent a report by the Special Officer, no linguistic
30
minority can claim protection as such under
Article 30(1)
of the

Constitution.
30.
In point of fact, in
D.A.V. College v. State of Punjab
(1971)

Supp. SCR 688, this Court held that where the challenge is to a

State law, linguistic minority status would have to be determined

State-wise (see page 696).
This view has been reiterated by the

Eleven Judge Bench in
T.M.A. Pai Foundation
(supra) (see pages

552, 553 and 587).
31.   There can be no doubt that qua the State of West Bengal,

Sikhs are a linguistic minority vis-à-vis their language, namely,

Punjabi, as against the majority language of the State, which is

Bengali. The argument of the learned counsel appearing on behalf

of the State that the school is, in fact, teaching in the Hindi medium

is neither here nor there. What is important is that the fundamental

right under
Article 30
refers to the “establishment” of the school as

a linguistic minority institution which we have seen is very clearly

the case, given paragraphs 5(a) and 5(b) of letter dated 19th April,

1976. Therefore, the medium of instruction, whether it be Hindi,

English, Bengali or some other language would be wholly irrelevant

to discover as to whether the said school was founded by a

linguistic minority for the purpose of imparting education to
31
members of its community. This argument also, therefore, must be

rejected.
32.   Seeing the writing on the wall, the learned Senior Advocate

appearing for the State made a fervent plea that we should refer

this matter to the Constitution Bench, following the order in

Shiromani Gurudwara Prabandhak Committee (supra) dated

18th November, 2010.
33.   This matter arose out of a judgment of the High Court of

Punjab and Haryana dated 17th December, 2007, as per which two

notifications were issued under the
Punjab Private Health Sciences

Educational Institutions (Regulation of Admission, Fixation of Fee

and Making of Reservation) Act, 2006
, by which the aforesaid Sikh

institutions were declared to be minority institutions within the State

of Punjab. The High Court had held, following this Court’s judgment

in
Bal Patil v. Union of India
(2005) 6 SCC 690, that the Sikhs

were, in fact, population-wise the majority community in the State

of Punjab, as a result of which the two notifications were struck

down as being violative of
Article 14
of the Constitution of India. It

is in this backdrop that, by an order dated 18th November, 2010, a

Division Bench of this Court referred this matter to be heard along

with other matters by a Constitution Bench.
The other matter
32
concerned
Brahmo Samaj Education Society v. State of West

Bengal
, (2004) 6 SC 224, in which a review petition was allowed

and directed to be heard by a Constitution Bench. In the aforesaid

case, the challenge that was raised was grounded on
Article

19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India and was not directly related to
Article 30
of the Constitution of India. Obviously, this reference

order is on different facts and would not avail the respondent State

in the present case.
34.   As a result, we are of the view that the judgment of Thakur,

J. is correct in law. Consequently, the judgment and order of the

learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court is correct, and that

of the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court is set aside. The

appeals are, accordingly, allowed with no order as to costs.
…………………………J.
                                          (R.F. Nariman)


                                          …………………………J.
                                          (R. Subhash Reddy)


                                          …………………………J.
New Delhi                                 (Surya Kant)
September 25, 2019.
33