[Cites
2
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Sep. Satgur Singh vs Union Of India on 2 September, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 4047, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 966, 2019 LAB IC 4272, (2019) 11 SCALE 787, (2019) 3 SERVLJ 365, (2019) 4 SCT 264, (2019) 5 SERVLR 802, 2019 (9) SCC 205, 2020 (1) KCCR SN 4 (SC), AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 3055
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE

                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1857 OF 2018


SEP. SATGUR SINGH                                           .....APPELLANT(S)

                                      VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                     .....RESPONDENT(S)



                            JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1)     The challenge in the present appeal is to an order passed on April

       30, 2014 by the Armed Forces Tribunal 1, Chandigarh, Regional

       Bench at Chandimandir whereby, the discharge of the appellant on

       account of seven red ink entries during his 11 years 9 months and

       15 days service was not found to be unjustified.
2)     The appellant was served with a show-cause notice on September

       22, 2004 that the appellant has proved himself undesirable and

       retention in service is not considered suitable, in respect of seven

       punishments: two in the year 1995; one in the year 1998; two in

       the year 2000; and two in the year 2004.           The details of his

       punishments seven times are as under:
(a) U/s 39(a) of
Army Act
21 days RI on 02.09.1995
(b) U/s 51 of
Army Act
28 days RI on 07.09.1995
(c) U/s 39(a) of Army Act        21 days RI on 04.08.1998

1    AFT
1
(d) U/s 39(b) of
Army Act
07   days   RI   on   02.11.2000
(e) U/s 63 of
Army Act
02   days   RI   on   15.11.2000
(f) U/s 39(b) of
Army Act
05   days   RI   on   12.02.2004
(g) U/s 63 of
Army Act
21   days   RI   on   25.05.2004
3)      In response to such show-cause notice, the reply of the appellant

        was that he did not have any other source to look after the welfare

        of his children and that he has committed a blunder and mistakes

        due to his family problems and that he would not commit a single

        mistake again.
4)      After considering the reply filed, the reasons for discharge have

        been recorded by General Officer Commanding 24 Infantry Division

        on November 26, 2004 wherein, it has been recorded that the

        appellant is habitual offender, therefore, he be discharged from

        service.
5)      Learned counsel for the appellant relied upon judgment of this

        Court in
Veerendra Kumar Dubey v. Chief of Army Staff &

        Ors.2
wherein, it has been held that the red ink entries by itself

        would not be sufficient to discharge any person, but the

        Commanding Officer is required to conduct an enquiry as required

        under para 5(a) of the Army Instructions dated December 28,

        1988. The relevant part is reproduced below:
“Addl. Director General Personal Services (PS-2) Army
                   Headquarters, Room No. Sena Bhawan’s Wing, DHQ PO
                   New Delhi – 110011

                   A/21210/159/ps-4(C)                 28 Dec. 1988
2    (2016) 2 SCC 627
2
Headquarters, Southern Command, Pune Eastern
              Command, Calcutta Western Command, Chandimandir
              Central Command, Lucknow Northern Command, C/o 56
              APO

              Procedure for          dismissal/discharge   of    undesirable
              JCOs/WOs/OR:
xx                  xx           xx

              5.    xx          xx            xx

              (a)   Preliminary    Enquiry.—Before   recommending
discharge or dismissal of an individual the authority
              concerned will ensure—
(i) that an impartial enquiry (not necessarily a court of
              inquiry) has been made into the allegations against him
              and that he has had adequate opportunity of putting up
              his defence or explanation and of adducing evidence in
              his defence.
(ii) that the allegations have been substantiated and
              that the extreme step of termination of the individual's
              service is warranted on the merits of the case.”
6)   We do not find any merit in the argument that since no regular

     enquiry was conducted by the Commanding Officer as held by this

     Court in Veerendra Kumar Dubey, therefore, the punishment is

     not sustainable.    This Court in the aforesaid judgment held as

     under:
“10. The Government has, as rightly mentioned by the
              learned counsel for the appellant, stipulated not only a
              show-cause notice which is an indispensable part of the
              requirement of the Rule but also an impartial enquiry
              into the allegations against him in which he is entitled
              to an adequate opportunity of putting up his defence
              and adducing evidence in support thereof. More
              importantly,    certain   inbuilt  safeguards    against
              discharge from service based on four red ink entries
              have also been prescribed. The first and foremost is an
3
unequivocal declaration that mere award of four red ink
entries to an individual does not make his discharge
mandatory. This implies that four red ink entries is not
some kind of Laxman rekha, which if crossed would by
itself render the individual concerned undesirable or
unworthy of retention in the force. Award of four red ink
entries simply pushes the individual concerned into a
grey area where he can be considered for discharge.
But just because he qualifies for such discharge, does
not mean that he must necessarily suffer that fate. It is
one thing to qualify for consideration and an entirely
different thing to be found fit for discharge. Four red ink
entries in that sense take the individual closer to
discharge but does not push him over. It is axiomatic
that the Commanding Officer is, even after the award of
such entries, required to consider the nature of the
offence for which such entries have been awarded and
other aspects made relevant by the Government in the
procedure it has prescribed.
11. xxx                     xxx              xxx
A careful reading of the above would show that the
competent authority has made it abundantly clear to
officers competent to direct discharge that before
discharging an individual, not only should there be a
show-cause notice but an enquiry into the allegations
made against the individual concerned in which he
ought to be given an opportunity of putting up his
defence and that the allegations must stand
substantiated for a discharge to follow.
12. Para 5(f)(2) underscores the importance of the
truism that termination of the individual's service is an
extreme step which ought to be taken only if the facts
of the case so demand. What is evident from the
procedural mandate given to the authorities is to
ensure that discharge is not ordered mechanically and
that the process leading to the discharge of an
individual is humanised by the requirement of an
impartial enquiry into the matter and fair opportunity to
the concerned especially when he is about to complete
his pensionable service. Equally significant is the fact
that the authority competent to discharge is required to
take into consideration certain factors made relevant by
the Circular to prevent injustice, unfair treatment or
arbitrary exercise of the powers vested in the authority
competent to discharge. For instance Note 2 to Rule 5
requires the competent authority to take into
4
consideration the long service rendered by the
                individual, the hard stations he has been posted to and
                the difficult living conditions to which the individual has
                been exposed during his tenure. It is only when the
                competent authority considers discharge to be
                absolutely essential after taking into consideration the
                factors aforementioned that discharge of the individual
                can be validly ordered.
xxx                        xxx                 xxx
18. Coming then to the case at hand, we find that no
                enquiry whatsoever was conducted by the Commanding
                Officer at any stage against the appellant as required
                under Para 5(a) of the procedure extracted above. More
                importantly, there is nothing on record to suggest that
                the authority competent had taken into consideration
                the long service rendered by the appellant, the difficult
                living conditions and the hard stations at which he had
                served. There is nothing on record to suggest that the
                nature of the misconduct leading to the award of red ink
                entries was so unacceptable that the competent
                authority had no option but to direct his discharge to
                prevent indiscipline in the force…”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)
7)   We do not find any merit in the present appeal. Para 5(a) of the

     Circular dated December 28, 1988 deals with an enquiry which is

     not a court of inquiry into the allegations against an army

     personnel.     Such enquiry is not like departmental enquiry but

     semblance of the fair decision-making process keeping in view the

     reply filed. The court of inquiry stands specifically excluded. What

     kind of enquiry is required to be conducted would depend upon

     facts of each case. The enquiry is not a regular enquiry as para

     5(a) of the Army Instructions suggests that it is a preliminary

     enquiry.   The test of preliminary enquiry will be satisfied if an

     explanation of a personnel is submitted and upon consideration, an
5
order is passed thereon. In the present case, the appellant has not

     offered any explanation in the reply filed except giving vague

     family   circumstance.   Thus,   he    has     been     given      adequate

     opportunity to put his defence.       Therefore, the parameters
laid

     down in
para 5(a) of the Army Instructions dated December 28,

     1988 stand satisfied.
8)   In reply to the show-cause notice, the appellant has not given any

     explanation of his absence from duty on seven occasions. He has

     been punished on each occasion for rigorous imprisonment ranging

     from 2 days to 28 days. A Member of the Armed Forces cannot

     take his duty lightly and abstain from duty at his will. Since the

     absence of duty was on several different occasions for which he

     was imposed punishment of imprisonment, therefore, the order of

     discharge cannot be said to be unjustified.            The Commanding

     Officer has recorded that the appellant is a habitual offender. Such

     fact is supported by absence of the appellant from duty on seven

     occasions.
9)   In view thereof, we do not find any error in the order of discharge of

     the appellant. Appeal is dismissed.
.............................................J.
                                                     (L. NAGESWARA RAO)



                                      .............................................J.
                                                           (HEMANT GUPTA)

NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 2, 2019.
6