[Cites
30
, Cited by
16
]
Supreme Court of India
K H Nazar vs Mathew K Jacob on 30 September, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 4681, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1137, (2019) 13 SCALE 179, (2019) 4 ICC 824, (2019) 4 KER LJ 472, (2019) 4 KER LJ 652, AIR 2020 SC (CIV) 363
Author:
L. Nageswara Rao
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
Reportable

         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

           Civil Appeal Nos. 7699-7700 of 2019
        (Arising out of SLP (C) Nos.7792-7793 of 2019)

K. H. NAZAR
                                                     .... Appellant(s)
                                 Versus

MATHEW K. JACOB & ORS.

                                               …. Respondent (s)

                         JUDGMENT
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
Leave granted.
1.   The     width      and     amplitude    of      the   expression

‘commercial site’ in Section 2 (5) and
Section 81 (1) (q)
of

the Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963 (for short, “ the Act”),

falls for our consideration in these Appeals.              Commercial

sites are exempted from the purview of the Act.                    The

question whether a rocky land which is used for quarrying

purposes can be treated as a ‘commercial site’ and

thereby excluded from the applicability of the Act was

answered by a learned Single Judge of the Kerala High

Court   by    holding    that    mere     blasting    of   rocks   and
1
conversion into metals does not render the area a

‘commercial site’.1 Twenty years after the said judgment, a

Division Bench of the Kerala High Court took a different

view.      Quarrying was held to be a commercial operation

involving the process of manufacture. Hence, it was held

that a quarry falls within the ambit of ‘commercial site’ and

is exempted from the applicability of the Act.2
2.       The Appellant requested environmental clearance for

his quarry which was recommended in his favour by the

District Expert Appraisal Committee (DEAC) on 25.04.2017.

Respondents No.1 and 2 filed a Writ Petition aggrieved by

the said recommendation to permit quarry on land which

was a plantation site. It is relevant to note that the

Appellant’s land was exempted from the realm of the Act

as it was a plantation. The objection of Respondent No.1

and 2 was that the Appellant cannot be permitted to use

the land for a purpose other than plantation, especially for

quarrying operations.            After examining the judgments of

the High Court in
K. Krishnankutty v. State of Kerala

and        Others
(supra)      and       State     of     Kerala   v.

Mohammedali Haji (supra), a learned Single Judge of the

High Court of Kerala doubted the correctness of the latter
1
K. Krishnankutty v. State of Kerala and Others
.
CRP No.1245/1975
2
State of Kerala v. Mohammedali Haji.
(1996) 1 KLT 584 (DB)
2
judgment in
State of Kerala v. Mohammedali Haji
(supra) and referred the matter to a larger Bench.
3.   The Writ Petition filed by Respondent No.1 and 2 was

heard by a Full Bench of the Kerala High Court comprising

three Judges.          The majority opinion was in favour of

Respondent No.1 and 2. It was held by the majority that

the land which is used for quarrying is not covered by the

expression ‘commercial site’. Therefore, there can be no

exemption of such land from the applicability of the Act.

The Appellant is aggrieved by
the said judgment
of the Full

Bench of the High Court.
4.   Mr. K. V. Vishwanathan, learned Senior Counsel for

the Appellant took us through the provisions of the Act

including
Sections 2(5)
,
81
and
83
to argue that a quarry is

a commercial site, which is exempted under
Section 81 (1)
(q) of the Act. He alluded to the statement of objects and

reasons to submit that the legislation was made to protect

the interests of all stake-holders.       He referred to the

meaning       of    the   words   ‘commercial   activities’   and

‘business’ to submit that the activity of quarrying is done

for profit.        Hence, quarrying is a commercial activity.

According to him, there can be no distinction between

activities done above and below the surface of land for the
3
purpose of deciding whether land is a commercial site or

not.     He criticized the plurality opinion for erroneously

invoking the mischief rule.     He commended the judgment

of the dissenting Judge for our acceptance.                       He

emphasized that environmental issues are not germane for

interpretation of
Sections 2 (5)
and
81 (1) (q)
of the Act.
5.     Mr.   Pallav   Shishodia,     learned    Senior    Counsel

appearing for the State of Kerala resisted the submissions

made on behalf of the Appellant by submitting that the

expression ‘commercial site’ is a term of art and has to be

interpreted on the basis of the context in which it is used.
6.     Mr. Romy Chacko, learned counsel for the Respondent

No.1 and 2 asserted that the Act is a beneficial legislation.

When there is a doubt about the meaning of expressions

used in such a statute, literal interpretation should be

avoided      and   Courts   should   adopt     the   principles   of

purposive construction. He submitted that the exemption

provision should be narrowly construed.
7.     Before we consider the submissions made by the

learned counsel, it is necessary to examine the provisions

of the Act.
Section 83
of the Act provides that no person

shall be entitled to own or hold or possess under a

mortgage, lands in the aggregate in excess of the ceiling
4
area with effect from the date notified by the Government

of Kerala in the Gazette.        The ceiling area of land is

specified in
Section 82
of the Act. Lands exempted under
Section 81
shall be excluded from computation of the

ceiling area as per
Section 82 (6)
of the Act.
Section 81
of

the Act is as follows:
81. Exemptions: - (1) the provisions of this Chapter
    shall not apply to-
a) Lands owned or held by the Government of Kerala or
    the Government of any other State in India or the
    Government of India or a local authority [or the
    Cochin Port Trust] or any other authority which the
    Government may, in public interest, exempt, by
    notification in the Gazette, from the provisions of this
    Chapter.
[Provided that the exemption under this clause shall
    not apply to lands owned by the Government of
    Kerala and held by any person under lease whether
    current or time expired or otherwise.]
    Explanation I. – “Lands owned by the Government
    of Kerala” shall, for the purposes of this clause, have
    the same meaning as “Government lands” under sub-
    section (1) of
Section 2
of the Kerala Government
    land Assignment Act, 1960 [but lands escheated to
    the Government and held by tenants entitled to fixity
    of tenure under
Section 13
shall not be deemed to be
    lands owned by the Government of Kerala;]
    Explanation II – Lands, the right, title and interest in
    respect of which have vested in the Government
    under sub-section (9) of
Section 66
or
Section 72
,
5
shall not be deemed to be “lands owned by the
   Government of Kerala” for the purposes of this
   clause;]
   Explanation III - For the purposes of this clause,
   “other authority” shall include a corporation owned or
   controlled by the Government of Kerala or the
   Government of any other State in India or the
   Government of India;]
b) Lands taken under the management of the Court of
   Wards;
Provided that the exemption under this clause shall
   cease to apply at the end of three years from the
   commencement of this Act;
c) Lands comprised of mills, factories or workshops and
   which are necessary for the use of such mills,
   factories or workshops;
d) Private forests;
e) Plantations;
f) x x x x
g) x x x x
h) lands mortgaged to the Government, or to a co-
   operative society (including a co-operative land
   mortgage       bank)    registered     or   deemed     to   be
   registered under the
Co-operative Societies Act
for
   the time being in force, or to the Kerala Financial
   Corporation, or to the Kerala Industrial Development
   Corporation,     or    to   the   State     Small   Industries
   Corporation, as security for any loan advanced by the
   Government or by such society or Corporation, so
   long as the mortgage subsists:
6
provided that the exemption under this clause shall
     cease to apply at the end of three years from the
     commencement of this Act;
i)   lands purchased by the Kerala Co-operative Central
     Land Mortgage Bank or a Primary Mortgage Bank
     under Section 18 of the Kerala Co-operative     Land
     Mortgage Banks Act, 1960 [or by the Kerala State Co-
operative Bank Ltd., or by a primary agricultural
     credit co-operative society or by a scheduled bank as
     defined in the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
] so
     long as such lands continue in the possession of the
     bank;
j) Lands purchased by the Kerala Financial Corporation
     or lands the management of which has been taken
     over by that Corporation, under
Section 32
of the
     State Financial Corporations Act, 1951, so long as
     such lands remain in the ownership, or continue
     under the management, as the case may be, of the
     said Corporation:
[provided that the exemption under this clause shall
     not apply in the case of lands the management of
     which has been taken over by the Corporation on or
     after the 1st day of April, 1964;]
k) lands belonging to or held by an industrial or
     commercial undertaking at the commencement of
     this Act, and set apart for use for the industrial or
     commercial purpose of the undertaking:
Provided that the exemption under this clause shall
     cease to apply if such land is not actually used for
     the purpose for which it has been set apart, within
     such time as the District Collector may, by notice to
     the undertaking, specify, in that behalf;
7
l) x x x x
m) house sites, that is to say, sites occupied by
   dwelling houses and lands, wells, tanks and other
   structures       necessary       for     the   convenient
   employment of the dwelling houses.
Explanation.- For          the avoidance of doubt, it is
   hereby declared that a compound wall shall not be
   deemed to be a structure necessary for the
   convenient enjoyment of a dwelling house, if the
   land on which the dwelling house is situated and
   enclosed by the compound wall is more than the
   land necessary for the convenient enjoyment of the
   dwelling house.
n) x x x x
o) sites    of     temples,     churches,     mosques    and
   cemeteries and burial and burning grounds:
p) sites of buildings and including warehouses;
q) commercial sites;
r) land occupied by educational institutions including
   land necessary for the convenient use of the
   institutions and playgrounds attached to such
   institutions;
s) lands vested in the Bhoodan Yagna Committee;
t) lands owned or held by-
i.    a University establishment by law; or
  ii.   a    religious,       charitable    or    educational
        institutions of a public nature; or
 iii.   a public trust which expression shall include a
        wakf; Provided that-
8
(i)   the entire income of such lands is appropriated for
       the University, institution or trust concerned, and
(ii) where the University, institution or trust come to
       hold the said lands after the commencement of this
       Act, the Government have certified previously that
       such lands are bona fide required for the purposes
       of the University, institution or trust, as the case
       may be; and

   u) lands granted to defence personnel for gallantry.

       (2)       [xxx]
(3)    The Government may if they are satisfied that it is
       necessary to do so in the public interest-
(a)    on account of any special use to which any land is
       put; or
(b)    on account of any land being bona fide required for
       the purpose of conversion into plantation or for the
       extension or preservation of an existing plantation
       or for any commercial, industrial, educational or
       charitable purpose, by notification in the Gazette,
       exempt such land from the provisions of this
       Chapter, subject to such restrictions and conditions
       as they may deem fit to impose:
Provided that the land referred to in clause (b)
       shall be used for the purpose for which it is
       intended within such time as the Government may
       specify in that behalf; and, where the land is not so
       used within the time specified, the exemption shall
       cease to be in force.]
9
8.       In the present case, the Appellant is claiming

exemption on the ground that a quarry would fall within

the sweep of ‘commercial site’ as stated in
Section 81 (1)
(q). Commercial site is defined in
Section 2 (5)
as follows:
‘‘2(5) “commercial site” means any land (not being a
        kudiyiruppu or a kudikidappu or karaima) which is
        used principally for the purposes of any trade,
        commerce, industry, manufacture or business;’’
9.       The Appellant contended that the definition of

‘commercial site’ is very wide and any land which is

principally used for the purpose of trade, commerce,

industry, manufacture or business is a commercial site.

According         to   the    Appellant,      breaking       of   rock   is   a

manufacturing activity.                Quarrying operations involve

digging land and breaking of rocks into metal pieces.                         It

was submitted that digging of land and breaking of rock is

for a commercial activity and the sale of stones is for the

purpose of trade and business.                   We are afraid that we

cannot agree.
10. The dominant legislative intent of the Act is the

imposition of ceiling on land holdings and distribution of

excess land among landless people.3                         Large number of
3
State of Kerala v. K. A. Gangadharan
(1977) 1 SCC 208
10
people have no place of abode in the State of Kerala,

which is known as God’s own country. To provide land to

such landless people by taking it from those who possess

in excess is the major objective of the Act.4
11.     Provisions of a beneficial legislation have to be

construed with a purpose-oriented approach. 5
The Act
should receive a liberal construction to promote its

objects.6    Also, literal construction of the provisions of a

beneficial legislation has to be avoided. It is the Court’s

duty to discern the intention of the legislature in making

the law.        Once such an intention is ascertained, the

statute     should      receive     a    purposeful       or    functional

interpretation7.
12. In the words of O. Chinnappa Reddy, J. 8, the principles

of statutory construction of beneficial legislation are as

follows:
4. The principles of statutory construction are well
      settled. Words occurring in statutes of liberal import
      such as social welfare legislation and human rights'
      legislation are not to be put in Procrustean beds or
      shrunk to Liliputian dimensions.
In construing these
4
One Earth One Life & Ors. v. State of Kerala, WP (C) No.28496 of 2016
5
Regional Executive, Kerala Fishermen’ Welfare Fund Board v. Fancy Food
, (
1995) 4
SCC 34
6
Bombay Anand Bhavan Restaurant v. ESI Corporation
, (
2009) 9 SCC 61 and Union of
India v. Prabhakaran Vijay Kumar
, (
2008) 9 SCC 527
7
Bharat Singh v. Management of New Delhi Tuberculosis Centre
, (1986) 2 SCC 614.
8
Workmen v. American Express International Banking Corpn.
(1985) 4 SCC 71
11
legislations the imposture of literal construction must
        be avoided and the prodigality of its misapplication
        must be recognised and reduced.
Judges ought to be
        more concerned with the “colour”, the “content” and
        the “context” of such statutes (we have borrowed the
        words from Lord Wilberforce's opinion in Prenn v.
        Simmonds [(1971) 3 All ER 237] ). In the same
        opinion Lord Wilberforce pointed out that law is not to
        be left behind in some island of literal interpretation
        but is to enquire beyond the language, unisolated
        from the matrix of facts in which they are set; the law
        is not to be interpreted purely on internal linguistic
        considerations.
In one of the cases cited before us,
        that is,
Surendra Kumar Verma v. Central Government
        Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour
Court [(1980) 4 SCC
        443], we had occasion to say,


             “Semantic       luxuries     are    misplaced       in   the
             interpretation of ‘bread and butter’ statutes.
             Welfare statutes must, of necessity, receive a
             broad      interpretation.      Where      legislation       is
             designed to give relief against certain kinds of
             mischief, the Court is not to make inroads by
             making etymological excursions.”
13. While interpreting a statute, the problem or mischief

that the statute was designed to remedy should first be

identified and then a construction that suppresses the

problem and advances the remedy should be adopted. 9 It

is settled law that exemption clauses in beneficial or social
9
Indian Performing Rights Society v. Sanjay Dalia
, (2015) 10 SCC 161
12
welfare legislations should be given strict construction 10.
It

was observed in
Shivram A. Shiroor v. Radhabai

Shantram            Kowshik
(supra)     that    the    exclusionary

provisions in a beneficial legislation should be construed

strictly so as to give a wide amplitude to the principal

object of the legislation and to prevent its evasion on

deceptive grounds.
Similarly, in Minister Administering

the Crown Lands Act v. NSW Aboriginal Land

Council11, Kirby, J. held that the principle of providing

purposive construction to beneficial legislations mandates

that exceptions in such legislations should be construed

narrowly.
14. There is no dispute that the Act is a beneficial

legislation. The extent of land that can be held is fixed and

any land in excess has to be surrendered to the

Government, which is distributed in favour of the landless

people in the State. The interpretation of the provisions of

the Act should be in a manner which promote the said

object.
15.
Section 81
exempts among others, lands comprised

of mills, factories or workshops, lands occupied by
10
Shivram A. Shiroor v. Radhabai Shantram Kowshik
, (1984) 1 SCC 588
11
[2008] HCA 48
13
educational    institutions,   and     lands   owned    by

Universities, religious and charitable institutions. House

sites, sites of temples, churches and mosques, sites of

buildings including warehouses and commercial sites are

also exempted.    There is a definite distinction between

the expressions ‘lands’ and ‘sites’ in the context in which

they have been used. Commercial sites read along with

the other clauses dealing with sites clearly indicate that

land occupied by structures is described as ‘site’. As

stated above, the other clauses in
Section 81
dealing

with sites are house sites, temples, churches and

mosques and buildings.         As such, the expression

‘commercial site’ cannot take into its fold vacant lands,

including lands used for the purpose of quarrying. It has

a restrictive meaning in comparison to the other

categories of ‘land’ in
Section 81
.      Therefore, quarry

cannot fit into the terms ‘commercial site’.    Mr. Bechu

Kurian, leaned Senior Counsel argued on behalf of the

Appellant that digging the land for extracting stones is

for a commercial purpose of making profit and hence

quarry is a commercial site.        We do not agree.     A

commercial site is a land on which there is a structure
14
being utilized for an industrial or commercial purpose.

Extension of the words ‘commercial site’ to quarries

would result in defeating the purpose of the Act.
16. We disagree with the opinion of the dissenting

Judge that the expression ‘commercial site’ should be

attributed its natural and original meaning. On the basis

of the statement made by the learned Additional

Advocate General, the dissenting Judge held that if lands

used for quarrying operations prior to the Act coming

into force stood exempted under
Section 81 (1) (k)
, a

quarry   should   be   considered   as   commercial    site.

Further, it was observed that if a quarry can be

exempted under
Section 81 (3)
by the Government in

public interest, then quarrying is a commercial activity

falling within the sweep of
Section 81 (1) (q)
of the Act.
17. We uphold the view of the majority that exemption

of quarries by the Government under
Section 81 (3)
would not arise if quarries are covered by
Section 81 (1)
(q) of the Act. In other words, if quarries are commercial

sites, the need for their exemption in public interest does

not arise.
Section 81(3)
of the Act empowers the

Government to exempt lands for commercial purposes in
15
public interest.   The overriding power conferred on the

Government to exempt lands from the applicability of

the   Act   cannot   be   utilized   for   the   purpose   of

interpretation of
Section 81 (1) (q)
which exempts

commercial sites from the purview of the Act.
Section

81 (1) (k)
exempts unused lands of industrial or

commercial undertakings at the time of commencement

of the Act. The provision presupposes that an industrial

or commercial undertaking was existing on the date of

the commencement of the Act and there was some land

set apart for the use of the undertaking in future. The

said land is exempted only if the land is used for the

industrial or commercial purposes of the undertaking

within the time to be fixed by the authority. If the land is

not used for the purpose for which it was set apart, the

exemption ceases to operate. It is clear from the above

that
Section 81(1) (k)
deals with a completely different

type of land belonging to an industrial or commercial

undertaking set apart for use of the said undertaking.

Therefore, we are not in agreement with the support

sought by the dissenting Judge from
Section 81 (1) (k)
to
16
interpret the expression ‘commercial site’ in
Section 81

(1) (q)
.
18. Another submission of the Appellant that quarrying

includes a manufacturing activity does not appeal to us.

Breaking of rock into small pieces of stone, according to

us, is not a manufacturing activity.           For this view, we

seek       support      from   a   judgment   of   this   Court   in

Rajasthan SEB v. Associated Stone Industries 12. It

was held in the said judgment that cutting and polishing

stones into slabs is not a process of manufacture for the

obvious and simple reason that no new and distinct

commercial product came into existence as the end

product still remained stone and thus its original identity

continued.
19. The findings recorded in the majority opinion on the

issue pertaining to the environment is not relevant for

the decision of the dispute.          The concern of the Court

should have been restricted to the gamut of the

expression ‘commercial site’.              The interpretation of
Section 81
which exempts certain lands and sites should

be interpreted in a manner, which promotes the object of
12
(2006) 6 SCC 141
17
the Act and restricts concentration of large swathes of

land in favour of a few individuals. Wider construction of

the words ‘commercial site’ would defeat the laudable

object of the Act.
20. The upshot of the above discussion is that there is

no error in the majority opinion of the Full Bench in the

impugned judgment which requires to be upheld.
21. The Appeals are dismissed, accordingly.
................................J.
                                    [L. NAGESWARA RAO]




                                   …............................J.
                                       [HEMANT GUPTA]
New Delhi,
September 30, 2019
18