[Cites
11
, Cited by
14
]
Supreme Court of India
D.A.V. College Trust And Managing ... vs Director Of Public Instructions on 17 September, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 4411, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1059, 2019 (6) ABR 550, 2020 (1) AJR 179, 2019 (4) AKR 730, 2019 (12) ADJ 35 NOC, (2019) 12 SCALE 511, (2019) 3 ESC 856, (2019) 4 CIVLJ 750, (2019) 4 PAT LJR 6, (2019) 4 RECCIVR 470, (2019) 6 ANDHLD 108, 2019 (9) SCC 185, AIR 2019 SC (CIV) 3042
Author:
Deepak Gupta
Bench:
Aniruddha Bose
,
Deepak Gupta
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9828 OF 2013

     D.A.V. COLLEGE TRUST AND
     MANAGEMENT SOCIETY & ORS.                                   …APPELLANT(S)


                                                  VERSUS

     DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
     INSTRUCTIONS & ORS.                                       …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                    With

                                CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 9844­9845 OF 2013

                                CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 9846­9857 OF 2013

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9860 OF 2013


                                             JUDGMENT
Deepak Gupta, J.
Whether    non­governmental    organisations    substantially

     financed by the appropriate government fall within the ambit of ‘public

     authority’ under
Section 2(h)
of the Right to Information Act, 2005 is

     the issue for consideration in this case.
Signature Not Verified
2.
Digitally signed by
RACHNA
Date: 2019.09.17
The Right to Information Act
(for short ‘the Act’) was enacted by
17:54:19 IST
Reason:
Parliament in the year 2005, for the purpose of setting out a practical
1
regime of right to information for citizens to secure access to

information. The relevant portion of the Objects & Reasons of the Act

reads as follows:­


           “…AND WHEREAS democracy requires an informed citizenry
      and transparency of information which are vital to its functioning
      and also to contain corruption and to hold Governments and their
      instrumentalities accountable to the governed;
AND WHEREAS revelation of information in actual practice is
      likely to conflict with other public interests including efficient
      operations of the Governments, optimum use of limited fiscal
      resources and the preservation of confidentiality of sensitive
      information;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to harmonise these conflicting
      interests while preserving the paramountcy of the democratic ideal;
      …”
3.
Under the Act
, a public authority is required to maintain

records in terms of Chapter II and every citizen has the right to get

information from the public authority. ‘Public authority’ is defined in
Section 2(h)
of the Act which reads as follows:­

      “…
(h) “public authority” means any authority or body or institution of
      self­government established or constituted –
(a)    by or under the Constitution;
(b)    by any other law made by Parliament;
          (c)    by any other law made by State Legislature;
          (d)    by notification issued or order made by the appropriate
                 Government,

     and includes any –

          (i)      body owned, controlled or substantially financed;
          (ii)     non­Government organisation substantially financed,
2
directly or indirectly   by   funds   provided   by   the   appropriate
     Government;”
4.   The appellants before us are all colleges or associations running

the colleges and/or schools and their claim is that Non­Governmental

Organisations (NGOs) are not covered under the Act. According to the

appellants, the objective of the Act was to cover only Government and

its instrumentalities which are accountable to the Government.                 It

has also been urged that the words ‘public authority’ mean any

authority or body or institution of self­government and such body or

institution must be constituted under the Constitution, or by any law

of Parliament, or by any law made by the State Legislature or by a

notification issued or order made by the appropriate Government.
5.   It is urged that unless a specific notification is issued, in terms

of clause (d), no body or institution outside the ambit of clauses (a) to
(c) of
Section 2(h)
can be deemed to be public authority. It is further

urged that there are 4 types of public authorities as pointed out

above, i.e., those set up (a) under the Constitution, (b) by an Act of

Parliament, (c) by any law made by State Legislature, or (d) by

notification issued or order made by the appropriate Government. No

other authority can be considered a public authority.                Since the
3
appellants do not fall under any of the above mentioned 4 categories,

they cannot be termed to be public authority.
6.       As far as definition of public authority is concerned this Court

has dealt with the matter in detail in
Thalappalam Service

Cooperative Bank Ltd. and Ors. v. State of Kerala and Ors.1 It
would however, be pertinent to mention that
in that case
the

Registrar of Cooperative Societies had issued a Circular No. 23 of

2006 directing that all cooperative societies would fall within the

ambit of the Act. This notification was challenged before this Court.

Dealing with
Section 2(h)
of the Act, this Court in the aforesaid

judgment held as follows:­

            “30. The legislature, in its wisdom, while defining the expression
         “public authority” under
Section 2(h)
, intended to embrace only those
         categories, which are specifically included, unless the context of the
         Act otherwise requires.
Section 2(h)
has used the expressions
         “means” and “includes”. When a word is defined to “mean”
         something, the definition is prima facie restrictive and where the
         word is defined to “include” some other thing, the definition is prima
         facie extensive. But when both the expressions “means” and
         “includes” are used, the categories mentioned there would exhaust
         themselves.
The meanings of the expressions “means” and “includes”
         have been explained by this Court in
DDA v. Bhola Nath Sharma
(in
         paras 25 to 28). When such expressions are used, they may afford an
         exhaustive explanation of the meaning which for the purpose of the
         Act, must invariably be attached to those words and expressions.
31.
Section 2(h)
exhausts the categories mentioned therein. The
         former part of
Section 2(h)
deals with:
(1) an authority or body or institution of self­government
         established by or under the Constitution,
            (2) an authority or body or institution of self­government
         established or constituted by any other law made by Parliament,

1 (2013) 16 SCC 82
4
(3) an authority or body or institution of self­government
      established or constituted by any other law made by the State
      Legislature, and
          (4) an authority or body or institution of self­government
      established or constituted by notification issued or order made by the
      appropriate Government.
32. The Societies, with which we are concerned, admittedly, do
      not fall in the abovementioned categories, because none of them is
      either a body or institution of self­government, established or
      constituted under the Constitution, by law made by Parliament, by
      law made by the State Legislature or by way of a notification issued
      or made by the appropriate Government. Let us now examine
      whether they fall in the latter part of
Section 2(h)
of the Act, which
      embraces within its fold:
(5) a body owned, controlled or substantially financed, directly or
      indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate Government,
          (6) non­governmental organisations substantially financed directly
      or indirectly by funds provided by the appropriate Government.”
7.     At this stage we may note that in the
Thalappalam
case

(supra) there was an order issued directing that cooperative societies

would fall within the ambit of the Act. The validity of this order was

challenged on the grounds that the cooperative societies were neither

bodies owned, controlled and/or substantially financed by the

government nor could they be said to be NGOs substantially

financed, directly or indirectly, by funds provided by the appropriate

Government.
8.    It is a well settled statutory rule of interpretation that when in

the definition clause a meaning is given to certain words then that

meaning alone will have to be given to those words. However, when

the definition clause contains the words ‘means and includes’ then
5
both these words must be given the emphasis required and one word

cannot override the other.
9.
In
P. Kasilingam v. P.S.G. College of Technology & Ors.2
this Court was dealing with the expression ‘means and includes’,

wherein Justice S.C. Agrawal observed as follows:­

          “19. …A particular expression is often defined by the Legislature by
         using the word ‘means’ or the word ‘includes’. Sometimes the words
         ‘means and includes’ are used. The use of the word ‘means’ indicates
         that “definition is a hard­and­fast definition, and no other meaning
         can be assigned to the expression than is put down in definition”.
(See : Gough v. Gough;
Punjab Land Development and Reclamation
         Corpn. Ltd. v. Presiding Officer, Labour
Court.) The word ‘includes’
         when used, enlarges the meaning of the expression defined so as to
         comprehend not only such things as they signify according to their
         natural import but also those things which the clause declares that
         they shall include. The words “means and includes”, on the other
         hand, indicate “an exhaustive explanation of the meaning which, for
         the purposes of the Act, must invariably be attached to these words
         or expressions”.
(See : Dilworth v. Commissioner of Stamps (Lord
         Watson);
Mahalakshmi Oil Mills v. State of A.P. The
use of the words
         “means and includes” in Rule 2(b) would, therefore, suggest that the
         definition of ‘college’ is intended to be exhaustive and not extensive
         and would cover only the educational institutions falling in the
         categories specified in Rule 2(b) and other educational institutions
         are not comprehended.
Insofar as engineering colleges are concerned,
         their exclusion may be for the reason that the opening and running
         of the private engineering colleges are controlled through the Board
         of Technical Education and Training and the Director of Technical
         Education in accordance with the directions issued by the AICTE
         from time to time…”



This judgment was followed in Bharat Coop. Bank (Mumbai) Ltd. v.

Coop. Bank Employees Union3 and
Delhi Development Authority

v. Bhola Nath Sharma (Dead) by L.Rs. and Ors.4
2 (1995) Supp 2 SCC 348
3 (2007) 4 SCC 685
4 (2011) 2 SCC 54
6
10.    It is thus clear that the word ‘means’ indicates that the

definition is exhaustive and complete. It is a hard and fast definition

and no other meaning can be given to it.         On the other hand, the

word ‘includes’ enlarges the scope of the expression. The word

‘includes’ is used to signify that beyond the meaning given in the

definition clause, other matters may be included keeping in view the

nature of the language and object of the provision.                  In P.

Kasilingam’s case (supra) the words ‘means and includes’ has been

used but in the present case the word ‘means’ has been used in the

first part of sub­section (h) of
Section 2
whereas the word ‘includes’

has been used in the second part of the said Section. They have not

been used together.
11.    One of the arguments raised before us is that the words “self­

government” occurring in the opening portion of
Section 2(h)
will

govern the words ‘authority’, ‘body’ or ‘institution’. It is urged that

only such authorities, bodies or institutions actually concerned with

self­governance can be declared to be public authorities.              This

objection has to be rejected outright. There are three categories in

the opening lines viz., (a) authorities; (b) bodies; and (c) institutions of

self­government. There can be no doubt in this regard and, therefore,

we reject this contention.
7
12.    The next contention is that a public authority can only be an

authority or body or institution which has been established or

constituted (a) under the Constitution; (b) by any law of Parliament;
(c) by any law of State Legislature or (d) by notification made by the

appropriate Government. It is the contention of the appellants that

only those authorities, bodies or institutions of self­government which

fall in these four categories can be covered under the definition of

public authority. It is also contended that in the
Thalappalam
case

(supra) the Court did not consider the effect of clause (d) on the

remaining portion of the definition.
13.    On the other hand, on behalf of the respondents it is urged

that the reading of
Section 2(h)
clearly shows that in addition to the

four categories referred to in the first part, there is an inclusive

portion which includes (i) body owned, controlled or substantially

financed; (ii) non­Government organisation substantially financed,

directly   or   indirectly   by   funds    provided   by   the   appropriate

Government.
14.    The Section, no doubt, is unartistically worded and therefore,

a duty is cast upon us to analyse the Section, find out its true

meaning and interpret it in a manner which serves the purpose of the

Act.
8
15.    If we analyse
Section 2(h)
carefully it is obvious that the first

part of
Section 2(h)
relates to authorities, bodies or institutions of

self­government established or constituted (a) under the Constitution;
(b) by any law of Parliament; (c) by any law of State Legislature or (d)

by notification made by the appropriate Government.              There is no

dispute with regard to clauses (a) to (c).         As far as clause (d) is

concerned it was contended on behalf of the appellants that unless a

notification is issued notifying that an authority, body or institution

of    self­government is brought within the ambit of the Act, the said

Act would not apply. We are not impressed with this argument. The

notification contemplated in clause (d) is a notification relating to the

establishment or constitution of the body and has nothing to do with

the Act. Any authority or body or institution of self­government, if

established or constituted by a notification of the Central Government

or a State Government, would be a public authority within the

meaning of clause (d) of
Section 2(h)
of the Act.
16. We must note that after the end of clause (d) there is a comma

and a big gap and then the definition goes on to say ‘and includes

any –' and thereafter the definition reads as:
“(i)    body owned, controlled or substantially financed;
(ii)   non­Government organisation substantially financed,
9
directly or indirectly   by   funds    provided    by   the   appropriate
      Government;”


The words ‘and includes any’, in our considered view, expand the

definition as compared to the first part.               The second part of the

definition is an inclusive clause which indicates the intention of the

Legislature to cover bodies other than those mentioned in clauses (a)

to (d) of
Section 2(h)
.
17.       We have no doubt in our mind that the bodies and NGOs

mentioned in sub­clauses (i) and (ii) in the second part of the

definition are in addition to the four categories mentioned in clauses
(a) to (d). Clauses (a) to (d) cover only those bodies etc., which have

been established or constituted in the four manners prescribed

therein. By adding an inclusive clause in the definition, Parliament

intended to add two more categories, the first being in sub­clause (i),

which relates to bodies which are owned, controlled or substantially

financed by the appropriate Government. These can be bodies which

may not have been constituted by or under the Constitution, by an

Act of Parliament or State Legislature or by a notification. Any body

which is owned, controlled or               substantially financed by             the

Government, would be a public authority.
18.        As far as sub­clause (ii) is concerned it deals with NGOs

substantially financed by the appropriate Government.                  Obviously,
10
such an NGO cannot be owned or controlled by the Government.

Therefore, it is only the question of financing which is relevant.
19.           Even in the
Thalappalam
case (supra) in para 32 of the

judgment, this Court held that in addition to the four categories there

would be two more categories, (5) and (6).
20.         The principle of purposive construction of a statute is a well­

recognised           principle   which   has    been     incorporated      in      our

jurisprudence.          While giving a purposive interpretation, a court is

required to place itself in the chair of the Legislature or author of the

statute.       The provision should be construed in such a manner to

ensure that the object of the Act is fulfilled.                Obviously, if the

language of the Act is clear then the language has to be followed, and

the court cannot give its own interpretation. However, if the language

admits of two meanings then the court can refer to the Objects and

Reasons, and find out the true meaning of the provisions as intended

by the authors of the enactment. Justice S.B. Sinha in
New India

Assurance Company Ltd. v. Nusli Neville Wadia and Anr.5
held

as follows:­

         “51. …to interpret a statute in a reasonable manner, the court must
         place itself in the chair of reasonable legislator/author. So done, the
         rules of purposive construction have to be resorted to which would
         require the construction of the Act in such a manner so as to see
         that the object of the Act is fulfilled; which in turn would lead the

5 (2008) 3 SCC 279
11
beneficiary under the statutory scheme to fulfil its constitutional
          obligations as held by the court inter alia in Ashoka Marketing Ltd.”


Justice Sinha quoted with approval the following passage from

Barak’s treatise on Purposive Interpretation in Law,6 which reads as

follows:­

          “52. …Hart and Sachs also appear to treat ‘purpose’ as a subjective
          concept. I say ‘appear’ because, although Hart and Sachs claim that
          the interpreter should imagine himself or herself in the legislator’s
          shoes, they introduce two elements of objectivity: First, the
          interpreter should assume that the legislature is composed of
          reasonable people seeking to achieve reasonable goals in a
          reasonable manner; and second, the interpreter should accept the
          non­rebuttable presumption that members of the legislative body
          sought to fulfil their constitutional duties in good faith.     This
          formulation allows the interpreter to inquire not into the subjective
          intent of the author, but rather the intent the author would have
          had, had he or she acted reasonably.”
21.            Justice M.B. Lokur speaking for the majority in
Abhiram

Singh v.           C.D. Commachen (Dead) by L.Rs. and Ors.7
held as

follows:­

          “39. …Ordinarily, if a statute is well drafted and debated in
          Parliament there is little or no need to adopt any interpretation other
          than a literal interpretation of the statute. However, in a welfare
          State like ours, what is intended for the benefit of the people is not
          fully reflected in the text of a statute. In such legislations, a
          pragmatic view is required to be taken and the law interpreted
          purposefully and realistically so that the benefit reaches the
          masses...”
22.            Therefore, in our view,
Section 2(h)
deals with six different

categories and the two additional categories are mentioned in sub

clauses (i) and (ii). Any other interpretation would make clauses (i)
6 (2008) 3 SCC 279: Aharon Barak, Purposive Interpretation in Law, (2007) at pg.87
7 (2017) 2 SCC 629
12
and (ii) totally redundant because then an NGO could never be

covered.     By specifically bringing NGOs it is obvious that the

intention of the Parliament was to include these two categories

mentioned in sub clauses (i) and (ii) in addition to the four categories

mentioned in clauses (a) to (d). Therefore, we have no hesitation in

holding that an NGO substantially financed, directly or indirectly, by

funds provided by the appropriate government would be a public

authority amenable to the provisions of the Act.
23.        NGO is not defined under the Act or any other statute as far

as we are concerned. In fact, the term NGO appears to have been

used for the first time describing an international body which is

legally constituted but non­governmental in nature. It is created by

natural or legal entities with no participation or representation by the

Government. Even NGOs which are funded totally or partially by the

Governments essentially maintain the NGO status by excluding

Government representations in all their organisations.          In some

jurisprudence, they are also referred to as civil society organisations.
24.     A society which may not be owned or controlled by the

Government, may be an NGO but if it is substantially financed

directly or indirectly by the government it would fall within the ambit

of sub­clause (ii).
13
25.       That brings us to the second limb of the argument of the

appellants that the colleges/schools are not substantially financed. In

this regard, we may again make reference to the judgment in the

Thalapplam case (supra) wherein this Court dealing with the issue

of substantially financed made the following observations:­

          “47. We often use the expressions “questions of law” and
      “substantial questions of law” and explain that any question of law
      affecting the right of parties would not by itself be a substantial
      question of law. In Black’s Law Dictionary (6th Edn.) the word
      “substantial” is defined as
          “Substantial.—Of real worth and importance; of considerable value;
      valuable. Belonging to substance; actually existing; real; not seeming
      or imaginary; not illusive; solid; true; veritable. … Something
      worthwhile as distinguished from something without value or merely
      nominal. … Synonymous with material.”
      The word “substantially” has been defined to mean “essentially;
      without material qualification; in the main; in substance; materially”.
      In Shorter Oxford English Dictionary (5th Edn.), the word “substantial”
      means “of ample or considerable amount of size; sizeable, fairly large;
      having solid worth or value, of real significance; solid; weighty;
      important, worthwhile; of an act, measure, etc. having force or effect,
      effective, thorough”. The word “substantially” has been defined to
      mean “in substance; as a substantial thing or being; essentially,
      intrinsically”. Therefore the word “substantial” is not synonymous with
      “dominant” or “majority”. It is closer to “material” or “important” or “of
      considerable value”. “Substantially” is closer to “essentially”. Both
      words can signify varying degrees depending on the context.
48. Merely providing subsidies, grants, exemptions, privileges, etc.
      as such, cannot be said to be providing funding to a substantial
      extent, unless the record shows that the funding was so substantial to
      the body which practically runs by such funding and but for such
      funding, it would struggle to exist. The State may also float many
      schemes generally for the betterment and welfare of the cooperative
      sector like deposit guarantee scheme, scheme of assistance from
      NABARD, etc. but those facilities or assistance cannot be termed as
      “substantially financed” by the State Government to bring the body
      within the fold of “public authority” under
Section 2(h)(d)(i)
of the Act.
      But, there are instances, where private educational institutions getting
      ninety­five per cent grant­in­aid from the appropriate Government,
      may answer the definition of public authority under
Section 2(h)(d)(i)
.”
14
26.      In our view, ‘substantial’ means a large portion. It does not

necessarily have to mean a major portion or more than 50%. No hard

and fast rule can be laid down in this regard. Substantial financing

can be both direct or indirect. To give an example, if a land in a city is

given free of cost or on heavy discount to hospitals, educational

institutions or such other body, this in itself could also be substantial

financing.   The very establishment of such an institution, if it is

dependent on the largesse of the State in getting the land at a cheap

price, would mean that it is substantially financed. Merely because

financial contribution of the State comes down during the actual

funding, will not by itself mean that the indirect finance given is not

to be taken into consideration. The value of the land will have to be

evaluated not only on the date of allotment but even on the date

when the question arises as to whether the said body or NGO is

substantially financed.
27.     Whether an NGO or body is substantially financed by the

government is a question of fact which has to be determined on the

facts of each case. There may be cases where the finance is more

than 50% but still may not be called substantially financed.

Supposing a small NGO which has a total capital of Rs.10,000/­ gets

a grant of Rs.5,000/­ from the Government, though this grant may be
15
50%, it cannot be termed to be substantial contribution.         On the

other hand, if a body or an NGO gets hundreds of crores of rupees as

grant but that amount is less than 50%, the same can still be termed

to be substantially financed.
28.     Another aspect for determining substantial finance is whether

the body, authority or NGO can carry on its activities effectively

without getting finance from the Government.       If its functioning is

dependent on the finances of the Government then there can be no

manner of doubt that it has to be termed as substantially financed.
29.    While interpreting the provisions of the Act and while deciding

what is substantial finance one has to keep in mind the provisions of

the Act.
This Act
was enacted with the purpose of bringing

transparency in public dealings and probity in public life. If NGOs or

other bodies get substantial finance from the Government, we find no

reason why any citizen cannot ask for information to find out whether

his/her money which has been given to an NGO or any other body is

being used for the requisite purpose or not.
30.    It is in the light of the aforesaid proposition of law that we now

propose to examine the cases individually.
Civil Appeal No. 9828 of 2013
16
31.    This has been filed by D.A.V. College Trust and Management

Society, New Delhi; D.A.V. College, Chandigarh; M.C.M. D.A.V.

College,    Chandigarh    and   D.A.V.        Senior   Secondary    School,

Chandigarh.
32.    Appellant   no.1    is   the        Society   which   runs   various

colleges/schools but each has an identity of its own and, in our view,

each of the college/school is a public authority within the meaning of

the Act. It has been urged that these colleges/schools are not being

substantially financed by the Government in as much as that they do

not receive more than 50% of the finance from the Government. Even

the documents filed by the appellants themselves show that M.C.M.

D.A.V. College, Chandigarh, in the years 2004­05, 2005­06 and

2006­07, has received grants in excess of 1.5 crores each year which

constituted about 44% of the expenditure of the College. As far as

D.A.V. College, Chandigarh is concerned the grant for these three

years ranged from more than 3.6 crores to 4.5 crores and in

percentage terms it is more than 40% of the total financial outlay for

each year. Similar is the situation with D.A.V. Senior Secondary

School, Chandigarh, where the contribution of the State is more than

44%.
33.        Another important aspect, as far as the colleges are
17
concerned, is that 95% of the salary of the teaching and non­teaching

staff of the College is borne by the State Government.                  A major

portion of the remaining expenses shown by the College is with

regard to the hostels, etc. It is teaching which is the essential part of

the College and not the hostels or other infrastructure like

auditorium, etc.        The State has placed on record material to show

that now these grants have increased substantially and in the years

2013­14, 2014­15 and 2015­16, the D.A.V. College, Chandigarh

received amounts more than Rs.15 crores yearly, M.C.M. D.A.V.

College, Chandigarh received amounts more than Rs.10 crores yearly

and the D.A.V. Senior Secondary School, Chandigarh received grant

of more than Rs.4 crores yearly. It can be safely said that they are

substantially financed by the Government.
34.     During the course of hearing, some information was placed on

record by the learned counsel for the respondents showing how much

is the fund being granted to these institutions from the year 2013­14

to 2015­16. As far as these institutions are concerned the payments

received are as follows:­

        Institution        2013­14 (Rs.)        2014­15       2015­16
                                                  (Rs.)         (Rs.)

      D.A.V. College,     14,97,31,954/     15,15,91,074/   17,57,90,476/
      Sector 10,                      ­                 ­               ­
      Chandigarh
18
M.C.M. D.A.V.       10,06,91,020/    10,47,79,495/   11,33,94,771/
      College, Sector­36,             ­                ­               ­
      Chandigarh



      D.A.V. Sr.
Sec.     3
,97,39,280/­    4,17,85,658/­   5,06,88,770/­
      School, Sector­8,
      Chandigarh
35.     These are substantial payments and amount to almost half

the expenditure of the Colleges/School and more than 95% of the

expenditure as far as the teaching and other staff is concerned.

Therefore, in our opinion, these Colleges/School are substantially

financed and are public authority within the meaning of
Section 2(h)
of the Act.
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 9844­9845 OF 2013
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 9846­9857 OF 2013
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9860 OF 2013
36.     As far as these cases are concerned, we find from the

judgments of the High Court that the aspect with regard to

substantial financing has not been fully taken into consideration, as

explained by us above. Therefore, though we hold that these bodies

are NGOs, the issue whether these are substantially financed or not

needs to be decided by the High Court. The High Court shall give
19
both the parties opportunity to file documents and decide the issue in

light of the law laid down by us.
37. With these observations, all the appeals are disposed of in

the aforesaid terms. Civil Appeal No. 9828 of 2013 is dismissed. Civil

Appeal Nos. 9844­9845 of 2013, 9846­9857 of 2013 and 9860 of 2013

are remitted to the High Court for determination whether the

institutions are substantially financed or not.    The High Court shall

treat the writ petitions to be filed in the year 2013 and give them

priority accordingly.
....................................J.
                                                           (Deepak Gupta)




                                          .....................................J.
                                                        (Aniruddha Bose)

New Delhi
September 17, 2019
20