[Cites
18
, Cited by
27
]
Supreme Court of India
Govindbhai Chhotabhai Patel vs Patel Ramanbhai Mathurbhai on 23 September, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 4822, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1114, (2019) 12 SCALE 732, (2019) 2 CLR 1024 (SC), (2019) 2 ORISSA LR 877, (2019) 4 CIVLJ 767, (2019) 4 ICC 831, (2019) 4 RECCIVR 549.2, (2019) 6 ANDHLD 59, (2020) 1 ALL RENTCAS 248, (2020) 2 MAH LJ 258, AIR 2020 SC (CIV) 289
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
L. Nageswara Rao
REPORTABLE

                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7528     OF 2019
              (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 4382 OF 2019)


GOVINDBHAI CHHOTABHAI PATEL & ORS.                             .....APPELLANT(S)

                                         VERSUS

PATEL RAMANBHAI MATHURBHAI                                   .....RESPONDENT(S)




                                JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1)      Leave granted.


2)      The order passed by the High Court of Gujarat on September 5,
2018 in second appeal is the subject matter of challenge in the

        present appeal on behalf of the plaintiffs-appellants.
3)      The appellants are sons of Chhotabhai Ashabhai Patel1 who died on

        December 6, 2001. During his life time, he purportedly executed a

        gift deed dated November 15, 1977 in favour of defendant

        Ramanbhai Mathurbhai Patel2.
4)      The parties went to trial on the following issues:
(i)    Whether the plaintiffs prove that the disputed gift deed is
1    for short, ‘Donor’
2    for short, ‘Donee’
1
fabricated?
(ii)   Whether the plaintiffs prove that the suit properties are

               ancestral properties and late Chhotabhai Ashabhai had no

              right to execute the gift deed?
(iii) Whether the plaintiffs prove that the defendant has no right,

             title or interest over the said property?
(iv) Whether the plaintiffs prove that they are entitled to get the

            relief as prayed for?
(v) Whether the defendant proves that the plaintiffs have no right

             to file the present suit?
(vi) What order and decree?
5)      The High Court framed five substantial questions of law and after

        giving findings on such substantial questions of law, the judgment

        and decree passed by the learned Trial Court on February 10, 2014

        and the judgment and decree passed by the First Appellate Court

        on October 9, 2017 were set aside.
6)      The findings recorded by the High Court, inter alia, are that

        execution of the gift deed was not specifically denied in the suit

        filed. Therefore, it is not necessary for the Donee to examine one

        of the attesting witnesses in terms of proviso to Section 68 of the

        Indian Evidence Act, 18723. It is also held that the suit property is

        not ancestral property. The property was purchased by Ashabhai

        Patel, father of the Donor and it is by virtue of Will executed by

        Ashabhai Patel, property came to be owned by the Donor in the

        year 1952-1953.          The High Court, thus, held that the Donor was

        competent to execute the gift deed dated November 15, 1977 as

        the property was not ancestral in the hands of Donor. The relevant
3    for short, ‘
Evidence Act
’
2
findings on such questions which arose for consideration in the

second appeal, read as under:
“92. Once again, at the cost of repetition, I state that
Section 68
of the Evidence Act has been thoroughly
         misconstrued by the Courts below. The occasion for
         applying the rule of exclusion from evidence in
Section
         68
arises when a party seeking to rely upon a document
         requiring attestation, fails to prove it in a given manner.
As observed by me earlier, the party will then not be
         able to use it as evidence. But this procedural disability
         against use of a document as evidence cannot by any
         stretch be regarded as an affirmative finding that the
         grounds of attack for avoidance of the deed as claimed
         in the original relief or cancellation subsisted. The
         plaintiff cannot succeed relying upon the weakness or a
         flaw in the case set up by the defendant. The law is
         that the plaintiff can succeed in the suit only on the
         strength of his own case.
xx              xx                   xx
105.     The case of the plaintiffs is very specific.
         According to them, the suit properties were purchased
         by their grandfather and those properties came to be
         devolved upon their father by Testamentary disposition
         i.e. on the strength of the will of their grandfather. The
         Hindu Law, as it stands today, clearly postulates that if
         it is a self-acquired property of the father, it falls into
         the hands of his sons not as coparcenary property, but
         would devolve on them in their individual capacity.
         Where the property is a self-acquired property of the
         father, it falls into the hands of his son in his individual
         capacity and not as coparcenary property in such case
         son’s son cannot claim right in such property.
xx              xx                   xx
108. In view of the above, I hold that the suit properties
         devolved upon the father of the plaintiffs could not be
         said to be coparcenary property. The properties were
         purchased by the grandfather of the plaintiffs, as
         pleaded and admitted by the plaintiffs themselves.
         Such self-acquired properties of the grandfather came
         to be devolved upon the father of the plaintiffs by way
         of a ‘will’ i.e. testamentary disposition.        In such
         circumstances, it could be said that the properties are
3
self-acquired properties of the father of the plaintiffs.
The succession would have been in accordance with
Section 8
of the Hindu Succession Act. When the
                   properties could be said to be self-acquired properties
                   of the father of the plaintiffs, then the father could have
                   definitely transferred those properties by way of a gift
                   deed.
xx              xx                xx
114. In view of the above, I hold that the suit properties
                   were self-acquired properties of the father of the
                   plaintiffs, and in such circumstances, it was open for the
                   father of the plaintiffs to execute the gift deed in favour
                   of the defendant.”
7)     Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the High Court

       has exceeded its jurisdiction in second appeal as findings recorded

       by the First Appellate Court were not specifically dealt with. It is,

       thus, argued that the interference in the second appeal is contrary

       to    judgment     of    this   Court    in
Thulasidhara      &    Anr.   v.

       Narayanappa & Ors.4
.             It is argued that the appellants have

       produced old revenue record and from the documents (Exhibits 107

       to 126), the property is proved to be ancestral and such is the

       finding recorded by the Trial Court and the First Appellate Court.

       Such evidence was not controverted by the Donee.
It is argued

       that the findings recorded by the High Court that the property

       devolved on the Donor by virtue of a Will, therefore, it ceases to be

       an ancestral property is contrary to the judgment of this Court in
C.N. Arunachala Mudaliar v. C.A. Muruganatha Mudaliar &

       Anr.5
.
The reliance is also placed upon judgment of this Court in


4    (2019) 6 SCC 409
5    AIR 1953 SC 495
4
Shyam Narayan Prasad v. Krishna Prasad & Ors.6 that self-
acquired property of a grandfather devolves upon his son as

        ancestral property.
8)      On the other hand, learned counsel for the Donee argued that the

        plaintiffs have failed to prove that the property was ancestral

        property after admitting that their grandfather has purchased the

        property and given it under Will to their father to the exclusion of

        other family members. The argument raised by learned counsel for

        the appellants that the High Court has exceeded its jurisdiction by

        reversing the findings of fact recorded by the First Appellate Court

        does not hold good as the very reasoning recorded has been found

        to be illegal.   It is argued that judgment in C.N. Arunachala

        Mudaliar is to the effect that the property bequeathed or gifted to

        a son by a Mitakshara father will be treated as self-acquired

        property in the hands of Donee.
9)      The first and the foremost question required to be examined is as

        to whether the appellants have proved that the property in the

        hands of Donor was ancestral property.
10)     Govindbhai Chhotabhai Patel (PW-1) has stated, vide Exhibit 34,

        that the property in question was purchased by his grandfather

        Ashabhai Patel and after death of his grandfather, property was

        owned by the Donor according to the inheritance since 1952-1953.

        The appellants stated in the cross-examination that there was


6     (2018) 7 SCC 646
5
family partition in the year 1964 between the Donor and his two

      brothers Chimanbhai Patel and Motibhai Patel. It is, thus, sought to

      be argued that since the property was partitioned in 1964,

      therefore, the Donor has acquired the property not as self-acquired

      property but as ancestral property.
11)   We find that a statement in the cross-examination that there was

      partition between the Donor and his two brothers will not make the

      property ancestral in the hands of Donor. The Will executed by the

      father of Donor has not been produced by the appellants to show

      as to what was intended by his grandfather when the Will was

      executed in favour of Donor. It is admitted fact that grandfather

      purchased the property, thus, such self-acquired property came to

      be bequeathed to the Donor even as per the judgment relied upon

      by the Appellant.
12)   This Court in three Judge Bench in C.N. Arunachala Mudaliar

      considered the question as to whether the properties acquired by

      defendant No. 1 under Will are to be regarded as ancestral or self-

      acquired property in his hands.       It is a case where the plaintiff

      claimed partition of the property in a suit filed against his father

      and brother. The stand of the father was that the house property

      was the self-acquired properties of his father and he got them

      under a Will executed in the year 1912. It was held that father of a

      Joint Hindu family governed by Mitakshara law has full and

      uncontrolled powers of disposition over his self-acquired immovable
6
property and his male issue could not interfere with these rights in

         any way. The Court while examining the question as to what kind

         of interest a son would take in the self-acquired property of his

         father which he receives by gift or testamentary bequest from him,

         it was held that Mitakshara father has absolute right of disposition

         over his self-acquired property to which no exception can be taken

         by his male descendants. It was held that it was not possible to

         hold that such property bequeathed or gifted to a son must

         necessarily rank as ancestral property. It was further held that a

         property gifted by a father to his son could not become ancestral

         property in the hands of the donee simply by reason of the fact

         that the donee got it from his father or ancestor.
13)      The Court found that such questions have been answered in

         different ways by different High Courts. The Calcutta High Court

         held that properties become ancestral property in the hands of his

         son as if he had inherited it from his father but in other High

         Courts, the question is treated as one of construction to be decided

         in each case with reference to its facts as to whether the gifted

         property was intended to pass to the sons as ancestral or self-

         acquired property.
14)      The Bombay High Court in Jugmohan Das v. Sir Mangal Das7

         held that if the son takes by devise, the property continues to be

         self-acquired in his hands. A man can give away his self-acquired
7     (1886) I.L.R. 10 Bom 528
7
property to whomsoever it pleases, including his own sons and that

         property so given would be considered self-acquired in the hands of

         the donee. The Court held as under:
“I now come to the question, whether a son, to whom a
                     father leaves his self-acquired property by will, takes
                     the estate by devise or by descent. This is a most
                     important point, perhaps the most important point in
                     the case. For, if the son takes by devise, the property
                     would, in my opinion, continue to be self-acquired in his
                     hands, and a ready means would be afforded by the use
                     of the testamentary power of checking enforced
                     partitions…

                                        xx      xx            xx

                     The principle is now settled beyond question, that
                     under Hindu law a man may alienate his property to the
                     same extent by a will as he might by a gift inter vivos.
                     In the Tagore Case (Ind. Ap. Sup. Vol. at p. 68) their
                     Lordships of the Privy Council say: “A gift by will is, until
                     revocation, a continuous act of gift up to the moment of
                     death, and does then operate to give the property
                     disposed of to the persons designated as beneficiaries.
                     They take, upon the death of the testator, as if he had
                     given the property in his life-time.”

                     A bequest by will, therefore, is a gift made in
                     contemplation of death. It only differs from a gift in the
                     fact that it takes effect at a future time instead of
                     immediately. But it must clearly be governed and
                     controlled by the general rules regarding gift. Now,
                     there is no doubt that a man can give away self-
                     acquired property to whomsoever he pleases, including
                     his own sons; and there is no doubt that property so
                     given would be considered self-acquired in the hands of
                     the donee. It would, therefore, follow that property
                     given by will would equally be self-acquired in the
                     hands of the devisee.”
15)      Such view of the Bombay High Court was accepted by the

         Allahabad High Court8 and the Lahore High Court9. This Court in
8     Parsotam v. Janki Bai, ILR 29 All 354
9     Amarnath v. Guran, AIR 1918 Lah 394
8
C.N. Arunachala Mudaliar approved the view of the Bombay

      High Court and held as under:
“9. … It was held, therefore, that the father of a joint
               Hindu family governed by Mitakshara law has full and
               uncontrolled powers of disposition over his self-acquired
               immovable property and his male issue could not
               interfere with these rights in any way. This statement of
               the law has never been challenged since then and it has
               been held by the various High Courts in India, and in
               our opinion rightly, that a Mitakshara father is not only
               competent to sell his self-acquired immovable property
               to a stranger without the concurrence of his sons
               [Vide Muddun v. Ram, 6 WR 71] but he can make a gift
               of such property to one of his own sons to the detriment
               of another [ Vide Sital v. Madho, ILR 1 All 394] ; and he
               can make even an unequal distribution amongst his
               heirs [Vide Bawa v. Rajah, 10 WR 287].
10. So far the law seems to be fairly settled and there
               is no room for controversy. The controversy arises,
               however, on the question as to what kind of interest a
               son would take in the self-acquired property of his
               father which he receives by way of gift or testamentary
               bequest from him, vis-a-vis his own male issue. Does it
               remain self-acquired property in his hands also,
               untrammeled by the rights of his sons and grandsons or
               does it become ancestral property in his hands, though
               not obtained by descent, in which his male issue
               become co-owners with him?......
11. In view of the settled law that a Mitakshara father
               has right of disposition over his self-acquired property
               to which no exception can be taken by his male
               descendants, it is in our opinion not possible to hold
               that such property bequeathed or gifted to a son must
               necessarily, and under all circumstances, rank as
               ancestral property in the hands of the donee in which
               his sons would acquire co-ordinate interest…”
16)   Still further, it was held that the father’s gifts are exempt from

      partition. The reason for this distinction is that the theory of equal

      ownership between the father and the son in the ancestral property
9
is not applicable to the father’s gifts at all.     The Court held as

under:
“12. …But when the father obtains the grandfather's
         property by way of gift, he receives it not because he is
         a son or has any legal right to such property but
         because his father chose to bestow a favour on him
         which he could have bestowed on any other person as
         well. The interest which he takes in such property must
         depend upon the will of the grantor. A good deal of
         confusion, we think, has arisen by not keeping this
         distinction in mind. To find out whether a property is or
         is not ancestral in the hands of a particular person, not
         merely the relationship between the original and the
         present holder but the mode of transmission also must
         be looked to; and the property can ordinarily be
         reckoned as ancestral only if the present holder has got
         it by virtue of his being a son or descendant of the
         original owner. The Mitakshara, we think, is fairly clear
         on this point. It has placed the father's gifts under a
         separate category altogether and in more places than
         one has declared them exempt from partition. Thus in
         Chapter I,
Section 1
, Placitum 19 Mitakshara refers to a
         text of Narada which says:
“Excepting what is gained by valour, the wealth
             of a wife and what is acquired by science which
             are three sorts of property exempt from
             partition; and any favour conferred by a father.”



                      xx             xx           xx
15. Another argument is stressed in this connection,
         which seems to have found favour with the learned
         Judges of the Patna High Court who decided the Full
         Bench case [Vide Bhagwat v. Mst. Kaporni, ILR 23 Pat
         599] referred to above. It is said that the exception in
         regard to father's gift as laid down in placitum 28 has
         reference only to partition between the donee and his
         brothers but so far as the male issue of the donee is
         concerned, it still remains partible. This argument, in
         our opinion, is not sound. If the provision relating to
         self-acquisition is applicable to all partitions, whether
         between collaterals or between the father and his sons,
         there is no conceivable reason why placitum 28, which
         occurs in the same chapter and deals with the identical
         topic, should not be made applicable to all cases of
10
partition and should be confined to collaterals alone.
The reason for making this distinction is undoubtedly
                 the theory of equal ownership between the father and
                 the son in the ancestral property which we have
                 discussed already and which in our opinion is not
                 applicable to the father's gifts at all. Our conclusion,
                 therefore, is that a property gifted by a father to his son
                 could not become ancestral property in the hands of the
                 donee simply by reason of the fact that the donee got it
                 from his father or ancestor.”
17)   This Court further held that on reading of the Will as a whole, the

      conclusion becomes clear that the testator intended the legatees

      to take the properties in absolute rights as their own self-acquired

      property without being fettered in any way by the rights of their

      sons and grandsons. In other words, he did not intend that the

      property should be taken by the sons as ancestral property.

      Consequently, the appeal was allowed and the suit for partition by

      the son against his father was dismissed.
18)   In other case reported as Pulavarthi Venkata Subba Rao & Ors.
v. Valluri Jagannadha Rao (deceased) by his Heirs & LRs &

      Ors.10, life estate was given by Valluri Jagannadha Rao to his two

      sons, Srivatsankara Rao and Narasimha Rao. There was a condition

      that if any of his sons left no son, the sons of his other son would

      be entitled to the properties at the end of the life estate. The High

      Court held that the properties taken by two sons of Narasimha Rao

      under Will were their separate properties and not ancestral

      properties as there was no such intention in the Will. This Court

      held as under:
10 AIR 1967 SC 591
11
“8. The contention of the judgment-debtors was that
               there were two persons who were legatees under the
               will. They took the villages not as ancestral properties
               but       as       self-acquired     properties,     and
               the peshkash payable on these two villages must be
               divided between them before
Section 3
( ii), proviso (D)
               of the Act was made applicable. The contention on the
               side of the decree-holders was that these properties
               were held by an undivided Hindu family and the sons of
               Narasimha Rao took the properties under the will as
               ancestral properties, and the peshkash in respect of the
               two villages must be added together for the purpose of
               the application of the said proviso. The High Court held
               that the properties taken by the two sons of Narasimha
               Rao under the will, were their separate properties and
               not ancestral properties, as there were no words to
               show a contrary intention. The High Court also referred
               to the conduct of the respondents in partitioning the
               villages and held that the property was held not jointly
               but in definite shares. The High Court, therefore, held
               that the peshkash in respect of the two villages could
               not be aggregated. The High Court, accordingly, broke
               up the peshkash in respect of Kalagampudi and the
               three-fifth share of Pedamamidipalli into two halves and
               held that as each son of Narasimha Rao was required to
               pay only his share, the peshkash paid by them
               individually did not exceed Rs 500 mentioned in proviso
               (D), and that the judgment-debtors were, therefore,
               agriculturists. This part of the case was not challenged
               before us by the learned Advocate-General of Andhra
               Pradesh.
Indeed, the decision of the High Court is
               supported       by
C.N.    Arunachala    Mudaliar v. C.A.
               Muruganatha Mudaliar
[(1954) SCR 243], in respect of
               the character of the property inherited by the two sons
               of Narasimha Rao, and this fundamental fact could not
               be questioned…..”
19)   Learned counsel for the appellants has referred to Shyam

      Narayan Prasad. That is a case in which the property in question

      was held to be ancestral property by the Trial Court. The plaintiffs

      therein being sons and grandson of one of the sons of Gopal

      Prasad, the last male holder was found to have equal share in the
12
property.     The question examined was whether the property

      allotted to one of the sons of Gopal Prasad in partition retains the

      character of coparcenary property.          It was the said finding which

      was affirmed by this Court. This Court held as under:
“12. It is settled that the property inherited by a male
                  Hindu from his father, father's father or father's father's
                  father is an ancestral property. The essential feature of
                  ancestral property, according to Mitakshara Law, is that
                  the sons, grandsons, and great grandsons of the person
                  who inherits it, acquire an interest and the rights
                  attached to such property at the moment of their birth.
                  The share which a coparcener obtains on partition of
                  ancestral property is ancestral property as regards his
                  male issue. After partition, the property in the hands of
                  the son will continue to be the ancestral property and
                  the natural or adopted son of that son will take interest
                  in it and is entitled to it by survivorship.”
20)   The question examined in the aforesaid case was in respect of

      status of the property after partition.         The said question is not

      arising in the present case as it is not a question of partition but

      testamentary succession in favour of the Donee.
21)   In view of the undisputed fact, that Ashabhai Patel purchased the

      property, therefore, he was competent to execute the Will in favour

      of any person. Since the beneficiary of the Will was his son and in

      the absence of any intention in the Will, beneficiary would acquire

      the   property     as   self-acquired     property    in   terms    of
C.N.

      Arunachala Mudaliar
case. The burden of proof that the property

      was ancestral was on the plaintiffs alone. It was for them to prove

      that the Will of Ashabhai intended to convey the property for the

      benefit of the family so as to be treated as ancestral property. In
13
the absence of any such averment or proof, the property in the

      hands of Donor has to be treated as self-acquired property. Once

      the property in the hands of Donor is held to be self-acquired

      property, he was competent to deal with his property in such a

      manner he considers as proper including by executing a gift deed

      in favour of a stranger to the family.
22)   The other material question is whether the appellants have

      specifically denied the execution of the gift deed in terms of proviso

      to
Section 68
of the Evidence Act, to make it mandatory for the

      defendant to examine one of the attesting witnesses to prove the

      Gift deed in his favour.
23)
Section 68
of the Evidence Act, reads as under:
“68. Proof of execution of document required by
                law to be attested- If a document is required by law
                to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence until one
                attesting witness at least has been called for the
                purpose of proving its execution, if there be an attesting
                witness alive, and subject to the process of the court
                and capable of giving evidence:
Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an
                attesting witness in proof of the execution of any
                document, not being a will, which has been registered
                in accordance with the provisions of the
Indian
                Registration Act, 1908
(16 of 1908), unless its execution
                by the person by whom it purports to have been
                executed is specifically denied.”
24)   A gift deed is required to be compulsorily attested in terms of
Section 123
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. Similar is the

      provision in respect of execution of a Will which is required to be
14
attested in terms of
Section 63
of the Indian Succession Act, 1925.
Section 68
of the Evidence Act makes it mandatory to examine one

      of the attesting witnesses for the purpose of proving of the

      execution of Will but such limitation is not applicable in respect of

      proof of execution of any document which has been registered in

      accordance with provisions of the
Indian Registration Act, 1908
,

      unless the execution is specifically denied.
25)   The gift deed (Ex.104) is registered and that all the requirements of
Section 123
of the Transfer of Property Act have been fulfilled, is

      the finding of the Trial Court. The learned Trial Court recorded the

      following findings:
“However, as far as it is concerned with the gift deed of
                Exh-104, in order to prove that Late Chhotabhai
                Ashabhai executed this gift deed in favour of the
                defendant in fully conscious state, it is necessary as per
                section – 123 of the
Transfer of Property Act
that this
                gift deed should be signed by the executer in presence
                of the two witnesses that means it should be executed
                in the presence of two attesting witnesses. Moreover, it
                should be proved that such gift deed is registered.
                Looking to the gift deed at Exh – 104, it is an
                undisputable fact that it is properly registered before
                the Sub Registrar, Padra. It is also an indisputable fact
                that (1) Bhikhabhai Ramabhai and (2) Karshanbhai
                Dhulabhai have put their signatures in this gift deed as
                the attesting witnesses. Thus, it is found that all the
                requirements of
section 123
of the Transfer of Property
                Act have been fulfilled. However, along with this, it is
                also necessary to examine the attesting witnesses of
                the deed.”
26)   The argument of the learned counsel for the appellants is that the

      attesting witnesses of the gift deed are Bhikhabhai Ramabhai and
15
Karsanbhai Dhulabhai, whereas Solanki Bhikhabhai Ramabhai and

      Vaid Alkaben Vinodchandra are the witnesses at the time of

      registration of the document.        It is argued that the attesting

      witnesses of the document have not been examined which is a

      mandatory requirement to prove execution of the gift deed in terms

      of
Section 68
of the Evidence Act. The High Court has held that the

      appellants have not denied specifically the execution of the gift

      deed, therefore, it was not necessary for the Donee to examine one

      of the attesting witnesses.
27)   The issue No. 1 framed by the Trial Court is whether the gift deed is

      fabricated. Such issue arises on the basis of averments made in

      the plaint wherein, the appellants have admitted the execution of

      the gift deed but alleged that Donee has made unsuccessful effort

      for grabbing the property.    The appellants have, inter alia, pleaded

      that Chanchalben, wife of the Donor, died in August, 1997. Thus,

      there was no reason for the Donor to execute the gift deed as real

      nephews of the Donor were taking complete control of the Donor.
The other ground of challenge was that the attesting witnesses

      have no relation with the Donor nor they are friends of the Donor.

      It was also alleged that the gift is not for religious reasons or to any

      religious trust or institution or for public use nor the consent has

      been sought by the Donor from the appellants.               The specific

      averments in the plaint are as under:
“2) The deceased Chhotabhai Ashabhai who was the
                father of plaintiff Nos. 1 to 4 and plaintiff Nos. 1 to 4
                were living in USA (America) since many years and the
16
deceased Chhotabhai Patel and the mother of plaintiff
Nos. 1 to 4 Chanchalben wife of Chhotabhai Ashabhai
who had expired in and around August, 1997, and since
August, 1997, deceased Chhotabhai Ashabhai was
living alone thus, taking advantage of his loneliness the
defendant on 15/11/1997 executed one gift deed which
was registered in the office of Sub-Registrar, Padra at
Sr. No. 1004 made unsuccessful efforts for grabbing the
said property thus, the plaintiffs are constrained to file
this suit, on the grounds which are stated as under:
(a) The deceased Chhotabhai Ashabhai was not in any
manner related to the        defendant Ramanbhai
Mathurbhai.
(b) The deceased Chhotabhai Ashabhai Patel and his
wife Chanchalben wife of Chhotabhai Ashabhai Patel
were living in America since many years prior to 1997.
(c) Chanchalben the wife of deceased Chhotabhai
Ashabhai had expired during the period of August,
1997, thus, on 15/11/1997, there was no reason for
Chhotabhai to execute the gift deed, not only that but
the real nephews of the deceased Chhotabhai Ashabhai
who were living at Ghayaj were taking complete care of
deceased Chhotabhai Ashabhai, thus, outside their
knowledge, at any time the deceased Chhotabhai had
no reason to execute deed.
(d) In the gift deed dated 15/11/1997, the witnesses
that have signed (1) Bhikhabhai Ramabhai and (2)
Karshanbhai Dhulabhai who were not having any kind of
relations with the deceased Chhotabhai Ashabhai
and/or they were not even related as his friends. There
was no reason of making the gift deed in their
presence.
(e) In the gift deed dated 15/11/1997 the details of the
date of the unregistered Will executed by deceased
Chhotabhai Ashabhai is kept blank and the date and
registration number of the registered Will is also kept
blank, and in this manner, with incomplete details the
gift deed is registered which is made hastily which
supports the facts of the plaintiffs.
(f) In the gift deed dated 15/11/1997 it is clearly evident
that the signature of the deceased Chhotabhai
17
Ashabhai is forged, and in this manner on the basis of
               the forged signature the gift deed is registered, in this
               regard we are constrained to file the present suit.
(g) The gift deed dated 15/11/1997 which is contrary to
               the provisions of law, therefore, also by such gift deed
               the defendant does not acquire any rights, interests or
               claims on the said property…..”
28)   The appellants refer to Will dated December 3, 2001 said to be

      executed by the Donor in their favour.         But no issue has been

      framed in respect of Will propounded by the appellants. In fact, no

      attesting witness of the Will has been examined. Therefore, the Will

      relied upon by the appellants cannot be said to be proved.
29)   The High Court held that the appellants have not led any evidence

      that signature of their father on the gift deed was forged as neither

      the specimen signature nor writings of their father for the purpose

      of comparing the disputed signature on the gift deed have been

      attempted. There is no report of an expert in respect of signatures

      of the Donor on the gift deed nor any request was made for

      sending the document to the Forensic Science Laboratory.               The

      High Court held as under:
“67. In my view, the plaintiffs have miserably failed to
               prove any forgery. If it is the case of the plaintiffs that
               the signature of their father on the disputed gift deed is
               forged, then the burden is on them to establish and
               prove by leading cogent evidence that the signature is
               forged by another. A mere doubt or assertion or an
               allegation of forgery by itself is not sufficient to even
               prima facie draw an inference of fraud. The plaintiffs
               tried to rely upon the 'will' said to have been executed
               by their late father just two days before his demise in
18
the year 2001. One of the cousins of the plaintiffs took
               out the 'will' out of the blue and handed over to the
               plaintiffs. The plaintiffs tried to capitalize on this 'will'
               because in the said 'will', there is a thumb impression of
               the father of the plaintiffs i.e. the testator. The plaintiffs
               thereby tried to create a doubt in the mind of the
               Courts below that the father was illiterate and was
               unable to put his signature. However, if the plaintiffs
               wanted to rely upon the 'will', they should have
               produced the original and proved the same in
               accordance with law by examining one of the attesting
               witnesses to the said 'will'. The 'will' has not even been
               exhibited, and therefore, there is no question of looking
               into the same. The entire approach of the Trial Court
               could be said to be erroneous and has led to a serious
               miscarriage of justice. I am of the view that the
               plaintiffs have practically led no evidence even to prima
               facie create a doubt that the signature of their father on
               the gift deed is forged. The plaintiffs could have
               produced the specimen signature or writings of their
               father, if any, for the purpose of comparing the
               disputed signature on the gift deed. The Trial Court
               could have been asked to seek an opinion of an expert
               in this regard by sending the document to the Forensic
               Science Laboratory. Nothing of this sort was done. All
               that has been asserted in the evidence is that the
               father had no good reason to execute the gift deed in
               favour of the defendant, more particularly, when the
               sons were taking good care of their father. This hardly
               could be termed as evidence with regard to fraud or
               forgery. The plaintiffs have not even pleaded or
               deposed that their father was illiterate and was not able
               to put his signature. If the evidence on record is looked
               into, then the plaintiffs have in substance just
               expressed doubts as regards the signature of their
               father.”
30)   At this stage, we may reiterate that though the learned Trial Court

      has discussed the evidence on record but in view of the finding that

      the property is ancestral, no finding was recorded whether the gift

      deed is forged or not as per the issue framed. The First Appellate

      Court in a short judgment affirmed the finding of the learned Trial
19
Court.     The Trial Court has not retuned any finding that the gift

      deed is forged. Therefore, the High Court was within its jurisdiction

      to decide the Issue No. 1 on the basis of evidence led by the

      parties.
31)   The appellants challenged the gift deed on account of probabilities

      as the witnesses were not related to the family or the friends or

      that the gift was not for religious or charitable purposes. The other

      challenge was on the ground of forgery or fabrication. The entire

      reading of the plaint does not show that there was any specific

      denial of execution of the gift deed.
32)   The appellants have referred to the judgments in
Rosammal

      Issetheenammal Fernandez (Dead) by LRs & Ors. v. Joosa

      Mariyan Fernandez & Ors.11
and
K. Laxmanan v. Thekkayil

      Padmini & Ors.12
. However, we find that both the judgments are

      not applicable to the facts of the present case. In Rosammal, the

      appellant had filed a suit for partition and challenged the execution

      of the gift deed, settlement deed and the Will.              The High Court

      found that the execution of the gift deed was specifically denied.
After finding so, the High Court recorded the following findings:
“11. Under the proviso to
Section 68
the obligation to
                  produce at least one attesting witness stands
                  withdrawn if the execution of any such document, not
                  being a will which is registered, is not specifically
                  denied. Therefore, everything hinges on the recording
                  of this fact of such denial. If there is no specific denial,
                  the proviso comes into play but if there is denial, the
                  proviso will not apply. In the present case as we have
11 (2000) 7 SCC 189
12 (2009) 1 SCC 354
20
held, there is clear denial of the execution of such
                document by the plaintiff, hence the High Court fell into
                error in applying the said proviso which on the facts of
                this case would not apply. In view of this the very
                execution of the gift deed, Exhibit B-1 is not proved.
Admittedly in this case none of the two attesting
                witnesses has been produced. Once the gift deed
                cannot be tendered in evidence in view of the non-
                compliance of
Section 68
of the Indian Evidence Act, we
                uphold that the plaintiff has successfully challenged its
                execution…”
33)   In the facts of the said case, the High Court found that there is

      specific denial of execution of the gift deed, therefore, in the

      absence of examining one of the attesting witnesses, the gift deed

      is not proved.
34)   In K. Laxmanan, a suit was filed by daughter claiming estate of

      Chathu on the basis of natural succession. The defendant (son of

      Chathu) relied upon a gift deed (Ex.B-2) as well as Will in his favour.

      The High Court held that both the attesting witnesses were not

      examined, therefore, the gift deed and Will are not proved to be

      executed. It was found that gift deed was relied upon in the written

      statement which was specifically denied in the affidavit filed in

      respect of injunction applications. The Court held as under:
“29. Pleadings as we understand under
the Code of
                Civil Procedure
(for short “the Code”) and as is defined
                under the provision of Rule 1, Order 6 of the Code
                consist only of a plaint and a written statement. The
                respondent-plaintiff could have filed a replication in
                respect to the plea raised in the written statement,
                which if allowed by the court would have become the
                part of the pleadings, but mere non-filing of a
                replication does not and could not mean that there has
                been admission of the facts pleaded in the written
                statement. The specific objection in the form of denial
21
was raised in the affidavits filed in respect of the
                 injunction applications which were accepted on record
                 by the trial court and moreover the acceptance on
                 record of the said affidavit was neither challenged nor
                 questioned by the present appellant.”
35)   In the abovesaid case, the plaintiff claimed natural succession

      whereas the defendant relied upon gift deed.           In the aforesaid

      judgments, it has been held as a matter of fact that there was

      specific denial of execution of gift deed. But in the present case,

      the appellants came out with the plea of forgery and fabrication of

      the gift deed which is based on different allegations and proof than

      the proof of document attested.
36)
Order VI Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908 warrants that

      in all cases in which allegation of any misrepresentation, fraud,

      breach of trust, wilful default, or undue influence, the necessary

      particulars are required to be stated in the pleadings.
37)   In
Badat and Co. Bombay v. East India Trading Co.13
,

      considering the provisions of Order VIII Rule 3, it was held that

      written statement must deal specifically with each allegation of fact

      in the plaint and when a defendant denies any such fact, he must

      not do so evasively and answer the points of substance.              If his

      denial of the said fact is not specific but evasive, the said fact shall

      be taken to be admitted.
38)   The appellants went to trial on the basis of fabrication of gift deed.
The appellants have admitted the execution of the gift deed but
13 AIR 1964 SC 538
22
alleged the same to be forged or fabricated. However, the

      appellants have not been able to prove any forgery in the

      execution of the gift deed.
39)   Dashrath Prasad Bajooram v. Lallosingh Sanmansingh &

      Anr.14 was dealing with the issue as to whether defendant No. 1

      executed the mortgage deed with proper attestation and for

      consideration.      Considering the proviso to
Section 68
of the

      Evidence Act, the Court held that word ‘specific’ has to be given

      some meaning appearing in proviso to
Section 68
. The Court held

      as under:
“11. That however raises the question whether a mere
                  general denial of a mtge or not admitting it can be
                  regarded as a specific denial. It will be observed that
                  the proviso to
Section 68
of the Evidence Act speaks of
                  a specific denial. Some meaning must be given to the
                  word ‘specific’. It must mean something over & above a
                  general denial. Accordingly in my judgment it is not
                  sufficient to have a mere general denial to; attract the
                  provisions of
S. 68
. That was the distinction drawn in
‘Jhillar v. Rajnarain’
, AIR (22) 1935 All 781 at p. 784 :
(156 IC 45) & in
‘Laehman Singh v. Surendra Bahadur
                  Singh’
, 54 All 1051 at p. 1058 : (AIR (19) 1932 All 527
                  FB).
But those decisions must in my opinion be held to
                  have gone too far in view of the decision of their
                  Lordships of the P.C. in
‘Surendra Bahadur v. Behari
                  Singh’
, AIR (26) 1939 PC 117 : (ILR 1939 KAR 222). In
                  view of what their Lordships have stated it must now be
                  accepted that if a party specifically says that he does
                  not admit a particular fact that amounts to a specific
                  denial within the meaning of the proviso to
Section 68
of the Evidence Act. But the P.C. decision is, in my
                  opinion, distinguishable.
12.
In the
P.C.
case both execution & attestation were
                  expressly not admitted. It was not a case of a mere
                  general denial of the mtge. The written statement there
                  was in these terms:
14 AIR 1951 Nag 343
23
“The contesting deft. does not admit the
                      execution & completion of the document sued
                      on” & at the trial, the P.C. said
                      “it was contended on behalf of Lachman Singh
                      that the execution & ‘due attestation’ of the mtge
                      bond……had not been proved.”
13. The case is in my opinion different when there is no
                  specific denial or when the fact of execution is not
                  specifically not admitted but there is a mere general
                  denial. As I have said, some meaning must be given to
                  the words ‘specifically denied’. So also some meaning
                  must be given to the provisions of O. 8 R. 3
of the CPC
which state that

                      “It shall not be sufficient for a deft. in his written
                      statement to deny generally the grounds alleged
                      by the pltf., but the deft. must deal specifically
                      with each allegation of fact of which he does not
                      admit the truth……”
40)   In
Kannan Nambiar v. Narayani Amma & Ors.15
, the Division

      Bench of the Kerala High Court was considering a suit filed by

      daughter of a donee claiming share in the property. The gift deed

      was admitted in evidence without any objection. The Court held

      that specific denial of execution of gift is an unambiguous and

      categorical     statement      that   the   donor   did   not    execute   the

      document. The Court held as under:
“14. Ab initio we have to examine whether there is any
                  specific denial of the execution of the document, in the
                  pleadings. Before considering whether there is specific
                  denial we have to consider what is the exact
                  requirement demanded when the proviso enjoins a
                  specific denial. ‘Specific’ means with exactness,
                  precision in a definite manner (See Webster's 3rd New
                  International Dictionary). It is clear, that something
                  more is required to connote specific denial in
                  juxtaposition    to    general   denial.   See Dashrath
                  Prasad v. Lallosing (AIR. 1951 Nag. 343)


15 1984 SCC OnLine Ker 174 : 1984 KLT 855
24
15. We think that specific denial of execution of gift is
               an unambiguous and categorical statement that the
               donor did not execute the document. It means not only
               that the denial must be in express terms but that it
               should be unqualified, manifest and explicit. It should
               be certain and definite denial of execution. What has to
               be specifically denied is the execution of the document.
Other contentions not necessarily and distinctly
               referring to the execution of the document by the
               alleged executant cannot be gathered, for the denial
               contemplated in the proviso.
xx             xx           xx
18. The question which elicited the above answer gives
               a clear understanding of the case of the defendants as
               they understood their case. Defendants have no case
               that no document was executed by Anandan Nambiar.
               Their case is that the document is not valid because it
               had been executed under circumstances which would
               render the document invalid. There is no specific denial
               of the execution of the document. The respondents can
               seek the aid of the proviso to
S. 68
of the Evidence Act.
               No defect in not calling an attesting witness to prove
               the document. We do not think that we can ignore Ext.
               A1 gift deed on the ground that no attesting witness
               has been called for, for proving the gift deed.”
41)   The facts of the present case are akin to the facts which were

      before the Kerala High Court in Kannan Nambiar. The appellants

      have not denied the execution of the document but alleged forgery

      and fabrication. In the absence of any evidence of any forgery or

      fabrication and in the absence of specific denial of the execution of

      the gift deed in the manner held in Kannan Nambiar, the Donee

      was under no obligation to examine one of the attesting witnesses

      of the gift deed. As per evidence on record, the Donee was taking

      care of the Donor for many years. The appellants were residing in

      the United States but failed to take care of their parents.
25
Therefore, the father of the appellants has executed gift deed in

      favour of a person who stood by him. We find that there is no error

      in the findings recorded by the High Court.
42)   Thus, we do not find any error in the judgment of the High Court

      which may warrant interference in the present appeal and

      accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
.............................................J.
                                                     (L. NAGESWARA RAO)




                                      .............................................J.
                                                           (HEMANT GUPTA)

NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 23, 2019.
26