[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Goel Ganga Developers India Pvt. ... vs Union Of India Through Secretary ... on 11 September, 2019
Author:
Deepak Gupta
Bench:
Aniruddha Bose
,
Deepak Gupta
1


                                                                      REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                       I.A. NO.64665 OF 2019
                                                 IN
                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10854 OF 2016

          M/S. GOEL GANGA DEVELOPERS
          INDIA PVT. LTD.                                           … Applicant (s)


                                                Versus




          UNION OF INDIA THROUGH SECRETARY
          MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT
          AND FORESTS & ORS.                                        …Respondent(s)


                                              ORDER
The only issue involved in this application is whether non­

          consideration of a judgment delivered by a three­Judge Bench in

          Re: Construction of Park at Noida Near Okhla Bird Sanctuary
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
Date: 2019.09.11
16:51:16 IST
& Ors.1, hereinafter referred to as ‘NOIDA Park case’, has led to
Reason:
1 (2011) 1 SCC 744
2
wrong conclusions by this Court with regard to the interpretation of

built up area in terms of Item No. 8 of the Schedule of the

Environment         Impact      Assessment        (EIA)     Notification        dated

14.09.2006.        The relevant portion of the notification reads as

follows:
(1)    (2)           (3) (4)                 (5)
           8                    Building/Construction projects/Area
                                Development projects and Townships
           8(a)   Building and          >20000     sq. #(built up area
                  Construction          mtrs.     And for        covered
                  projects              <1,50,000 sq. construction;
                                        mtrs. Of built­ in the case of
                                        up area#        facilities open
                                                        to the sky, it
                                                        will be the
                                                        activity area)
           8(b)   Townships             Covering    an ++All     projects
                  and      Area         area >50 ha under           Item
                  Development           and or built 8(b) shall be
                  projects              up        area appraised as
                                        >1,50,000 sq. Category B1.
                                        mtrs. ++
While interpreting this clause, one of us (Deepak Gupta, J.)

held as follows:
“13.     From a bare perusal of the two hash tags (#) in
           Column 4 and 5 of Item 8(a), it is apparent that what is shown
           under Column 5 is actually a continuation of Column 4 and
           basically it describes or defines ‘built up area’ to mean covered
           construction and if the facilities are open to the sky, it will be
           taken to be the activity area. This by itself clearly shows that
3
under the notification of 2006, all constructed area, which is
        covered and not open to the sky has to be treated as ‘built up
        area’. There is no exception for non­FSI area.
14.        Indeed, the concept of FSI or non­FSI has no
        concern or connection with grant of EC. The same may be
        relevant for the purposes of building plans under municipal
        laws and regulations but it has no linkage or connectivity with
        the grant of EC. When EC is to be granted, the authority
        which has to grant such clearance is only required to ensure
        that the project does not violate environmental norms. While
        projects and activities, as mentioned in the notification, may
        be allowed to go on, the authority while granting permission
        should ensure that the adverse impact on the environment is
        kept to the minimum. Therefore, the authority granting EC
        may lay down conditions which the project proponent must
        comply with. While doing so, such authority is not concerned
        whether the area to be constructed is FSI area or non­FSI
        area. Both will have an equally deleterious effect on the
        environment. Construction implies usage of a lot of materials
        like sand, gravel, steel, glass, marble etc., all of which will
        impact the environment. Merely because under the municipal
        laws some of this construction is excluded while calculating
        the FSI is no ground to exclude it while granting the EC.
Therefore, when EC is granted for a particular construction it
        includes both FSI and non­FSI areas. As far as environmental
        laws are concerned, all covered construction, which is not
        open to the sky is to be treated as built up area in terms of the
        EIA Notification dated 14.09.2006.”




     The contention raised on behalf of the applicant is that since

the three­Judge Bench had in Para 84 of the judgment in the

NOIDA Park case observed that the EIA Notification dated

14.09.2006 calls for a close second look by the authorities

concerned especially in respect of the projects/activities falling
4
within the ambit of Items 8(a) and 8(b) of the Schedule to the

Notification which need to be described with greater precision and

clarity and the definition of built up area with facilities open to the

sky needs to be freed from its present ambiguity and vagueness, the

two­Judge Bench which delivered the judgment was bound by this

judgment of three­Judge Bench and could not have held that the

Notification dated 14.09.2006 clearly shows that all constructed

area which is covered and not open to the sky, has to be treated as

built up area.
Though the observations in Para 84, at first blush, support the

contention of the applicant, one has to appreciate the factual

background in which these observations were made. In the NOIDA

Park case, this Court was asked to intervene and halt a project in

which a huge park was being constructed. As far as Item 8(a) of the

Schedule   to    the   EIA   Notification,   2006   is   concerned,   the

contentions in this regard start from Para 38. The MoEF took the

stand that no environmental clearance was required because the

project area was 33.43 hectares, which was less than 50 hectares
5
and the built up area was 9542 sq. mtrs., which was less than

20,000 sq. mtrs.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioners and the amicus

curiae that the project would fall under Section 8(a) because though

the covered construction of the project was only 6999.50 sq. mtrs.,

the project by its very nature provided facilities open to the sky and

the whole of this open area, which was activity area, should be

treated as the built up area.       The park consisted of certain

constructed structures like pathways, walkways, statues, fountains,

etc. which were open to the sky and treated as activity area. The

contention of the amicus curiae and the petitioners who were

objecting to the project was that the construction which was open

to the sky and was to be treated as activity area should also be

considered as part of the built up area.
The main dispute in the NOIDA Park case was whether the

project was a building and construction project or a township and

area development project. This Court held that this was a township

and area development project. While considering this dispute the
6
Court felt that there was some ambiguity. This issue did not arise

in the case in hand. The second point urged before the Court was

that the facilities open to the sky i.e. the activity area should also be

included in the built up area and it was this confusion which the

court wanted the Central Government to settle. No party had raised

any contention in the NOIDA Park case about the covered area

being built up area.     All the parties were ad idem that covered

construction was built up area and the Court also held so.
This Court in this judgment has only held that all covered

construction shall be deemed to be built up area and that the

municipal laws regarding Floor Space Index (FSI) or Floor Area

Ratio (FAR) have no relevance.       This issue did not arise in the

NOIDA      Park case.
Therefore, in our opinion, the earlier judgment will have no

impact on the present case.
Reference was also made to Notification dated 04.04.2011 and

the Clarification dated 07.07.2017. These have already been dealt

with in the judgment dated 10.08.2018 and those were not points of
7
issue in the NOIDA Park case. Therefore, we find no merit in the

application and the same is dismissed accordingly.
…………………………………J.
                                             (Deepak Gupta)




                                       ………………………………..J.
                                            (Aniruddha Bose)

New Delhi
September 11, 2019