[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ali Hussain (D) Thr. Lrs. vs Rabiya on 17 September, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIR 2019 SUPREME COURT 4313, AIRONLINE 2019 SC 1060, (2019) 12 SCALE 431, (2019) 2 CLR 951 (SC), (2019) 2 ORISSA LR 782, (2019) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 690, (2019) 4 CIVILCOURTC 568, (2019) 4 RECCIVR 467, (2019) 6 ANDHLD 92, 2019 (9) SCC 353, (2020) 1 CIVLJ 236
Author:
Ajay Rastogi
Bench:
Ajay Rastogi
,
Mohan M. Shantanagoudar
,
N.V. Ramana
NON­REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 7137 OF 2010


         ALI HUSSAIN(D) THROUGH LRS                                      ….APPELLANT(S)



                                               VERSUS


         RABIYA & ORS.                                              ….RESPONDENT(S)


                                               JUDGMENT
Rastogi, J.
1.              This appeal is directed against the judgment and decree

         dated             18th   August,   2008   passed    by    the    High   Court   of

         Uttarakhand in Second Appeal No. 1341 of 2001.
2.              The facts in brief are that the first respondent­plaintiff filed

         a suit against the defendant­appellant for cancellation of sale

         deed dated 10th May, 1995 registered in Sub­Registrar Office,

         Jagadari, Roorkee on 22nd May, 1995. According to the plaint,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
Date: 2019.09.17
16:33:11 IST
Reason:
the plaintiff­first respondent Smt. Rabiya inherited the property
1
shown in the schedule of property indicated at the foot of the

plaint, from her father late Sri Ahamad and is the owner and in

possession of the suit property in question.        It was further

averred that the impleaded defendants in the suit (defendant

nos.1 and 3, Ali Hussain and Abdul Hassan) are the sons of her

great grandfather and impleaded defendant no. 2 Smt. Raquiba,

is the wife of Ali Hussain (impleaded defendant no. 1).
3.   It was averred in the plaint that the impleaded defendant

no.1 (appellant) in order to grab the suit property of the

plaintiff­respondent, got prepared a forged registered power of

attorney, in the name of the plaintiff­first respondent on 25 th

April, 1995 and on the basis of the forged power of attorney, sold

the suit property by a registered sale deed for a consideration of

Rs. 1,50,000/­ on 10th May, 1995 in favour of defendant nos. 2

and 3 (Smt. Raquiba and Abdul Hassan).            According to the

plaintiff­first respondent, the sale price of the suit property could

not be less than Rs. 3,00,000/­. It is also alleged in the plaint

that there is no recital as to who had actually received the sale

consideration and she is in actual possession of the suit property

and the forged sale deed was never acted upon. It was prayed for
2
the decree for cancellation of power of attorney and the sale deed

obtained by playing fraud.
4.   Before the trial Court, on the basis of pleadings of the

parties, following issues were framed:­
1. Whether the sale deed dated 10.05.1995 executed by
           defendant no. 1 in favour of defendant nos. 2 and 3
           is liable to be cancelled on the grounds set in the
           plaint?
2. Whether the alleged power of attorney dated
           25.04.1995 executed by plaintiff in favour of
           defendant no. 1 is forged document and the plaintiff
           did not execute the same? If so, its effect?
3. Whether the plaintiff received the sale consideration
           in respect of sale deed from defendant no. 1 in
           favour of defendant nos. 2 & 3.
4. Whether the plaintiff is owner and in possession of
           the property in dispute?
5. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for any relief?
6. Whether after selling the property in dispute to
           Mohammad Mateen by the plaintiff, the suit
           rendered infructuous?
7. Whether the suit is barred by principle of estoppel
           and acquiescence?
8. Whether the suit rendered infructuous in view of the
           contention raised in para no. 13­A of the written
           statement?
5.   Both the parties adduced their oral as well as documentary

evidence in support of their defence.              The trial Judge, after

hearing the parties and considering the evidence on record,

dismissed the suit filed by the plaintiff­first respondent vide
3
judgment and decree dated 19th January, 2001 which was further

assailed at the instance of the plaintiff­first respondent in first

appeal which was dismissed vide judgment and decree dated 27 th

August, 2001, further assailed in second appeal before the High

Court of Uttarakhand.
6.   It may be relevant to note that at the time of admission of

second appeal, the High Court admitted the appeal on the

following substantial questions of law:­
1. As to whether both the courts below were justified
           placing burden of proof on the plaintiff/appellant to
           prove negative fact that power of attorney is not
           executed by her?
2. Whether burden/onus of proof lies on the transferee
           when transferor totally denies execution of the deed
           by himself? If so, its effect?
7.   The High Court after hearing the parties proceeded on the

premise that the plaintiff­first respondent was the pardanasheen

illiterate lady and taking note of the judgment of this Court in

Mst.
Kharbuja Kuer Vs. Jangbahadur Rai and Others
AIR

1963 SC 1203, relying on the judgment of the Privy Council

(
Farid­Un­Nisa(Plaintiff)      Vs.      Mukhtar         Ahmad      and

Another
(Defendants) AIR 1925 PC 204) held that burden of proof
4
in such a case rest, not with those who attack, but with those

who found upon the deed, and the proof must go so far as to

show affirmatively and conclusively that the deed was not only

executed by, but was explained to, and was really understood by

the grantor.
8.    The High Court held that the burden to prove that the

alleged power of attorney is not a result of fraud and

misrepresentation lie on the shoulder of the appellant­defendant

because they are the beneficiaries and the trial Court and the

first Appellate Court has committed a manifest error in shifting

the burden on the shoulders of the plaintiff­first respondent and

accordingly set aside the judgment and decree of the Courts

below and remitted the matter back to the trial Judge to decide

the suit afresh in view of the evidence available on record taking

note of the observations made by the High Court in the impugned

judgment dated 18th August, 2008 which is a subject matter of

challenge at the instance of the appellant­defendant no. 1 before

us.
5
9.    This Court, while issuing notice on 14 th November, 2008

stayed the operation of the impugned judgment dated 18 th

August, 2008.
10.   Learned counsel for the appellants submits that the very

foundation on which the High Court has proceeded that the

plaintiff­first respondent was a pardanasheen illiterate lady and

shifting the burden of proof on the shoulder of the appellant­first

defendant to establish that the document was explained to the

plaintiff­first respondent and she understood it and thereafter

transaction was entered into, is against the pleadings on record.

From the perusal of the copy of the plaint annexure P/1 on

record filed by the plaintiff­first respondent, it is nowhere pleaded

that she was a pardanasheen illiterate lady and in absence

whereof, the very proposition which has been examined by the

High Court under the impugned judgment is unsustainable and

so far as the issues which are framed by the trial Judge on the

basis of the pleadings on record, all have been negated against

the plaintiff­first respondent and in the given circumstances, the

finding recorded by the High Court in remitting the matter to the
6
trial Judge to revisit the same on the basis of principles laid

down deserves to be interfered by this Court.
11.   Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents, while

supporting the finding recorded by the High Court under the

impugned judgment, submits that it is indisputed fact that the

plaintiff­first respondent is a pardanasheen illiterate lady and

still the case was proceeded with the burden of proof on her

shoulders to establish that the power of attorney executed by the

plaintiff in favour of defendant­appellant was a forged document

was a patent error of law.     In the given circumstances, the

burden of proof was upon the defendant no.1­appellant to

establish that the registered power of attorney executed on 25 th

April, 1995 was a genuine document and only thereupon the

onus could have been shifted to the plaintiff­first respondent and

this is an apparent manifest error which was committed by the

trial Judge but noticed by the High Court in the impugned

judgment and it needs no further interference by this Court.
12.   We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with

their assistance perused the material available on record.
7
13.   The plaintiff­first respondent filed a Suit No. 155 of 1996

before the Civil Judge (J.D.), Roorkee. A copy of the plaint has

been placed on record (Annexure P/1). On perusal of the plaint,

it reveals that it has nowhere been pleaded that the plaintiff­first

respondent is a pardanasheen illiterate lady.      In the ordinary

course the burden of proof rest, on who attack. On the contrary,

it was pleaded in the plaint that defendant nos.1 and 3 are the

sons of her uncle Mangta and defendant no. 2 is the wife of

defendant no. 1 and they hatched a conspiracy to grab the land

of the plaintiff­first respondent and with connivance, the power of

attorney was prepared & registered on 25 th April, 1995 in the

registry office, in the name of the plaintiff and pursuant thereto,

suit land was sold by a registered sale deed.      On the basis of

pleadings on record, the above­mentioned eight issues were

framed on which both the parties have adduced oral and

documentary evidence and the trial Judge, after considering the

evidence, dismissed the suit vide judgment and decree dated 19 th

January, 2001 and that came to be affirmed on dismissal of the

appeal filed at the instance of the plaintiff­first respondent dated

27th August, 2001. It reveals from the record that without there

being any factual foundation, the High Court, while admitting the
8
appeal, framed two substantial questions of law in reference to

which there was no supporting pleadings on record.
14.   We still, for our satisfaction have gone through the plaint

placed on record at Annexure P/1 and we are unable to find the

pleadings in support that she was a pardanasheen illiterate lady

and was entitled for protection of law and the burden was on the

defendant­appellant to prove that the alleged power of attorney

was the result of fraud.
15.   After we have heard the parties, we are of the view that the

High Court has committed a manifest apparent error in reversing

the concurrent finding of the two Courts below and on this score

the impugned judgment is not sustainable.
16.   Consequently, the appeal succeeds and accordingly allowed.

The judgment of the High Court in second appeal dated 18 th

August, 2008 is hereby set aside. No costs.
9
17.   Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
..………………………………………J.
                                 (N.V. RAMANA)


                                 ..………………………………………J.
                                 (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR)


                                 .……………………………………….J.
                                 (AJAY RASTOGI)
NEW DELHI
SEPTEMBER 17, 2019
10