[Cites
12
, Cited by
248
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India & Anr vs Arulmozhi Iniarasu & Ors on 6 July, 2011
Equivalent citations: AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 2731, 2011 (7) SCC 397, 2011 AIR SCW 4252, 2011 LAB IC 3314, (2011) 2 CURLR 861, (2011) 4 SERVLR 697, (2011) 3 SCT 815, (2012) 6 ALL WC 6090, (2011) 130 FACLR 1076, (2011) 4 PAT LJR 83, (2011) 4 LAB LN 494, (2011) 5 ALLMR 469 (SC), (2011) 3 SERVLJ 92, (2011) 3 JCR 254 (SC), (2011) 8 ADJ 59 (SC), (2011) 7 SCALE 340, (2011) 3 ESC 538, (2011) 3 KER LT 84
Author:
D.K. Jain
Bench:
H.L. Dattu
,
D.K. Jain
REPORTABLE

                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                  CIVIL APPEAL  NOS.4990-4991 0F 2011

           (Arising Out of S.L.P. (C) Nos. 25200-25201 of  2010)




 UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                --               APPELLANTS


                                        VERSUS


 ARULMOZHI INIARASU &                                 --              RESPONDENTS

 ORS.




                                  J U D G M E N T
D.K. JAIN, J.:
1.Leave granted.
2.These two appeals, by special leave, are directed against the judgment 


and   final   order   dated   5th  January,   2010   delivered   by   the   High   Court   of 


Judicature at Madras, whereby the High Court, in slight modification of 


the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Madras Bench 


(for short "the Tribunal"), has directed that the respondents shall be given 


a relaxation of five years and three years respectively to SC/ST and OBC 


candidates in age limit for being considered for   selection to the post of 


Sepoy   in   the   Central   Excise   department,   Ministry   of   Finance, 


Government of India.  However, the High Court has directed that the said 


relaxation   would   be   applicable   to   those   candidates   who   were   actually 


erstwhile employees of the said department.
3.Shorn of unnecessary details, the facts essential for adjudication of the 


present appeals may be stated as follows:
The   respondents   were   engaged   as   part-time   contingent   casual 


labourers-purely on temporary basis in the Office of the Commissioner 


of   Central   Excise,   Chennai   Zone,   in   the   year   1999.   As   per   offer   of 


appointment  on   record,   they   were   required   to   work   on   the   basis   of   the 


need of the office, for which they were to be paid @   `10/- per working 


hour with no guarantee  as regards minimum number of hours in a month. 


In para 7 of the said letter, it was stated that the appointment letter would 


not   confer   any   right   to   claim   any   permanent   post   in   the   department   as 


also any automatic right to be considered for selection to any permanent 


post in the department.  Most of them were in continuous employment for 


a period ranging from 8 to 14 years.   It is common ground that none of 


the respondents fall within the purview of 1993 scheme, notified on 10th 


September,   1993,   for   conferring   temporary   status   and   regularisation   of 


casual workers, who were in employment on 1st  September, 1993, all of 


them having been engaged after the said date.
4.On   2nd  May,   2005,   in   compliance   with   the   directions   issued   by   the 


Ministry of Finance, the appellants dispensed with the services of all such
2
casual labourers and handed over the work done by them to contractors.
Aggrieved   by   the   said   action   the   respondents   herein,   approached   the 


Tribunal   by   preferring   an   original   application,   (O.A.No.764   of   2005) 


seeking regularisation of their services. The said O.A. was dismissed by 


the Tribunal. Against the order of dismissal, the respondents filed a writ 


petition before the High Court.   While disposing of the writ petition, the 


High Court directed the appellants herein to consider the matter afresh in 


light   of   the   circulars   issued   by   the   Department   of   Personnel   in 


O.M.No.49019/1/2006-Estt(C)   dated   11th  December,   2006   as   also   the 


circulars issued by the Ministry of Finance dated 7th September, 2007 and 


13th  September, 2007.   These circulars were issued pursuant to the order 


passed by this Court in the case of Secretary, State of Karnataka & Ors.
Vs.  Umadevi   (3)   &   Ors.1,  inter-alia  directing   the   Union   of   India,   State 


Governments and their instrumentalities to take steps to regularise, as a 


one time measure, the services of such irregularly appointed employees, 


who are duly qualified in terms of the statutory recruitment rules for the 


post and who have worked for ten years or more in duly sanctioned post 


but not under cover of orders of Courts or Tribunals.
5.Upon   a   fresh   consideration   in   terms   of   the   said   direction,   the   Chief 


Commissioner   of   Central   Excise   found   that   the   respondents   were   not 


eligible   for   regularization   of   their   services   as   they   did   not   satisfy   the 


1 (2006) 4 SCC 1
3
criteria   laid   down   in   the   case   of  Umadevi(3)  (supra)   and   Office 


Memorandum   dated   11th  December,   2006,   issued   by   Department   of 


Personnel   &   Training,     Ministry   of   Personnel,   Public   Grievances   and 


Pensions.
6.On 14th January, 2008, the office of the Chief Commissioner of Central 


Excise,   Chennai   Zone,   issued   a   notice   inviting   applications   for 


recruitment   to   40   (37   GC   &   3   OBC)   posts   of   Sepoy   (General   Central 


Service   Group   D   Post).   As   per   the   recruitment   rules,   the   age   limit 


prescribed for the post as on 1st  January, 2008, was 27 years for general 


candidate, 32 years for SC/ST candidates and 30 years for OBC because 


of   relaxation   of  age   limit   by   five   years   and   three   years   in   the   cases   of 


SC/ST   candidates   and   OBC   candidates   respectively.   In   the  recruitment 


process,   thus   initiated,   initially   the   respondents   were   permitted   to 


participate   but   later   on,   realising   that   the  respondents   (all   SC/ST   and 


OBC candidates) had crossed the prescribed age, they were not called to 


participate   in   the   further   selection   process.     Their   applications   were 


rejected as age barred.
7.  Being   aggrieved   by   the   decision   of   the   department   in   not   granting 


relaxation in age, the respondents filed fresh Original Applications before 


the Tribunal. The Tribunal was of the view that the ratio of the decision 


of this Court in
Nagendra Chandra & Ors.  Vs.  State of Jharkhand &
4
Ors.2
was  applicable   to   the   case   of   the   respondents   and   therefore,   they 


were entitled to the same relief as was granted
in that case
. Accordingly, 


the   Tribunal   directed   the   appellants   herein   to   consider   the   case   of   the 


respondents   for   appointment   by   relaxing   the   age   limit   prescribed,   if 


necessary, in view of the long service rendered by them.
8.Aggrieved  by the  said direction,  the  appellants  herein unsuccessfully 


questioned the validity of the order of the Tribunal before the High Court.
The High Court disposed of both the writ petitions  with modification of 


the order of Tribunal to the effect that relaxation in the age limit  could be 


up   to   3   years   for   OBC   candidates   and   5   years   for   SC/ST   candidates, 


subject   to   the   condition   that   it   would   be   applicable   to   those   candidates 


who   were   actually   erstwhile   employees   of   the   department.   Hence,   the 


present appeals.
9.Mr.   B.   Bhattacharya,   learned   Additional   Solicitor   General   of   India, 


appearing   for   the   appellants   strenuously   urged   that   the   High   Court   has 


committed a manifest error in directing relaxation of age bar in the case 


of   the   respondents   by   treating   the   decision   in   the   case   of
Nagendra  


Chandra   &   Ors.
(supra)   as   a   binding   precedent   on   the   point,   without 


appreciating that: (i) the observation with regard to relaxation in age bar 


in  the  penultimate paragraph  of
Nagendra  Chandra
's  case   (supra)  was 




2 (2008) 1 SCC 798
5
made   by   this   Court   in   exercise   of   power   under
Article   142
of   the 


Constitution of India, which is not possessed by either the High Court or 


the   Tribunal   and   (ii)   the   fact-situation   in   the   instant   case   was   entirely 


different from the one obtaining
in that case
.
It was asserted that unlike
Nagendra   Chandra
's  case   (supra),   where   there   was   irregularity   in   the 


appointment of Constables against the sanctioned posts, the present case 


pertained   to   engagement   of   need   based   casual   labourers   without   any 


recruitment rules or sanctioned posts.    It was thus, argued that the High 


Court failed to   notice distinction between the casual labourer and those 


whose appointment was irregular because of non-compliance with some 


procedure in the selection process, which is not the case here when none 


of the respondents had earlier participated   in recruitment for the post of 


Sepoys.
10.Per   contra,   Mr.   P.B.   Krishnan,   learned   counsel   appearing   for   the 


respondents,   in   his   written   submissions,   has   submitted   that   though   the 


respondents   were   informed   at   the   time   of   the   appointment   about   the 


nature of their work, many a times they continued to work day and night 


and also on national holidays without any monetary benefits only with the 


hope and expectation that they would be absorbed on regular basis or at 


least   conferred   temporary   status.   It   has   been   further   pleaded   that   the 


action of the appellants in rejecting the request for age relaxation without
6
taking into account considerable years of their casual service, was highly 


unjust   and  arbitrary.   The  learned  counsel  pleaded   that   by   reason   of  the 


impugned   directions   the   respondents   have   only   been   given   a   right   to 


compete and not an appointment as such and therefore, this Court should 


be   loathe   to   interfere   with   a   just   and   equitable   order   by   the   authorities 


below, particularly when similarly placed labourers had been granted age 


relaxation.
11.Thus,   in   these   appeals   the   first   and   the   foremost   question   to   be 


examined is whether in the matter of relaxation of age limit, prescribed as 


eligibility criteria for appointment on a particular  post, any principle of 


law   has   been
laid   down   in
the   decision   of   this   Court   in
Nagendra  


Chandra
's case (supra)?  If so, whether it could be applied to the facts of 


the present case for directing the afore-stated relaxation in age limit?
12.Before examining the first limb of the question, formulated above, it 


would be instructive to note, as a preface, the well settled principle of law 


in   the   matter   of   applying   precedents   that   the   Court   should   not   place 


reliance   on decisions  without  discussing  as   to  how  the  fact  situation  of 


the case before it fits in with the fact situation of the decision on which 


reliance   is   placed.     Observations   of   Courts   are   neither   to   be   read   as 


Euclid's theorems nor as provisions of Statute and that too taken out of 


their context.   These observations must be read in the context in which
7
they   appear   to   have   been   stated.     Disposal   of   cases   by   blindly   placing 


reliance   on  a   decision   is   not   proper   because   one   additional   or  different 


fact may make a world of difference between conclusions in two cases.
(Ref.:
Bharat   Petroleum   Corpn.   Ltd.   &   Anr.  Vs.  N.R.   Vairamani   &  


Anr.3
;
Sarva   Shramik   Sanghatana   (KV),   Mumbai  Vs.  State   of  


Maharashtra   &   Ors.4
and
Bhuwalka   Steel   Industries   Limited  Vs. 


Bombay Iron & Steel Labour Board & Anr.5
.)
13.Bearing in mind the aforenoted principle of law, we may now refer to 


the   decision   in
Nagendra   Chandra
(supra).     It   is   plain   from   a   bare 


reading of
the said decision
that the question which fell for consideration 


before a bench of three learned Judges of this Court was as to whether the 


appointments of the appellants
in that case
were illegal or irregular.  This 


Court   opined   that   since   the   appointments   made   were   not   only   in 


infraction of the recruitment rules but also violative of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution of India, these were illegal.  It was thus, held that the 


appellants   would   not   be   entitled   to   get   the   benefit   of   the   directions 


contained in Umadevi(3) case (supra), which are applicable only to those 


qualified employees who were appointed irregularly in a sanctioned post.
Having   come   to   the   conclusion   that   the   subject   appointments   being 


illegal, the competent authority was justified in terminating the services 



3 (2004) 8 SCC 579

4 (2008) 1 SCC 494

5 (2010) 2 SCC 273
8
of   the   employees   concerned   and   the   High   Court   was   also   justified   in 


upholding   the   same,   in   our   view,   the   relied   upon   observation   in   the 


penultimate   paragraph   of   the   judgment   in
Nagendra   Chandra
(supra) 


does   not   appear   to   be   consistent   with   the   ratio   of   the   decision   of   the 


Constitution  Bench  in  Umadevi(3)  case  (supra).    In
the said decision
it 


has   clearly   been   held   that   the   courts   are   not   expected   to   issue   any 


direction   for   absorption/regularisation   or   permanent   continuance   of 


temporary, contractual, casual, daily wagers or ad-hoc employees merely 


because such an employee is continued for a long time beyond the term 


of his appointment.   It has also been held that such an employee would 


not   be   entitled   to   be   absorbed   in   regular   service   or   made   permanent, 


merely  on the strength of such continuance, if the original appointment 


was not made by following a due process of selection as envisaged by the 


relevant rules.   Therefore, in our opinion, the said observation cannot be 


said  to  be an  exposition  of general   principle   of  law  on the  point  that a 


long length of service, dehors the relevant recruitment rules for the post, 


is   a   relevant   factor   for   waiver   or   relaxation   of   any   eligibility   criterion, 


including age limit, for future regular selections for the post.  Obviously, 


the observation, general in nature, was made by this Court in exercise of 


its   jurisdiction   under
Article   142
of   the   Constitution   of   India   and, 


therefore, cannot be treated as a binding precedent.  It has to be confined 


to the peculiar facts of that case.
9
14.We may  now advert  to  the  second  limb  of the  question  in  para  11 


(supra).  The issue need not detain us for long as in our view the factual 


position   as   obtaining   in   the   present   case   does   not   fit   in   with   the   fact 


situation in the case of
Nagendra Chandra
(supra).   In the instant case, 


indubitably, the respondents were engaged as part time contingent casual 


labourers in the office of the Commissioner of Central Excise for doing 


all types of work as may be assigned to them by the office.   Their part 


time   engagement   was   need   based   for   which   they   were   to   be   paid   on 


hourly basis.  Though their stand is that many a times they were required 


to work day and night but it is nowhere stated that they were recruited or 


ever discharged the duties of a `sepoy' for which recruitment process was 


initiated vide public notice dated 14th  January 2008 and the Tribunal as 


also the High Court has directed the appellants to grant relaxation in age 


limit   over   and   above   what   is   stipulated   in   the   recruitment 


rules/advertisement.     In   view   of   the   stated   factual   scenario,   in   our 


opinion, the engagement of the respondents as casual labourers even for 


considerable   long   duration   did   not   confer   any   legal   right   on   them   for 


seeking a mandamus for relaxation of age limit.
We have no hesitation in 


holding   that
Nagendra   Chandra
's  case  (supra)   has   no   application   on 


facts in hand and the impugned direction by the Tribunal, as affirmed by 


the High Court based on
the said decision
, was clearly unwarranted.
1
15.We may now consider the plea relating to the legitimate expectation of 


the respondents of being permanently absorbed/regularised in the Excise 


Department   on   account   of   their   alleged   uninterrupted   engagement   for 


long durations ranging between 8-14 years.
16.The   doctrine   of   legitimate   expectation   and   its   impact   in   the 


administrative   law   has   been   considered   by   this   Court   in   a   catena   of 


decisions.  However, for the sake of brevity, we do not propose to refer to 


all these cases.  Nevertheless, in order to appreciate the concept, we shall 


refer to a few decisions.
17.In Council of Civil Service Unions Vs. Minister for Civil Service6, a 


locus classicus on the subject, for the first time an attempt was made by 


the House of Lords to give a comprehensive definition to the principle of 


legitimate   expectation.   Enunciating   the   basic   principles   relating   to 


legitimate   expectation,   Lord   Diplock   observed   that   for   a   legitimate 


expectation   to   arise,   the   decision   of   the   administrative   authority   must 


affect   such   person   either   (a)   by   altering   rights   or   obligations   of   that 


person which are enforceable by or against him in private law; or (b) by 


depriving him of some benefit or advantage which either: (i) he has in the 


past   been   permitted   by   the   decision-maker   to   enjoy   and   which   he   can 


legitimately expect to be permitted to continue to do until some rational 




6 1985 AC 374 : (1984) 3 All ER 935 (HL)
1
ground   for   withdrawing   it   has   been   communicated   to   him   and   he   has 


been   given   an   opportunity   to   comment   thereon,   or   (ii)   he   has   received 


assurance   from   the   decision-maker   that   they   will   not   be   withdrawn 


without   first   giving   him   an   opportunity   of   advancing   reasons   for 


contending that they should be withdrawn.
18.Recently,   in
Sethi   Auto   Service   Station   &   Anr.  Vs.  Delhi  


Development Authority & Ors.7
, one of us (D.K. Jain, J.), referring to a 


large   number   of   authorities   on   the   point,   summarised   the   nature   and 


scope of the doctrine of legitimate expectation as follows:
"32. An examination of the aforenoted few decisions shows that 

       the golden thread running through all these decisions is that a 

       case for applicability of the doctrine of legitimate expectation, 

       now   accepted   in   the   subjective   sense   as   part   of   our   legal 

       jurisprudence, arises when an administrative body by reason of 

       a   representation   or   by   past   practice   or   conduct   aroused   an 

       expectation which it would be within its powers to fulfil unless 

       some overriding public interest comes in the way. However, a 

       person   who   bases   his   claim   on   the   doctrine   of   legitimate 

       expectation, in the first instance, has to satisfy that he has relied 

       on the said representation and the denial of that expectation has 

       worked to his detriment. The Court could interfere only if the 

       decision   taken   by   the   authority   was   found   to   be   arbitrary, 

       unreasonable   or   in   gross   abuse   of   power   or   in   violation   of 

       principles of natural justice and not taken in public interest. But 

       a claim based on mere legitimate expectation without anything 

       more cannot ipso facto give a right to invoke these principles."
19.Bearing in mind the afore-stated legal position, we may now advert to 


the facts at hand.  For the sake of ready reference, the relevant portions of 


7 (2009) 1 SCC 180
1
offer of appointment issued by Commissioner of Central Excise, Chennai, 


to the respondents on  6th August 1999 are extracted below:
"The under mentioned candidates who have been applied in 

       response   to   the   advertisement   given   by   this   department   in 

       the   "Daily   Thanthi"   &   who   are   appeared   in   Interview 

       conducted   by   this   office   on   10.04.99   are   offered 

       appointment   provisionally   in   "part   time   contigent   casual 

       labourers"   Purely   on   temporary   basis   on   the   basis   of 

       payment   for   the   number   of   hours   actually   worked   in   a 

       month. They will be paid Rs. 10.00 for every working hour.


       XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

       XXX
3.   The   candidates   should   note   that   they   will   be   asked   to 

       work on the basis of the need of the office and there is no 

       guarantee as regards minimum number in a month.


       XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX

       XXX
6.   The   offer   of   appointment   is   purely   on   temporary   basis 

       only. In case the work and conduct of the candidates is not 

       found   to   be   satisfactory.   Their   services   will   be   terminated 

       without                       any                     intimation/notice.
7.This appointment letter does not confer any right to claim 

       any permanent post in this department and does not also vest 

       any   automatic   right   to   be   considered   for   selection   to   any 

       permanent post in the Department.
XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX


       XXX
20.It   is   plain   from   the   terms   of   the   letter   of   appointment   that   the 


respondents were told in unambiguous terms that their appointments were 


temporary and would not confer any right to claim any permanent post in 


the department.   It is not the case of the respondents that at any point of
1
time, during their engagements  with the appellants,  a promise  was held 


out   to   them   by  the   appellants   that   they   would   be   absorbed   as   regular 


employees of the department.  In fact, no such promise could be held out 


in   view   of   the  Government   O.M.   dated   7th  June,   1988   banning   the 


employment of persons in regular posts.
21.At this juncture, it would be apposite to note that a  similar plea was 


negatived by the Constitution Bench in Umadevi(3) (supra) by observing 


thus:
"47. When a person enters a temporary employment or gets 

         engagement   as   a   contractual   or   casual   worker   and   the 

         engagement is not based on a proper selection as recognised 

         by   the   relevant   rules   or   procedure,   he   is   aware   of   the 

         consequences of the appointment being temporary, casual or 

         contractual   in   nature.   Such   a   person   cannot   invoke   the 

         theory of legitimate expectation for being confirmed in the 

         post when an appointment to the post could be made only by 

         following   a   proper   procedure   for   selection   and   in   cases 

         concerned,   in   consultation   with   the   Public   Service 

         Commission. Therefore, the theory of legitimate expectation 

         cannot   be   successfully   advanced   by   temporary,  contractual 

         or casual employees. It cannot also be held that the State has 

         held out any promise while engaging these persons either to 

         continue them where they are or to make  them permanent. 

         The State cannot constitutionally make such a promise. It is 

         also   obvious   that   the   theory   cannot   be   invoked   to   seek   a 

         positive relief of being made permanent in the post."
22.Having bestowed our anxious consideration to the facts of the case, in 


our opinion, the doctrine of legitimate expectation, as explained above, is 


not attracted in the instant case.  The argument is rejected accordingly.
1
23.Lastly, as regards the submission that the action of the appellants is 


highly discriminatory in as much as some similarly situated persons have 


been appointed/absorbed as Sepoys, the argument is stated to be rejected.
It is well settled that a writ of mandamus can be issued by the High Court 


only   when   there   exists   a   legal   right   in   the   writ   petitioner   and 


corresponding   legal   obligation   in   the   State.     Only   because   an   illegality 


has been committed, the same cannot be directed to be perpetuated.  It is 


trite   law   that   there   cannot   be   equality   in   illegality.     (Ref.:
Sushanta  


Tagore   &   Ors.  Vs.  Union   of   India   &   Ors.8
;  U.P.   State   Sugar   Corpn.
Ltd.   &   Anr.  Vs.  Sant   Raj   Singh   &   Ors.9
;
State,   CBI  Vs.  Sashi  


Balasubramanian   &   Anr.10
and
State   of   Orissa   &   Ors.  Vs.  Prasana  


Kumar Sahoo11
.)
24.In view of the foregoing discussion, the impugned judgment cannot be 


sustained.   It   is   set   aside   and   the   appeals   are   allowed   accordingly.
However,   in   the   facts   and   circumstances   of   the   case,   there   shall   be   no 


order as to costs.
...........................................
(D.K. JAIN, J.) 





8 (2005) 3 SCC 16

9 (2006) 9 SCC 82

10 (2006) 13 SCC 252

11 (2007) 15 SCC 129
1
............................................
(H.L. DATTU, J.)

NEW DELHI;
JULY 6, 2011.
ARS
1