[Cites
11
, Cited by
59
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Gammon India Ltd vs Commnr. Of Customs, Mumbai on 6 July, 2011
Equivalent citations: 2011 AIR SCW 4175, 2011 (12) SCC 499, AIR 2011 SC (SUPP) 84, (2012) 1 ALLMR 894 (SC), (2011) 6 ANDHLD 29, (2011) 3 CURCC 191, (2011) 7 SCALE 297
Author:
D.K. Jain
Bench:
H.L. Dattu
,
D.K. Jain
REPORTABLE

                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5166 OF 2003


      M/S GAMMON INDIA LTD.                               --         APPELLANT




                                      VERSUS




      COMMISSIONER OF CUSTOMS,                            --       RESPONDENT

      MUMBAI





                                  J U D G M E N T
D.K. JAIN, J.:
1.    This Civil Appeal, under
Section 130-E(b)
of the Customs Act, 1962 


      (for short "the Act"), is directed   against order dated 4th  April, 2003 


      passed by the Customs, Excise and Gold (Control) Appellate Tribunal, 


      as it then existed,  (for short "the Tribunal"), in Appeal No. C/298/02-
Mum.    By   the impugned  order,   the  Tribunal  has  allowed  the appeal 


      preferred by the Commissioner of Customs, Mumbai, holding that the 


      appellant is not entitled to claim the benefit of Exemption Notification 


      No.   17/2001/Cus   (General   Exemption   No.   121),   issued   by   the   Min-
istry of Finance, Government of India on 1st March, 2001.
2. Briefly stated, the facts, material for adjudication of the issue arising 


      in this appeal, are as follows:
The   appellant  namely, M/s  Gammon  India  Ltd.  (for  short  "Gam-


mon") and one M/s Atlanta Infrastructure Ltd., Mumbai, (for short "At-


lanta")  both  incorporated   as  Public  Limited  Companies,   entered     into  a 


joint venture agreement on 18th  September, 2000. The joint venture was 


named and styled as "Gammon Atlanta JV".  The agreement was entered 


into for the purpose of submitting a bid to the National Highways Author-


ity of India (for short "NHAI") for award of a contract for construction of 


31.40   Kilometers   of   road   on   National   Highway-5.     The   terms   of   the 


agreement, inter-alia, provided that: each of the said parties would share 


financial responsibilities in the form of guarantees, securities etc. to the 


extent of 50% of the project value; the venture would be managed by set-
ting up of a management board consisting of a Chairman and one Direc-
tor to be nominated by Gammon and a Joint Chairman and another Direc-
tor to be nominated  by  Atlanta. Although Gammon was to be designated 


as   the   lead   partner   to   the   venture   but   both   the     companies   were   to   be 


jointly and severally  liable to NHAI for due execution of the contract.
3.    The bid tendered by the said joint venture was accepted by NHAI and 


      an   agreement   dated   20th  December,   2000   was   executed   between 


      NHAI, referred to as the "Employer" on the one part and M/s Gam-
2
mon-Atlanta JV, referred to as the "contractor", on the other part.  On 


      behalf of Gammon-Atlanta JV, the agreement was signed by the repre-
sentatives of both the companies, i.e. Gammon and Atlanta.
4.    On 1st March, 2001, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section 


      (1)   of
Section   25
of   the   Act,   the   Central   Government,       issued   the 


      afore-noted   Exemption   Notification,  inter   alia,  exempting   the   goods 


      of the description specified in Column  (3) of the Table given thereun-


      der, read with the relevant List appended thereto and falling within the 


      Chapter, Heading no. or sub-heading no. of the
First Schedule to the 


      Customs Tariff Act, 1975
, as specified in the corresponding entry in 


      Column (2) of the said Table. Serial No. 217 of the said Table granted 


      full exemption from basic Customs duty and additional Customs duty, 


      on the goods falling under Chapter 84 specified in List 11, required for 


      construction   of   roads.   However,   the   said   exemption   was   subject   to 


      certain conditions, enumerated in the said notification.  Condition No. 


      38, relevant for this case, reads as follows:
"38.  If,-
(a)     the goods are imported by-
(i)         the ministry of Surface Transport, or
(ii)        a   person   who   has   been   awarded   a   contract 

                              for the construction of roads in India  by or 

                              on behalf of the Ministry of Surface Trans-
port, by the National Highway Authority of 

                              India, by the Public Works Department of a 

                              State Government or by a road construction
3
corporation under the control of the Govern-

                            ment of a State or Union Territory; or
(iii)      a person who has been named as a sub-con-
tractor   in   the   contract   referred   to   in   (ii) 

                            above for the construction of roads in India 

                            by   or   on   behalf   of   the   Ministry   of   Surface 

                            Transport, by the National Highway Author-
ity of India, by Public Works Department of 

                            a   State   Government  or   by   a   road   construc-
tion   corporation   under   the   control   of   the 

                            Government of a State or Union Territory;
(b)      the importer, at the time of importation, furnishes an 

                  undertaking to the Deputy Commissioner of Customs 

                  or   the   Assistant   Commissioner   of   Customs,   as   the 

                  case   may be,  to the  effect  that  he shall  use  the  im-

                  ported   goods   exclusively   for   the   construction   of 

                  roads and that  he shall not sell or otherwise dispose 

                  of the said goods, in any manner, for a period of five 

                  years from the date of their importation; and
(c)      in case of goods of serial nos. 12 and 13 of List 11, 

                  the   importer,   at   the   time   of   importation   of   such 

                  goods, also produces to the Deputy Commissioner of 

                  Customs or the Assistant Commissioner of Customs, 

                  as the case may be, a certificate from an officer not 

                  below the rank of a Deputy Secretary to the Govern-
ment   of   India   in   the   Ministry   of   Surface   Transport 

                  (Roads Wing), to the effect that the imported goods 

                  are required for construction of roads in India."
5.    It appears that the appellant approached NHAI for issue of the certifi-
cate, as contemplated in para (c) of Condition no.38, for import of one 


      `Concrete   batching   plant   56   cum/hr'   covered   under   Item   No.   13   of 


      List 11, referred to at Serial No. 217 in the said Exemption Notifica-
tion. Vide letter dated 3rd August, 2001 NHAI forwarded a Certificate, 


      issued   by   the   Deputy   Secretary,   Government   of   India,   Ministry   of
4
Road Transport and Highways, addressed to   the Assistant Commis-
sioner of Customs, Mumbai, certifying that the said equipment was re-
quired for construction of roads and recommending its duty free im-
port.
6.    Equipped with the said certificate, Gammon, the appellant  herein, im-
ported the specified Concrete Batching Plant from Germany and filed 


      Bill of Entry (for home consumption) for its clearance at `nil' rate of 


      duty under Notification No.17/2001-cus, dated 1st  March, 2001.   The 


      Deputy   Commissioner   of   Customs,   by   his   order   dated   5th  October, 


      2001 rejected the claim of the appellant for exemption from payment 


      of Customs duty on the ground that the appellant had failed to comply 


      with the conditions stipulated at Serial No. 38 appended to the exemp-
tion notification.  According to the Adjudicating Authority, as per the 


      said condition, the exemption is available only if the goods are import-
ed   by   "a   person   who   has   been   awarded   the   contract"   by   NHAI   for 


      construction of roads in India by or on behalf of Ministry of Surface 


      Transport,   but   in   the   present   case   the   goods   have   been   imported   by 


      Gammon   to   whom  no   contract   had   been   awarded   by   the   authorities 


      specified in the notification. Admittedly, the contract had been award-
ed in the name of joint venture - M/s Gammon-Atlanta JV.  Thus, the 


      adjudicating  authority  came  to the conclusion  that the appellant  was
5
not entitled to the benefit of exemption notification in their capacity as 


      a partner in the joint venture, to whom the contract had been awarded.
7.    Aggrieved thereby the appellant preferred an appeal to the Commis-
sioner   of   Customs   (Appeals).     The   Commissioner   (Appeals)   was   of 


      the view that Gammon having been nominated as the lead partner in 


      the   joint   venture   for   due   performance   of   the   contract   awarded   by 


      NHAI, with authority to incur liabilities and to receive instructions for 


      and on behalf of the joint venture, and the machine having been im-
ported on behalf of the joint venture for the purpose of road construc-
tion, the benefit of the said exemption notification could not be denied 


      to   the   appellant.  Inter-alia,  observing   that   the   appellant   was   not   an 


      outsider and perhaps due to some technical reasons the machine had 


      been   imported   in   the   name  of  the   appellant,   the   Commissioner   held 


      that outright denial of the benefit of the said notification was not war-
ranted.   Accordingly, he allowed the appeal.
8.    Being  dissatisfied   with the  decision  of the  Commissioner  (Appeals), 


      the revenue carried  the matter  in further appeal to the Tribunal.    As 


      aforestated, by the impugned order the Tribunal has allowed the said 


      appeal.  Distinguishing the case of
New Horizons Limited & Anr. Vs.  


      Union of India & Ors.1
, relied on behalf of the importer, the Tribunal 


1 (1995) 1 SCC 478
6
has come to the conclusion that the benefit of Exemption Notification 


    cannot be availed of by a joint venture because it is nothing more than 


    an association of two persons, having no identity in law. The Tribunal 


    has gone on to observe that had such a bill of entry been filed even by 


    a joint venture, the department would have  been justified in rejecting 


    it on the ground that the identity of the real importer was not known.
Aggrieved, Gammon is before us in this appeal.
9. We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
10. Mr. J.S. Sinha,  learned  counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, 



    strenuously urged that in light of the decision of this Court in the case 


    of
New Horizons
(supra), wherein the concept of a joint venture has 


    been explained and the same has been subsequently followed in Gan-
pati
RV-Talleres Alegria Track Private Limited  Vs.  Union of India  


    & Anr.2
, the view taken by the Tribunal  is clearly erroneous.   It was 


    contended that since a joint venture is a legal entity with all the trap-
pings of a partnership under the
Indian Partnership Act, 1932
, the gen-
eral principles of the said Act were applicable to the joint venture and, 


    therefore, any one of the two partners of the joint venture, viz. Gam-
mon and Atlanta was competent to import the subject machinery for 


    and on behalf of the contractor viz. the joint venture for execution of 




2 (2009) 1 SCC 589
7
the road project under contract between the joint venture and NHAI. It 


    was argued that the eligibility certificate dated 3rd August 2001, issued 


    by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, stating that the sub-
ject machine would be imported by the appellant herein, will sustain 


    the eligibility of the joint venture in view of the law
laid down by
this 


    Court in
New Horizons
(supra).   It was submitted that in view of an 


    inclusive   definition   of   the   word   "person"   in   the   Export   and   Import 


    policy for the years 1997-2002, which includes a "legal person", the 


    import   of   machinery   by   the   appellant   for   and   on   behalf   of  the   joint 


    venture   is   as   good   as   an   import   by   the   joint   venture   who   has   been 


    awarded the  contract  for  construction  of roads,  thus fulfilling  condi-
tion No.38 of the Exemption Notification.   Learned counsel asserted 


    that   since   in   identical   fact   situations   in   the   cases   of  IVRCL   Infras-
tructures   &   Projects   Ltd.  Vs.  C.C.,   Chennai   (Sea)3  and  Techni  


    Bharathi Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of Customs, Mumbai-II4, when ma-
chinery for a road project was imported by one of the constituents' of 


    the joint venture, the benefit of the same Exemption Notification had 


    been granted by the Tribunal.  It was argued that the said orders of the 


    Tribunal having been accepted by the revenue, it cannot be permitted 


    to take a different stand on the same point in the case of the appellant.
Lastly, relying on the decision of this Court in Commissioner of Cus-
3 2004 (166) E.L.T. 447 (Tri.-Del.)

4 2006 (198) E.L.T. 33 (Tri.-Bang.)
8
toms (Preventive), Mumbai  Vs.  M. Ambalal & Co.5, learned counsel 


    submitted that a beneficial and promotional exemption notification has 


    to be construed liberally.
11. Per contra,  Mr.  Harish Chander, learned senior counsel appearing on 



    behalf   of   the   revenue,   supporting   the   decision   of   the   Tribunal, 


    submitted that the joint venture and Gammon being two independent 


    entities,   the   eligibility   certificate   dated   3rd  August,   2001   issued   in 


    favour of the latter was of no consequence in so far as the Exemption 


    Notification was concerned   because the contract for construction of 


    roads   had   not   been   awarded   to   Gammon,   who   had   imported   the 


    machine  but to the joint venture.     It was stressed that Gammon,  on 


    their own, were not entitled to import any goods for the execution of 


    road works under the contract awarded to the joint venture by NHAI.
Placing reliance on the decision of this Court in
Novopan India Ltd.,  


    Hyderabad Vs. Collector of Central Excise & Customs, Hyderabad6
, 


    learned counsel contended that the Exemption Notification has to be 


    construed   strictly.   Responding   to   the   allegation   of   pick   and   choose 


    policy adopted by the revenue, learned counsel urged that non-filing 


    of an appeal in a similar case does not operate as a bar for the revenue 


    to   prefer   an   appeal   in   another   case.     In   support,   learned   counsel 




5 (2011) 2 SCC 74: 2010 (260) E.L.T. 487 (S.C.)
6 1994 Supp (3) SCC 606
9
commended us to the decision of this Court in
C.K. Gangadharan &  


    Anr. Vs. Commissioner of Income Tax, Cochin7
.   It was thus, assert-
ed that the decision of the Tribunal did not warrant any interference 


    and the appeal deserved to be dismissed.
12. The   short   question  for   determination  is   whether   import  of   the   speci-
fied machine by Gammon can be considered   to be   an import "by a 


    person who has been awarded a contract for construction of the roads 


    in   India",   so   as   to   fulfill   Condition   No.38
,
laid   down   in
Exemption 


    Notification No.17/2001/Cus dated 1st March, 2001?
13. In order to appreciate the contentions  advanced on behalf of the par-
ties on the question in issue, it would be expedient and useful to once 


    again   notice   the   salient   features   of   agreement   dated   18th  September, 


    2000 entered between Gammon and Atlanta.
14. Agreement   dated   18th  September,   2000   provided   that:   financial   re-
sponsibilities of each of the parties to be shared equally in the form of 


    guarantees,  securities,  etc. of the joint venture  would be 50% of the 


    project value; the Management of the joint venture would be subject to 


    the overall control of the Management  Board, consisting of a Chair-
man, to be nominated by Gammon, a Joint Chairman to be nominated 


    by   Atlanta   and   one   Director   each   to   be   appointed   by   both   of   them;
7 (2008) 8 SCC 739 : (2008) 228 ELT 497
1
joint venture bank account would be operated under joint signatures of 


the   authorized   representatives   of   Gammon   and   Atlanta   and   neither 


party would be entitled to borrow for or on behalf of the joint venture 


or to acknowledge any liability without express prior consent in writ-
ing of the other party except to the extent of its share of work; Gam-
mon being most experienced party would   be the lead partner of the 


joint venture for the performance of the contract; the partner-incharge 


would be authorized to incur liabilities and to receive instructions for 


and on behalf of the partners of the joint venture, whether jointly or 


severally, and entire execution of the contract including receiving pay-
ment  would   be carried  out exclusively through the partner-incharge 


but any financial commitment required by the lead partner, on behalf 


of the joint venture, would always be previously discussed and agreed 


upon by the parties.   As stated above, though under agreement dated 


18th  September,   2000,   Gammon   was   notified   as   the   lead   partner   but 


agreement dated 20th December, 2000 executed between NHAI as the 


"employer"   and   Gammon-Atlanta   JV   as   "contractor"   was   signed   by 


the representatives of both the companies viz. Gammon and Atlanta, 


meaning thereby that so far as NHAI was concerned, for them the con-
tractor was Gammon-Atlanta JV and not Gammon or Atlanta individ-
ually.
1
15. According to the adjudicating authority, it was clear from both of the 



   said agreements that the contract of construction of roads in India was 


   awarded to the joint venture and, therefore, Gammon was not entitled 


   to avail of the benefit of the Exemption Notification as an independent 


   entity.  On the contrary, the Commissioner (Appeals) allowed the ben-
efit of the Exemption Notification to the appellant on the ground that 


   the Exemption Notification should be given a liberal interpretation and 


   that the revenue should not try to take advantage of ignorance of law 


   and procedure on the part of Gammon.   It is the Tribunal which has 


   dealt with the issue in detail by taking into consideration certain factu-
al aspects pertaining  to the import of machine  like placement of the 


   supply  orders  by  Gammon  and not by  the joint  venture and  its  pay-
ment by Gammon from its own account and not from the joint venture 


   account   provided   for   in   the   joint   venture   agreement.     Rejecting   the 


   plea of the appellant that in light of the decision of this Court in New  


   Horizons (supra) wherein it has been held that a joint venture is a le-
gal entity in the nature of a partnership, the import of the machinery 


   by Gammon is to be considered as having been done on behalf of the 


   joint venture, the Tribunal has allowed revenue's appeal.
16. Since the stand of the appellant is that the issue arising in the present 



   appeal stands concluded in their favour by the decision of this Court in
1
New Horizons
(supra) and a subsequent decision of this Court as also 


   of   the   Tribunal,   in   which
the   said   decision
has   been   relied   upon,   it 


   would be necessary to discern the ratio of the decision in  New Hori-
zons (supra).
17.
In
New Horizons
(supra), a joint venture company, consisting of a few 



   Indian   companies   (with   60%   share   capital)   and   a   Singapore   based 


   company (with 40% share capital), had participated in tender proceed-
ings   floated   by   the   Department   of   Telecommunications   for   printing 


   and binding of telephone directories of Delhi and Bombay.   The ten-
der submitted by   New Horizons Ltd; (for short "NHL") was not ac-
cepted by the tender evaluation committee, apparently, on the basis of 


   the fact that the successful party had more technical experience than 


   any one of the constituent companies of NHL.  Aggrieved by
the said 


   decision
, NHL filed a writ petition in the Delhi High Court against the 


   decision   of   the   Department   of   Tele-communications.     The   said   writ 


   petition was dismissed rejecting the plea of the NHL that the technical 


   experience   of   the   constituents   of   the   joint   venture   was   liable   to   be 


   treated   as   that   of   the   joint   venture.   NHL   brought   the   matter   to   this 


   Court.   Explaining the concept of joint venture in detail, it was held 


   that a joint venture is a legal entity in the nature of a partnership en-
gaged   in   the   joint   undertaking   of   a   particular   transaction   for   mutual
1
profit   or   an   association   of   persons   or   companies   jointly   undertaking 


some commercial enterprise wherein all contributed assets and shared 


risks.     It  was observed  that a  joint  venture   could take  the  form of a 


Corporation wherein two or more persons or companies might join to-
gether.  Accordingly, the appeal of NHL was allowed and it was held 


that it was a joint venture company in the nature of a partnership be-
tween the Indian group of companies and Singapore based company 


which had jointly undertaken the commercial venture by contributing 


assets and sharing risks.  Applying the principle of "lifting the corpo-
rate veil", it was held that the joint venture companies' technical expe-
rience could only be the experience of the partnering companies and 


the  technical   experience   of  all constituents   of  NHL   was liable   to be 


cumulatively reckoned in the tender  proceedings  and any one of the 


constituents was competent to act on behalf of the joint venture com-
pany.   Highlighting  the concept of joint venture, the Court observed 


thus:
"24.  The expression "joint venture" is more frequently used in 

   the United States. It connotes  a legal entity in the nature  of a 

   partnership   engaged   in   the   joint   undertaking   of   a   particular 

   transaction   for   mutual   profit   or   an   association   of   persons   or 

   companies   jointly   undertaking   some   commercial   enterprise 

   wherein   all   contribute   assets   and   share   risks.   It   requires   a 

   community of interest in the performance of the subject-matter, 

   a right to direct and govern the policy in connection therewith, 

   and duty, which may be altered by agreement, to share both in 

   profit   and   losses.   (Black's   Law  Dictionary,   6th   Edn.,   p.   839)
1
According   to  Words   and   Phrases,   Permanent   Edn.,   a   joint 

        venture is an association of two or more persons to carry out a 

        single   business   enterprise   for   profit   (p.117,   Vol.   23).   A   joint 

        venture can take the form of a corporation wherein two or more 

        persons   or   companies   may   join   together.   A   joint   venture 

        corporation has been defined as a corporation which has joined 

        with   other   individuals   or   corporations   within   the   corporate 

        framework   in   some   specific   undertaking   commonly   found   in 

        oil,   chemicals,   electronic,   atomic   fields.   (Black's   Law  

        Dictionary, 6th Edn., p. 342)...................."
18.
In short,
New Horizons
(supra) recognises a joint venture to be a legal 



    entity   in   the   nature   of   a   partnership   of   the   constituent   companies.
Thus, the necessary corollary flowing from the decision in New Hori-
zons  (supra),   wherein   the   partnership     concept   in   relation   to   a   joint 


    venture has been accepted, would be that   M/s Gammon-Atlanta JV, 


    the joint venture could be treated as a `legal entity', with the character 


    of   a   partnership   in   which   Gammon   was   one   of   the   constituents.     In 


    that view of the matter, the next question for consideration is whether 


    being a legal entity i.e. a juridical person, the joint venture is also a 


    "person" for the purpose of Condition No.38 of the Exemption Notifi-
cation,   stipulating   that   the   goods   should   be   imported   by   "a   person"
who had been awarded a contract for construction of goods in India by 


    NHAI?
19.In   support   of   his   submission   that   the   joint   venture   is   a   "person"   as 


    contemplated in the Exemption notification, learned counsel for Gam-
1
mon had relied on the definition of the word "person" as given in para 


   3.37 of the Export and Import policy for the year 1997-2002.  It reads 


   thus:
"3.37-"Person" includes an individual, firm, society, 

               company, corporation or any other legal person".
20. The argument was that since a joint venture has been declared to be a 



   legal entity in New Horizons (supra), it squarely   falls within the am-
bit of the said definition of the word "person".  We are of the opinion 


   that   even   if   the   stated   stand   on   behalf   of   the   appellant   is   accepted, 


   mercifully, on stark facts at hand, it does not carry their case any fur-
ther. Neither was it the case of the appellant either before the Adjudi-
cating Authority or before the Appellate Authority or before us, nor is 


   it suggested by the documents viz. the supply order or the bill of entry, 


   that the import of the machine was by or on behalf of the joint venture.
On the contrary, the Tribunal has recorded in its order that when ques-
tioned, learned counsel for the appellant clarified that correspondence 


   with the supplier of goods and placement of order had been done by 


   Gammon and not by the joint venture or on their behalf. He also ad-
mitted that payment for the machine had not been made from the joint 


   venture  account,   which  had  been  provided   for  the  contract  but  from 


   the funds of Gammon.
1
21. Thus,   the   inevitable   conclusion   is   that   import   of   "Concrete   batching 



   plant 56 cum/hr" by Gammon  cannot be considered as an import by 


   M/s Gammon-Atlanta JV, "a person" who had been awarded contract 


   for construction of the roads in India and therefore, neither Gammon 


   Atlanta JV nor Gammon fulfill the requisite requirement stipulated in 


   Condition No.38 of the Exemption Notification No. 17/2001/Cus dat-
ed 1st March, 2001.
22. As   regards   the   plea   of   the   appellant   that   the   Exemption   Notification 



   should receive a liberal construction to further the object underlying it, 


   it is well settled that a provision providing for an exemption has to be 


   construed   strictly.
In
Novopan   India   Ltd.
(supra),   dealing   with   the 


   same   issue   in   relation   to   an   exemption   notification,   a   three-Judge 


   Bench of this Court, stated the principle as follows:
"16.  We   are,   however,   of   the   opinion   that,   on   principle,   the 

       decision of this Court in Mangalore Chemicals-- and in
Union  

       of   India  v.  Wood   Papers
referred   to  therein   --   represents   the 

       correct view of law. The principle that in case of ambiguity, a 

       taxing statute should be construed in favour of the assessee -- 

       assuming that the said principle is good and sound -- does not 

       apply   to   the   construction   of   an   exception   or   an   exempting 

       provision; they have to be construed strictly. A person invoking 

       an exception or an exemption provision to relieve him of the tax 

       liability   must   establish   clearly   that   he   is   covered   by   the   said 

       provision. In case of doubt or ambiguity, benefit of it must go 

       to   the   State.   This   is   for   the   reason   explained   in  Mangalore  

       Chemicals         and   other   decisions,   viz.,   each   such 

       exception/exemption   increases   the   tax   burden   on   other 

       members  of the community  correspondingly.
Once, of course,
1
the   provision   is   found   applicable   to   him,   full   effect   must   be 

       given to it. As observed by a Constitution Bench of this Court 

       in
Hansraj Gordhandas  v.  H.H. Dave
that  such  a  notification 

       has to be interpreted  in the light  of the words employed by it 

       and not on any other basis. This was so held in the context of 

       the principle  that in a taxing statute, there is no room for any 

       intendment, that regard must be had to the clear meaning of the 

       words   and   that   the   matter   should   be   governed   wholly   by   the 

       language   of   the   notification,   i.e.,   by   the   plain   terms   of   the 

       exemption."
23.Applying the above principles, we are of the opinion that since in the 


   instant case the language of condition No.38 in the Exemption Notifi-
cation is clear and unambiguous, there is no need to resort to the inter-
pretative process in order to determine whether the said condition is to 


   be imparted strict or liberal construction.
24. Before  parting,   we  wish   to  place   on  record  our   deep  concern  on  the 



   conduct   of  the   two   Benches   of  the   Tribunal   deciding   appeals   in   the 


   cases   of
IVRCL   Infrastructures   &   Projects   Ltd.
(supra)   &
Techni  


   Bharathi   Ltd.
(supra).
After   noticing   the   decision   of   a   co-ordinate 


   Bench in the present case, they still thought it fit to proceed to take a 


   view totally contrary to the view taken in the earlier judgment, thereby 


   creating a judicial uncertainty with regard to the declaration of law in-
volved on an identical issue in respect of the same Exemption Notifi-
cation.     It   needs   to   be   emphasised   that   if   a   Bench   of   a   Tribunal,   in 


   identical fact-situation, is permitted   to come to a conclusion directly
1
opposed to the conclusion reached by another Bench of the Tribunal 


    on earlier occasion, that will be destructive  of the institutional integri-
ty itself.  What is important is the Tribunal as an institution and not the 


    personality of the members constituting it. If a Bench of the Tribunal 


    wishes   to   take   a   view   different   from   the   one   taken   by   the   earlier 


    Bench,   the   propriety   demands   that   it   should   place   the   matter   before 


    the   President   of   the   Tribunal   so   that   the   case   is   referred   to   a   larger 


    Bench, for which provision exists in the Act itself.  In this behalf, the 


    following observations by a three Judge Bench of this Court in  Sub-
Inspector Rooplal & Anr.  Vs.  Lt. Governor & Ors.8
are quite appo-
site :
"At the outset, we must express our serious dissatisfaction in 

        regard   to   the   manner   in   which   a   Coordinate   Bench   of   the 

        Tribunal has overruled, in effect, an earlier judgment of an-

        other  Coordinate  Bench  of the  same  Tribunal.   This is  op-

        posed   to   all   principles   of   judicial   discipline.     If   at   all,   the 

        subsequent Bench of the Tribunal was of the opinion that the 

        earlier view taken by the Coordinate Bench of the same Tri-

        bunal was incorrect, it ought to have referred the matter to a 

        larger  Bench so  that the difference of opinion between the 

        two Coordinate Benches on the same point could have been 

        avoided.   It is not as if the latter Bench was unaware of the 

        judgment of the earlier Bench but knowingly it proceeded to 

        disagree with
the said judgment
against all known rules of 

        precedents.     Precedents   which   enunciate   rules   of  law   form 

        the foundation of administration of justice under our system. 

        This is a fundamental principle which every presiding offi-

        cer of a judicial forum ought to know, for consistency in in-

        terpretation of law alone can lead to public confidence in our 

        judicial   system.    This   Court   has   laid  down   time   and   again 


8 (2000) 1 SCC 644
1
that precedent law must be followed by all concerned; devia-

         tion from the same should be only on a procedure known to 

         law.  A subordinate court is bound by the enunciation of law 

         made by the superior courts.  A Coordinate Bench of a Court 

         cannot   pronounce   judgment   contrary   to   declaration   of   law 

         made   by   another   Bench.     It   can   only   refer   it   to   a   larger 

         Bench if it disagrees with the earlier pronouncement."
We respectfully concur with these observations and are confident that all 


the Courts and various Tribunals in the country shall follow these salutary 


observations in letter and spirit.
25. In view of the foregoing discussion, the decision of the Tribunal, hold-
ing that the appellant was not entitled to the benefit of Exemption no-
tification No. 17/2001-Cus  dated 1st  March, 2001, cannot be flawed.
The   appeal   being   bereft   of  any   merit   is   dismissed   accordingly,   with 


      costs, quantified at `50,000/-.
...........................................
(D.K. JAIN, J.) 





                                                      ...........................................
(H.L. DATTU, J.)

  NEW DELHI;
JULY 6, 2011.
RS
2
2