[Cites
37
, Cited by
10
]
Supreme Court of India
Narmada Bachao Andolan vs State Of M.P on 26 July, 2011
Equivalent citations: AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT 3199, 2011 AIR SCW 4473, 2011 (4) AIR JHAR R 751, AIR 2011 SC (CIVIL) 1942, (2011) 5 ALLMR 388 (SC), (2011) 8 SCALE 38, (2012) 6 ALL WC 6212, 2011 (12) SCC 333, 2011 (3) KLT SN 71 (SC), 2011 (4) KCCR SN 433 (SC)
Author:
B.S. Chauhan
Bench:
J.M. Panchal
,
Deepak Verma
,
B.S. Chauhan
REPORTABLE




                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3726 OF 2011

              


Narmada Bachao Andolan                                              ... Appellant 


                                              Versus


State of Madhya Pradesh                                                     ...Respondent





                                         J U D G M E N T
Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN, J.
1.                This appeal has been preferred against the judgment and order 


dated 16.12.2010 passed by the Madhya Pradesh High Court, Jabalpur 


in Writ Petition No. 1360 of 2009.
2.                Facts and circumstances giving rise to this appeal are as under:
A.        In the year 1972, the State of Madhya Pradesh conceived a dam 


          to   provide   irrigation   facilities   to   farmers   of   Khargone     district. 


          The   dam,   on   filling   upto   full,   would   cause   submergence   of 


      1258.59 hectares  of  land, out  of  which 1037.715  is  private   and 


      206.635 is government  and 14.24 hectares is  forest land.
B.    On   10.1.1992,   a   detailed   Project   Report   was   prepared   and 


      submitted to the State Government and  the Final Project Report 


      was   approved   by   Technical   Committee   of   Central   Water 


      Commission vide order dated 6.5.1997. Clearance to the project 


      was given by the Government of India. It was on 10.10.2002 that 


      the project was accorded Environmental and Forest clearance.
C.    The Cabinet of Ministers in its meeting dated 4.10.2002 approved 


      payment of Special Rehabilitation Grant (hereinafter called SRG) 


      to be paid to oustees, who would not ask for land in lieu of land 


      acquired. As a consequence thereof, order dated 28.12.2002  was 


      issued to the same effect in the name of the Governor of the State 


      of Madhya Pradesh.
D.    On   23.5.2004,   construction   of   dam   site   commenced   and   was 


      completed   upto   crest   level   in   the   year   2008;   only   gates   were 


      required to be installed so as to achieve full reservoir level of 317 


      metres.   Subsequent   thereto,   Notification   dated   5.3.2008   was 


      issued   regarding   submergence   of   four   villages,   namely,   Sonud, 


      Nimit, Bedhaniya and Khamid.
2
E.         Appellant   approached   the   High   Court   by   filing   writ   petition 


No.   1360   of   2009   claiming   various   reliefs,  inter-alia,  to   stop   further 


construction which may cause submergence so that displaced families 


are resettled and rehabilitated in 6 months before the submergence;   to 


direct State Government to provide irrigated agricultural land to eligible 


oustees   including   encroachers   and   landless   labourers;     to   declare   the 


order   dated   7.6.1991   passed   by   Narmada   Valley   Development 


Department (hereinafter called NVDD) amending para 5.1   of the Re-
settlement   and   Rehabilitation   Policy,   1991   (hereinafter   called   R   &   R 


Policy) to be ultra vires and unconstitutional, being arbitrary and mala 


fides.
F.         The State Authorities opposed the writ petition contending that 


the validity of the R & R Policy had already been upheld by the courts;
landless labourers  were not entitled for allotment of agricultural  land;
the writ petition was filed at much belated stage, i.e. after completion of 


the   dam;   appellant   had   an   alternative   efficacious   remedy     before   the 


Grievance  Redressal Authority (hereinafter  called GRA);   amendment 


in para 5.1 of the R & R Policy was only procedural, and carried out 


legally and was thus valid; even otherwise the amendment to para 5.1 


was   inconsequential   because   the   allotment   of   land   for   the   oustees   is
3
provided under Clause 3 of the R & R Policy and amendment carried 


out   in   Clause   3   of   the   Policy   at   subsequent   stage   had   not   been 


challenged by the appellant.
G.         The High Court considered the rival submissions advanced on 


behalf   of   the   parties   and   held   that   challenge   to   the   validity   of   the 


amendment   dated   7.6.1991   was   belated   and   could   not   be   entertained.
The   alternative   remedy   before   the   GRA   was   efficacious   and   no 


extraordinary situation prevailed warranting the High Court to interfere 


at such a stage. The landless labourers were not entitled for allotment of 


agricultural land. The oustees had been offered grant; the value of their 


land   had   also   been   assessed   under   the
Land   Acquisition   Act,   1894
(hereinafter   called   `the   Act   1894').   Person   aggrieved,   if   any,   can 


approach  the GRA if  he is not satisfied with the reliefs granted to him 


in terms of the R & R Policy. After taking the aforesaid view, the High 


Court issued various directions including:   to install radial gates, block 


sluice gates and to fill up dam upto 310 metres; when canal network is 


ready, the Government could approach the Court to fill up the dam to 


317 metres; the Government would ensure that land oustees were given 


benefits to which they are entitled under the R & R Policy within four
4
weeks; and that persons aggrieved, if any, were at liberty to agitate the 


grievances in respect of  reliefs before the GRA.
Hence, this appeal.
3.        Ms.   Chittaroopa   Palit,   representative   of   the   appellant,   has 


raised before us all the issues which had been agitated before the High 


Court, including the right of oustees for allotment of land in lieu of land 


acquired   and   non-compliance   of   R&R   Policy   is   violative   of 


fundamental   rights   of   the   oustees   enshrined   in
Article   21
of   the 


Constitution.  It has further been submitted  by her that the amendment 


in Clause 5.1 of the R & R Policy was null and void as it has not been 


carried out in accordance with the procedure prescribed under
Section 


21
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 as well as the provisions of
Article 


166(2)
and
(3)
of the Constitution of India.   Clause 5.1 of the R & R 


Policy could not be amended in violation of Rule 7(viii) of Part II of the 


Business Rules.  And that since the Ministry of Welfare, Government of 


India, has accorded clearance to the project with a clear understanding 


that landless   labourers  would  also  be  allotted  agricultural   land  and as 


the   same   has   not   been   complied   with,   the   High   Court's   judgment 


requires interference.
5
4.        On   the   contrary,   Mr.   P.S.   Patwalia,   learned   senior   counsel 


appearing   for   the   respondents   has   vehemently   opposed   the   appeal 


contending that Clause  5.1 of the R & R Policy deals  with procedure 


only.   Entitlement for allotment   of land   is provided under Clause 3.2 


of the R & R Policy and as the amendment to the said clause was not 


challenged,   amendment   to   Clause   5.1   remains   inconsequential.   Dam 


construction started in   year 2004 and compensation for land acquired 


had been determined much ago. By December 2002, the benefit of SRG 


had also been given to the oustees.  The writ petition was filed in year 


2008  after  the  dam stood   fully  constructed.   At  the  time   of   filing   the 


writ petition  there was no challenge to Clause 5.1 of the R & R Policy, 


rather   it   was   challenged   seeking   amendment   by   filing   an   application 


dated 11.5.2010. Amendment to Clause 5.1 of  R & R Policy  has been 


in conformity with the Business Rules  of the Government and  all the 


orders in this respect had been passed in the name of the Governor. The 


Council of Ministers had delegated the power to the NVDD and to the 


Hon'ble   Minister   for   Rehabilitation   and   in   case   there   was   any 


difference between the said two Hon'ble Ministers, the matter would be 


referred to the Hon'ble Chief Minister. The law permits delegation of 


power to make routine changes in subordinate legislation. Therefore, no
6
fault can be found with the procedure adopted for amendment of Clause 


5.1 of the R & R Policy.
Mr.   Patwalia   further   asserts   that   so   far   as   the 


entitlement   of  relief   in   favour  of   landless   labourers   etc.  is   concerned, 


this   Court   has   dealt   with   the   issue   in  Narmada   Bachao   Andolan   v.
State of M.P., AIR 2011 SC 1989 (hereinafter called "Narmada Bachao 


Andolan   III")   and   all   the   issues   agitated   in   this   appeal   have   been 


answered in the said judgment. The appeal lacks merit and is liable to 


be dismissed.
5.         We   have   considered   the   rival   submissions   made   by   learned 


counsel for the parties and perused the record.
6.         This Court in Narmada Bachao Andolan III (supra) has dealt 


elaborately with most of the issues agitated in this appeal, particularly, 


the   issues   of   delay   and   laches,   availability   of   alternative   remedy, 


entitlement   of   major   sons   and   daughters   of   oustees/as   well   as   the 


landless labourers for allotment of agricultural land.  The issues of land 


acquisition, rehabilitation and resettlement of oustees considering their 


fundamental   and   constitutional   rights   under
Articles   21
and
300-A
of
7
the Constitution of India have been dealt with elaborately therein.  This 


Court held:-
"These   cases   are   to   be   decided   giving   strict  

           adherence   to   the   R   &   R   Policy,   as   amended   on  

           3.7.2002, further considering that special care is  

           to   be   taken   where   persons   are   oppressed   and  

           uprooted   so   that   they   are   better   off.     Our  

           Constitution   requires   removal   of   economic  

           inequalities   and   provides   for   provision   of  

           facilities and opportunities for a decent standard  

           of living and protection of economic interests  of  

           the   weaker   segments   of   the   society   and   in  

           particular   Scheduled   Castes   and   Scheduled  

           Tribes.     Every   human   being   has   a   right   to  

           improve his standard of living.   Ensuring people  

           are   better   off   is   the   principle   of   socio-economic  

           justice   which   every   State   is   under   obligation   to  

           fulfil,   in   view   of   the   provisions   contained   in
Articles 37
, 38
, 39(a)
, (b), (e), (f)
, 41
, 43
, 46
and
47
of the Constitution of India."
Thus, the case in fact requires to be disposed of in terms of the  


said judgment.
7.        Ms.   Palit     has   submitted   that   as   the   High   Court   did   not 


consider the issue of amendment of Clause 5.1 of the R & R Policy  and 


the effect of non-compliance of the condition imposed by the Ministry 


of  Welfare while granting the clearance for the project, this court must 


examine the said issues.
8
According   to   Ms.   Palit,   while   making   the   amendment   the 


procedure prescribed under
Article 166
of the Constitution has not been 


followed and while granting the clearance, the Ministry of  Welfare  has 


added the clause that families of the landless labourers would  be given 


agricultural land to the extent of 2 hectares which has not been given.
Thus, this appeal is being considered to be restricted to these two 


issues.
Amendment to Clause 5.1 of the R & R Policy:
8.            The   NVDD   vide   Resolution   dated   18.11.1987   proposed 


liberal   amended   policy   for   the   oustees   of   the   Narmada   Projects   and 


submitted   the   same   for   approval   to   the   Cabinet   of   Ministers, 


Government   of  Madhya   Pradesh.   The   said   proposal   was  approved   by 


the   Cabinet   of   Ministers,   Government   of   M.P.   on   25.11.1987.
Subsequently,   the   NVDD   vide   Resolution   dated   28.8.1989   proposed 


certain   modifications   in   the   rehabilitation   policy   and   the   summary   of 


the  same   was  submitted   for  the   approval   to   the  Cabinet   of  Ministers, 


Government   of   M.P.   The   said   proposal     specifically   provided   for 


delegation   of   power   to   the   NVDD   and   Rehabilitation   Department   to 


make routine/general amendment in R & R Policy with the permission
9
of the Ministers-in-charge of the said two departments.  The Council of 


Ministers vide resolution dated 1.9.1989 approved the said proposal.
9.         Certain   amendments   were   sought   in   R   &   R   Policy   vide 


resolution   dated   5.9.1989.   The   NVDD,   in   consultation   with   the 


Rehabilitation Department and after seeking approval of the Ministers-
in-charge of both the said Departments, amended Clauses 4.1, 5.1 and 


8.3 of the R & R Policy and issued the amended policy on 7.6.1991 in 


the name of the Governor of the State.  The copy of the said amendment 


order was issued to 44 officers concerned as is evident from the record.
Clause   4.1   of  the   R   &  R   Policy   was  amended  to   facilitate   the   tenure 


holders,   who   were   voluntarily   willing   to   sell   their   lands,   "as   far   as 


possible" to alienate the same   and further providing for procedure for 


determination   of   reasonable   price   of   such   lands.     Clause   5.1   was 


amended to the effect that if an oustee family does not wish to obtain 


land   in   lieu   of   the   submerged   land   and   wishes   full   payment   of   the 


amount of compensation, it can do so by submitting  an application to 


this effect in writing to the concerned Land Acquisition Officer. In such 


cases, the oustee families would  have no entitlement over allotment of 


land and would be paid full amount of compensation.   An option once 


exercised   under   this   provision   would   be   final,   and   no   claim   for
1
allotment   of   land,   in   lieu   of   the   land,   acquired   could   be   made 


afterwards.   If   any   oustee   family   belonging   to   the   Scheduled   Tribes 


submits  such an application,  it will be essential  to obtain orders from 


the Collector, who would after necessary enquiry certify that it would 


not adversely affect the interests of the oustee family. Such applications 


of the Scheduled Tribes oustee families could be accepted only after the 


said   certification   by   the   Collector.     Clause   8.3   was   also   amended 


changing the size of plots to be allotted to the oustees etc.
10.        Subsequently   on   24.10.2002,   NVDD   submitted   the   summary 


to   Council   of   Ministers   for   approval   of  SRG   for   oustees   of   Narmada 


Projects, particularly in respect of those oustees who were not claiming 


land in lieu of the land acquired, and the said proposal was approved by 


the Cabinet of Ministers.  As a consequence, the order dated 28.12.2002 


was   issued   giving   effect   to   the   said   amendment   in   the   name   of   the 


Governor of the State of Madhya Pradesh .
11.        On 27.4.2002, the amendment was made in Clause 3.2 of the R 


&   R   Policy   putting   the   words   "as   far   as   possible"   for   allotment   of 


agricultural land  to the oustees in lieu of the land acquired.
1
12.        The aforesaid chronological development of amendment of R 


&   R   Policy   reveals   that   Clause   3   of   the   R   &   R   Policy   provided   for 


entitlement of oustees to get land in lieu of the land acquired. Clause 5 


prescribed only the procedure for allotment of land under Clause 3 of 


the   R   &   R   Policy.     The   amendment   of     R   &   R   Policy   on   7.6.1991 


which is under challenge by the appellant  only facilitates those oustees 


who were not willing to take the land in lieu of the land acquired. Such 


an amendment was brought on demand of the oustees as an alternative.
However, it does not take away the right of the oustees to claim land in 


lieu   of   the   land   acquired,   for   the   simple   reason   that   there   was   no 


amendment  in year 1991 to Clause  3.2 of the   R & R Policy and the 


amendment   to   the   said   Clause   3.2   incorporated   on   27.4.2002   is   not 


under challenge.  The amendment under challenge simply facilitated an 


oustee   to   claim   compensation   instead   of   land.     This   may   be   for   the 


reason that oustee may be willing to settle in another State or in urban 


area or   wants to adopt any other vocation/profession or wants to start 


any   other   business.   However,   it   does   not   take   away   the   right   of   any 


oustee to claim the land in lieu of the land acquired.  Therefore, in our 


opinion, amendment to Clause 5.1 remains inconsequential so far as the 


right   of   an   oustee   to   claim   land   in   lieu   of   the   land   acquired   is
1
concerned.  Ms. Palit  could  not explain  that in  case  her  averment  was 


accepted and the amendment to Clause 5.1 dated 7.6.1991 stood struck 


down, what benefit could an oustee derive from the same.   In view of 


the above, we do not find any force in the submissions made on behalf 


of the appellant on this count.
13.        In   view   of  our   conclusion   reached   herein   that  amendment   to 


clause 5.1 of the R & R Policy was inconsequential so far as entitlement 


of allotment of agricultural land in lieu of land acquired was concerned, 


grievance   of   the   appellant   that   procedure   adopted   for   its   amendment 


was   not   in   conformity   with   the   Statutory/Constitutional   requirement 


becomes   purely   an   academic   issue,   not   required   to   be   determined   as 


Ms.   Palit   could   not   point   out   as   what   prejudice   the   said   amendment 


could   cause   to   an   oustee.     However,   as   we   have   heard   the   issue   at 


length, it is desirable to decide the same also.
Procedure adopted for amendment:
14.          Ms.   Palit   has   submitted   that   the   procedure   adopted   for 


amendment of Clause 5.1 of the R & R Policy is not in consonance with 


the   provisions   of
Section   21
of   the   General   Clauses   Act,   1897   and
Article   166   (2)
and
(3)
of   the   Constitution.     Rule   7   of   the   Business
1
Rules, Part II provided for the cases to be brought before the Council of 


Ministers.  Clause (viii) thereof reads:-
"Proposals   to   vary   or   reverse   a   decision  

          previously taken  at meeting of the Council".
15.
In
Sampat Prakash v. The State of Jammu & Kashmir & 


Anr.
, AIR 1970 SC 1118, this Court held:-
"This   provision   (
S.21
)   is   clearly   a   rule   of  

          interpretation which has been made applicable to  

          the Constitution in the same manner as it applies  

          to   any   Central   Act   or   Regulation......     As   an  

          example, under
Article 77(3)
, the President, and,  

          under
Article 166(3)
the Governor of a State are  

          empowered to make rules for the more convenient  

          transaction of the business of the Government of  

          India or the Government of the State, as the case  

          may   be,  and   for   the  allocation   among  Ministers  

          of the said business.   If, for the interpretation of  

          these   provisions,
Section   21
of   the   General  

          Clauses   Act   is   not   applied,   the   result   would   be  

          that   the   rules   once   made   by   the   President   or   a  

          Governor   would   become   inflexible   and   the  

          allocation   of   the   business   among   the   Ministers  

          would   forever   remain   as
laid   down   in
the   first  

          rules.  Clearly, the power of amending these rules  

          from time to time to suit changing situations must  

          be held to exist and that power can only be found  

          in   these   articles   by   applying
Section   21
of   the  

          General Clauses Act".
16.      As the issue raised is of great public importance and Ms. Palit 


was not able to render proper legal assistance, we requested Mr. Gourab
1
Banerjee, learned Additional Solicitor General who was present in the 


court to assist the court on two issues, namely:
(1)           Whether the State Council of Ministers is, as a matter of 


       law,  permitted   to  delegate   its  power  to  a  subordinate  authority   to 


       amend its own decision.
(2)    Whether such amendment is to be consistent with the Rules of 


       Business framed under
Article 166
of the Constitution of India.
17.           Mr. Banerjee has made the submissions citing large number of 


judgments of this Court  and contended that law permits the delegation 


of   power   for   amending   the   subordinate   legislation   in   view   of   the 


provisions of
Articles 77
and
166
of the Constitution.
18.           Even   function   or   duties   which   are   vested   in   a   State 


Government by a statute may be allocated to ministers by the Rules of 


Business   framed   under
Article   166(3).
In   the   case   of
The   State   of 


Bihar   v.   Rani   Sonabati   Kumari
,  AIR   1961   SC   221,   it   was   held   as 


under:
"
Section   3(1)
of   the   Act   confers   the   power   of  

              issuing   notifications   under   it,  not   on  any   officer  

              but on the State Government as such though the  

              exercise of that power would be governed by the  

              rules of business framed  by the Governor  under
Art. 166(3)
of the Constitution. But this does not
1
afford any assistance to the appellant. The order  

         of Government in the present case in expressed to  

         be   made   "in   the   name   of   the   Governor"   and   is  

         authenticated   as   prescribed   by
Art.   166(2)
,   and  

         consequently   "the   validity   of   the   order   or  

         instrument   cannot   be   called   in   question   on   the  

         ground that it is not an order or instrument made  

         or executed by the Governor."
19.
In
the said judgment
,   it was also observed that the Governor 


remains responsible for actions of subordinates taken in his name:
"The   only  point  canvassed  is  whether   it  was  an  

         order made by the Governor or by some one duly  

         authorised   by   him   in   that   behalf   within
Art.154(1).
Even assuming that the order did not  

         originate from the Governor personally, it avails  

         the State nothing because the Governor remains  

         responsible   for   the   action   of   his   subordinates  

         taken  in  his  name.
In
King  Emperor   v.  Sibnath  

         Banerjee   &   Ors.
,  AIR   1945   PC   156   already  

         referred   to,   Lord   Thankerton   pointing   out   the  

         distinction   between   delegation   by   virtue   of  

         statutory power there and the case of the exercise  

         of   the   Governor's   power   by   authorised  

         subordinates   under   the   terms   of
S.   49(1)
of   the  

         Government of India Act, 1935 corresponding to
Art. 154(1)
, said:
"Sub-
section   5
of
S.   2
(of   the
Defence   of   India  

         Act, 1939
) provides a means of delegation in the  

         strict sense of the word, namely, a transfer of the  

         power or duty to the officer or authority defined  

         in   the   sub-section,   with   a   corresponding  

         divestiture of the Governor of any responsibility  

         in the matter, whereas under
S. 49(1)
of the Act  

         of   1935,   the   Governor   remains   responsible   for  

         the action of his subordinates taken in his name.
1
This last point is therefore without force and has  

            to be rejected."
(See also the decision of the Constitution Bench in R. Chitralekha  v.
State of Mysore & Ors., AIR 1964 SC 1823).
20.        The   decision   of   any   minister   or   officer   under   the   Rules   of 


Business  made  under
Articles  77(3)
and
166(3)
of the  Constitution  is 


the   decision   of   the   President   or   the   Governor   respectively   and   these 


Articles  do not provide for `delegation'.  That is to say, that decisions 


made   and   actions   taken   by   the   minister   or   officer   under   the   Rules   of 


Business cannot be treated as exercise of delegated power in real sense, 


but are deemed to be the actions of the President or Governor, as the 


case may be, that are taken or done by them on the aid and advice of the 


Council   of   Ministers.
In
State   of   U.P.   &   Ors.     v.   Pradhan   Sangh 


Kshettra Samiti & Ors.
, AIR 1995 SC 1512,  this Court relied on the 


decision   of   the   Seven-Judge   Bench   in  Samsher   Singh   v.   State   of 


Punjab & Anr., AIR 1974 SC 2192 and  held as under:
"....Any   action   taken   in   the   exercise   of   the  

            executive   power   of   the   State   vested   in   the  

            Governor   under
Article   154(1)
is   taken   by   the  

            Government   of   the   State   in   the   name   of   the  

            Governor as will appear in
Article  166(1).
There  

            are   two   significant   features   in   regard   to   the  

            executive   action   taken   in   the   name   of   the
1
Governor.   First,
Article   300
states,   among   other  

things,   that   the   Governor   may   sue   or   be   sued   in  

the   name   of   the   State.   Second,
Article   361
states  

that   proceedings   may   be   brought   against   the  

Government   of   the   State   but   not   against   the  

Governor.   The   reason   is   that   the   Governor   does  

not exercise the executive functions individually or  

personally. Executive action taken in the name of  

the Governor is the executive action of the State.  

Para 48 of the said judgment explains the position  

of law in that behalf succinctly as follows:
"The   President   as   well   as   the   Governor   is   the  

constitutional   or   formal   head.   The   President   as  

well   as   the   Governor   exercises   his   powers   and  

functions   conferred   on   him   by   or   under   the  

Constitution on the aid and advice of his Council  

of Ministers, save in spheres where the Governor  

is   required   by   or   under   the   Constitution   to  

exercise  his  functions in his  discretion.  Wherever  

the   Constitution   requires   the   satisfaction   of   the  

President or the Governor for the exercise by the  

President   or   the   Governor   of   any   power   or  

function,   the   satisfaction   required   by   the  

Constitution is not the personal satisfaction of the  

President   or   Governor   but   the   satisfaction   of   the  

President or Governor in the constitutional  sense  

in   the   Cabinet   system   of   Government,   that   is,  

satisfaction  of his  Council  of  Ministers  on  whose  

aid   and   advice   the   President   or   the   Governor  

generally   exercises   all   his   powers   and   functions.  

The   decision   of   any   Minister   or   officer   under  

Rules   of   Business   made   under   any   of   these   two
Articles   77(3)
and
166(3)
is   the   decision   of   the  

President   or   the   Governor   respectively.   These  

articles   did   not   provide   for   any   delegation.  

Therefore,   the   decision   of   a   Minister   or   officer  

under the Rules of Business is the decision of the  

President or the Governor."
1
21.         Whether there can be further delegation by the minister to the 


officer   subordinate   to   him   depends   on   the   provisions   of   the   Rules   of 


Business.
22.         Rules   of   Business   operate   even   when   a   statute   does   not 


authorise   sub-delegation.   In  King   Emperor   v.   Sibnath   Banerjee   & 


Ors. (supra), the law was crystallised by the Privy Council holding that 


a provision permitting sub-delegation is merely supplementary and can 


be   no   ground   for   excluding   the   ordinary   method   by   which   the 


Government's executive business was carried on.
23.         The   requirement   of   the   Rules   of   Business   must   be   complied 


with in order to give validity  to the action or decision taken.
In
Smt. 


Godavari Shamrao Parulekar v. The State of Maharashtra & Ors.
, 


AIR   1964   SC   1128,   a   Constitution   Bench   of   this   Court   considered 


whether   an   order   of   preventive   detention   under   the   Defence   of   India 


Ordinance  could have been passed in terms of the Rules  of Business.
While   upholding   the   order   of   detention,   the   court   held   that   the 


preventive   detention   could   only   be   ordered   by   the   minister   who   had 


been allocated the relevant subject which was the basis of the detention 


order.
1
24.         Earlier cases of this Court suggest that the Rules of Business 


are   to   be   construed   as   directory   so   that   substantial   compliance   with 


them would suffice to uphold the validity of the relevant order of the 


Government.   (See:
State   of   Uttar   Pradesh   v.   Om   Prakash   Gupta
, 


AIR 1970 SC 679)
25.         Similarly, in R. Chitralekha (Supra), a Constitution Bench of 


this   Court   had   observed   that   it   is   settled   law   that   the   provisions   of
Article 166
of the Constitution  are only directory and not mandatory in 


character. In paragraph 4 it was held as under:
".....This   view   has   been   reaffirmed   by   this   Court  

             in   subsequent   decisions:   see  Ghaio   Mal   &   Sons  

             v.The State of Delhi & Ors., AIR 1959 SC 65 and  

             it is, therefore,  settled law that provisions of
Art.  

             166
of the Constitution are only directory and not  

             mandatory   in   character  and,   if   they   are   not  

             complied with, it can be established as a question  

             of fact that the impugned order was issued in fact  

             by the State Government or the Governor."
(Emphasis added)
26.         The   judgment   in             R.   Chitralekha            (supra)   has   been 


subsequently   cited   for   this   proposition   in
Bannari   Amman   Sugars 


Ltd. v. Commercial Tax Officer & Ors.
, (2005) 1 SCC 625.
2
27.
In
Dattatraya Moreshwar v. The State of Bombay & Ors.
, 


AIR   1952   SC   181,   a   Constitution   Bench   of   this   Court   held   that   an 


omission   to   make   and   authenticate   an   executive   decision   in   the   form 


mentioned in
Article  166
does not make  the decision  itself  illegal,  on 


the basis that its provisions were directory and not mandatory.
28.             However,   in   the   recent   decision   of
MRF   Ltd.   v.   Manohar 


Parrikar & Ors.
, (2010) 11 SCC 374, a two-Judge Bench of this Court 


has sought to distinguish the above mentioned judgments and taken the 


view that in case there is   non-compliance   of Business Rules framed 


under
Article   166(3)
of   the   Constitution,   the   notification   issued   in 


violation of Business Rules is void ab initio and all actions consequent 


thereto are null and void. The court held:
"Thus,   from   the   foregoing,   it   is   clear   that   a  

           decision to be the decision of the Government must  

           satisfy   the   requirements   of   the   Business   Rules  

           framed   by   the   State   Government   under   the  

           provisions of
Article 166(3)
of the Constitution of  

           India. In the case on hand, as has been noticed by  

           us and the High Court, the decisions leading to the  

           notifications do not comply with the requirements  

           of the Business Rules framed by the Government of  

           Goa under the provisions of
Article 166(3)
of the  

           Constitution and the notifications are the result of  

           the   decision   taken   by   the   Power   Minister   at   his  

           level.   The   decision   of   the   individual   Minister  

           cannot   be   treated   as   the   decision   of   the   State  

           Government   and   the   notifications   issued   as   a
2
result   of   the   decision   of   the   individual   Minister  

           which   are   in   violation   of   the   Business   Rules   are  

           void   ab   initio   and   all   actions   consequent   thereto  

           are null and void."
29.       On the other hand, in M/s. Crawford Bayley & Co. & Ors. v.
Union of   India & Ors., AIR 2006 SC 2544, a two-Judge Bench has 


accepted   that   the   Rules   of   Business   framed   under
Article   77
of   the 


Constitution, which is analogous to
Article  166
, are directory and not 


mandatory, with the following observations:
"It   was   next   contended   with   reference   to   the  

           Allocation   of   Business   Rules   that   the   Central  

           Government in the Urban Department can appoint  

           an   Estate   Officer   but   in   the   present   case,   the  

           Finance   Department   has   appointed   an   Estate  

           Officer   which   is   in   violation   of   the   Allocation   of  

           Business Rules, 1961. Though the Division Bench  

           dealt with this aspect exhaustively in its judgment  

           and held that the provisions of the Business Rules  

           are   not   mandatory   and   will   not   vitiate   the  

           appointment,   we   fully   agree   that   the   Rules   of  

           Business   are   administrative   in   nature   for  

           governance   of   its   business   of   the   Government   of  

           India framed under
Article 77
of the Constitution  

           of   India.
In   this   connection,   the   Division   Bench  

           referred to the decision of this Court in
Dattatraya  

           Moreshwar   Pangarkar   v.   The   State   of   Bombay
,  

           (1952)   SCR   612.    There   analogous   Rules   of  

           Business framed by the State under
Article 166
of  

           the   Constitution   of   India   came   up   for  

           consideration   and   it   was   observed   that   they   are  

           directive and no order will be invalidated, if there  

           is a breach thereof....".
2
30.        We have considered the larger Bench judgment of this Court in
R.   Chitralekha
(supra)   and   taken   note   of   the   fact   that  MRF   Ltd.
(supra)   is   distinguishable   from   the   case   at   hand   since   that   case   dealt 


with rules pertaining to financial implications for which there were no 


provisions   in   the
Appropriation   Act
,   and   so   the   rules   required 


mandatory   compliance.   Here,   there   is   no   issue   of   financial 


repercussions.   The   issue   here   is   whether   the   Council   of   Ministers   is 


permitted to delegate the power to amend its decision to a Committee of 


Ministers   consisting   of   the   Ministers-in-charge   of   the   Departments 


concerned and the Chief Minister, and whether such amendment needs 


to be consistent with the Rules of Business framed under
Article 166
of 


the   Constitution   of   India.   The   case   law   provides   that   delegation   is 


permissible and that Rules of Business are directory in nature. In view 


of   the   above,   we   find   that   delegation   of   power   is   permissible.
Submissions   so   made   on   behalf   of   the   appellant   in   this   regard   are 


preposterous.
Land to landless labourers:
31.        So far as the issue of non-compliance of the clearance of the 


terms incorporated by the Ministry of Welfare is concerned, the issue
2
has been elaborately dealt with by us in earlier judgment  in Narmada 


Bachao   Andolan   III  (Supra).   However,   Ms.   Palit   has   submitted   that 


certain   issues   could   not   be   agitated   in   that   case   as   the   terms   and 


conditions were incorporated by the Ministry of Welfare (Government 


of India), while granting the clearance dated 6.5.1997.
32.        So far as the present appeal in respect of Upper Beda Project is 


concerned,     the   rehabilitation   policy   for   the  oustees   provided   that   the 


displaced families would be rehabilitated maintaining existing structure 


of   social   groups   as   far   as   possible,   in   the   command   area   or   near   the 


periphery of the affected areas in accordance with their preferences.
Relevant   provisions   of   the   R   &   R   Policy   read     as 


under:
"3.1        xx                      xx                      xx



            3.2 (a) Every displaced family  from whom more  

            than   25   per   cent   of   its   land   is   acquired     in  

            revenue   villages  or   forest   villages   shall   be  

            entitled   to   and   be   allotted   land   to   the   extent   of  

            land   acquired   from   it,   subject   to   provision   in  

            3.2(b) below.
(b)       A   minimum   area   of   2   hectares   of   land  

                      would be allotted to all the families whose  

                      lands   would   be   acquired  irrespective   of  

                      whether   government   land   is   offered   or  

                      private land is purchased for allotment.
2
Where   more   than   2   hectares   of   land   is  

acquired  from  a  family,  it will  be  allotted  equal  

land, subject to a ceiling of 8 hectares.
xx                                 xx

            xx                          

    xx                                xx

            xx



9.1         Special   efforts   will   be   made   for   the
effective   rehabilitation   of  landless   displaced  

families. Adequate arrangements will be made by  

the   Narmada   Valley   Development   Authority   for  

the up-gradation of existing skills or impartment  

of   new   skills   so   as   to   promote   full   occupational  

rehabilitation.   In   this   regard,   new   opportunities  

emerging   as   a   result   of   the   project   will   be   fully  

used   for   the   benefit   of   the   displaced   families.  

Suitable   provisions   will   be   incorporated   in   the  

tender   document   of   Local   Competitive   Bidding  

(LCB) and other forms to ensure the employment  

of   displaced   persons.   The   Narmada   Valley  

Development   Authority   will   ensure   appropriate  

arrangement             for         discharge         of         these  

responsibilities within a stipulated time frame. In  

the interim time, special financial assistance will  

be   given   to  supplement   the   income   of   the  

landless  agricultural labourers and the landless  

scheduled   castes   and   scheduled   tribes   oustee  

families for 3 years in descending order, which  

shall   be   in   addition   to   the   grant-in-aid  

mentioned   in   para   6.1.   This   period   of   3   years  

will be calculated from the payment year of the  

grant-in-aid   under   para   6.1.  Thus,   a   landless  

oustee   family   will   get   a   special   income   support  

amount of Rs. 2,250/-, Rs.5,500/- and Rs.2,750/-
in   the   second,   third   and   fourth   year   of  

displacement, respectively. In addition, a further  

sum   of   Rs.12,500/-   shall   be   kept   in   reserve   for  

every   landless   oustee   family   and   for   earning
2
livelihood   or   for   purchase   of   productive   assets.
The above poverty line and the amount to be kept  

           in   reserve   is   also   linked   with   special   support  

           amount   and   the   reserve   shall   also   be  

           proportionately increased accordingly. For other  

           landless   families   special   financial   assistance   of  

           Rs.19,500/-   will   be   given   for   the   purchase   of  

           productive assets."                                        (Emphasis 

           added)
33.       The   policy   makes   it   clear   that   there   was   no   provision   for 


allotment of agricultural land  to the landless labourers. However, when 


the project was placed before the Ministry of Welfare, Government of 


India,   it   granted   clearance   on   6.5.1997   providing   for   allotment   of 


minimum 2 hectares of land for all landless labourers.
34.       Before   the   High   Court   the   issue   was   raised   and   the   State 


Authorities while filing the counter affidavit  replied  as under:
"Reply to para 5.4:  While the approval  

           and   sanction   as   mentioned   in   the   para   under  

           reply are not disputed, it is submitted that in so  

           far   as   the   said   clearance   (Annexure   P-3)  

           proceeds   on   the   basis   that   2   hectares   of   land  

           would   be   given   to   even   a   landless   labour,   the  

           same   was   represented   against   by   the   State  

           Government   by   its   letter   dated   5.4.1997........   A  

           bare   perusal   of   the   said   letter   would   show  that  

           the   issue   regarding   the   grant   of   minimum   2  

           hectares   of   land   to   all   landless   labourers   was  

           denied and it was pointed out that the State has  

           no such policy.  It was also pointed out that such
2
a   policy   was   the   prerogative   of   the   State  

               Government   as   "land"   and   "water"   are   State  

               subjects   appearing   in   entries   17   and   18  

               respectively of the State list of the VIIth Schedule  

               of the Constitution of India.   Thus, the State has  

               the exclusive power to frame R&R policies.   It is  

               also   pertinent   to   mention   here   that   the   said  

               provision of allotment of 2 hectares of land to all  

               the   landless   labourers   neither   finds   mention   in  

               the   R&R   policy   of   the   State   nor   in   the   NWDT  

               Award nor even in the National Resettlement and  

               Rehabilitation   Policy,   2007.               Thus,   the  

               petitioner's reliance on the letter dated 6.5.1997  

               is baseless and misconceived."
(Emphasis added)
35.       Further   vide   letter   dated   5.4.1997,     the   NVDD   wrote   to   the 


Ministry   of   Welfare   informing   it   that   landless   labourers   had   been 


proposed   for   giving   them   minimum   2   hectares   of   land   as   per   its 


clearance but action in this respect  would be taken as per decision of 


the Government.
36.           We have also gone through the clearance letter dated 6.5.1997 


issued by the Ministry of Welfare. The relevant part of the said letter 


on which Ms. Palit has placed strong reliance reads:
"In   view   of   the   fact   that   R&R   Action   Plan  

               prepared   is   based   on   the   R&R   guidelines   of  

               N.V.D.A projects and since the R&R Action Plan  

               has   been   modified  to   treat   unmarried   major  

               daughters   as   separate   entities   for   all   R&R
2
packages   and   for   allotting   a   minimum   of   2  

            hectares of land for all landless labourers, I am  

            directed   to   initiate   the   clearance   for   the   R&R  

            Action Plan of this project by this ministry"
(Emphasis added)



       It   is   impermissible   in   law   to   read   a   part   of   the   document   in 


isolation. The document is to be read as a whole. The letter of approval 


mentions  "allotting a minimum of 2 hectares of land for all landless  


labourers"  and says that unmarried major daughters would be treated 


as   separate   entities   for   that   particular   purpose,   i.e.   of   allotting   2 


hectares of land. Ms. Palit never pleaded the cause of unmarried major 


daughters   to   be   treated   as   separate   entities   for   allotment   of   land.   As 


noted   earlier,   we   have   already   dealt   with   and   answered   the   issue   of 


entitlement   of   major   sons   and   daughters   of   oustees   for   allotment   of 


land in negative in  Narmada Bachao Andolan  III  (supra). Thereby, 


Ms. Palit mistakenly relied on the clearance letter by the Ministry of 


Welfare to say that granting land to landless labourers was in and by 


itself a precondition for granting clearance to the project.
37.        Moreover, even if we regard the allotment of land to landless 


labourers as a condition, the Government of M.P. did not accept such a 


condition.  The Ministry of Welfare's clearance was not statutory,   like
2
any other statutory clearance e.g. clearance granted by Environment and 


Forest Ministry.   There is nothing in that clearance as to what would be 


the   consequence   for   non-compliance   with   those   conditions.   More   so, 


subsequent thereto, it is evident from the record that representations had 


been   filed   on   behalf   of   the   oustees   before   the   Ministry   of   Welfare.
However, no action had ever been taken by the Ministry of Welfare that 


the   terms   incorporated   by   it   while   granting   clearance   were   not   being 


adhered   to   and   in   spite   of   writing   several   letters,   the   Ministry   of 


Welfare   did not consider it proper to take any action or even to refer 


those letters to the State Government or to the NVDD.   Thus, the said 


Authorities also treated the same as non-statutory.
In view of the above, we do not find any cogent reason to accept 


the   submission   made   by   Ms.   Palit   that   landless   labourers   are   entitled 


for allotment of agricultural land to the extent of 2 hectares. The said 


contention is devoid of any merit.  Even otherwise, it does not appeal to 


us that landless labourer could be entitled for allotment of agricultural 


land admeasuring two hectares.  Neither  it had ever been contemplated 


nor it is compatible with R & R Policy.   Nor such land had ever been 


allotted to this class of persons.  The contention is hereby rejected.
2
38.        In   view   of   the   above,   appeal   lacks   merit   and   is   accordingly 


dismissed.  No order as to costs.
Before   parting   with   the   case,   we   record   our   deep 


sense   of   appreciation   and   thanks   to   Mr.   Gourab   Banerjee,   learned 


Additional   Solicitor   General   for   India,   for   rendering   assistance   to   the 


Court on our request.
...........................J.

                                                        (J.M. PANCHAL)





           ...........................J.



           (DEEPAK VERMA)





............................J.

                                                        (Dr. B.S. CHAUHAN)

New Delhi,

July 26, 2011
3