[Cites
6
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Mohd.Hamid & Anr Etc.Etc vs Badi Masjid Trust & Ors.Etc.Etc on 20 July, 2011
Equivalent citations: 2011 AIR SCW 4606, 2011 (13) SCC 61, 2011 (5) AIR BOM R 562, 2011 (4) AIR JHAR R 839, (2011) 8 MAD LJ 1116, (2011) 3 RECCRIR 691, (2011) 3 ALLCRIR 3280, (2011) 8 SCALE 2, (2011) 3 KER LT 401, (2011) 4 MAD LW 796, (2012) 114 CUT LT 1148
Bench:
Anil R. Dave
,
Mukundakam Sharma
REPORTABLE




                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION




              CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 5860-5861 OF 2011

        [Arising out of SLP(C) No(s). 20136-20137 of 2011]

                    [IN SLP(C)..CC No. 11834/2011]





MOHD.HAMID & ANR ETC.ETC.                                     Appellant(s)




                                   VERSUS




BADI MASJID TRUST & ORS.ETC.ETC.               Respondent(s)





                                   O R D E R
1.      Application for permission to file SLP is allowed.
2.      Leave granted.
3.      These   Appeals   are   directed   against   the   judgment   and 


order   dated   12.7.2011   passed   by   the   Bombay   High   Court, 


Nagpur  Bench   at  Nagpur  allowing   the  two  writ   petitions   being 


Writ   Petition   No.   3123   of   2011   and   Writ   Petition   No.   3177   of 


2011.
4.       By the said judgment and order, while allowing the writ 


petitions, the High Court issued certain directions contained in 


paragraph 49 and 50.  One of the directions issued by the High 


Court was that appropriate steps would be taken by respondent 


nos. 3 and 5 therein to exhume the body of late Baba with full 


respect   to   his   saintly-hood   and   to   arrange   for   its   appropriate 


honourable   burial   in   accordance   with   law,   within   a   period   of 


three days.
5.       One of the other directions  was to the respondent nos. 


1,   2,   4   and   5   therein   to   forthwith   take   all   appropriate   steps 


within   their   powers   to   restore   normalcy   in   the   area   so   as   to 


prevent   the   wrongdoers   and   mischief   mongers   from 


creating/continuing   to   affect   the   law   and   order   situation,   so 


that   schools   can   be   reopened   and   normal   tempo   of   life   is 


restored.
6.       The aforesaid directions have been issued in the light of 


the   facts   that   'Mohd.   Mustafa   Mohd.   Ansari',   popularly   known 


as   "Baba"   died   on   28.6.2011   at   about   00.30   hours   and   the 


burial was done about 5.30 a.m. on 29.6.2011.  Said Baba, who 


was respected by the people of the locality, used to sit regularly 


outside the school area being managed by the respondent no. 7, 


Central   Tanzeem   Committee.     The   school   authority   had   a 


hostel   classrooms,   playground,   etc.,   within   the   aforesaid 


premises   leased   out   to   it   by   the   State   Government   under   a 


lease deed to which reference shall be made hereinafter.  In the 


ground  floor  of  the  said  hostel,  there  are  certain  shops   facing 


the   main   road   and   in   front   of   shop   no.   11   and   off   the   road, 


Baba used to sit regularly.
7.       On   his   death,   his   body   was   taken   to   Tajbagh.     After 


performing  some   religious   functions  there,  a  group  of   persons 


decided to take the dead body to Mominpura burial ground on 


29.6.2011,   where   necessary   arrangements   were   also   made   for 


his   burial.     However,   all   of   a   sudden,   some   people   took   a 


decision   otherwise   and   took   the   body   of   Baba   and   forcibly 


entered into the premises of Respondent no. 7, dug portion of 


the   land   in   the   playground   of   the   school   and   buried   the   dead 


body there.  The aforesaid action was done by the said group of 


persons   by   forcibly   occupying   the   area   by   breaking   open   the 


lock of the school and also despite opposition from the lessee, 


namely, Respondent  no. 7, who informed the police about the 


illegal   action   committed   by   the   said   group   of   people.     As   a 


result   of   the   aforesaid   act,   and   forcible   action   taken   by   the 


group of people, there was disturbance of law and order in the 


locality   and   consequently   there   was   also   disturbance   of   the 


communal harmony amongst two sects at Mominpura.
8.      Since no action could be taken by the police, some writ 


petitioners   filed   three   writ   petitions   in   the   High   Court.   The 


first   writ   petition   came   to   be   filed   which   was   registered   as 


Criminal Writ Petition No. 375 of 2011.   The said writ petition 


was disposed of with certain directions on 1.7.2011.
9.      However,   as   the   situation   did   not   improve,   two   other 


writ   petitions   came   to   be   filed,   which   were   registered   as   W.P. 


No.  3123  of  2011  and  W.P.  No.  3177  of  2011.    All   the  parties 


entered   appearance   and   thereafter   the   writ   petitions   were 


heard in presence of all the parties and they were allowed and 


disposed of in terms of the observations made therein referred 


to earlier.
10.     Being   aggrieved   by   the   aforesaid   findings   recorded,   the 


Appellants are before this Court by filing the present Appeals, 


in which we have heard the learned counsel  appearing  for the 


contesting parties.
11.     Counsel   appearing   for   the   parties   have   drawn   our 


attention   to   various   documents   on   record   and   also   drawn   our 


attention   to   two   judgments   of   this   Court   to   which   reference 


shall   be   made   hereinafter.     One   of   the   contentions   that   is 


raised   by   Shri   Lalit,   the   senior   counsel   appearing   for   the 


Appellants   is   that   the   High   Court   acted   illegally   and   without 


jurisdiction in entertaining the writ petition in the manner in 


which it was entertained and that the High Court should have 


relegated the parties to the civil court for deciding the disputes 


between   the   parties.     The   next   contention   which   is   raised   by 


him  is that   according  to  the  Fatwa  issued  under  Mohammden 


law,   a   dead   body,   once   buried,   cannot   be   exhumed   and   in 


support of  the  same,  he has  referred to  certain passages from 


the Fatwas, which are annexed in the present appeals.
12.     The   aforesaid   submissions   of   the   counsel   appearing   for 


the   appellants   are   refuted   by   the   counsel   appearing   for   the 


respondents, who have also placed reliance on similar but other 


Fatwas and also on the two decisions of this Court.
13.     Having   considered   the   said   submissions,   we   propose   to 


dispose of these appeals by giving our reasons.
14.     Records   placed   before   us   clearly   disclose   the   very   fact 


that a group of people took law into their own hands, took the 


dead   body   away   forcibly   from   where   it   was   proposed   to   be 


buried   and   proper   arrangements   were   made   to   give   a   proper 


burial with honour and dignity and after taking it to the school 


premises, which is leased out in favour of the respondent no. 7 


herein, broke open forcibly the lock of the door of the school in 


the   entry   point   and   thereafter   forcibly   occupied   the   area 


concerned   and   buried   the   dead   body   in   the   said   school 


premises, without permission and without any authority.   The 


justification   that   is   sought   to   be   given   now   for   the   aforesaid 


illegal action is that Baba used to sit at that place where he has 


been   buried.     That   position   is   also   not   borne   out   from   the 


records as Baba was not sitting at the place where he has been 


buried   but   he   was   sitting   at   a   place   away   from   that   place, 


outside   the   school   premises   and   off   the   road   and   in   front   of 


shop   no.   11.     No   permission   was   taken   by   the   said   group   of 


people from the concerned authority, namely, the Government, 


the owner and the respondent No. 7, the lessee.  The said land 


was   given   by   the   Government   to   Respondent   no.   7   for   the 


purpose of establishing a Sarai.  In column no. 12 of the Nazul 


Khasra of the land in dispute, it is recorded that land cannot be 


used   for   any   purpose   other   than   Dharamshala   and   Garden. 


Even   the   lessee,   namely,   Respondent   No.   7,   could   not   have 


given   any   permission   for   any   burial   within   the   aforesaid 


premises, which was leased out by the Government in favour of 


Respondent   No.   7.   Despite   the   fact,   the   group   of   persons 


forcibly   occupied   the   said   place   and   buried   the   body   of   the 


Baba   at   an   unauthorised   place   without   any   authority.     The 


entire action, therefore, was illegal, without jurisdiction and in 


violation of the law which brought in disturbances in the area 


and   also   created   huge   law   and   order   problem   for   the 


Government.
15.     We   are   informed   that   curfew   had   to   be   imposed   in   the 


area   in   order   to   maintain   law   and   order   and   peaceful 


atmosphere.   Same   situation,   namely,   curfew,   is   still   being 


imposed even today for a particular period of time.
16.     Counsel appearing for the Appellants also submitted that 


the dead body cannot be exhumed under the Muslim law, once 


it   is   buried   at   a   particular   place.     In   order   to   appreciate   the 


aforesaid   contention,   we   have   looked   into   the   records.     The 


High   Court   has   also   referred   to   some   of   the   religious 


authorities, which were placed before it by the parties hereto. 


Page   406   of   Hanafi   Law   Relating   to   Wakf   or   Trusts   was   also 


placed before the High Court and has also been placed before us 


by the counsel appearing for the Respondents.  Page 406 of the 


said  law reveals  a Fatwa contained  in Fatawi  Alamgiri  at  page 


556, in which it is stated under the heading "A burial-ground"
in the following manner:
"When   a   body   has   been   buried   in   the   ground, 

       whether   for   a   long   or   short   time,   it   cannot   be 

       exhumed   without   some   excuse.     But   it   may   lawfully 

       be   exhumed   when   it   appears   that   the   land   was 

       usurped, or another is entitled to it under a right of 

       pre-emption".
17.      There is yet another Fatwa referred to by the High Court 


in paragraph 29 of the judgment which is Fatwa Rajviya Jild 4 


Safah 119 in Hadis, which is recognised Deoband Madarsa and 


which   is   known   as   'Fatwa   Darululoom   Deoband   (Mez   403). 


According to the said Fatwa, if such burial is without consent 


of land owner, land owner is entitled to remove it and use the 


land for proper purpose.  Besides, the aforesaid burial and using 


the   place   as   a   burial   ground   is   also   against   the   specific 


condition  of the Nazul Khasara by which  the  Government had 


leased out the land in favour of the respondent no. 7.
18.     In this connection, we may also refer to the decision of 


this Court in Gulam Abbas & Others Versus State of U.P. & Ors 


reported in (1984) 1 SCC 81.   In the said decision,  this Court 


has considered the scope and ambit of
Articles 25
and
26
of the 


Constitution   of   India   and   also   the   jurisdiction   of   this   court 


under
Article   32
of   the   Constitution   of   India.     In   the   said 


decision,   the   question   which   arose   for   consideration   was   that 


whether two graves could be shifted to some other place for the 


purpose   of   finding   out   some   permanent   solution   to   perennial 


problem   of   clashes   between   the   two   religious   communities. 


While   dealing   with   the   aforesaid   issue,   this   Court   considered 


various Fatwas issued by religious heads, namely, Head Muftis 


and   Shahi   Imams   from   Delhi,   Banaras   and   Patna   stating   the 


position   of   law   for   shifting   the   graves   under   the   Sheriat   law. 


After going through all those Fatwas, this Court found that the 


common   theme   in   all   these   Fatwas   is   that   under   Sheriat   law 


respecting of graves is the religious obligation of every Muslim, 


that   shifting   of   dead   bodies   after   digging   old   graves   in   which 


they   are   lying   buried   is   not   permissible   and   to   do   so   would 


amount   to   interference   with   their   religious   rights.     It   was 


further   found   that   such   religious   rights   of   every   person   and 


every   religious   are,   however,   subject   to   "public   order",   the 


maintenance whereof is paramount in the larger interest of the 


society.   It was also held that if it becomes necessary to shift 


graves in certain situations and exigencies of public order, the 


same   would   surely   provide   a   requisite   situation,   especially   as 


the fundamental rights under
Articles 25
and
26
are expressly 


made subject to public order.
19.      However,   another   decision   which   may   also   have 


relevance   is   one   which   arises   out   of   the   same   subject   matter 


and   heard   subsequently   in   another   writ   petition   filed   in   this 


Court   between    Abdul   Jalil   &   Ors.   Versus  State   of   U.P.   &   Ors. 


Reported in (1984) 2 SCC 138, wherein it was held that Muslim 


graves   coming   up   unauthorisedly   and   illegally   on   others'   land 


can be shifted in the larger interest of society for maintaining 


public   order.     It   was   also   held   that   such   action   of   shifting   of 


graves would not be un-Islamic and also would not be violative 


of
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution of India.
20.      The   situation   which   was   created   and   under   which   the 


aforesaid   burial   had   taken   place   within   the   school   premises 


created   disturbances   of   public   order   and   in   order   to   maintain 


the public order, there could be shifting of Muslim grave from 


an unauthorised place to a place which is authorised by law for 


such   burial.   Besides,   interring   a   corpse   in   an   unauthorised 


place without permission or consent of the owner and lessee of 


the property amounts to usurping somebody else's property.
21.     Since there was statutory violation in the unauthorised 


action of burial of the saint, in our considered opinion,
Article 


226
of the Constitution of India was the only remedial measure 


available, which could be taken for immediate redressal of the 


grievances.  There was statutory violation in the instant case of
Section 269
of the City of Nagpur Corporation Act and as held 


by   the   High   Court,   there   was   also   violation   of
Section   133
of 


the   Code   of   Criminal   Procedure.   The   action   done   created 


disturbance   of   law   and   order   and   public   order   and   in   that 


situation   to   restore   peace   and   communal   harmony   and   to 


control the volatile situation, the recourse taken of filing a writ 


petition cannot be said to be unwarranted.
22.     In that view of the matter, we find no reason to interfere 


with   the   orders   passed   by   the   High   Court   and   dismiss   these 


appeals. We also direct that the dead body of the saint would be 


exhumed   from   the   place   of   its   present   burial   and   shifted   to 


another   appropriate   place   and   buried   in   accordance   with   law 


with   all   dignity   and   respect   and   he   shall   be   laid   in   peace   for 


enabling his devotees to offer their prayers and respects as and 


when they desire in accordance with law.
23.      With   the   aforesaid   observations,   these   appeals   are 


dismissed but leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
............................................J

                                               (Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)





                                              ...........................................J

                                               (ANIL R. DAVE)


NEW DELHI,

JULY 20, 2011.