[Cites
6
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Kalpana Dilip Bahirat vs Pune Municipal Corp.& Ors on 27 June, 2013
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2013 SC 112, (2013) 9 SCALE 690 2014 (15) SCC 654, 2014 (15) SCC 654
Bench:
Ranjan Gogoi
,
A.K. Patnaik
REPORTABLE




                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4805 OF 2013
                               ARISING OUT OF
                SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO. 19296 of 2013






      KALPANA DILIP BAHIRAT                 Petitioner(s)


                       VERSUS


      PUNE MUNICIPAL CORP.& ORS.            Respondent(s)




                                  JUDGMENT
Leave granted.
2.    This is an appeal against the judgment dated 9th April, 2013  of
      the Bombay High Court in Writ Petition No. 3315  of  2013  by  way  of
      special leave petition under
Article 136
of the Constitution.
3.    The facts very briefly are that the appellant contested election
      to the Pune Municipal Corporation held in December,  2011  to  a  seat
      reserved for Other Backward Classes and filed as proof of his caste  a
      caste certificate dated 3-7-2008 issued by the competent authority and
      caste validity certificate dated 26-8-2010 purportedly issued  by  the
      Caste  Scrutiny  Committee  under  the  Maharashtra  Schedule  Castes,
      Scheduled Tribes, De-notified Tribes (Vimukta Jatis), Nomadic  Tribes,
      Other Backward Classes and Special Backward  Category  (Regulation  of
      Issuance and Verification of) Caste Certificate Act, 2000  (for  short
      'the 2000 Act'). She was declared elected as a Corporator for Ward No.
      40-A on 17-02-2012. Mrs. Laxmi Balasaheb Ghodake, who  also  contested
      the election as a  member  of  Other  Backward  Class  filed  Election
      Petition No. 26 of 2012 before the Court of  the  Principal  Judge  of
      Small Causes, Pune challenging the election of the  appellant.  Though
      the election petition  is  pending  and  has  not  been  decided,  the
      Commissioner of Municipal Corporation on  receiving  information  that
      the Caste Certificate, on the basis of which the  appellant  contested
      the election,  was  never  actually  issued  by  the  concerned  Caste
      Scrutiny Committee, passed an order dated  26th  March,  2013  holding
      that the appellant has not submitted  genuine  caste  certificate  and
      because of that her election is ab-initio null and void and  declaring
      that the seat of Pune Municipal Corporator  from  Ward  No.  40-A  has
      become vacant  retrospectively  from  the  date  of  election  of  the
      appellant. Aggrieved, the appellant filed Writ Petition  No.  3315  of
      2013, but by the impugned judgment  and  order,  the  High  Court  has
      refused to  entertain  the  writ  petition  on  the  ground  that  the
      appellant did not approach the High Court under
Article 226
with clean
      hands. Hence, the appellant has preferred the  present  appeal  before
      this Court.
4.    Mr.  V.A.  Mohta,  learned  senior  counsel  appearing  for  the
      appellant submitted that the main contention  urged  before  the  High
      Court by the appellant was that
Article  243ZG
of  the  Constitution
      provides that no election to  any  municipality  shall  be  called  in
      question except by an election petition presented  to  such  authority
      and in such manner as is provided for by or under any law made by  the
      Legislature of a State notwithstanding anything in  the  Constitution.
      He submitted  that  since  the  appellant  had  been  elected  to  the
      Municipality, her election could be called  in  question  only  by  an
      Election Petition filed under
Section  16
of  the  Bombay  Provincial
      Municipal Corporations Act,  1949  (for  short  'the  1949  Act').  He
      submitted that the High Court has not gone into this question and  has
      dismissed the writ petition of the appellant on irrelevant grounds.
5.    Mr. Shekhar Naphade, learned senior counsel  appearing  for  the
      Municipal Corporation, on the other hand, referred to  the  provisions
      of Section 5B of the 1949 Act to submit  that  a  person  desirous  of
      contesting election to a seat reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
      Tribes or Backward Class as the case may be, has to submit along  with
      the nomination paper, a caste  certificate  issued  by  the  competent
      authority and a validity certificate issued by the Scrutiny  Committee
      in accordance with the provision of the 2000 Act. He further submitted
      that sub-section (4) of
Section 10
of the 2000  Act  clearly  provided
      that notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time  being
      in force, a person shall be disqualified for being  a  member  of  any
      statutory body if he has contested the election for  local  authority,
      co-operative society or any statutory body on the  seat  reserved  for
      any of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, De-notified Tribes (Vimukta
      Jatis), Nomadic Tribes, Other Backward  Classes  or  Special  Backward
      Category by procuring a false caste certificate as belonging  to  such
      caste, tribe or class  on such false caste certificate being cancelled
      by the Scrutiny Committee and the election of  such  person  shall  be
      deemed to have been terminated retrospectively from the  date  of  his
      election.
6.    In rejoinder, Mr. Mohta submitted that the appellant belongs  to
      the Other Backward Class and her claim that she belongs to  the  other
      Backward Class has not been decided by the  Caste  Scrutiny  Committee
      and, therefore, the provisions of
Section 10
of the 2000 Act will  not
      apply would be clear from sub-section (1) of
Section 10
of  the  2000
      Act.
7.    We have considered the submissions of the learned senior counsel
      for the parties and we find that Section 5B of the 1949  Act  provides
      as follows:
5B. Person contesting election for reserved seat to submit Caste
           Certificate and Validity Certificate.
Every person desirous of contesting election to a seat  reserved
           for the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or, as the  case  may
           be, Backward Class of citizens, shall  be  required  to  submit,
           along with the nomination papers, Caste  certificate  issued  by
           the Competent Authority and the Validity Certificate  issued  by
           the Scrutiny Committee in accordance with the provisions of  the
           Maharashtra  Scheduled  Castes,  Scheduled  Tribes,  De-notified
           Tribes (Vimukta Jatis), Nomadic Tribes, Other  Backward  Classes
           and  Special  Backward  Category  (Regulation  of  Issuance  and
           Verification of) Caste Certificate Act, 2000.
The language of the  aforesaid  provision  makes  it  clear  that  the
      nomination paper of a candidate contesting from a  seat  reserved  for
      Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes or Backward Class citizens  has  to
      be accompanied by a Caste Certificate issued by a competent  authority
      and the Validity Certificate  issued  by  the  Scrutiny  Committee  in
      accordance with the provisions of the 2000  Act.  In  this  case,  the
      nomination of the  appellant  was  accompanied  by  a  caste  validity
      certificate purported to have been issued by  the  Scrutiny  Committee
      constituted under the 2000 Act and admittedly Scrutiny  Committee  has
      not issued  the  caste  validity  certificate  which  accompanied  the
      nomination paper. In other words, admittedly,  the  certificate  which
      accompanied the nomination of the appellant was  a  false  certificate
      and was not required to be cancelled by the Caste Scrutiny Committee.
8.    We have perused sub-section (1) of
Section 10
of  the  2000  Act
      and we find that it applies  to  admission  to  reserved  seat  in  an
      educational institution and to appointment to a reserved post  in  the
      Government, local  authorities,  Government  Corporations,  Government
      aided institutions or co-operative societies and will not be attracted
      to the facts of the case. Instead, the consequences as provided in sub-
      section (4) of
Section 10
of the 2000 Act will follow. Sub-Section (4)
      of
Section 10
reads :
“Notwithstanding anything contained in  any  law  for  the  time
           being in force, a person  shall  be  disqualified  for  being  a
           member of any statutory body if he has  contested  the  election
           for local authority, co-operative society or any statutory  body
           on the seat reserved for  any  of  Scheduled  Castes,  Scheduled
           Tribes, De-notified  Tribes  (Vimukta  Jatis),  Nomadic  Tribes,
           Other Backward Classes or Special Backward Category by procuring
           a false caste certificate as belonging to such caste,  tribe  or
           class  on such false caste certificate being  cancelled  by  the
           Scrutiny Committee, and any benefits  obtained  by  such  person
           shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue and the election
           of  such  person  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been   terminated
           retrospectively.”


      The consequence is that the election of a person who has contested  on
      a seat reserved for  the  aforementioned  categories  on  false  caste
      certificate as belonging to such  caste,  tribe  or  class  “shall  be
      deemed to have been terminated retrospectively”. The deeming provision
      in sub-section (4) of
Section 10
of  the  2000  Act  is  a  statutory
      fiction which has to be given effect to and the  Commissioner  of  the
      Municipal Corporation has given effect to the  deeming  provision  and
      has thus acted in accordance with law.
9.    Mr. Mohta is right that in view of  the  provisions  of
Article
      243ZG
of the Constitution, the election of a  person  elected  to  the
      Municipality can only be called in question by an  Election   petition
      presented to such authority and in such manner as is provided  for  by
      or under any law made by the Legislature of the State and
Section  16
of the 1949 Act provides for the  manner  in  which  election  to  any
      municipality can be called in question, but the opening words of  sub-
      section  (4)  of
Section  10
of  the   2000   Act,   provide    that
      “notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time  being  in
      force”, which obviously will also include
Section 16
of the 1949  Act,
      the deeming provision in sub-section (4) of
Section 10
of the 2000 Act
      will have to be given effect to and will not await the outcome  of  an
      election petition. We, therefore, maintain the  order  passed  by  the
      High Court for the reasons indicated in this judgment.
10.   We however make it clear that it will be open for the  appellant
      to pursue her claim before the Caste Scrutiny Committee  that  she  is
      entitled to a caste certificate as  a  person  belonging  to  Backward
      Class and the Caste Scrutiny Committee will consider the same  on  its
      own merits in accordance with the decisions of  this  Court  including
      the decision in
Anand Vs. Committee
for Scrutiny and  Verification  of
      Tribe Claims (2012) 1 SCC 113. We also make it clear that in case  the
      appellant is furnished with a caste certificate by the Caste  Scrutiny
      Committee, she will be entitled to contest the election on  the  basis
      of such Caste Certificate irrespective of what we have  said  in  this
      order.
11.   Considering the facts and circumstances of the case,  the  costs
      awarded by the High Court are deleted. The interim  order  dated  17th
      June, 2013 passed by this Court stands vacated and the appeal and  the
      interlocutory application No. 4 stand disposed of accordingly.
............................J.
                                                              (A.K. PATNAIK)




                                              ............................J.
                                                              (RANJAN GOGOI)
     NEW DELHI,
     JUNE 27, 2013