[Cites
7
, Cited by
52
]
Supreme Court of India
Sri Chand Gupta vs Gulzar Singh And Anr on 22 October, 1991
Equivalent citations: 1992 AIR 123, 1991 SCR SUPL. (1) 538, AIR 1992 SUPREME COURT 123, 1992 (1) SCC 143, 1991 AIR SCW 2813, (1991) 6 JT 532 (SC), 1991 (6) JT 532, 1992 SCFBRC 161, 1992 HRR 204, 1992 (1) UJ (SC) 90, (1991) 2 RENCJ 557, (1991) 2 RENCR 702, (1992) 1 RENTLR 5, (1992) 19 ALL LR 242, (1992) 1 ALL RENTCAS 353, (1992) 46 DLT 6
Author:
K. Ramaswamy
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
Yogeshwar Dayal
PETITIONER:
SRI CHAND GUPTA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
GULZAR SINGH AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT22/10/1991

BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
YOGESHWAR DAYAL (J)

CITATION:
 1992 AIR  123		  1991 SCR  Supl. (1) 538
 1992 SCC  (1) 143	  JT 1991 (6)	532
 1991 SCALE  (2)949


ACT:
Delhi	 Rent	  Control   Act
.    1958.
Section
14(b)
--Sub-letting--Eviction  Petition--Eviction  order	  by
Rent  Controller and Tribunal---Order based on	inadmissible
evidence---Appraisal of evidence, interference with  concur-
rent findings of fact and dismissal of Eviction Petition  by
High Coutr hem justified.
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
:
Section 18
.
    Admission--Eviction proceedings---Admission by  tenant's
brother in an affidavit before Income Tax Authorities as  to
exclusive possession held not binding on the tenant.



HEADNOTE:
   The appellant-landlord filed an application under
Section
14(1)(b)
of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 for  ejectment
of  the respondents and the three courts concurrently  found
that  the  respondent  was the sole tenant.  Relying  on  an
affidavit  filed by tenant's brother before Income  Tax	 au-
thorities  in which he claimed exclusive possession as	ten-
ant, the Rent Controller and the Tribunal concluded that the
admission  made by the tenant's brother was binding  on	 the
tenant as a result of which sub-letting by tenant was proved
and consequently allowed the landlord's eviction petition.
    But	 the High Court dismissed the eviction	petition  by
holding	 that since the admission made by  tenant's  brother
was not binding on the tenant, the finding of sub-letting by
tenant was vitiated in law because it was based on  inadmis-
sible evidence.
    In	appeal to this court it was contended on  behalf  of
the landlord that (i) the admission made by tenant's brother
was  binding on the tenant under
section 18
of the  Evidence
Act;  (ii)  the	 High Court erred in  interfering  with	 the
concurrent finding of fact.
  Dismissing the appeal, this Court, 538
539
    HELD: 1.
Section 18
of the Evidence Act postulates	that
statements made by a party to the proceeding, or by an agent
to any such party, whom the Court regards, under the circum-
stances of the case, as expressly or impliedly authorised by
him to make them, are admissions. Equally statement made  by
a  person who has any proprietary or pecuniary	interest  in
the  subject  matter of the proceedings	 or  persons  having
derivative  interest make statements during the	 continuance
of the interest also are admissions. [540 H, 541 A-B]
    2.	In  the instant case,  admittedly,  the	 respondent-
tenant was not a party to the affidavit signed by his broth-
er. Therefore, the admission made by his brother that he  is
the  tenant in exclusive possession of the demised  premises
does  not bind the respondent-tenant. Once it is found	that
respondent alone is the tenant, his brother cannot claim  to
have  any  pecuniary or derivative interest in	the  demised
premises.  He is not an agent of his  tenant-brother.  Since
the admission made by tenant's brother was inadmissible	 and
not binding on the tenant, the High Court rightly held	that
the finding of sob-letting or parting with possession of the
premises in dispute was vitiated in law as it was  primarily
based on inadmissible evidence. Consequently, it was open to
the  High Court to re-examine and reappreciate the  evidence
on record. [541 B-E]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 849 of
1987.
From the Judgment and Order dated 24.9.1985 of the Delhi
High Court in S.A.O. ('Second Appeal From Order) no. 295  of
1981.
K.R. Nagaraja, R.S. Hegde and C.B. Nath Babu for the  Appel-
lant.
M .L. Bhargava and Randbit Jain for the Respondents.
The following Order of the Court was delivered:
The	 appellant landlord had filed an  application  under
Sec. 14(1)(b)
of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (for short
the  'Act') for ejectment of the respondents. All the  three
courts	concurrently  found that Gulzar Singh was  the	sole
tenant.	 The Rent Controller and the Tribunal found that  he
sublet the demised premises to Avtar Singh, his brother	 and
therefore  ordered ejectment. The High Court found that	 the
tenant	was in exclusive possession of the premises  bearing
No. W.Z. 258/4, Subash Bazar, Nangal
540
Raya,  New Jail Road, New Delhi, and that he did not  sublet
the  premises to Avtar Singh. On that premise  the  petition
for  ejectment	was dismissed. Thus this appeal	 by  special
leave under
Art. 136
of the Constitution.
Shri  Nagaraja, learned counsel for the appellant  has	con-
tended	that the High Court has committed a gross  error  in
interfering with the concurrent finding of fact recorded  by
the Addl. Rent Controller and the Rent control Tribunal that
the tenant, Gulzar Singh has sublet the premises in question
to  his brother, Avtar Singh and that it is not open to	 the
High court to interfere with the concurrent finding of fact.
He  placed reliance on
Sec. 18
of the Evidence Act and	said
that in an affidavit filed by Avtar singh before  Income-Tax
Authorities he claimed exclusive possession as a tenant	 and
that, therefore, the admission made by him would be  binding
on  Gulzar  Singh. The Addl. Rent Controller  and  the	Rent
Control Tribunal relying upon this admission of Avtar  Singh
and other oral evidence concluded that Avtar Singh alone was
in exclusive possession and that, therefore, subletting	 was
proved	as a fact. We find no substance in  the	 contention.
Section 18
of the Evidence Act. reads as under:-
"18.  Admission by party to proceeding or	 his
	      agent; by suitor in representative  character;
	      by  party	 interested  in	 subject-matter	  by
	      person  from whom interest derived.  -  State-
	      ments  made by a party to the proceedings,  or
	      by an agent to any such party, whom the  court
	      regards, under the circumstances of the  case,
	      as expressly or impliedly authorised by him to
	      made them, are admissions.
Statements made by parties to suits, suing  or
	      sued  in a representative character,  are	 not
	      admissions,  unless they were made  while	 the
	      party making them held that character.
	      Statements made by -
(1)  persons  whom  have	any  proprietary  or
	      pecuniary	 interest in the subject  matter  of
	      the  proceeding and who make the statement  in
	      their character of persons so interested, or
	      (2) persons from whom the parties to the	suit
	      have  derived  their interest in	the  subject
	      matter  of the suit, are admissions,  if	they
	      are made during the continuance of the  inter-
est of the persons making the statement."
Section 18
postulates that statements made by a party to the
541
proceeding, or by an agent to any such party, whom the Court
regards, under the circumstances of the. case, as  expressly
or impliedly authorised by him to make them, are admissions.
Equally statement made by a person who has an proprietary or
pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the	 proceedings
or persons having derivative interest make statements during
the continuance of the interest also are admissions. In this
case,	admittedly,  Gulzar  Singh  was	 not  a	  party	  to
the .affidavit signed by Avtar Singh. Therefore, the  admis-
sion  made by Avtar Singh that he is the tenant m  exclusive
possession  of	the demised premises does  not	bind  Gulzar
Singh. In view of the plea and stand of the appellant, Avtar
Singh  cannot  claim to have any pecuniary interest  or	 any
joint  interest alongwith Gulzar Singh in the demised  prem-
ises.  Once it is found that Gulzar Singh alone is the	ten-
ant,  as  admittedly pleaded by the appellant,	Avtar  Singh
cannot claim to have any pecuniary or derivative interest in
the  demised premises. He is not an agent of  Gulzar  Singh.
Under  those  circumstances, as rightly found  by  the	High
Court, that the admission made by Avtar Singh in the affida-
vit  is	 inadmissible and does not bind Gulzar	Singh.	Once
that  admission is excluded from consideration, there is  no
other evidence worth accepting to conclude that Avtar  Singh
was  in	 exclusive possession as a tenant.  The	 High  Court
rightly held that the finding of subletting or parting	with
possession of the premises in dispute was vitiated in law as
it  was	 primarily based on  inadmissible  evidence.  Having
found the finding vitiated, it was open to the High Court to
re-examine  and	 reappreciate  the evidence  on	 record.  On
reappraisal it disbelieved-the oral evidence. We do not find
any  error  in	such reappraisal. It is then  sought  to  be
contended  that Gulzar Singh had other business and  it	 im-
plies that he is not in exclusive possession of the  demised
premises. We find no force in the contention. It may be that
Gulzar	Singh had other business but that does not  lead  to
the conclusion that Gulzar singh is not in exclusive posses-
sion of the demised premises as tenant or that he sublet the
premises to Avtar Singh.
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed, but in the circum-
stances, without costs.
T.N.A.						      Appeal
dismissed.
542