[Cites
6
, Cited by
325
]
Supreme Court of India
Poddar Steel Corporation vs Ganesh Engineering Works And Others on 6 May, 1991
Equivalent citations: 1991 AIR 1579, 1991 SCR (2) 696, AIR 1991 SUPREME COURT 1579, 1991 (3) SCC 273, 1991 AIR SCW 1522, 1991 ALL. L. J. 706, 1991 (2) UJ (SC) 181, (1991) 2 ARBILR 94, (1991) 2 BANKLJ 361, (1991) 2 BANKCLR 457, (1991) 2 LANDLR 368, (1991) 2 COMLJ 275, (1991) 2 JT 577 (SC), 1991 UJ(SC) 2 181, (1991) 2 SCR 696 (SC), (1991) 2 LJR 21, (1991) IJR 466 (SC)
Author:
L.M.  Sharma
Bench:
L.M.  Sharma
,
M.M. Punchhi
PETITIONER:
PODDAR STEEL CORPORATION

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
GANESH ENGINEERING WORKS AND OTHERS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT06/05/1991

BENCH:
SHARMA, L.M. (J)
BENCH:
SHARMA, L.M. (J)
PUNCHHI, M.M.

CITATION:
 1991 AIR 1579		  1991 SCR  (2) 696
 1991 SCC  (3) 273	  JT 1991 (2)	577
 1991 SCALE  (1)928


ACT:
     Constitution of India:
Articles 226
and
136.
Railway  contract-Tender  notice-Conditions-Payment  of
earnest money stipulated by cash or demand draft drawn on  a
specified bank-Acceptance of banker's cheque drawn on a bank
other  than  the stipulated bank-Validity  of-Essential	 and
ancilliary conditions-Distinction between.



HEADNOTE:
     The  Diesel Locomotive Works, Indian  Railway,  invited
tenders	 for disposal of one lot of Ferrous scrap.   One  of
the  conditions mentioned in the tender notice was that	 the
earnest money should be deposited by cash or by demand draft
drawn of the State Bank of India.  The appellant, one of the
intending purchasers, submitted his tender accompanied by  a
cheque of Union Bank of India drawn on its own branch.	 The
tender of the appellant, being the highest, was accepted and
tenders	 of respondent no. 1 and some others were  rejected.
The  Tender Committee had verified from Union Bank of  India
the bona fide of appellant's cheque and then only decided to
accept its tender.
     Respondent no. 1 filed writ petition in the High  Court
challenging  the rejection of its tender, and acceptance  of
appellant's  tender  on the ground that the latter  did	 not
comply	with the necessary condition for payment of  earnest
money with the tender.	The appellant contended that it	 had
substantially complied with the requirement by sending	with
its  tender  a banker's cheque marked and certified  by	 the
Union  Bank  of India as good for payment.  The	 High  Court
opined	that respondent's tender was rightly for failure  to
deposit	 the  earnest money, but allowed the  writ  petition
holding	 that  the  appellant  also  did  not  satisfy	 the
condition  regarding payment of the earnest money since	 the
cheque	sent  was from a bank other than the State  Bank  of
India  as  stipulated, and as such the	authorities  had  no
power	to  accept  appellant's	 tender.    Aggrieved,	 the
appellant  preferred  the appeal by special  leave  to	this
Court.
     Allowing the appeal, this Court
						       697
     HELD:  1. As a matter of general proposition it  cannot
be laid down that an authority inviting tenders in bound  to
give  effect  to  every	 term mentioned	 in  the  notice  in
meticulous  detail,  and  is not entitled to  waive  even  a
technical  irregularity of little or no	 significance.	 The
requirement  in a tender notice can be classified  into	 two
categories-those which lay down the essential conditions  of
eligibility,  and the other which are merely  ancilliary  or
subsidiary  with  the  main object to  be  achieved  by	 the
condition.   In	 the first case the  authority	issuing	 the
tender	may  be required to enforce them  rigidly.   In	 the
other case it must be open to the authority to deviate	from
and not to insist upon the strict literal compliance of	 the
condition in appropriate case. [699E-G]
     2. In the instant case, in submitting the cheque  drawn
on  the	 Union Bank of India and not on the  State  Bank  of
India,	the relevant condition of the tender notice was	 not
obeyed	literally;  but the said cheque must be	 treated  as
sufficient  for the purpose of achieving the object  of	 the
condition and the Tender Committee took the abundant caution
by  a further verification from the bank.  In the  situation
it could not be said that the Diesel Locomotive Works had no
authority  to waive the technical literal compliance of	 the
clause,	 regarding  manner  of	payment	 of  earnest   money
especially  when  it was in its interest not to	 reject	 the
said bid which was the highest. [699D-E; 700F-G]
     GJ	 Fernandez  v. State of Karnataka & Ors.,  [1990]  2
SCC  488  and  Sita  Ram  Jhunjhunwala	v.  Bombay   bullion
Association Ltd. & Anr., [1965] 35 Company Cases 526, relied
on.
     Ramana   Dayaram	Shetty	v.   International   Airport
Authority of India & Ors., [1979] 3 SCC 489; Spargo's  Case,
1873  LR 8 Ch. App. 407; M/s B.D Yadav and M.R.	 Meshram  v.
Administrator of the City of Nagpur, AIR 1984 Bombay 351 and
T.V.  Subharda Amma v. Kerala Board of Revenue	and  Others,
AIR 1982 Kerala, 81, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2272  of
1991.
From  the	Judgment and Order dated 12.11.1990  of	 the
Allahabad High Court  in C.M.W.P. No. 11192 of 1990.
Sunil Gupta and S.Sukumaran for the Appellant.
     Dr.  Anand Prakash, B.K. Prasad and S.N. Sikka  for the
Respondents.
698
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     SHARMA, J. Special Leave is granted.
2.	 In  response to a notice inviting  tenders  by	 the
Diesel	Locomotive  Works.  Indian Railways,  in  connection
with  disposal	of  one lot of Ferrous Scrap,  a  number  of
tenders were submitted by the appellant, the respondent	 no.
1  and	other  intending purchasers.   The  tenders  of	 the
respondent  no.	 1 and some other bidders were	rejected  as
defective  and the appellant's offer being the	highest	 was
accepted,  and accordingly the appellant deposited a sum  of
about  Rs.15  lacs.   The respondent no	 .1  challenged	 the
decision by a writ petition before the Allahabad High  Court
contending that there was  no defect in its tender and	that
the  tender  of the appellant could not	 have  been  validly
accepted as the necessary condition of payment of Rs. 50,000
as earnest money with the tender had not been complied with.
The  application  was resisted on the grounds (i)  that	 the
respondent  no. 1 having not deposited the earnest money  at
all  was not entitled to a consideration of its	 tender	 and
has no locus standi in the present matter; and (ii) that the
appellant had substantially complied with the requirement by
sending	 with  its  tender  a  Banker's	 Cheque	 marked	 and
certified  by the Union Bank of India as good  for  payment.
The  High  Court  accepted  the	 appellant's  first  ground,
holding	 that the tender of the respondent had been  rightly
rejected  for  failure	to deposit the	earnest	 money,	 but
allowed the writ petition on the finding that the  appellant
also did not satisfy the condition no.6 of the tender notice
as the earnest money was offered by the Banker's Cheque of a
bank  other  than the State Bank of India mentioned  in	 the
said  clause.	The High Court directed the  authorities  to
consider  the other valid tenders and further observed	that
should	the  other tenders be found to	be  unacceptable  it
would  be open to the authorities to invite  fresh  tenders.
the present appeal is directed against this judgment.
3.	 The case of the appellant has been that  its tender
mentioned the highest amount of one and a half crores rupees
for  the  2000 M.T. of Ferrous Scrap which was a  very	fair
price,	 and  the  authorities	were  absolutely  right	  in
accepting the same.  With respect to the alleged  deficiency
in the matter of deposit of the earnest amount, the stand is
that a Banker's Cheque is as good as cash and especially  so
when  a	 verification from the bank in	question  about	 its
authenticity was made and the Bank's assurance to honour the
same  was  obtained.  Admittedly, the Tender  Committee	 had
taken  the precaution of getting the matter  confirmed	from
the appellant's bank before deciding to accept his tender.
699
4.	 The  relevant clause 6 of the notice  required	 the
tender	to be accompanied by earnest money calculated at  5%
of the offer  under  the tender	 subject  to a maximum of Rs
50,000	and  in terms permitted the deposit by	cash  or  by
demand	draft drawn on the State Bank of India.	 the  defect
pointed out by the respondent no. 1 and accepted by the High
Court  is in the appellant sending the cheque of  the  Union
Bank  of India drawn on its own branch and not on the  State
Bank.	By  the impugned judgment it has been held  that  in
view  of this defect the authorities had no power to  accept
the appellant's tender.
5. the learned counsel for the appellant has  contended
that having regard to the circumstances in the case it	must
be  held that the Tender Committee had the power  to  accept
the  appellant's  tender. Referring to the books  "Bills  of
Exchange"  by  Byles, and "Cheques in Law  and	Practice" by
M.S.  Parthasarathy,  it  has  been  argued  that  certified
cheques are as good as cash and the irregularity relied upon
in  the appellant's submitting his tender could	 be  validly
waived	by the Diesel Locomotive Works.	 Reliance  was	also
placed	on M/s
B.D. Yadav and M.R. Meshram v.  Administrator
of the City of Nagpur
,
AIR 1984 Bombay 351 and T.V  Subhadra
Amma v. Kerala Board of Revenue and Others
, AIR 1982  Kerala
81.
6. It is true that in submitting its tender accompanied
by a cheque of the Union Bank of India and not of the  State
Bank  the clause no. 6 of the tender notice was	 not  obeyed
literally,  but the question is as to whether the said	non-
compliance  deprived  the  Diesel Locomotive  Works  of	 the
authority  to  accept  the  bid.  As  a	 matter	 of  general
proposition  it	 cannot be held that an	 authority  inviting
tenders	 is bound to give effect to every term mentioned  in
the  notice  in meticulous detail, and is  not	entitled  to
waive  even  a	technical  irregularity	 of  little  or	  no
significance.	The requirements in a tender notice  can  be
classified  into  two categories-those which  lay  down	 the
essential conditions of eligibility and the others which are
merely	ancillary or subsidiary with the main object  to  be
achieved by the condition.  In the first case the  authority
issuing the tender may be required to enforce them  rigidly.
In  the	 other	cases it must be open to  the  authority  to
deviate	 from  and  not to insist upon	the  strict  literal
compliance  of	the condition in  appropriate  cases.	This
aspect	was examined by this Court in GJ Fernandez v.  State
of  Karnataka 7 Ors., [1990] 2 SCC  488 a case dealing	with
tenders.  Although not in an entirely identical situation as
the  present one, the observations in the  judgment  support
our  view.
The High Court has, in the	 impugned  decision,
relied	upon
Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International  Airport
Authority of India &
700
Ors.
, [1979] 3 SCC 489 but has failed to appreciate that the
reported  case	belonged  to the first	category  where	 the
strict	compliance of the condition could be insisted  upon.
The  authority
in  that case
, by  not	insisting  upon	 the
requirement  in	 the tender notice which  was  an  essential
condition  of eligibility, bestowed a favour on one  of	 the
bidders,  which	 amounted to  illegal  discrimination.	 The
judgment  indicates  that  the Court  closely  examined	 the
nature	of  the	 condition which had been  relaxed  and	 its
impact	before answering the question whether it could	have
validly condoned the shortcoming in the tender in  question.
This  part  of	the  judgment  demonstrates  the  difference
between	 the  two  categories of  the  conditions  discussed
above.	However it remains to be seen as to which of the two
clauses, the present case belongs.
7.	  The  nature of payment by a certified	 cheque	 was
considered by this Court in
Sita Ram Jhunjhunwala v.  Bombay
Bullion	 Association  Ltd. & Anr.
, [1965] 35  Company  Cases
526.  Several objections were taken there in support of	 the
plea that the necessary condition in regard to	payment	 was
not  satisfied	and in that context this  Court	 quoted	 the
observations from the judgment in an English decision  (vide
Spargo's  case:	 1873  L.R. & Ch. App. 407)  that  it  is  a
general	 rule of law that in every case where a	 transaction
resolves itself into paying money by A to B and then handing
it  back again by B to A, if the parties meet  together	 and
agree to set  one demand against the other, they need not go
through the form and ceremony of handing the money backwards
and forwards.  This Court applied that the observations to a
transaction  requiring payment by one to another.
The	High
Court's	 decisions  in
B.D. Yadav
's case and
T.V.  Subhadra
Amma
's case are also illustrations where literal  compliance
of every term of the tender notice was not insisted  upon.
8.	 In  the instant case the certified  cheque  of	 the
Union  Bank of India drawn on is own branch must be  treated
as sufficient for the purpose of achieving the object of the
condition   and	 the   Tender Committee	 took  the  abundant
caution	 by a further verification from the bank.   In	this
situation  it  is  not	correct	 to  hold  that	 the  Diesel
Locomotive  Works  had no authority to waive  the  technical
literal compliance of clause 6, specially when it was in its
interest  of  not  to  reject the said	bid  which  was	 the
highest.  We, therefore, set aside the impugned judgment and
dismiss	 the  writ petition of the respondent  no.  1  filed
before	the High Court.	 The appeal is	accordingly  allowed
with costs through out.
R.P.					 Appeal allowed.
701