[Cites
6
, Cited by
62
]
Supreme Court of India
Surinder Singh Sibia vs Vijay Kumar Sood on 10 October, 1991
Equivalent citations: 1992 AIR 1540, 1991 SCR SUPL. (1) 467, AIR 1992 SUPREME COURT 1540, 1992 (1) SCC 70, 1992 AIR SCW 1725, 1991 (2) UJ (SC) 758, 1991 UJ(SC) 2 758, 1991 HRR 543, (1991) 4 JT 125 (SC), (1991) 2 RENCR 576, (1991) 2 RENTLR 418, (1991) 2 LJR 706, (1992) 1 PUN LR 326, (1992) 1 CURLJ(CCR) 464
Author:
R.M.  Sahai
Bench:
R.M.  Sahai
,
T.K.  Thommen
PETITIONER:
SURINDER SINGH SIBIA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
VIJAY KUMAR SOOD

DATE OF JUDGMENT10/10/1991

BENCH:
SAHAI, R.M. (J)
BENCH:
SAHAI, R.M. (J)
THOMMEN, T.K. (J)

CITATION:
 1992 AIR 1540		  1991 SCR  Supl. (1) 467
 1992 SCC  (1)	70	  JT 1991 (4)	125
 1991 SCALE  (2)781


ACT:
Himachal Pradesh Urban Rent Control Act, 1987
:
Section  14(3)
-  Second  Proviso---Expression  "has	 not
vacated	 such  building	 without  sufficient   cause"--Scope
of--Possession	given  be consequence of  requisition  order
cannot be held vacation not without sufficient cause.
    Himachal Pradesh Requisition and Acquisition of  Immova-
ble
Property Act, 1972
:
    Validity  or  invalidity  of  requisition  order--Cannot
reflect	  on   sufficiency   cause   under
Rent    Control
Act
----Requisition  Proceedings--Non-filing of objection  by
Landlord--Effect of.
Words and Phrases:



HEADNOTE:
"Vacation "--"Sufficient Cause"-- Meaning of.
Section 14(3)
of the Himachal Pradesh Urban Rent Control
Act 1987 enables a landlord to obtain an order for  eviction
of the tenant if he requires the building for his own  occu-
pation and he has no other building  in the area  concerned.
This right however stands deferred under second proviso	 for
a period of five years if the landlord has vacated a  build-
ing in use without sufficient cause.
The  appellant,	 an owner of a house, was in  occupation  of
first floor of the house, while the second floor was let out
to a Judge. His entire house is requisitioned for occupation
of a Judge. The appellant did not file any  objection  under
section 3(2) of the Requisition Act. However, after vacating
the  building  he applied for eviction	of  respondent.	 The
Courts	in  view rejected his application  by  applying	 the
second proviso to section 14(3) of the Himachal Rent Control
Act.
468
    Allowing  the  Landlord's appeal and setting  aside	 the
order of Courts below, this Court,
    HELD:  1. 'Sufficient cause' is an expression  which  is
found  in various statutes. It has been construed  liberally
in keeping with its ordinary dictionary meaning as  adequate
or  enough.  That  is any justifiable  reason  resulting  in
vacation  has  to  be understood as  sufficient	 cause.	 For
instance  economic  difficulty or  financial  stringency  or
family	reasons may compel a landlord to let out a  building
in  his	 occupation. So long it is found to be	genuine	 and
bona fide it would amount to vacating a building for  suffi-
cient cause. And the bar of second proviso stands lifted  In
other  words if the vacation of the building was not a	pre-
tence  or pretext the proviso could not frustrate the  right
of landlord to approach the controller for necessary  direc-
tion to tenant to hand over possession to him. [470 B-C]
    1.1	 Vacation of a building by landlord in pursuance  of
an order of requisition by the competent authority could not
be characterised as 'not without sufficient cause'. A  land-
lord  has  no option. He is required to	 vacate	 under	con-
straint of law. Therefore the statutory restriction  created
by second proviso would not apply in such a case. [470-D]
    2. Validity or invalidity of an order under	 Requisition
Act  could  not adversely reflect on  sufficiency  of  cause
under
Rent Control Act
. Reason for either arises in  differ-
ent circumstances. Vacating a building, even under an incor-
rect order passed by a competent authority under Requisition
Act would be for sufficient reason. The Rent Control author-
ities could not examine merit of the order under Requisition
Act  Therefore	it could not be a  valid  consideration	 for
holding	 that  the building was vacated	 without  sufficient
cause.	The courts below thus committed an error of  law  in
applying  second proviso to reject the application filed  on
behalf of the appellant. [470-H, 471-A-B]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2383 of
1988.
From the Judgment and Order dated 1.4.1988 of the  Hima-
chal Pradesh High Court in Civil Revision No. 29 of 1988.
N.S. Hegde and Ms. Madhu Moolchandani for the Appellant.
469
Ms. Asha Jain Madan for the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
R.M.  SAHAI,  J. The short but interesting question  of	 law
that  arises  or  consideration	 in  this  appeal,  directed
against	 judgment of the Himachal Pradesh High Court, is  if
possession  given  to  competent  authority  under
Himachal
Pradesh	 Requisition and Acquisition of	 Immovable  Property
Act,  1972
(for brevity 'Requisition Act') is	vacation  of
premises  without sufficient cause within second proviso  to
sub-section (3) of
Section 14
of Himachal Pradesh Urban Rent
Control Act, 1987 deemed to have come into force with effect
from  17th  November 1971 (hereinafter referred	 to  as	 the
Act').
Sub-section (3) of
Section 14
is extracted below:
"(3) A landlord may apply to the  Controller
	      for  an order directing the tenant to put	 the
	      landlord	in possession (a) in the case  of  a
	      residential building, if -
(i) he requires it for his own occupation:
Provided	that  he is  not  occupying  another
	      residential  building  owned by  him,  in	 the
	      urban area concerned: Provided further that he
	      has not vacated such a building without suffi-
	      cient cause within five years of the filing of
	      the application, in the said urban area;"
It enables a landlord to obtain an order for eviction of
the  tenant if he requires the building for his own  occupa-
tion  and  he has no other building in the  area  concerned.
This right however stands deferred under second proviso	 for
a period of five years if the landlord has vacated a  build-
ing in his use without sufficient cause. The question is how
the  expression	 he has not vacated  such  building  without
sufficient cause' in the second proviso should be construed.
It has two aspects one whether the proviso applies to volun-
tary vacation only or it extends to vacating under  pressure
of legal proceedings such as requisition order by  competent
Authority. Second even assuming that the expression  'vacate
such  building' is given wide interpretation does giving  up
possession in consequence of a requisition order amounts  to
vacation  without sufficient cause? Vacate, normally,  means
to  go away, to leave. The setting or context in  which	 the
word has been used does not indicate ,my different  meaning.
Nor it is
470
necessary to decide if it applies to voluntary vacation only
as it was urged that even assuming that giving up possession
in pursuance of requisition order is included in the proviso
can  it	 be said to be without sufficient  cause  Sufficient
cause  is an expression which is found in various  statutes.
It  has	 been construed liberally in keeping with its  ordi-
nary  dictionary meaning of adequate or enough. That is	 any
justifiable  reason resulting in vacation has to  be  under-
stood as sufficient. cause. For instance economic difficulty
in financial stringency or family reasons may compel a land-
lord  to let out building in his occupation. So long  it  is
found to be genuine and bona fide and would amount to vacat-
ing  a building for sufficient cause. And the bar of  second
proviso stands lifted. In other words if the vacation of the
building was not a pretence or pretext the proviso could not
frustrate  the right of landlord to approach the  controller
for necessary direction to tenant to hand over possession to
him.
Vacation  of a building by landlord in pursuance  of  an
order of requisition by the competent authority could not be
characterised as, 'not without sufficient cause'. A landlord
has no option. He is required to vacate under constraint  of
law.  Therefore the statutory restriction created by  second
proviso	 would	not apply in such a case. Does it  make	 any
difference in law or the action of the landlord is  rendered
without	 sufficient cause as  he did not file any  objection
in  requisition proceedings either under mistaken advice  or
ignorance of law? For this it is necessary to narrate  facts
in brief. The appellant is owner of Kennilworth	 house/Simla
and  its  annexure He was in occupation of  first  floor  of
Kennilworth house. Second floor was let out to the  District
Judge, who, later was elevated to the Bench. For his occupa-
tion  the entire house was requisitioned. The appellant	 did
not  file  any objection. After vacating,  the	building  he
applied	 for  eviction to respondent from  the	annexe.	 His
application was rejected as it would found to be in teeth of
the  second proviso. It was held that the order of  requisi-
tion was passed because the appellant did not show any cause
be  filing any objection under sub-section (2) of Section  3
of  the Requisition Act even though proviso to the  sub-sec-
tion precluded any property or part from being requisitioned
if  it was in bonafide use by the owner. The explanation  of
the appellant that he was advised by his lawyer not to	file
an  objection as the building was required for a High  Court
judge, was not accepted.
Validity or invalidity of an order under Requisition Act
could  not adversely reflect on sufficiency of	cause  under
Rent  Control  Act
. Reason for either  arises  in  different
circumstances. Vacating a building, even under an  incorrect
order passed by a competent authority under Requis-
471
tion  Act would be for sufficient reason. The  Rent  Control
authorities  could  not	 examine merit of  the	order  under
Requisition Act. Therefore it could not be a valid consider-
ation  for  holding that the building  was  vacated  without
sufficient  cause. The courts below thus committed an  error
of law in applying second proviso to reject the	 application
filed on behalf of the appellant.
Even  the  finding on requirement of  the  appellant  to
occupy the building is not well founded. The inference drawn
by the two courts below that the appellant being a rich	 man
would  not occupy the annexe or that he would use  it  occa-
sionally  is not well founded. It being undisputed that	 the
appellant  has	no other building in the urban area  and  it
having	been  found that he vacated the other  building	 for
sufficient reason there was no fetter on the right of appel-
lant to seek eviction of the tenant.
In	the result this appeal succeeds and is allowed.	 The
orders	of all the courts below are set aside. The  applica-
tion of appellant shall stand allowed. He shall approach the
Rent Control authorities for appropriate directions. Parties
shall bear their own costs.
T.N.A						      Appeal
allowed.
472