[Cites
3
, Cited by
21
]
Supreme Court of India
Mathura Refinery Mazdoor Sangh ... vs Indian Oil Corporation Ltd., Mathura ... on 15 February, 1991
Equivalent citations: 1991 SCR (1) 468, 1991 SCC (2) 176, 1991 AIR SCW 574, 1991 (2) SCC 176, (1992) 80 FJR 77, (1998) 3 LABLJ 797, 1991 SCC (L&S) 533, (1992) 3 SERVLR 126, 1991 UJ(SC) 2 23, (1991) 1 CURLR 684, (1991) 62 FACLR 425, (1991) 1 SCR 468 (SC), (1991) 1 JT 472 (SC)
Author:
M.M. Punchhi
Bench:
M.M. Punchhi
,
K.N.  Saikia
PETITIONER:
MATHURA REFINERY MAZDOOR SANGH THROUGHITS SECRETARY

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
INDIAN OIL CORPORATION LTD., MATHURA REFINERYPROJECT, MATHUR

DATE OF JUDGMENT15/02/1991

BENCH:
PUNCHHI, M.M.
BENCH:
PUNCHHI, M.M.
SAIKIA, K.N. (J)

CITATION:
 1991 SCR  (1) 468	  1991 SCC  (2) 176
 JT 1991 (1)   472	  1991 SCALE  (1)297


ACT:
Contract  Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act,  1971
:
Mathura Refinery-Casual Labourers-Some Labourers forming Co-
operative  Societies  and entering contracts  with  refinery
while  others working under contractors who  have  contracts
with  refinery-Claim  for  regularisation  and	parity	with
employees of refinery-Casual labourers held not employees of
refinery and hence not entitled for absorption in refinery.



HEADNOTE:
     The  appellant-Union,  representing  about	 900  casual
labourers falling under the
Contract Labour (Regulation	 and
Abolition)  Act,  1971
some  of  whom	formed	Co-operative
societies  and entered into contracts with  the	 respondent-
refinery  while	 others	 worked	 for  contractors  who	 had
contracts  with the refinery, filed a writ petition in	this
court  claiming parity in wages and service conditions	with
the regular workmen of the respondent-refinery.	 This  Court
disposed the petition by directing the Central Government to
refer  to  the	Industrial  Tribunal  for  adjudication	 the
questions  whether the petitioners and some of	the  workmen
whose  services	 were  terminated  were	 employees  of	 the
refinery;  whether  their termination was justified  and  to
what  relief they were entitled to. The Government  referred
and   the  Tribunal  decided  the  questions   against	 the
appellant-union by holding that the labourers were employees
of  the	 contractors  and  not of  the	refinery  and  their
termination  was justified.  But the Tribunal  gave  certain
directions  by	way  of	 relief	 for  consideration  by	 the
Advisory Board about the desirability of continuance of	 the
contract  system in the refinery, for providing minimum	 pay
of  scale  of regular employees to the contract	 labour	 and
giving them preference in the regular employment.
     Against the award of the Industrial Tribunal, the Union
filed an appeal in this Court praying for directions to	 the
refinery to absorb and regularise the casual labourers in  a
phased manner.
     Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
						       469
     HELD:The contract laboures are  not, and have also	 not
been  found  to	 be, having a  direct  connection  with	 the
Refinery,  even	 though	 it is a State for  the	 purpose  of
enforcement  of fundamental rights. The directions given  by
the  Tribunal  was the only relief which was  due   to	 the
appellant_union	 and  its members.  Hence the  Tribunal	 has
given  to the  appellant -union the maximum which  could  be
given	in  the	 facts	and  circumstances  of	 the   case.
Therefore,  the	 impugned Award of the	Tribunal  cannot  be
improved upon. [472E-F]
     BHEL   Workers  Association,  Hardwar  and	 Ors.	etc.
v.  Union   of India and Ors., [1985] 1 SCC 630,  referred
to.
     Dharwad  Distt.  P.W.D. Literate Daily  Wage  Employees
Association and Ors. V. State Of Karnataka and Ors.,  [1990]
2 SCC 396, distinguished.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION:Civil Appeal No. 1430  of
1990.
From  the	Judgment  and  Order  dated  21.10.1989	  of
the    Central Government Industrial Tribunal, New Delhi  in
I.D. No. 40 of 1986.
N.B. Shetye and A.M. Khanwilkar for the Appellant.
	  Ashok	 H. Desai, R.P. Bhatt. P.H. Parekh and	Mrs.
Sumita Sharma for the Respondents.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     PUNCHHI, J. This appeal by special	 leave	is  directed
against	   the	Award	 of    the    Central	  Government
Industrial Tribunal,  New  Delhi,  in I.D. No.	40  of	1986
published   in	the  Gazette  of  India,  New	Delhi  dated
21.10-89.
The   appellant  is  the  Mathura	 Refinery    Mazdoor
Sangh	  (here-after	referred  to   as   'Union').	 The
contesting   respondent	  is  the Indian   Oil	 Corporation
Ltd.,	  Mathura    Refinery	 Project,    Mathura,	U.P.
(hereafter  referred  to  as  the  'Refinery').	 The   Union
represents  about 900  casual  labourers  working   in	 the
Refinery.  These  labourers are	 contract  labourers  coming
under  the
Contract  Labour  (Regulation & Abolition)	Act,
1971
. The nature  of  their  work  has	grouped	 them .Some
of   the    labourers	have	formed	  themselves	into
cooperative societies and those societies have entered	into
labour contracts with
470
the   Refinery.	  Other	  labourers   are   working    under
labour	  contractors who have contracts with the  Refinery.
Theirs	 is   not   a	constant   relationship	 with	 one
contractor  and	 these	labourers  keep	 shifting  from	 one
contractor to another. However	it  is	claimed	 that  these
casual	 labourers,  have  been	 working  in  the   Refinery
for  so	 many  years  in  the past ranging between  ten	  to
fifteen	  years	  but  they  are  denied   wages  and  other
benefits  as  also  other  beneficial	service	  conditions
enjoyed	 by workmen  who  are  regular	employees   of	 the
Refinery.  Claiming  that they had a right to be treated  at
par   with   regular   employees,   the	  Union	 filed	Writ
Petition  No.  2876  of	 1985  under
Article  32
of	 the
Constitution  of India in this Court  which   was   disposed
of   on	  January   16,	 1986	by  directing	the  Central
Government   to	  refer	 to  the  Industrial   Tribunal	 for
adjudication the following questions:
1.  Whether,  in  law,	 the  petitioners  and	the
	 48    workmen	 whose	 services     have     been
	 terminated    are    employees	   of  the    Indian
	 Oil   Corporation,   Mathura	Refinery    Project,
	 Mathura?
2.   Whether	the  termination  of  the   services
	  of  48  workmen was justified? and
3. To what  relief  are  the	workmen	 entitled?"
Status	quo   was   ordered  to	 be   maintained   and	 the
services    of	 the   workmen	were  ordered  not  to	  be
terminated.   At  that	time,  the  services  of 48  workmen
alone	were	involved    but	  as	is    evident	 the
adjudication   of  the Tribunal would have  affected  others
too.
Pursuant  to  the order of this Court,  the     Central
Government   referred	and   the    Industrial	    Tribunal
decided	   the	 above	 referred questions   holding	that
the   workmen  were  not  employees  of	 the   Refinery	 and
were  rather  the  employees  of   the	 contractors.	With
regard	 to the termination of the services of the   workmen
and   to   what	 relief	 they were entitled,  the  Tribunal,
after  answering  the  questions  against  the Union and  in
favour of  the	Refinery,  suggested  the  following   steps
in the interest of Industrial harmony:
(i)    Though the Union  should  have   pressed   their
     demand  for abolition of the contract labour system  in
     the    Refinery   to   the	 Central   Advisory    Board
     constituted  under	 the  Act,  and	 even though it	 had
     been pursuing its remedies before	this  Court  and the
     Tribunal,	suggestions  were made to  the	Refinery  to
     approach
471
the Advisory Board to make	 a  study  with	 regard	  to
     the   desirability	 of  continuance of   the   contract
     labour  system  in	 the  Refinery.
(ii)   Till  the  Central	Advisory  Board	 makes	 its
     recommendations  and   the	  action   is	taken,	 the
     management	  of   the   Refinery	to ensure  that	 the
     contract labour is paid at least the  minimum  of	 the
     pay  scale	 of its regular employees   performing	 the
     same  or  similar duties as the workmen of the contract
     labour   and   further  that  the	workmen	 among	 the
     contract  labour  who  have  put  in  5  years  or more
     of	  work	 at   the   Mathura   Refinery	 shall	  be
     continued	to  be employed	  in   the   same work	even
     if	 there	is  a  change  in  the contractor  and	such
     workmen   shall   not   be	 terminated   except   as  a
     punishment	   inflicted   by   way	  of	disciplinary
     action  for  misconduct, etc., voluntary retirement  or
     retirement on reaching the age of superannuation (which
     may  be taken as the superannuation age for the  I.O.C.
     employees) or on ground of continuous ill-health.
(iii)     Refinery to give preference to those  workmen
     in its employment by waiving the requirement of age and
     other qualifications wherever possible and it may	also
     consider  the  creation of a benevolent  fund  for	 the
     contract	labour	wherein	 it  may  make	 a   lumpsum
     contribution initially and then make equivalent or even
     more contribution to match the contribution made by the
     workmen of the contract labour.
Having suggested these, the Tribunal has clarified that
these  ameliorative steps, if taken by the  Refinery,  shall
not be taken to mean that the contract labour has become the
direct employees of the Refinery.
Learned counsel for the  appellant	 says  that   though
the  above suggestions, which have the colour of directions,
are  in	 accord with  the decision of this  Court  in  13HEL
workers	 Association,  Hardwar and Others etc. v.  Union  of
India  and Others, [ 1985] 1 SCC 630 yet they fall short  of
the expectancies of the Union and in particular to the	wide
sweep  of the principles laid down by this Court in
Dharwad
Distt P.W.D.  Literate Daily Wage Employees Association	 and
Others	v. State of Karnataka and Others
, [ 1990] 2 SCC	 396
and  prayed for directions such as those given to the  State
of Karnataka in the
Dharwad
's case (supra).
The argument of the  learned  counsel  has	 barely	  to
be  noted  and
472
rejected.  The Tribunal has given to the appellant-Union the
maximum which could be given in the facts and  circumstances
of  the,  case.
In
Dharwad
's case (supra),  the  State  of
Karnataka  had itself come out with a scheme to	 absorb	 the
casual	workers	 in regular government service in  a  phased
manner	and though it did not satisfy all concerned, yet  it
was  given a workable final shape.  This Court	observed  as
follows:
"Though the, scheme so finalised is not the  ideal
	  one  but  it	is the obligation of  the  court  to
	  individualise justice to suit a given situation in
	  a  set of facts that are placed before  it.  Under
	  the  scheme of the Constitution the purse  remains
	  in the hands of the executive.  The legislature of
	  the State controls the Consolidated Fund   out  of
	  which	 the expenditure to be incurred,  in  giving
	  effect  to the scheme, will have to be  met.	 The
	  flow	into the Consolidated Fund depends upon	 the
	  policy  of  taxation	depending  perhaps  on	 the
	  capacity   of	  the  payer.	 Therefore,   unduly
	  burdening   the   State   for	  implementing	 the
	  constitutional obligation forth with would  create
	  problems  which  the	State may  not	be  able  to
	  handle.  Therefore, the directions have been	made
	  with judicious restraint."
Those casual workers were under the employment of the  State
and  the State came out with a scheme for phased  absorption
and a graded financial responsibility.	In the instant	case
before us, the contract labourers are not, and have also not
been  found  to	 be, having a  direct  connection  with	 the
Refinery,  even	 though	 it is a State for  the	 purpose  of
enforcement of fundamental rights.The suggestions/directions
given  by the Tribunal, appear to us to be the	only  relief
which was due to the appellant and its members in the  given
situation and circumstances.  Therefore, the impugned  Award
of the Tribunal cannot be improved upon.
Finding  no merit in the appeal, we dismiss  the  same.
No costs.
T.N.A.					   Appeal dismissed.
473