[Cites
8
, Cited by
113
]
Supreme Court of India
Vania Silk Mills (P) Ltd vs Commissioner Of Income-Tax, Ahmedabad on 14 August, 1991
Equivalent citations: 1991 AIR 2104, 1991 SCR (3) 577, AIR 1991 SUPREME COURT 2104, 1991 (4) SCC 22, 1991 AIR SCW 2391, 1991 TAX. L. R. 935, 1991 (2) UPTC 1139, 1991 KERLJ(TAX) 668, (1991) 3 SCR 577 (SC), (1991) 59 TAXMAN 3, (1991) 3 COMLJ 124, 1991 UPTC 2 1139, 1991 (3) SCR 577, (1991) 3 JT 394 (SC), (1991) 191 ITR 647, (1991) 98 CURTAXREP 153
Author:
P.B. Sawant
Bench:
P.B. Sawant
,
Kuldip Singh
PETITIONER:
VANIA SILK MILLS (P) LTD.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX, AHMEDABAD

DATE OF JUDGMENT14/08/1991

BENCH:
SAWANT, P.B.
BENCH:
SAWANT, P.B.
KULDIP SINGH (J)

CITATION:
 1991 AIR 2104		  1991 SCR  (3) 577
 1991 SCC  (4)	22	  JT 1991 (3)	394
 1991 SCALE  (2)327


ACT:
Income  Tax	 Act,  1961
:  Ss.  2(47),  41(2),45--Capital
asset--Destruction    of--Money	  received   as	   insurance
claim--Nature of Whether chargeable to capital gains tax.



HEADNOTE:
    The	  appellant   company  purchased   machinery   worth
Rs.2,81,741 in the year 1957 and gave it on hire to  another
company	 which	insured the machinery. In the year  1966,  a
fire  broke  out  in the lendee	 company  causing  extensive
damage to the machinery of the appellant. On a settlement of
the insurance claim the lendee company paid to the appellant
a  sum of Rs.6,32,533 on account of the destruction  of	 its
machinery.  The	 difference between the actual cost  of	 the
machinery   and	 its  written  down  value  worked  out	  to
Rs.2,62,781 which the appellant (the asses-I see) showed  in
its  income  tax  return for the  relevant  year  as  profit
chargeable to tax under
s. 41(2)
of the Income-Tax Act.	 The
lncomeTax  Officer  subjected  to tax  also  the  additional
amount	of Rs.3,50,792 the difference between the amount  of
insurance    claim   and   the	 original   cost   of	 the
machinery---treating  the same as capital  gains  chargeable
under
section 45
of the Act, and rejected the case  of	 the
appellant  that the capital gains tax was not  attracted  to
the amount received on account of the insurance claim  since
there  was no transfer of capital asset as was	contemplated
by
s. 45
read with
s. 2(47)
of the Act.
    The	 appeal of the assessee was dismissed by the  Appel-
late  Assistant Commissioner, but its claim was accepted  by
the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal which held that the amount
was not received on account of transfer of the capital asset
but on account of damage to it and that
s. 45
was  attracted
only when there was a transfer of the capital asset.
    The	 reference  at the instance of the revenue  was	 an-
swered by the High Court against the assessee. Aggrieved the
assessee filed the appeal before this Court on a certificate
granted by the High Court.
    On the question: whether the money received towards	 the
insurance claim on account of the damage to. or	 destruction
of the capital
578
asset  was  so received on account of the  transfer  of	 the
asset within the meaning of
s. 45
of the Act and was, there-
fore,  chargeable  to the capital gains tax under  the	said
section,
Allowing the appeal, this Court,
HELD:  1.1 The money received under the insurance policy  is
by way of indemnity or compensation for the damage, loss  or
destruction  of the property. It is not in consideration  of
the  transfer of the property for the transfer of any  right
in it in favour of the insurance company. It as by virtue of
the  contract of insurance or of indemnity, and in terms  of
the conditions of the contract. [584C-D]
    1.2	 In  the  case of damage, partial  or  complete,  or
destruction for loss of property there is no transfer of  it
in  favour of a third party. The fact that while paying	 for
the  total loss of or damage to the property, the  insurance
company takes over such property or whatever is left of	 it,
does  not change the nature of the insurance claim which  is
indemnity  or  compensation  for the loss.  The	 payment  of
insurance  claim  is not in consideration  of  the  property
taken over by the insurance company, for. one is not consid-
eration for the other. The insurance claim is not the  value
of the damaged property. The claim is assessed on the  basis
of the damage sustained by the property or the amount neces-
sary  to restore it to its original conditions. It is not  a
consideration for the damaged property. [584C, F-G]
    1.3	 In  the instant case, the amount  received  by	 the
assessee was the one received by it as damages on account of
the loss of its machinery. The lendee company, as a  bailee,
had insured the machinery hired from the assessee, since  it
was  liable  to make good the loss of the machinery  to	 the
assessee.  This	 was implied under a  contract	of  bailment
unless	it was provided to the contrary. The lendee  company
paid the insurance amount pro rata to the assessee. [587D-G]
    1.4 The insurance was on reinstatement basis which meant
that  the  property was to be restored to the  condition  in
which  it was, before the fire. The insurance  company	paid
the amount for the restoration of the machinery which had to
be  on the basis of its value at the time of the  fire.	 The
machinery in question was purchased in the year 1957 and the
fire broke' out on. August 11, 1966. Taking into  considera-
tion  the  ordinary course of events, it was  legitimate  to
presume	 that the cast of machinery had gone up	 during	 the
intervening  period  and  the assured  and,  therefore,	 the
assessee, was entitled to recover on the basis of the
579
increased value of the machinery. [584H; 585A-B]
Halsbury's  Laws,of  England, Fourth Edition, Vol.  25,	 re-
ferred to.
    2.1	 The capital gains is attracted by transfer and	 not
merely	by extinguishment of right howsoever brought  about.
The transfer may be effected by various modes and one of the
modes  is  the extinguishment of right on  transfer  of	 the
asset  itself or on account of the transfer of the right  or
rights in it. The extinguishment of right or rights must  in
any case be on account of its or their transfer in order  to
attract	 the  provisions of
Section 45
which  speaks  about
capital gains arising out of "transfer" of asset and not  on
account	 of  "extinguishment of right" by  itself.  [583G-H;
584A]
    If	extinguishment	of  right or rights is	not  due  to
transfer and is on account of the destruction or loss of the
asset, it is not a transfer and does not attract the  provi-
sions  of  s. 45 which relate to transfer and  not  to	mere
extinguishment	of  right but to one by transfer.  Hence  an
extinguishment	of  right not brought about by	transfer  is
outside the purview ors. 45. [584A-B]
    Whatever the mode by which a transfer is brought  about,
the existence of the asset during the process of transfer is
a  pre-condition.  Unless the asset exists  in	fact,  there
cannot be a transfer of it. [583E]
    Transfer presumes both the existence of the asset and of
the transferee to whom it is transferred. [584C]
    2.2	 When an asset is destroyed there is no question  of
transferring  it to others. The destruction or loss  of	 the
asset, no doubt, brings. about the destruction of the  right
of the owner or possessor of the asset, in it. But it is not
on  account of transfer. It is on account of the  disappear-
ance of the asset. The extinguishment of right in the  asset
on account of extinguishment of asset itself is not a trans-
fer  of	 the  right but its destruction. By  no	 stretch  of
imagination, the destruction of the right on account of	 the
destruction of the asset can be equated with the extinguish-
ment of right on account of its transfer. [583E-G]
      3.1  Although the definition of "transfer"  in
Section
2(47)
of the Act is inclusive, and, therefore,	 extends  to
events	and transactions which may not otherwise be  "trans-
fer"  according to its ordinary, popular and natural  sense,
yet it also mentions such transactions as
580
sale,  exchange	 etc.  to which the  word  "transfer"  would
properly  apply	 in its popular and  natural  import.  Since
those  associated words and expressions imply the  existence
of the asset and of the transferee, according to the rule of
noscitur  a  sociis, the expression "extinguishment  of	 any
rights	therein" would take colour from the said  associated
words and expressions, and will have to be restricted to the
sense analogous to them. [585C-E]
    If the legislature intended to extend the definition  to
any extinguishment of right, it would not have included	 the
obvious	 instances  of transfer, viz.  sale,  exchange	etc.
Hence the expression "extinguishment of any rights  therein"
will have to be confined to the extinguishment of rights  on
account	 of  transfer  and cannot be extended  to  mean	 any
extinguishment of right independent of or otherwise than  on
account of transfer. [585E-F]
    3.2	 The  High  Court, was not correct  in	reading	 the
expression "'extinguishment of any rights" in the assets  as
any extinguishment of right whether it resulted in or was on
account	 of transfer nor was it right in assuming  that	 for
"transfer"  within the meaning of
Section 45
the asset	need
not  exist.  It erred in ignoring the basic  postulate	that
Section 45
does not relate to extinguishment of right but to
transfer.  Having  concentrated its attention on  the  words
"extinguishment	 of  right" rather than on  "transfer",	 the
High  Court, misdirected itself and proceeded on  the  basis
that every extinguishment of right whether by way of  trans-
fer or not, is attracted by
Section 45
. [585F-G; 584B]
    Commissioner  of Income-Tax v. Madurai Mills  Co.  Ltd.,
[1973] 89 ITR 45 and Commissioner of Income-Tax v. Mohanbhai
Pamabhai, [1973] 91 ITR 393, referred to.
    4.	Whether	 the lendee company had	 insured  assessee's
machinery as bailees or as agents of the assessee would make
no  difference.	 The insurance policy contained	 the'  rein-
statement  clause requiring the insurer to pay the  cost  of
the machinery as on the date of the fire. [587G-H; 588A]
    5. In an insurance policy with the reinstatement clause,
the insurer is bound to pay the cost of the insured property
as  on the date of destruction of loss, and it matters	very
little	if  the amount so paid by the insurance	 company  is
invested for purchasing the destroyed asset or for any other
purpose. [588A-B]
    C.	Leo Macho do v. Commissioner of	 Income-Tax,  [1988]
172 ITR 744, approved.
 581
    Income-tax Commissioner v.J.K. Cotton Spinning & Weaving
Mills Co. Ltd., [1987] 164 ITR 18, disapproved.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1106 (NT)
of 1976.
From the Judgment and Order dated 22nd/23rd January 1976
of  the	 Gujarat High Court in Income Tax Ref.	No.  122  of
1974.
Joseph Vellappilly, K.J. John and Ms. Deepa Dikshit	 for
the Appellant.
S.C. Manchanda, Ranvir Chandra and Ms..A. Subhashini for
the Respondent.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    SAWANT.  J.-The appellant/Company, hereinafter  referred
to as the assessee, carries on. the business of	 manufacture
and sale of  art-silk cloth. In the year 1957, it  purchased
machinery  worth  Rs.2,81,741 and gave it on  hire  to	M/s.
Jasmine	 Mills	Pvt.  Ltd.,  Bombay at	an  annual  rent  of
Rs.33,900.  On	August	11, 1966, a fire  broke-out  in	 the
premises  of M/s. Jasmine Mills causing extensive damage  tO
the  machinery	installed in their  premises  including	 the
machinery  hired  by them from the assessee.  The  machinery
belonging  to the assessee became useless for  any,  further
use on account of the damage. M/s. Jasmine Mills had insured
along  with its own machinery, the  assessee's	machinery-as
well,  and  on	a settlement of the  insurance	claim,	M/s.
Jasmine Mills received a certain amount out of which it paid
a  sum	of  Rs.6,32,533 to the assessee on  account  of	 the
destruction  of	 its machinery. The difference	between	 the
actual	cost  of the machinery and  its	 written-down  value
worked	out to Rs.2,62,781. The assessee in  its  income-tax
return for the assessment year 1967-68 (relevant  accounting
year being 'the year ending on 31st August, 1966) showed the
said amount as profit chargeable to tax under
Section  41(2)
of the Income-Tax Act (hereinafter referred to as the "Act")
The  IncomeTax Officer, however, subjected to tax  also	 the
additional  amount of Rs.3,50,792 being the  difference	 be-
tween  the amount of Rs.6,32,533 received on account of	 the
insurance  claim  and the original 'cost of  the  machinery,
i.e.,  Rs.2,81,741,  treating  the  same  as  capital  gains
chargeable  under
Section 45
of the Act. The contention	 ad-
vanced	by the assessee that the capital gains tax  was	 not
attracted to the amount received on account of the insurance
claim since there was no transfer.
582
of capital asset as was contemplated by
Section 45
read with
Section	 2(47)
of the Act, was negatived by  the  Income-Tax
Officer.
The assessee appealed against the order to the Appellate
Assistant  Commissioner who also negatived the said  conten-
tion of the appellant and" dismissed the appeal. The  asses-
see's  contention was, however; upheld in the appeal  before
the  Income-Tax	 Appellate Tribunal,  the  Tribunal  holding
that:  the amount was not received on account of a  transfer
of the capital asset but on account of the damage to it	 and
that.
Section 45
was attracted only when there was a  trans-
fer  of	 the  capital asset. Being  aggrieved,	the  Revenue
applied	 for  reference	 of the case to the  High  Court  on
the,following two questions:
(i)  whether on the facts and in	the  circum-
stances of the case the transfer was justified
	      in  law in holding that there Was no  transfer
	      of  capital asset by the assessee	 within	 the
	      meaning Of
Section 2(47)
of the Act?
(ii)  whether on the facts and in the  circum-
stances  of  the case the sum  of	 Rs.3,50,792
	      being the excess of the cost of the  machinery
-received	 from M/s. Jasmine Mills  Pvt.	Ltd.
	      was  chargeable to tax as Capital gains  under
Section 45
of the Act?
The High Court answered the first question in the  negative,
and  consequently  the second question in  the	affirmative.
i.e.,  both questions in favour of the Revenue	and  against
the assessee.
This appeal has been filed by the assessee on a certifi-
cate granted by the. High Court.
2.  The short question that falls for our 'consideration  is
whether	 the money received towards the insurance  claim  on
account of the damage to or destruction of the capital asset
is  so	received  on account of the transfer  of  the  asset
within the meaning of
Section 45
of the Act and is.,  there-
fore,  chargeable to the capital gains tax under  the  'said
section.
3.  It would be convenient to reproduce here the  provisions
of
Section 45
of the Act as they stood at the relevant time:
"45.  Capital  gains--Any	 profits  or   gains
	      arising  from the transfer of a capital  asset
	      effected	in the previous year shall, save  as
	      otherwise	 provided in
sections 53
and
54
,  be
	      chargeable   to  income-tax  under  the	head
	      'capital gains', and shall
583
be  deemed  to-be the income of  the  previous
	      year in which the transfer took place".
,. Emphasis supplied,
Section  2(47)
of the Act  which  defined
	      transfer	at the relevant time read'  as	fol-
lows:
"2.  Definitions--In  this  Act,	unless	 the
	      context otherwise requires,.
..........................
(47)  'transfer',	 in relation  to  a  capital
	      asset, includes the, sale, exchange or  relin-
quishment	 of the asset or the  extinguishment
	      of any rights therein or the compulsory acqui-
	      sition thereof under any law."
A reading of the two sections makes it abundantly  clear
that  the profits or gains which are amenable to
Section  45
must  arise from the transfer of the capital asset which  is
effected  in the previous year. The transfer may be  brought
about  by any of the modes of transfer which include  ,sale,
exchange, relinquishment of the asset or the  extinguishment
of 'the rights therein, or the compulsory acquisition of the
asset  under any law. It may be 'of the asset itself  or  of
any  rights in it. It may further be the result of a  volun-
tary  act  or a compulsory operation. Whatever the  mode  by
which it is brought about, the existence of the asset during
the process of transfer is a pre-condition. Unless the asset
exists in fact, there cannot be a transfer of it.
4.	When an asset is destroyed there is no	question  of
transferring  it to others- The destruction or loss  of	 the
asset,	no doubt, brings about the destruction of the  right
of the owner or possessor of the asset, in it. But it is nOt
On  account of transfer. It is on account of the  disappear-
ance of the asset. The extinguishment of right in the  asset
on  account of extinguishment of the asset. itself is not  a
transfer of the right but its destruction. By no stretch  of
imagination, the destruction of the right on account of	 the
destruction  of	 the asset can be equated with'	 the  extin-
guishment  of right on account of its transfer.
Section  45
speaks	about  capital, gains arising out of  "transfer"  of
asset  and not on account of "extinguishment of	 right".  by
itself.	 The capital gains is attracted by transfer and	 not
merely	by extinguishment of right howsoever brought  about.
The transfer may be effected by various modes and one of the
modes  is  the extinguishment of right on  transfer  of	 the
asset itself for on account of the transfer of the right  or
rights in
584
The  extinguishment of right or rights must in any case  be
on account of its or their transfer in order to attract	 the
provisions  of
Section 45
. If is not, and is on' account  of
the  destruction  or loss of the asset, as  in	the  present
case,  it is not a transfer and does not attract the  provi-
sions  of
Section 45
which relate to. transfer and  not1  to
mere  extinguishment of right but to one by transfer.  Hence
an extinguishment of right not brought about by transfer  is
outside	 the purview of
Section 45
. The High Court erred  in
ignoring the basic postulate that
Section 45
does not relate
to   extinguishment  of	 right	but  to	  transfer.   Having
concentrated  its attention on the words "extinguishment  of
right"	rather	than  on "transfer", the  High	Court,	with
respect, misdirected itself and proceeded on the basis	that
every extinguishment of right whether by way of transfer  or
not, is attracted by
Section 45
.
5. Transfer presumes both the existence of the asset and
of the transferee to whom it is transferred. In the case  of
the  damage, partial or complete, or destruction or loss  of
the  property,	there is no transfer of it in  favour  of  a
third  party. The money received under the insurance  policy
in such cases is by way of indemnity or compensation for the
damage,	 loss or destruction of the property. It is  not  in
consideration of the transfer of the property or the  trans-
fer  of any right in it in favour of the insurance  company.
It is by virtue of the contract of insurance or of  indemni-
ty, and in terms of the conditions of the contract. Under an
insurance  contract,, the assured cannot claim	more  amount
than the sum insured. The sum insured is the maximum liabil-
ity of the insurer and the assured secures it by paying	 his
premium	 which	is  accordingly fixed.	'Even  within'	the.
maximum limit, the insured cannot recover more than What  he
establishes  to	 be  his actual loss, whatever	may  be	 his
estimates of the loss that he was likely to bear and whatev-
er  the premium he may have paid calculated on the basis  of
the said estimate.
The	 fact  that while paying for the total	loss  of  or
damage	to  the property, the insurance company	 takes	over
such property or whatever is left of it, does not change the
nature of the insurance claim which is indemnity or  compen-
sation	for the loss. The payment of insurance claim is	 not
in consideration of the property taken over by the insurance
company,  for one is not consideration for the other. It  is
incOrrect' to argue that the insurance claim is the value of
the damaged property- The claim is assessed on the basis  of
the damage sustained by the property or the amount necessary
to restore it to its original condition. It is not a consid-
eration	 for the damaged property. In the present case,	 the
insurance was on reinstatement. basis which meant that the
585
property  was  to be restored to the Condition in  which  it
was, before the fire. The insurance company paid the  amount
for the restoration of the 'machinery which had to be on the
basis of its value at the time of the fire. The machinery in
question  was purchased in the year 1957 and the fire  broke
out. on August 11, 1966. Although nothing has come On record
on the point, taking into consideration the 'ordinary course
of  events,  it is legitimate to presume that  the  cost  of
machinery had gone up during the intervening period and	 the
assured and, therefore, the assessee, was entitled to recov-
er  on	the basis of the increased value  of  the  machinery
(refer	to Halsbury's Laws of England, Fourth edition,	Vol.
25 under the heading insurance, in para 654).'
6..	 It  is true that the definition  of  "transfer"  in
Section	 2(47)
of the Act is inclusive,	 and-therefore,	 ex-
tends to events and transactions which may not otherwise  be
"transfer"  according to its ordinary, popular	and  natural
sense. It is this aspect of the definition which has weighed
with  the  High Court and, therefore'; the 'High  Court	 has
argued	that  if the' words  "extinguishment-of	 any  rights
therein" are substituted for the 'word "transfer" in
Section
45
,  the claim or compensation received from  the  insurance
company	 would	be attracted by the said section.  The	High
Court has, however, missed the fact that the definition also
mentions  such transactions as sale, exchange etc. to  which
the word "transfer" would properly apply' in its popular and
natural	 import. Since those associated' words	and  expres-
sions imply the existence of the asset and of the  transfer-
ee, according to the rule of noscitur a sociis, the  expres-
sion'  'extinguishment	of any rights  therein"	 would	take
colour	from the said associated words and expressions,	 and
will  have to be restricted t6 the sense analogous to  them.
If the legislature intended to extend the definition to	 any
extinguishment	of  right, it would not	 have  included	 the
obvious	 instances of transfer, viz., sale,  exchange  etc.,
Hence the expression "extinguishment of any rights therein".
will have to be confined to the 'extinguishment of rights on
account	 of  transfer and cannot be extended  'to  mean	 any
extinguishment of right independent of or otherwise than  on
account of transfer.
7.	The High Court, as stated earlier, read the  expres-
sion  "extinguishment  of any rights" in the assets  as	 any
extinguishment	of  right whether it resulted in or  was  on
account of transfer. For the reasons which we have discussed
earlier	 we find that approach is not correct. For the	same
reasons,  we are unable to accept the reasoning of the	High
Court  that for "transfer" within the meaning of
Section  45
the  asset  need  not exist. We are  afraid  that  the	High
Court's reliance on
Commissioner of Income-Tax v. R.M. Amin
,
[1971] 82 ,ITR 194
586
Gujarat	 to  hold  that for the.  transfer  contemplated  by
Section	 45
, the asset need not exist is  not  well-merited.
There, the High Court was concerned with a  chose-in-action,
viz.,  the shares, and the amount received by the  assessee-
shareholder  on liquidation of the company representing	 his
share  in  the assets of the company. The  Court  there	 had
pointed	 out that the extinguishment of right of the  asses-
seeshareholder in his share which was an incorporeal proper-
ty  had	 come  about on account of receipt by'	him  of	 the
amount representing the value of the shares.
    The amount received by the assessee-shareholder does not
represent  any consideration received by him as a result  of
the  extinguishment of his rights in 'the shares. The  share
merely represents the right to receive money on distribution
of the net assets of the company in liquidation and it is by
satisfaction  of that right, that the right is	extinguished
when  such monies are received by the shareholder. The	con-
sideration presumes quid pro quo and, therefore, transfer of
the property or. of the rights in the property, whether	 the
property is corporeal or incorporeal.
When the assets, themselves are being distributed, it is
correct,to say that to the extent of distribution, they	 are
wiped out. It is in that sense that the assets do not  exist
to the extent that they are distributed. When the  company's
assets are thus distributed, is a sense the assets which are
converted into money and which, therefore, exist in the form
of  money are transferred from the liquidator to the  share-
holder.	 His  rights in the assets come to an  end  when  he
receives  his liquidated share of the asset. In such a	case
the assets do exist though in the converted form, viz., cash
and  what is transferred is also the converted form  of	 the
asset.	With  respect, therefore,"it is not correct  to	 say
that in such cases the capital asset does not exist and does
not  change hand  as capital asset. That the receipt of	 his
share  in  the asset brings about automatically	 the  extin-
guishment  of the shareholder's rights in the asset  cannot,
however, be gainsaid. The decision of the Gujarat High Court
in
R.M. Amin
's case (supra) was appealed against  and	this
Court  while approving' the ratio of
the said decision
fur-
ther explained the nature of the 'money received by a share-
holder on the' liquidation of a company. This Court  reiter-
ating  its earlier view in the case of Commissioner  Of	 In-
come-tax  v. Madurai Mills Co. Ltd., [1973] 89 ITR 45,	held
that the act of the liquidator in distributing the assets of
the  company does not result in the creation of new  rights.
It  merely recognises the legal rights which were in  exist-
ence  prior  to the distribution. The  shareholder  receives
money in recognition and satisfaction of his
587
right and not by operation of any transaction which  amounts
to sale, exchange, relinquishment of asset or extinguishment
of any of his rights in such asset.
8.	So also when a partner retires from the	 partnership
what  he receives is his share in the partnership  which  is
worked out and realised. It does not represent consideration
received'  by 'him as a result of the extinguishment of	 his
interest  in-the partnership assets. He has no share in	 any
particular asset of the firm. Therefore, there is no  trans-
fer  of	 interest  in any particular asset of  the  firm  on
account of the receipt of his share by a retired partner. As
held  in
Commissioner of Income-tax v.	Mohanbhai  Pamabhai
,
[1973]	91 ITR 393 (Gujarat) no part of the amount  received
by the assessee as a retired partner is assessable to  capi-
tal gains tax under
Section 45
.
9.	The High Court has explained these two decisions  by
giving.	 reasons  which do not appeal to us. The  COurt	 has
tried to distinguish them from the facts of the present Case
pointing out, firstly, t, hat there was no foundation either
in  law	 or  in fact to believe that the  amount  which	 the
assessee received from M/s. Jasmine 'Mills was paid to it in
satisfaction  or  in working out of its right,	if  any,  to
recover	 damages under law or contract for the loss or	dam-
age' caused' to the machinery. We do not see any  difficulty
in holding that it was an amount received by the assessee as
damages	 on  account  of the loss of its  machinery.  It  is
difficult to describe it otherwise. The second reason  given
by  the High Court is, with'respect, equally fragile. It  is
held  that  the alleged right, if any, of  the	assessee  t9
recover damages was not an absolute statutory right but	 one
which was subject to a contract to the contrary and even  if
there  was  no such contract, it was merely an	inchoate  or
contingent  right in respect of which some investigation  or
legal  proceeding  and settlement or adjudication  would  be
necessary  for	its' satisfaction or fulfilment. We  do	 not
agree  with this reasoning as well. The facts  clearly	show
that M/s. Jasmine Mills as a bailee had insured the  machin-
ery  hired  from the assessee, since it was liable  to	make
good  the  loss of the machinery to the	 assessee.  This  is
implied	 under a contract of bailment unless it is  provided
to the contrary. M/s. jasmine Mills further admittedly	paid
the  insurance amount pro rata to the assessee. In the	cir-
cumstances,  we	 are unable to	appreciate  the	 distinction
sought to be made by the High Court.
10.  We  are also unable to see how it would  make	 any
difference to the point involved in the present case whether
the  Jasmine Mills had insured the assessee's  machinery  as
bailees or as agents of the assessee.
588
There  is further no dispute that the insurance policy	con-
tained	the reinstatement clause requiring the	in-surer  to
pay the cost of the machinery as on the date of the fire. As
we have pointed out earlier, in an insurance policy with the
reinstatement  clause, the insurer-is bound to pay the	cost
of the insured property as on the date of the destruction or
loss,  and it matters very little if the amount so  paid  by
the  insurance	company is invested for purchasing  the	 de-
stroyed asset or for any other purpose.In the circumstances,
for  the purposes of answering the question in hand, it	 was
not necessary to inquire whether the amount received by	 the
assessee was spent in replacement of the machinery or not.
11.	 For  the reasons given above, the  decision  of,the
Allahabad  High Court-in Commissioner of Income-tax v.	J.K.
Cotton	Spinning& Weaving Mills Co. Ltd., [1987] 164 ITR  81
which  proceeds on the same reasoning as the impugned  judg-
ment  is  also not a good law. InStead, we  approve  of	 the
conclusion reached by the Madras High Court in C. Leo Macho-
do v. Commissioner of Income-tax, [1988] 172 ITR 744 for the
reasons given by us above;
12. In the result, the' appeal succeeds and the impugned
decision  is  set aside. In the circumstances of  the  case,
however, there will be no order as to costs.
R.P,						Appeal	 al-
lowed.
589