[Cites
3
, Cited by
33
]
Supreme Court of India
Director, Lift Irrigation Corporation ... vs Pravat Kiran Mohanty And Ors on 12 February, 1991
Equivalent citations: 1991 SCR (1) 341, 1991 SCC (2) 295, 1991 AIR SCW 393, 1991 (2) SCC 295, (1991) 62 FACLR 433, 1991 SCC (L&S) 472, 1991 ALL CJ 2 850, (1991) 71 CUT LT 722, (1991) 2 SERVLR 121, 1991 UJ(SC) 1 414, (1991) 1 SCR 341 (SC), (1991) 16 ATC 467, (1991) 1 CURLR 650, (1991) 1 JT 430 (SC)
Author:
K. Ramaswamy
Bench:
K. Ramaswamy
,
Kuldip Singh
PETITIONER:
DIRECTOR, LIFT IRRIGATION CORPORATION LTD. ANDORS. ETC. ETC.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
PRAVAT KIRAN MOHANTY AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT12/02/1991

BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
BENCH:
RAMASWAMY, K.
KULDIP SINGH (J)

CITATION:
 1991 SCR  (1) 341	  1991 SCC  (2) 295
 JT 1991 (1)   430	  1991 SCALE  (1)399


ACT:
     Civil   Services:	 Orissa	  State	  Lift	  Irrigation
Corporation  Ltd.- Reorganisation of   set   up-Amalgamation
of   composite	 cadre	 of   Electrical-Mechanical	into
Electrical   or	  Mechanical   cadre-Validity	of Gradation
List-Fitment  of  personnel of	composite   cadre   as	 per
date   of initial  appointment	vis-a-vis  scale  of	pay-
Consequent  loss  of  seniority and  reduction	in   chances
of   promotion-Whether	violative  of
Articles 14
and
16
of    the   Constitution-Right	 to   promotion-Whether	   a
fundamental right.
     Constitution  of  India,	1950:
Articles   14
and
16-Gradation  List-Prepared  consequent	  to	amalgamation
of   cadres-Seniority	and chances of Promotion   affected-
Whether	   violative   of   right   to	 equality-Right	  to
Promotion-Whether a fundamental right.
     Administrative	Law:	 Judicial      Review-Policy
decision     to	   reorganise	set   up   and	  amalgamate
cadres	  on	administrative	 exigency- Whether  open  to
judicial review.



HEADNOTE:
     The   Lift	 Irrigation  Corporation  Ltd.	 had   three
categories	of   services,	    namely,	 Mechanical,
Electrical     and    Composite	   unit	    of	 Mechanical-
Electrical    when   it	  was	 carved	   out	  of	 the
Government     organisation.	Subsequently,	 due	  to
administrative	 exigency,   the   Corporation	decided	  to
reorganise  its set up and  classify  the   employees	into
two  categories'  namely,  Electrical  and   Mechanical	  by
amalgamating  the   composite  Electrical   and	  Mechanical
Engineering   diploma	 holders  either  in  Electrical  or
Mechanical wing,  and  invited	objections  to	the  scheme.
It also called for options from persons	 holding  only	 the
composite   diploma,  namely,  Mechanical   and	  Electrical
Engineering    Supervisors.  On	 consideration	of   options
received,  the	Corporation  prepared two gradation lists in
the  order  of	seniority  from	 the  respective  dates	  of
appointment to the posts  and  higher  scale  of  pay	held
by   respective	 Persons and fitted them in  the  respective
lists as per options.
     Respondent	 No. 1,	 a  diploma  holder  in	  Electrical
Engineering,  who
						       342
was  working  as  Sub-Assistant	 Engineer  (Electrical)	  in
Government service, and had been drawn on deputation to	 the
Corporation  along with Respondents No. 6 and 7,  appellants
in third appeal, holders of double diploma in Mechanical and
Electrical   Engineering,   and	  working   as	  Mechanical
Supervisors, along with others, had not filed any  objection
to  the	 scheme, but questioned before the  High  Court	 the
gradation  of  Respondents  No. 6 and 7 and  others  in	 the
Electrical Wing.
     The High Court quashed the gradation lists and directed
the Government and the Corporation to treat Respondent No. 1
and the other respondents as belonging to two cadres of Sub-
Assistant    Engineer	 (Electrical)	 and	(Mechanical)
respectively.
     The Corporation, the State Government and the aggrieved
employees   filed  separate  appeals,  by   special   leave,
contending that the Corporation had the power to  amalgamate
the  three  sections  into  two,  due	to    administrative
exigency    and	   to	prepare	   seniority   lists	from
respective dates of employees' initial appointment, etc.
     Respondent	 No. 1	contended  that	 his  seniority	  as
No.  2	in  the Electrical  Wing  could	 not  be   disturbed
by  taking  Mechanical	 Supervisors  into  the	  Electrical
Wing   offending   his	 right	  to	promotion  enshrined
under
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution.
     Allowing the appeals, this Court,
     HELD: 1. 1	 The  Government  or  the  Corporation,	 due
to  administrative exigencies, is entitled to and has  power
to  reorganise the  existing cadres or amalgamate  some	  or
carve	out  separate  cadres.	The  decision to  amalgamate
the  existing  cadres	by  reorganising   them	  into	 two
cadres	being  a policy decision, taken	 on   administrative
exigencies,   is  not  open to judicial review unless it  is
mala   fide,   arbitrary  or  bereft   of   any	 discernible
principle. [345E, G]
     1.2 On account of	amalgamation  into  two	 cadres	  by
absorbing   the	 personnel   working   in   the	   composite
cadre,	namely,	 Electrical-Mechanical in either  Electrical
or Mechanical  cadre,  and  their  adjustment,	the order of
seniority  of  the employees  working	in   Electrical	  or
Mechanical  cadres is  likely  to  be  reviewed.  When	 the
persons	  in   the  composite  Electrical-Mechanical   cadre
opted	to  the	 Electrical  cadre,  they  were entitled  to
be  considered	for their fitment in the cadre as  per	 the
seniority from the date of their initial appointment  vis-a-
vis   their   scale   of pay.	This   was   the   procedure
adopted	 by  the  Corporation  in   fixing   the
						       343
inter se seniority. The	 procedure  adopted  is	 just,	fair
and   reasonable   and	benificial   to	 all  the  employees
without	  affecting  their  scales  of	pay  or	 losing	 the
seniority  from	 the date of initial  appointment.  [345G-H,
346A-B]
     Undoubtedly, in  this  process,  the  first  respondent
lost  some  place in seniority which  is  consequential	  to
amalgamation.	He  has	 not  been deprived of his right  to
be   considered	 for  promotion;  only	 his   chances	  of
promotion have been receded.
     1.3 There is no  fundamental  right  to  promotion.  An
employee  has only right to be considered when it arises, in
accordance  with  the  relevant rules. [346C]
     1.4  In  the circumstances, the High  Court   was	 not
right	in  holding that the gradation list prepared by	 the
Corporation  was  in  violation	 of Respondent No. 1's right
to equality  enshrined	in
Article  14
read  with
Article
16
of the Constitution, and that  he  was  unjustly   denied
of  the same. [346D]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 699  of
1985.
From  the	Judgment  and  Order  dated   17.5.1984	  of
the   Orissa High Court in O. J. C. No. 936 of 1979.
G.L.   Sanghi,   Adv.,  R.K.  Mehta,  Ms.	 Uma   Jain,
M.A.  Firoz   and P.N. Misra for the appearing parties.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
     K.	   RAMASWAMY,	J.   These   three    appeals	 are
against	    the judgment  of  the  Orissa  High	  Court	  in
O.J.C.	 No.  936  of  1979.  The Division   Bench   allowed
the  writ  petition  and  quashed  the	 gradation lists  of
sub-Asstt.    Engineers	  (Electrical)	  and	  Sub-Asstt-
Engineer (Mechanical), Annexures  5  &	6  before  the	High
Court  and  the	 promotions given to the  respondents	Nos.
4   and	  5  therein  Annexure	7.  The Government  and	 the
Corporation  were  directed  to	 consider  the	question  of
promotion   treating   the   writ   petitioner	  and	 the
respondents  as belonging  to  two  cadres   of	  Sub-Asstt.
Engineer    (Electrical)    And	 (Mechanical).	These  three
appeals	 were  filed,  one  by	the  Corporation, another by
the   State   Government   and	the   third   one   by	 the
aggrieved employees.
344
The  facts are simple.  Shri Bidura  Charan  Mohapatra,
the  6th respondent/first appellant in the third  appeal,  a
diploma holder in Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, was
appointed as Mechanical Supervisor on August 24, 1962 in the
pay   scale  of	 Rs.215-396.  Shri  Parijat  Ray,  the	 7th
respondent/2nd	appellant, equally possessed of	 diploma  in
Electrical and Mechanical Engineering, was appointed in	 the
same scale of pay as a Mechanical Supervisor on November  5,
1962.	Shri P.K. Mohanty, the writ petitioner in  the	High
Court  and the respondent in these appeals holds diploma  in
Electrical Engineering and was appointed as Hand Driller  in
the pay-scale of Rs. 100- 155, on October 23, 1963 and	Sub-
Assistant Engineer (Electrical) in the payscale of Rs.	185-
325  on September 1, 1965.  The Lift Irrigation	 Corporation
Ltd., a part of the Government Organisation, was carved	 out
separately and the three persons alongwith others were drawn
on deputation from the Government service to the Corporation
in  the	 year  1963.   Three  categories  of  services	were
existing in the Corporation, namely, Mechanical,  Electrical
and Mechanical-Electrical Composite unit.  In the year 1971,
three	tentative   gradation  lists   were   prepared	 for
classification	purpose	 of those three	 divisions  as	Sub-
Assistant  Engineer  (Mechanical),  Sub-Assistant   Engineer
(Electrical),  Supervisors, Electrical and Mechanical  which
includes  Electrical  Supervisors,  Mechanical	Supervisors,
Drilling  Supervisors and Foreman-cum-Instructors.  In	1977
the  Corporation  decided to reorganise its set	 up  and  to
classify  the  employees into two categories,  namely,	Sub-
Assistant      Engineer	    (Electrical),      Sub-Assistant
Engineer  (Mechanical)	to attend to the  respective  works,
namely, mechanical and electrical.  The Corporation  invited
objections to amalgamate Composite Electrical and Mechanical
Engineering   Diploma  Holders,	 either	 in  Electrical	  or
Mechanical  Wing.  Options were called for from the  persons
holding	 only the composite diploma, namely, Mechanical	 and
Electrical  Engineering	 Supervisors.	The  respondent-writ
petitioner  did	 not file any objection to the	scheme.	  On
consideration  of  the	objections  filed  by  others,	 two
gradation lists were prepared in the order of seniority from
the respective dates of appointment to the posts and  higher
scale  of pay held by respective persons and fitted them  in
the respective lists as per options.  As stated earlier	 the
respondent questioned their gradation in the Electrical Wing
in  the	 High Court and the High Court quashed	it  and	 the
appellants obtained leave of this Court under
Art. 136.
The contention of the appellants is that the  respondent
has  no	 right	to  be	kept  in  a  particular	 wing.	 The
Corporation,  with  a  view to	H   create  two	 categories,
namely, Mechanical and Electrical sought to
345
amalgamate the	 third	 Composite     Mechanical/Electrical
Wing	and sought for	options	 from  the  persons  holding
the    composite    posts.   This   was	  taken	   due	  to
administrative	exigency.  The	Corporation   has   power
to  carve out by  amalgamating	three  sections,  into	 two
divisions  and	to prepare the	seniority  lists  from	 the
respective  date  of  their  initial appointment,  etc.	 The
High  Court,  therefore,  was  unjustified  to	quash
the   gradation	  lists.  It   was   contended	  for	 the
respondent   by	  Sri  Misra, his  learned   counsel,	that
the    persons	  from	 the   three	wings	 are	only
deputationists	 holding  lien	on  Government	posts.	 The
Corporation   did not  frame  any  scheme  of  its  own	  to
appoint	 its  own  employees,	nor given  options  to	 all
the  deputationists  for  confirmation	as  its	  employees.
So long as the	employees  are	continuing  on	 deputation,
they   are entitled to have seniority  in   the	  respective
wings.	The  writ  petitioner admittedly has  been   working
on   the  Electrical  Wing  and	 was  No.  2  in  the  order
of  seniority	as  Sub-Assistant   Engineer   (Electrical).
His  right to seniority,  cannot  be  disturbed	 by   taking
Mechanical    Supervisor    into  the	 Electrical    Wing,
offending  his	right  to  promotion  enshrined	 under Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The   writ   petitioner	holds	only   Diploma	  in
Electrical   Engineering. S/Shri  Bidura  Charan   Mohapatra
and   Parijat	Ray   hold   double diploma  of	  Mechanical
and   Electrical  Engineering.	It  is	 settled   law	that
the    Government    or	   the	  Corporation,	  due	  to
administrative	exigencies,   is   entitled   to   and	 has
power  to  reorganise  the   existing cadres  of  amalgamate
some   or   carve   out	  separate    cadres.	 The	pre-
existing   three   separate  cadres,   namely,	 Electrical,
Mechanical    and    the   composite	 cadre,	     namely,
Electrical-Mechanical	were   sought	to   be	 amalgamated
into  two  cadres  by  absorbing   the	 personnel   working
in  the	 composite  cadre,   namely,   Electrical-Mechanical
in    either	Electrical  cadre   or	 Mechanical   cadre.
Options	 have  been  called  for  in  that regard from	 all
the  persons  working  in  the	Electrical-Mechanical  cadre
and   the   appellants	 exercised   their    options	 for
absorption   in	 Electrical cadre.  The	 employees   working
in   the   Electrical  and  Mechanical	  cadres  were	also
aware  of  the	same.  It  was,	 therefore,  open   to	 the
respondent  to	raise any objection to the  policy  at	that
stage.	  But	he   failed   to   so.	The   decision	  to
amalgamate  the	 existing  cadres  by	reorganising   into
two    cadres	 was   a   policy    decision	 taken	  on
administrative	 exigencies. The policy decision is not open
to judicial review unless  it  is  mala	 fide, arbitrary  or
bereft	 of  any  descernable principle.  On   account	  of
the  amalgamation     and    adjusting	   the	   composite
Electrical-Mechanical  cadre in either of the Electrical  or
Mechanical  cadre  as  per  the	 options given, the order of
seniority  of  the  employees  working	in  Electrical	or
Mechanical  cadres  is	likely	to  be	reviewed.  When	 the
persons	 in  the
346
composite   Electrical-Mechanical   cadre   opted   to	 the
Electrical  cadre,  they are entitled to be  considered	 for
their  fitment	to the cadre as per the seniority  from	 the
date  of their initial appointment vis-a-vis their scale  of
pay.   This was the procedure adopted by the Corporation  in
fixing	the  inter se seniority.  The procedure	 adopted  is
just,  fair  and  reasonable  and  beneficial  to  all	 the
employees  without effecting their scales of  pay or loosing
the   seniority	 from  the  date  of  initial	appointment.
Undoubtedly, in this process the respondent/writ  petitioner
lost  some  place  in seniority which  is  consequential  to
amalgamation.	He has not been deprived of his right to  be
considered for promotion, only his chances of promotion have
been  receded.	It was not the case of the  respondent	that
the action was actuated by mala fide or colourable  exercise
of  power.  There is no fundamental right to promotion,	 but
an  employee has only right to be considered for  promotion,
when it arises, in accordance with the relevant rules.	From
this  perspective  in our view the conclusion  of  the	High
Court that the gradation list prepared by the Corporation is
in violation of the right of the respondent/ writ petitioner
to equality enshrined under
Art. 14
read with
Art. 16
of the
Constitution,	and  the  respondent/writ   petitioner	 was
unjustly denied of the same is obviously unjustified.
The  appeals are accordingly allowed and the  writ  petition
stands	dismissed.   But in the circumstances,	parties	 are
directed to bear their respective costs.
N.P.V.				Appeals	 allowed.
347