[Cites
5
, Cited by
60
]
Supreme Court of India
Ghan Shyam Das Gupta And Anr vs Anant Kumar Sinha And Ors on 17 September, 1991
Equivalent citations: 1991 AIR 2251, 1991 SCR SUPL. (1) 119, AIR 1991 SUPREME COURT 2251, 1991 AIR SCW 2591, 1991 ALL. L. J. 958, 1991 (2) UJ (SC) 730, 1991 (4) SCC 379, 1991 UJ(SC) 2 730, 1992 (2) BLJR 747, 1992 BLJR 2 747, (1991) 4 JT 43 (SC), 1991 (2) ALL CJ 1217, (1991) 2 RENCJ 401, (1992) 1 ALL WC 243, (1991) 3 CURCC 291, (1992) 1 RENCR 42, (1991) 2 GUJ LH 317, (1992) 1 APLJ 19, (1992) 1 MAHLR 26, (1992) 1 LANDLR 73, (1991) 2 RENTLR 654
Author:
L.M.  Sharma
Bench:
L.M.  Sharma
,
Jagdish Saran  Verma
PETITIONER:
GHAN SHYAM DAS GUPTA AND ANR.

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
ANANT KUMAR SINHA AND ORS.

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/09/1991

BENCH:
SHARMA, L.M. (J)
BENCH:
SHARMA, L.M. (J)
VERMA, JAGDISH SARAN (J)

CITATION:
 1991 AIR 2251		  1991 SCR  Supl. (1) 119
 1991 SCC  (4) 379	  JT 1991 (4)	 43
 1991 SCALE  (2)611


ACT:
    Constitution  of  India,  1950:
Article  226--
Scope  of
---Jurisdiction--Exercise of---Whether justified when alter-
native remedy available.
     Civil  Procedure Code, 1908: Order XXI, Rules  97-106--
Execution of decree--Whether third party, claimant objector,
entitled to remedy.



HEADNOTE:
    The	 appellants,  owners  of the  premises	in  question
obtained a decree of eviction against the tenant, Respondent
No. 7. While the decree was under challenge before the	High
Court,	 Respondent  Nos. 1 to 5 approached the	 High  Court
under
Art.  226
of the Constitution, claiming	that,  being
members	 of  Joint  Hindu Family, alongwith  the  lather  of
Respondent No. 7, they were tenants in their own right under
the appellants and were not bound by the decree, since	they
were not parties in the eviction case. The appellants denied
the claim of independent right of the respondent Nos. 1 to 5
and alleged that they had been subsequently inducted in	 the
premises as sub-tenants by respondent No. 7.
    The High Court held that since the claim of the Respond-
ent Nos. 1 to 5 was not examined and decided in the suit and
the  decree was passed against Respondent No. 7	 only,	they
could not be evicted from the premises.
    Allowing  the  appeal preferred by	the  landlord-appel-
lants, this Court,
    HELD:  1.1	The remedy provided under
Art.	226
is	 not
intended to supersede the modes of obtaining relief before a
civil  court or to deny defences legitimately open  in	such
actions.  The jurisdiction to issue a writ of certiorari  is
supervisory in nature and is not meant for correcting errors
like appellate Court. [122 E-F]
    State of Andhra Pradesh v. Chitra Venkata Rao, [1976]  1
SCR  521; Thansingh Nathmal & Ors. v.A. Mazid, [1964] 6	 SCR
654 and M. Naina Mohammed v. K.A. Natarajan & Ors., [1976] 1
SCR 102, relied on.
120
    1.2	 The  Civil Procedure Code  contains  elaborate	 and
exhaustive  provisions for dealing with executability  of  a
decree	in all its aspects. The numerous rules of order	 XXI
of  Civil Procedure Code take care of different	 situations,
providing  effective remedies not only	to  judgment-debtors
and  decree-holders  but also to claimant objectors  as	 the
case  may be.  In an exceptional case, where provisions	 are
rendered incapable of giving relief to an aggrieved party in
adequate  measure  and	appropriate time, the  answer  is  a
regular suit in the civil court.  The remedy under the	Code
is  of	superior  judicial quality than	 what  is  generally
available  under  other statutes, and the judge,  being	 en-
trusted	 exclusively  with  administration  of	justice,  is
expected  to do better. It will be, therefore, difficult  to
find  a	 case where interference in  writ  jurisdiction	 for
granting relief to a judgment-debtor or a claimant  objector
can  be	 justified.  Rules 97 to 106 of Order  XXI  envisage
questions  to be determined on the basis of evidence  to  be
led  by the parties and after the 1976 Amendment, the  deci-
sion has been made appealable like a decree. [123C-E]
    1.3	 In the instant case, it was necessary to adjudicate
upon the dispute between the parties and record a finding on
the character of possession of Respondent Nos. 1 to 7 before
proceeding  to consider whether the decree is executable  or
not against them and having not done so, the High Court	 has
seriously  erred in law in allowing the writ petition  filed
by them. The decision on the disputed issue was dependent on
the consideration of the evidence to be led by the  parties,
and  while exercising the writ jurisdiction, the High  Court
was  not expected to go into that question and ought not  to
have  embarked	upon a decision on merits, and	should	have
refused	 to exercise the special jurisdiction on the  ground
of alternative remedy before the civil court. [122 B-D]



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3656 of
1991.
From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  5.12.1988  of	 the
Allahabad  High Court in Civil Misc. Writ Petition No.	1695
of 1986.
O.P. Rana and Girish Chandra for the Appellants.
B.D. Agarwal and R .D. Upadhyay for the Respondents.
121
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
SHARMA, J. Special leave is granted.
2.	This  appeal  is directed against  the	judgment  of
Allahabad  High	 Court, allowing the writ  petition  of	 the
respondents  Nos. 1 to 5 under
Article 226
of the  Constitu-
tion, and directing that they shall not be evicted from	 the
premises  in  dispute  in pursuance of	an  eviction  decree
passed by the small causes court, Allahabad. The main  ques-
tion  which arises for decision is whether in the facts	 and
circumstances  of the case the High Court was  justified  in
entertaining  the  writ petition under
Article	226
of	 the
Constitution,  and proceeding to issue the  impugned  direc-
tion.
3.	The  appellants are the owners of  the	premises  in
question which according to their case was in possession  of
Dr.  K.C. Sinha as tenant. After his death his	son  Prabhas
Kumar Sinha, respondent No. 7, continued in possession.	 The
writ  petitioners- respondents are the sons of the  brothers
of  Dr. K.C. Sinha, and according to their case	 they  being
members of the joint Hindu Family along with Dr. K.C.  Sinha
are  tenants  in their own right under the  appellants.	 The
case  of the appellants is that they were  subsequently	 in-
ducted in the premises as sub-tenants by Prabhas Kumar Sinha
and did not have any independent right.
4. The eviction suit in the small causes court was filed
by the appellants against Prabhas Kumar Sinha for his  evic-
tion,  without	impleading  the writ  petitioners,  and	 the
decree	passed therein is under challenge by  the  judgment-
debtor	Prabhas	 Kumar	Sinha in revision  before  the	High
Court.	In  this background the respondents No. 1 to  5	 ap-
proached  the High Court under
Article 226
of the  Constitu-
tion, claiming that they, not being parties in the  eviction
case, are not bound by the decree.
5.	The  appellants in support of their  denial  of	 the
claim of independent right as tenants of the writ  petition-
ers,  pleaded supporting facts and circumstances in  detail,
inter alia alleging that the writ petitioners have  deliber-
ately concealed the fact they were parties in an immediately
preceding  case	 under the provisions of the
Rent  Act
for
release of the premises in favour of the landlord-appellants
and that the release order was ultimately made by the  dele-
gated authority overruling their objection.
6.	The High Court has held that since the claim of	 the
writ  petitioners was not examined and decided in  the	suit
and the decree was passed against Prabhas Kumar Sinha  only,
they cannot be evicted from the premises unless a decree  is
expressly passed against them. It has been
122
observed  that	the appellants must proceed to file  a	suit
against	 the  writ petitioners and obtain a  decree  against
them if they intend to eject them.
7.	It  has been contended, and in our  view  correctly,
that  if the claim of the writ petitioners of being in	pos-
session	 of  the premises as tenants in their own  right  is
rejected and they are held to have been inducted by  Prabhas
Kumar Sinha or his father Dr. K.C. Sinha, they are liable to
be  evicted  in	 execution of the present  decree.  It	was,
therefore, necessary to adjudicate upon the dispute  between
the parties and record a finding on the character of posses-
sion of the writ petitioners, before proceeding to  consider
whether	 the decree is executable or not against  them,	 and
having	not done so, the High Court has seriously  erred  in
law in allowing the writ petition by the impugned  judgment.
The  decision  on the disputed issue was  dependent  on	 the
consideration of the evidence to be led by the parties,	 and
while  exercising the writ jurisdiction the High  Court	 was
not expected to go into that question. In the circumstances,
the  Court  ought  to have refused to dispose  of  the	writ
petition on merits, leaving the writ petitioners to avail of
the remedy before the civil court. The error in the judgment
as  pointed out earlier was the consequence of	the  initial
mistake in entertaining the petition.
8.	 The  principle	 as to when the	 High  Court  should
exercise its special jurisdiction under
Article 226
and when
to  refuse  to	do so on the ground of	availability  of  an
alternative remedy has been settled by a long line of cases.
The  remedy  provided under
Article 226
is not	intended  to
supersede the modes of obtaining relief before a civil court
or  to deny defences legitimately open in such	actions.  As
was  observed in
State of Andhra Pradesh v.  Chitra  Venkata
Rao
[1976]  1 SCR 521 the jurisdiction to issue a  writ  of
certiorari  is	supervisory in nature and is not  meant	 for
correcting  errors  like an appellate  court.  In  Thansingh
Nathmal and Ors. v.A. Mazid: [1964] 6 SCR 654 a case dealing
with  liability	 to pay sales tax,  the	 appellants  without
following  the	statutory remedy under the
Sales  Tax	Act
,
moved  the High Court under
Article 226
on the	ground	that
the Act was ultra vires. The challenge was rejected. Another
contention,  namely,  that the finding of  the	Commissioner
that the goods were actually within the State at the time of
the contract was based on no evidence and was purely  specu-
lative, was also raised. This ground also failed before	 the
High  Court and the writ petition was  dismissed.  Approving
the decision, this Court observed that if the appellants had
persued the statutory remedy under the Act and the  question
had  been referred  to the High Court, the Court could	have
appropriately advised the Commissioner, but not having	done
so the High Court could	 not be asked to assume the role  of
an appellate
123
court  over  the decision of the Commissioner  either  on  a
question of fact or even of law.
Again when a learned Single
Judge  of  the	High Court and on appeal  a  Division  Bench
proceeded to examine the correctness of an order in relation
to grant of a permit to ply a vehicle under the Motor  Vehi-
cles Act, it was observed by this Court in
M. Naina Mohammed
v.  K.A. Natarajan & Ors.
, [1976] 1 SCR 102, that the  power
under
Article 226
is supervisory in nature and the Judges at
both the tiers had unwittingly slipped into the subtle	but,
fatal,	error of exercising a kind of appellate	 review.  So
far the question of executability of a decree is  concerned,
the  Civil Procedure Code contains elaborate and  exhaustive
provisions  for	 dealing  with it in all  its  aspects.	 The
numerous rules of order XXI of the Code take care of differ-
ent  situations,  providing effective remedies not  only  to
judgment-debtors  and  decree-holders but also	to  claimant
objectors as the case may be. In an exceptional case,  where
provisions  are	 rendered incapable of giving relief  to  an
aggrieved  party in adequate measure and  appropriate  time,
the answer is a regular suit in the civil court. The  remedy
under  the  Civil  Procedure Code is  of  superior  judicial
quality	 than what is generally available under other  stat-
utes, and the Judge being entrusted exclusively with  admin-
istration of justice, is expected to do better. It will	 be,
therefore,  difficult to find a case where  interference  in
writ  jurisdiction for granting relief to a  judgment-debtor
or a claimant objector can be justified. The rules 97 to 106
of order XXI envisage questions as in the present appeal  to
be  determined	on the basis of evidence to be	led  by	 the
parties and after the 1976 Amendment, the decision has	been
made  appealable  like	a decree. The  High  Court,  in	 the
present	 case, therefore, ought not to have embarked upon  a
decision  of  the writ petition on merits, and	should	have
refused	 to exercise its special jurisdiction on the  ground
of alternative remedy before the civil court.
9.	We, accordingly, set aside the impugned judgment and
dismiss the writ petition of the respondents without  exami-
nation of the merits of the rival cases of the parties.	 The
appeal	 is  allowed  with  costs,  assessed  at   Rs.2,000.
"""
N.P.V.				       Appeal allowed.
124