[Cites
15
, Cited by
58
]
Supreme Court of India
Yusufbhai Noormohmed Nendoliya vs State Of Gujarat And Anr on 17 September, 1991
Equivalent citations: 1991 AIR 2153, 1991 SCR SUPL. (1) 158, AIR 1991 SUPREME COURT 2153, 1991 (4) SCC 531, 1991 AIR SCW 2528, (1992) 1 APLJ 17.1, 1992 (1) ALL CJ 152, 1992 (2) BLJR 793, 1992 (1) UJ (SC) 21, 1992 UJ(SC) 1 21, (1992) 1 SCJ 57, (1991) 3 CURCC 321, (1992) 2 GUJ LR 1591, (1991) 2 GUJ LH 601, (1992) 1 KER LT 335, (1992) 1 LANDLR 57, (1992) 1 MAHLR 355, (1992) 1 RRR 259, (1992) 7 LACC 499, (1992) 1 CIVLJ 211
Author:
M.H. Kania
Bench:
M.H. Kania
,
N.M.  Kasliwal
,
M.  Fathima Beevi
PETITIONER:
YUSUFBHAI NOORMOHMED NENDOLIYA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF GUJARAT AND ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/09/1991

BENCH:
KANIA, M.H.
BENCH:
KANIA, M.H.
KASLIWAL, N.M. (J)
FATHIMA BEEVI, M. (J)

CITATION:
 1991 AIR 2153		  1991 SCR  Supl. (1) 158
 1991 SCC  (4) 531	  1991 SCALE  (2)608


ACT:
Land Acquisition Act, 1894
:
    Section 11-A---Explanation--Interpretation	of--Acquisi-
tion  of landproceedings--When lapse---Two-Year	 period	 for
making	of  award--Computation	of--Whether  entire   period
during which any action or proceedings pursuant to  declara-
tion under
Section 6
remained staved to be excluded.



HEADNOTE:
    A  notification under
Section 6
of the Land	 Acquisition
Act, 1894 was published in respect of lands under the appel-
lant's	occupation.  The appellant challenged the  notifica-
tion before the High Court and prayed for an interim stay of
operation  and implementation of the  notification.  Pending
admission of the appellant's Special Civil Application,	 the
High Court granted limited interim relief by restraining the
respondent  from taking possession of the  lands.  Meanwhile
Respondent  No.	 2, the Land Acquisition Officer,  issued  a
notice under
Section 9(1)
of the Act and proceeded to deter-
mine  the  compensation.  In the enquiry,  he  rejected	 the
appellant's  objection that as two years had  elapsed  after
the  publication of the notification and no award  had	been
made within the said period, all the acquisition proceedings
lapsed and were exhausted. The High Court also rejected	 the
appellant's  appeal, relying on the decision of	 a  Division
Bench of the High Court, that Section 11-A of the  aforesaid
Act enjoined exclusion of the entire period during which any
action	or proceeding to be taken pursuant to a	 declaration
under
Section 6
was stayed by an order of a competent court,
and that the Explanation to the Section was not confined  to
the staying of the making of the award, pursuant to
Section
6
of the notification, but it was widely worded and  covered
in  its sweep the entire period during which any  action  or
proceeding was stayed by a competent Court.
    In the appeal before this Court, on behalf of the appel-
lant  it was contended that by Explanation to  Section	11-A
the  only  period excluded in computing the  period  of	 two
years was the period during which  any action
    159
or  proceeding taken in pursuance of the  declaration  under
Section 6
upto the making of the award under
Section 11
was
stayed	and  that the question of  taking  possession  could
arise  after making the award and merely because  the  land-
holder	obtained an injunction restraining land	 acquisition
authorities  from taking possession that could not serve  to
exclude	 any time from the period of two years within  which
the award must be made.
Dismissing the appeal, this Court,
    HELD: The Explanation to Section 11-A of the Land Acqui-
sition Act, 1894, which prescribes the period to be excluded
while  computing  the period of two years within  which	 the
award  has to be made, is in the widest possible  terms	 and
there  is no warrant for limiting the action or	 proceedings
referred  to  in the Explanation to actions  or	 proceedings
preceding  the making of the award under
Section 11
of	 the
Act.  In the first place, where the case is covered by	Sec-
tion 17, the possession can be taken before an award is made
and there is no reason why the expression "the period during
which any action or proceedings to be taken in pursuance  of
the  said declaration is stayed by an order by a Court",  in
the Explanation should be given a different meaning, depend-
ing upon whether the case is covered by
Section 17
or other-
wise.  On  the other hand, the Explanation  is	intended  to
limit the benefit conferred by Section 11-A on a land-holder
whose  land is acquired after the declaration under
Section
6
.  The	 benefit  is that the award must be  made  within  a
period	of two years of the declaration, failing  which	 the
acquisition  proceedings  would	 lapse and  the	 land  would
revert	to the land-holder. In order to get the	 benefit  of
the said provision what is required, is that the land-holder
who seeks the benefit must not have obtained any order	from
a court restraining any action or proceeding in pursuance of
the declaration under
Section 6
of the said Act so that	 the
operation  of the beneficial provisions of Section  11-A  is
confined  to cases of those land-holders who do	 not  obtain
any  order  from a court which would delay  or	prevent	 the
making	of  the award or taking possession of the  land	 ac-
quired. [163 E-H, 164 A]
    The	 High Court was, therefore, right in  rejecting	 the
appellant's challenge to the continuance of the proceedings.
[164-B]
    Special  Civil Application No. 4314 of 1990	 decided  by
Gujarat High Court approved.
160
    S. BavajanSahib v. State of Kerala and Others, AIR	1988
Kerala 280, disapproved.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION. Civil Appeal No. 3659 of
1991.
From  the  Judgment	 and Order dated  5.11.1990  of	 the
Gujarat	 High  Court in Spl. Civil Application No.  7685  of
1990.
Dushyant Dave, Ms. Indu Malhotra and Ms. Shirin Jain for
the Appellant.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
	      KANIYA, J. Leave granted. Counsel heard
	      This  appeal  raises an  interesting  question
	      regarding	 the interpretation of
Section	11-A
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (hereinafter
	      referred	to as "the said Act"). Section	11-A
	      was inserted into the said Act by
Section 9
of
	      Act 68 of 1984.
The relevant facts lie within a very narrow compass. The
appellant  is the occupant of lands comprising	Survey	Nos.
864  and  687 respectively of village Samal  Pati  in  Patan
Taluka	of Mehsana District in Gujarat. The said lands	were
sought	to be acquired by the State of	Gujarat,  Respondent
No. 2 herein, for the purpose of 'the North Gujarat  Univer-
sity.	The notification under
Section 6
of the said Act  in
respect	 of the said lands was issued on May 12,  1988.	 The
parties proceeded on the assumption that it was published in
the locality around about that time. The learned Counsel for
the appellant stated in the High Court that such publication
took place sometime in June 1988, and the parties as well as
the  Court proceeded on the footing that the said  statement
is  correct. The appellant challenged the said	notification
by filing Special Civil Application No. 4342 of 1988 in	 the
High Court of Gujarat. On the prayer for interim relief made
by the appellant for the stay of the operation and implemen-
tation	of  the said notification, the	Gujarat	 High  Court
granted	 only  a limited interim relief by  restraining	 re-
spondent  No. 1 from taking possession of the said lands  of
the  appellant pending admission of the said  special  civil
application.  The said interim relief, which was granted  on
August	8,  1988, still continues to be	 operative.  In	 the
meantime,  respondent  No.  2, being  the  Land	 Acquisition
Officer concerned, issued a notice under
Section 9(1)
of the
said  Act and proceeded to determine the compensation  after
hearing	 the objections. In the inquiry held  by  respondent
No. 2 in respect of the objections the appel-
161
lant  took up the contention that, as two years had  elapsed
after the publication of the notification making the  decla-
ration	under
Section 6
of the said Act, and no  award	 had
been  made within the said period, all the acquisition	pro-
ceedings in respect of the said lands lapsed and the  acqui-
sition	proceedings were exhausted. The said  contention  of
the appellant was rejected by the land acquisition  authori-
ties.  The  appellant challenged this decision of  the	land
acquisition authorities by filing the Special Civil Applica-
tion  No.  7685 of 1990 in the High Court  of  Gujarat.	 The
challenge  made by the appellant to the continuance  of	 the
acquisition  proceedings  was repelled by the  Gujarat	High
Court  relying on the decision of an earlier Division  Bench
of that Court comprising of R.C. Mankad and K.J. Vaidya, JJ.
in  Special Civil Application No. 4314 of 1990. It was	held
by  the	 Division Bench that Section 11-A of  the  said	 Act
enjoins	 exclusion  of the entire period  during  which	 any
action	or proceeding to be taken pursuant to a	 declaration
under
Section 6
is stayed by an order of a competent  court.
The  Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court took the	view
that the Explanation to Section 11-A is not confined to	 the
staying of the making of the award pursuant to
Section 6
of
the notification, but it is widely worded and covers in	 its
sweep the entire period during which any action or  proceed-
ing  to be taken in pursuance of the declaration under	Sec-
tion 6, is stayed by a competent court.	 I1 is the  correct-
ness of this decision, which is assailed before us.
    In	order to appreciate the submissions made before	 us,
it  will be useful to refer to the relevant  provisions	 of'
the  said  Act.
Section 4
of the said Act  deals  with	 the
publication  in	 the  Official Gazette	of  the	 preliminary
notification  that it appears to the appropriate  government
that  land  in	any locality is needed or is  likely  to  be
needed for any public purpose or for a company, where it  so
appears	 to the appropriate Government. Section 5A  provides
for  the hearing of the objections to the proposed  acquisi-
tion.
Section 6
provides for the issuance of a	 declaration
of intended acquisition, namely, that land is required for a
public	purpose after considering the report, if  any,	made
under Section 5-A.
Section 11
of the said Act deals with the
enquiry into the matters set out therein and the making	 the
award  of  compensation by the Collector. The  said  section
prescribes that the said award, inter alia, shall  determine
the  compensation  which  in the opinion  of  the  Collector
should be allowed for the land and for apportionment of such
compensation  among all the persons interested in  the	said
land  as provided in
Section 11 (i) (iii)
of the  said	Act.
Section 11-A which was inserted in 1984 into the said Act as
stated earlier runs as follows:
"11-A.  Period within which an award shall  be
	      made---The Col-
162
lector  shall make an award under
Section  11
within a period of two years from the date  of
	      the  publication of the declaration and if  no
	      award  is made within that period, the  entire
	      proceedings  for the acquisition of  the	land
	      shall lapse:
Provided that in a case where the said  decla-
	      ration has been published before the commence-
	      ment of the Land Acquisition (Amendment)	Act,
	      1984, the award shall be made within a  period
	      of two years from such commencement."
Explanation:  In computing the period  of	 two
	      years referred to in this section, the  period
	      during  which any action or proceeding  to  be
	      taken in pursuance of the said declaration  is
	      stayed by an order of a Court shall be exclud-
	      ed.
Section 12
deals with the question as to when the  award
of  the Collector becomes final.
Section 15
deals  with	 the
matters to be considered and matters to be neglected in	 the
determination of the compensation.
Section 16
deals with the
power to take possession and provides that when the  Collec-
tor has made an award under
Section 11
, he may take  posses-
sion  of the land which shall thereupon vest  absolutely  in
the  Government free from encumbrances.
Section	 17
confers
powers	on the appropriate government to take possession  of
any  land  needed for a public purpose and  intended  to  be
acquired,  although  no	 award has been made,  in  cases  of
special urgency.
The	 submission of learned Counsel for the appellant  is
that in the present case the notification under
Section 6
of
the  said Act was published in June 1988 and, as  the  award
under
Section 11
not made by the Collector within a  period
of  two years from the date of the publication,	 the  entire
proceedings  for  the  acquisition of the  land	 lapsed.  In
connection  with  the Explanation to
Section 1
I-A  it	 was
submitted  by learned Counsel that by the  said	 Explanation
the  only period excluded in computing the aforesaid  period
of  two years is the period during which any action or	pro-
ceeding	 taken	in pursuance of the said  declaration  under
Section	 6
upto the stage of
Section 11
, namely,  upto	 the
making of the award under
Section 11
was stayed by the order
of  a  competent  court. It was submitted by  him  that	 the
question  of taking possession would arise after making	 the
award  under
Section  11
and merely  because  a  landholder
obtained an injunction restraining land acquisition authori-
ties from taking possession that would not serve to  exclude
any time from the aforesaid period of two years within which
the award must be made.
163
In	support	 of his contention learned Counsel  for	 the
appellant relied upon the judgment of a learned Single Judge
of  the	 Kerala High Court in
S. Bavajan Sahib v.  State  of
Kerala and others
, AIR 1988 Kerala 280. In his judgment	 the
learned	 Single Judge has taken the view that the action  or
proceeding  contemplated by the Explanation to Section	11-A
of  the	 said Act is any action or proceeding  to  be  taken
after  the  making of the declaration under
section  6
and
before	the  passing  of the award under
section  11
.	Such
actions	 are  those contemplated by
sections 7
to
10
.	 The
question  of taking possession of the land arises only	when
the award is passed under
Section 16
of the said Act  except
in  cases  of  emergency covered under
Section	17
.  It	 was
pointed	 out by the learned Judge that the case	 before	 him
was not a case in respect of which
Section 17
was applicable
and  hence, unless there was a stay of the proceedings	con-
templated  by
Sections 7
to
10
or  of	further	 proceedings
pursuant to the declaration under
Section 6
the	 Explanation
will  not  operate so as to extend the period of  two  years
prescribed  by	Section 11-A. We find  ourselves  unable  to
agree  with  the  view of the learned Single  Judge  of	 the
Kerala High Court in the aforesaid judgment.  In the  Expla-
nation to Section 11-A of the said Act which prescribes	 the
period which is to be excluded, the expression used is
	      "the  period during which any action  or	pro-
ceedings to be taken in pursuance of the	said
	      declaration is stayed by an order by a Court."
			  (Emphasis supplied)
    The	 said  Explanation is in the widest  possible  terms
and,  in our opinion, there is no warrant for  limiting	 the
action	or  proceeding	referred to in	the  Explanation  to
actions	 or  proceedings preceding the making of  the  award
under
section	11
of the said Act. In the first  place,  as
held  by the learned Single Judge himself where the case  is
covered by
Section 17
, the possession can be taken before an
award is made and we see no reason why the aforesaid expres-
sion in the Explanation should be given a different  meaning
depending upon whether the case is covered by
Section 17
or
otherwise. On the other hand, it appears to us that  Section
11-A  is intended to limit the benefit conferred on  a	land
holder	whose land is acquired after the  declaration  under
Section	 6
is made to in cases covered by  the	Explanation.
The  benefit is that the award must be made within a  period
of two years of the declaration, failing which the  acquisi-
tion  proceedings would lapse and the land would  revert  to
the  land-holder.  In order to get the benefit of  the	said
provision  what	 is required, is that  the  land-holder	 who
seeks the benefit must not have obtained any order from a
164
court  restraining any action or proceeding in pursuance  of
the declaration under
Section 6
of the said Act so that	 the
Explanation covers only the cases of those land-holders	 who
do  not obtain any order from a court which would  delay  or
prevent the making of the award or taking possession of	 the
land  acquired. In our opinion, the Gujarat High  Court	 was
right in taking a similar view in the impugned judgment.
In  the	 result, there is no merit in the appeal and  it  is
dismissed.
N.P.V.					   Appeal dismissed.
165