[Cites
7
, Cited by
118
]
Supreme Court of India
Chander Mohan Khanna vs National Council Of Educational ... on 17 September, 1991
Equivalent citations: 1992 AIR 76, 1991 SCR SUPL. (1) 165, AIR 1992 SUPREME COURT 76, 1991 (4) SCC 578, 1991 AIR SCW 2749, 1991 (2) UJ (SC) 747, (1991) 4 JT 233 (SC), 1991 UJ(SC) 2 747, 1992 (1) UPLBEC 18, (1991) 2 ORISSA LR 499, 1992 SCC (L&S) 109, (1991) 79 FJR 538, (1993) 66 FACLR 967, (1992) 1 LABLJ 331, (1992) 1 LAB LN 16, (1992) 1 MAHLR 214, (1992) 1 UPLBEC 18, (1992) 46 DLT 128
Author:
K.J.  Shetty
Bench:
K.J.  Shetty
,
Yogeshwar Dayal
PETITIONER:
CHANDER MOHAN KHANNA

	Vs.

RESPONDENT:
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH ANDTRAINING AND ORS

DATE OF JUDGMENT17/09/1991

BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
BENCH:
SHETTY, K.J. (J)
YOGESHWAR DAYAL (J)

CITATION:
 1992 AIR   76		  1991 SCR  Supl. (1) 165
 1991 SCC  (4) 578	  JT 1991 (4)	233
 1991 SCALE  (2)773


ACT:
Constitution of India:
	Art 12-- NCERT whether "State"-- Indicative  indicia
and determinative factors -- What are.



HEADNOTE:
    In a writ petition challenging the termination of  serv-
ices  of the appellant, who was an employee in the  National
Council of Educational Research & Training (NCERT), the High
Court  upheld the preliminary objection that the writ  peti-
tion was not maintainable as NCERT was not an instrumentali-
ty or authority within the meaning of
Art. 12
of the Consti-
tution. Aggrieved, the appellant filed the appeal by special
leave to this Court.
    On	the  question whether NCERT is	"State"	 as  defined
under
Article 12
of the Constitution,
Dismissing the appeal, the Court,
    HELD:  1.1. Like all societies, having a  Memorandum  of
Association and Rules for internal management, the  National
Council	 of Educational Research and Training is  a  society
registered under the
Societies Registration Act
. [168 E]
    1.2. Having regard to the object, functions, activities,
sources	 of  funds of NCERT, freedom of application  of	 its
income and property towards the promotion of its  objectives
and implementation of programmes, confinement of  Government
control only to proper utilisation of the grant, and largely
being  an autonomous body, the institution does not  satisfy
the requirements of "State" under
Article 12
of the  Consti-
tution. [169 G-H; 170A-C; 171 C-D]
Tekraj Vasandhi alias K.L. Basandhi v. Union of India [1988]
2 SCR 260, Sabhjit Tewari v. Union of India and Ors., [1975]
1 SCC 485, referred to.
166
    Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardhi, [1981] 1 SCC 722
P.K.  Ramachandra Iyer v. Union of India, [1984] 2  SCC	 141
distinguished.
    2.
Article 12
should not be stretched so as to bring  in
every autonomous body which has some nexus with the  Govern-
ment  within  the sweep of the expression  "State".  A	wide
enlargement of the meaning must be tempered by a wise  limi-
tation.	 It  must not be lost sight of that  in	 the  modern
concept of Welfare State; independent institution,  corpora-
tion and agency are generally subject to State control.	 The
State  control does not render such bodies as "State"  under
Article 12.
The	 State control, however vast and pervasive,  is	 not
determinative.	The financial contribution by the  State  is
also not conclusive. [168 A-B]
    3.	The powers, functions, finances and control  of	 the
government are some of the indicating factors to answer	 the
question whether a body is "State" or not. These are  merely
indicative indicia and are by no means conclusive or clinch-
ing  in any case. Each case should be handled with care	 and
caution. [167 E-G]
    Sukhdev  Singh  v. Bhagat Ram, [1975] 1  SCC  421;	R.D.
Shetty v. International Airport Authority, [1979]3 SCC	489,
and Sore Prakash Rekhi v. Union of India, [1981] 1 SCC	449,
referred to.
    4.1 The combination of State aid coupled with an unusual
degree	of control over the management and policies  of	 the
body, and rendering of an important public service being the
obligatory functions of the State may largely point out that
the body is "State". [168 B-C]
    4.2. If the Government operates behind a corporate veil,
carrying  out governmental activity and	 governmental  func-
tions of vital public importance, there may be little diffi-
culty in identifying the body as "State", within the meaning
of
Article 12
of the Constitution. [168 C]
      Central  Inland Water Transport Corporation v.  Brojo-
nath  Gangoli, [1996] 3 SCC 156, Tekraj Vasandhi alias	K.L.
Basandhi v. Union. of India, [1988] 2 SCR 260, referred to.



JUDGMENT:
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 1690 of
1981.
167
From the Judgment and order dated 10.4.1980 of the Delhi
High Court in Civil Writ No. 450 of 1971.
H.K. Puri for the Appellant.
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by
    K. JAGANNATHA SHETTY, J. Whether the National Council of
Educational  Research  and Training (NCERT)  is	 "State"  as
defined	 under
Article 12
of the Constitution ? This is	 the
only  question that calls for decision in this	appeal.	 The
appellant  was an employee of the NCERT. This services	were
terminated by the Secretary of NCERT. Challenging the termi-
nation	he moved the Delhi High Court under
Article  226
of
the Constitution.The NCERT raised a preliminary objection as
to  the maintainability of the writ petition. The  objection
was that the NCERT is not amenable to the writ	jurisdiction
of  the High Court as it is not an instrumentality or  other
authority within the meaning of
Article 12
of the  Constitu-
tion.  The High Court has upheld the  preliminary  objection
and  dismissed the writ petition. The decision of  the	High
Court has been challenged in this appeal.
There  are	only general principles but  not  exhaustive
test  to determine whether a body is an	 instrumentality  or
agency of the Government. Even in general principles,  there
is  no	cut and dried formula which  would  provide  correct
division of bodies into those which are instrumentalities or
agencies  of  the Government and those which  are  not.	 The
powers,	 functions, finances and control of  the  Government
are  some of the indicating factors to answer  the  question
whether	 a body is "State" or not. Each case should be	han-
dled  with care and caution. Where the financial  assistance
from the State is so much as to meet almost entire  expendi-
ture of the institution, or the share capital of the  corpo-
ration is completely held by the Government, it would afford
some  indication of the body being impregnated with  govern-
mental	character.  It may be a relevant factor if  the	 in-
stitution or the corporation enjoys monopoly status which is
State  conferred or State protected. Existence of  deep	 and
pervasive  State  control may afford an indication.  If	 the
functions  of the institution are of public  importance	 and
related to governmental functions, it would also be a  rele-
vant factor. These are merely indicative indicia and are  by
no  means  conclusive or clinching in any ease	See
Sukhdev
Singh v. Bhagat Ram
, [1975] 1 SCC 421; R.D. Shetty v. Inter-
national  Airport Authority, [1979]3 SCC 489;
Ajay Hasia  v.
Khalid	Mujib Sehravardhi
, [1981]1
SCC 722 and	Som  Prakash
Rekhi v. Union of India
, [1981]1 SCC 449.
168
Article  12
should not be stretched so as to  bring  in
every autonomous body which has some nexus with the  Govern-
ment within the sweep of expression "State". A wide enlarge-
ment  of the meaning must be tempered by a wise	 limitation.
It  must not be lost sight of that in the modern concept  of
Welfare	 State;	 independent  institution,  corporation	 and
agency	are  generally subject to State control.  The  State
control does not render such bodies as "State" under Article
12.  The State control, however, vast and pervasive  is	 not
determinative.	The financial contribution by the  State  is
also  not conclusive. The combination of State	aid  coupled
with  an unusual degree of control over the  management	 and
policies  of the body, and rendering of an important  public
service	 being	the obligatory functions of  the  State	 may
largely	 point out that the body is "State". If the  Govern-
ment operates behind a corporate veil, carrying out  govern-
mental	activity and governmental functions of vital  public
importance,  there may be little difficulty  in	 identifying
the body as "State" within the meaning of
Article 12
of	 the
Constitution. See: P.K. Ramachandra lyer v. Union of  India,
[1984]2	 SCC 141 Central Inland Water Transport	 Corporation
v.  Brojonath Gangoli, [1986] 3 SCC 156 and Tekraj  Vasandhi
alias
K.L. Basandhi v. Union of India
, [1988]2 SCR 260.
    The	 NCERT is a society registered under  the
Societies
Registration Act
. Like all societies, it has a Memorandum of
Association. It has Rules for internal management. The	High
Court has elaborately examined the Memorandum of Association
and the rules of the NCERT. The relevant part of the discus-
sion by the High Court is as follows:
"The  NCERT  is governed by  a  Memorandum  of
	      Association subscribed to by seven officers of
	      the  Government  of India on  6.6.1961.  Under
	      clause  3.1 of the Memorandum  of	 Association
	      the  object  of the Council is to	 assist	 and
	      advise  the Ministry of Education	 and  Social
	      Welfare in the implementation of its  policies
	      and major programmes in the field of education
	      particularly  school education.  Under  clause
	      3.2 the Council is empowered for the  realisa-
	      tion  of	the above  objectives  to  undertake
	      several  kinds  of programmes  and  activities
	      which include coordination or research, exten-
	      sion  services and training, dissemination  of
	      improved educational techniques and  practices
	      in   schools,  collaboration  in	 educational
	      programmes, distribution of ideas and informa-
	      tion,  preparation and publication  of  books,
	      materials,  periodicals and  other  literature
	      and  allied  activities. Under  clause  5	 the
	      income  and property of the Council is  to  be
	      applied towards the promotion of its ob-
169
jects  and  cannot be disposed of	 by  way  of
	      dividends,  bonus etc. But under this  clause,
	      the  Council is free to apply the	 income	 and
	      property towards its objectives in such manner
	      as  it  may think fit. It is  subject  to	 the
	      limitations placed by the Government of  India
	      in this regard only in respect of the expendi-
	      ture  of grants made by the Government.  Under
	      clause 6	the Government of India could review
	      the work and progress of the Council and	take
	      appropriate  action  to  give  effect  to	 the
	      reports  received on enquiries.  In  addition,
	      the Government could at any time issue  direc-
	      tions  to the Council on important matters  of
	      policy and programmes." Rule 3 of the Rules of
	      the  Council provides for Constitution of	 the
	      Council  which  consists	mainly	of   various
	      Government  officials  but also  includes	 the
	      Chairman of the University Grants	 Commission,
	      four  Vice Chancellors and a number  of  nomi-
	      nees,  four from school teachers	and  several
	      others.  Rule 7 enables the Government to	 fix
	      the  period of appointment of the members	 and
	      to extend it from time to time. The  council's
	      affairs are conducted by the Executive Commit-
	      tee whose constitution is outlined in Rule 23.
	      This includes various Government servants	 but
	      it also includes four educationists and  three
	      Professors and Heads of Departments who may be
	      nominated	 by the President. Rule 37  provides
	      that if there is any difference of opinion the
	      view of the majority will prevail subject to a
	      veto  which could be exercised by the  Govern-
	      ment of India within a month. It also  enables
	      the  President to refer any question  for	 the
	      decision	of the Government. Rule	 40  enables
	      the  Executive  Committee to frame  and  amend
	      Regulations  not inconsistent with the  rules.
	      Rule  42 empowers the Executive  Committee  to
	      enter  into  arrangements.  with	 Government,
	      public or private organisations or individuals
	      in furtherance of its objectives and implemen-
	      tation  of  its programmes. Rule	57  provides
	      that the funds of the council shall consist of
(i) grants made by Government; (ii)  contribu-
tion from other sources; (iii) Income from the
	      assets  of the Council; and (iv)	Receipts  of
	      the Council from other sources."
The object of the NCERT as seen from the above  analysis
is to assist and advise the Ministry of Education and Social
Welfare	 in the implementation of the Governmental  policies
and major programmes in the field of education	particularly
school	education.  The NCERT undertakes  several  kinds  of
programmes and activities connected with the coordination of
,
170
research  extension services and training, dissemination  of
improved educational techniques, collaboration in the educa-
tional programmes. It also undertakes preparation and publi-
cation	of books, materials, periodicals and  other  litera-
ture. These activities are not wholly related to  Government
functions.   The affairs of the NCERT are conducted  by	 the
Executive  Committee comprising of Government  servants	 and
educationists.	 The  Executive Committee would	 enter	into
arrangements  with Government, public or  private  organisa-
tions  or individuals in furtherance of the  objectives	 for
implementation of programmes. The funds of the NCERT consist
of:  (i)  grants made by the Government,  (ii)	contribution
from other sources and (iii) income from its own assets.  It
is free to apply its income and property towards the  promo-
tion of its objectives and implementation of the programmes.
The Government control is confined only to the proper utili-
sation of the grant. The NCERT is thus largely an autonomous
body.
Almost  a similar case was considered by this  Court  in
Tekraj	Vasandhi  alias
K.L. Basandhi v.  Union	 of   India
,
[1988]2 SCR 260. This Court was required to determine wheth-
er the Institute of Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies
(ICPS) was State under
Article 12.
The ICPS was a registered
society financed mostly by the Central Government and partly
by gifts and donations from Indian and foreign agencies. The
first  President of the society was the then Speaker of	 the
Lok  Sabha. Out of the five vice- presidents three were	 the
then  central ministers; the other two were the	 then  Chief
Justice	 of India and the Attorney General. The	 objects  of
the  society were to provide for constitutional and  parlia-
mentary	 studies,  promotion of research  in  constitutional
law, setting up of legislative research and reference  serv-
ice for the benefit of legislators, organisation of training
programmes  in matters of parliamentary interest and  impor-
tance  and  publication of a journal. The Court	 found	that
ICPS was born as a voluntary organisation. It found  further
that though the annual financial contribution from the State
was  substantial,  it was entitled to receive aid  from	 the
public	and  in	 fact  received	 contributions	from   other
sources.  Its  objects were not	 governmental  business.  As
regards the argument that the government exercised pervasive
control over ICPS, the Court said:
"In  a Welfare State  .................	Gov-
	      ernmental control is very pervasive and touch-
es    all	   aspects    of    social    exist-
ence   ...........   A broad  picture  of	 the
	      matter  has to be taken and a discerning	mind
	      has  to be applied keeping the  realities	 and
	      human  experiences  in view so as to  reach  a
	      reasonable conclusion."
In the light of all these factors it has held that ICPS	 was
not "State".
171
In the present case, the High Court has relied upon	 the
Constitution Bench decision of this Court in Sabhjit  Tewari
v.  Union of India and Ors., [1975] 1 SCC 485. There it	 was
held that the Council of Scientific and Industrial  Research
(CSIR),	 which was sponsored and controlled by	the  Central
Government  and registered under the
Societies	Registration
Act
was not "State" within the meaning of
Article  12.
But
this decision has been distinguished and watered down in the
subsequent decisions particularly in Ajay Hasia and Ramchan-
dra lyer cases (supra).
Counsel  for  the  appellant strongly  relied  upon	 the
decision in P.K Ramchandra lyer case   where this Court held
that  Indian  Council for Agricultural Research	 (ICAR)	 was
"State" under
Article 12.
But it may be noted that ICAR	 was
originally an attached office of the Government of India and
its  position  was not altered when it was registered  as  a
society. That case, therefore is clearly distinguishable.
    In	our opinion, the case on hand, having regard to	 the
indications to which we have called attention earlier,	does
not satisfy the requirements of "State" under
Article 12
of
the  Constitution. We, therefore, agree with the  conclusion
of  the	 High Court and dismiss the appeal. In	the  circum-
stances of the case, we make no order as to costs.
R.P.					      Appeal	dis-
missed.
172