[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Major Singh vs The State Of Punjab on 16 June, 2022
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
A.S. Bopanna
1


2022 INSC 1306
                                                                    REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                          CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.2405­06 OF 2014


         MAJOR SINGH                                             …APPELLANT(S)

                                              VERSUS

         STATE OF PUNJAB & ANR.                              …RESPONDENT(S)


                                             O R D E R
1.      The present set of appeals filed by accused­

         appellant, Major Singh (hereinafter referred to as

         ‘the         appellant’)          arises   from   the    order   dated

         03.04.2014 passed by Punjab and Haryana High Court

         in Criminal Appeal No. 421 of 2002 and Criminal

         Revision No. 391 of 2002, whereby the appeal and

         revision petition were allowed, the acquittal by

         the Trial Court was set aside and the appellant

         was convicted under
section 302
IPC1 and sentenced

         to undergo imprisonment for life and pay fine of


         1
IPC
–
Indian Penal Code
, 1860
2
Rs.5,000/­.
FACTS:
2.   Prosecution’s     case       arises    from     a    two­day

incident and it unfolds as follows:
i. On 20.07.1998, a day preceding the unfortunate

incident, appellant had quarreled with his uncle

Makhan Singh (deceased) and had abused the uncle.
Due to this argument between them,                 Makhan Singh

had severely reprimanded the appellant.
ii. On the day of the incident, i.e. on 21.07.1998

at about 10:30/11:00 A.M., Makhan Singh, father of

Sukhraj Singh (complainant) was going towards bus

stand of their village. On his way over, Major

Singh came from the other side of the bus stand

holding   a   wooden   ‘Bahi’     (wooden    side    of    a   cot

frame). He abused Makhan Singh for shouting and

insulting him on the previous day and threatened

to teach Makhan Singh a lesson. Thereafter, the

accused dealt a ‘Bahi’ blow to Makhan Singh on his
3
head as a result of which Makhan Singh fell down.
Immediately after which Major Singh ran away from

the spot with the ‘Bahi’. After this both Sukhraj

Singh and Charanjit Singh, who were standing in

front   of    the   shop      of    Dilbag      Singh,      took     their

father, who was bleeding from the head to Civil

Hospital,       Giddarbaha.           As     his         condition     was

serious,      the     doctor       referred        him     to   Dayanand

Medical College, Ludhiana. Makhan Singh succumbed

to the injuries on 22.07.1998, that is a day after

the incident.
3.    Sukhraj    Singh      went        to   the    Police      Station,

where he met ASI Arnail Singh at Husnar Chowk,

Gidderbaha      and    his     statement           was     recorded     in

writing.      The   police,        after      making       endorsement,

sent    the     same     to    police        station­Kotbhai           for

registration of FIR. The police visited the spot

and    prepared     rough      site      plan      and    blood­stained

earth was lifted from the spot.
4
4.    On    the     day    of     the       death   of    the   incident,

police       visited       DMC,    Ludhiana         and   prepared    the

inquest          report.    The        offence      was    enhanced    to
section 302
IPC and the body of the deceased was

sent       for    post    mortem.       Post­mortem        report   found

eight injuries and, according to the doctor, the

cause of death was due to shock and hemorrhage as

a result of head injury.
5.    Appellant was arrested on 09.08.1998. As per

the        prosecution,           he        confessed       about     the

concealment of ‘Bahi’ by him in the wheat chaff

room at his residence. In the presence of Head

Constable Gurdass Singh and Charanjit Singh, the

‘Bahi’ stained in blood was recovered from the

place disclosed by the appellant. The police sent

the blood­stained earth, plain earth along with

‘Bahi’ for chemical examination. In the report of

chemical examiner, it was found that the stain on

the ‘Bahi’ and the blood recovered from the spot
5
were of the same person, i.e. the deceased.
6.      After compliance of
section 207
CrPC 2, the case

was committed to the Sessions Court, vide order

dated 13.10.1998 and charge was framed against the

accused under
section 302
IPC on 17.11.1998. The

accused            pleaded               not    guilty          and    claimed    to   be

tried.
7.      The       prosecution                  examined         eight    witnesses     as

PW1 to PW­8 and also filed documentary evidence.

After           the         evidence                by     the        prosecution      was

recorded, the accused was examined under
section

313
CrPC and the entire incriminating material was

put to him. He denied all the allegations against

him and reiterated his innocence. He claimed to be

falsely             implicated                 in        this    case     due    to    the

occurrence of the squabble between him and the

deceased, a day before the incident. He stated

that the deceased had received injuries due to a


2
CrPC
–
Criminal Procedure Code
, 1973
6
scooter      accident.   However,      the   accused   did   not

produce any evidence in defence.

TRIAL COURT JUDGMENT:
8.   The learned Additional Sessions Judge, Muktsar

vide order 13.07.2001, acquitted the appellant on

the following findings:
(i) There was a delay of 4 ½ hours in recording

     the FIR. Even the late arrest of the accused on
03.08.1998 shows that the prosecution was not

     sure about the real story behind the incident.
(ii) The motive behind the occurrence of the

     incident was neither serious nor proved beyond

     reasonable doubt by the prosecution.
(iii)    Sukhraj    Singh       (complainant)     and   ASI

     Jarnail Singh, the Investigating Officer were

     acquainted with each other.
(iv) The time of occurrence as claimed is not

     established.
(v) Statements of eye witnesses, Sukhraj Singh
7
and   Charanjit   Singh       were    not     found    to    be

     credible.
(vi) Further, the prosecution had not examined

     Teja Singh, Manohar Singh and Darbara Singh who

     had witnessed the incident.
(vii) Medical evidence is contradictory to the

     ocular    testimony.      Even       the     case      history

     mentioned    in   the   bed     head       ticket     of    DMC,

     Ludhiana is contrary to the ocular version.
(viii) The scaled site plan does not tally with

     the rough site plan.
9.    Aggrieved   by   the   acquittal,          the     State     of

Punjab and the complainant filed an appeal and

revision respectively before the High Court.

HIGH COURT JUDGMENT:
10.        The High Court, set aside the acquittal of

the accused and was of the opinion that the Trial

Court has misread the evidence. Following reasons

were recorded by the High Court while convicting
8
the accused under
section 302
IPC –

  i. Prosecution’s case could not be thrown out

  only on the ground of delay in registering FIR.

  Makhan Singh was in a serious condition and the

  first priority of the complainant was to save

  his father, who was profusely bleeding from the

  injury in his head.
ii. The fact as to whether ASI Jarnail Singh

  was   known   to    the   complainant           is    immaterial.

  Complainant had a right to inform the police.

  There   is    nothing     to       show   that       ASI   did    any

  favour to the complainant.
iii. The occurrence took place during day time

  as recorded by the eye witnesses and the doctor

  had   sent    the   intimation        to    police         at    11.15

  a.m.,   which       corroborates          the    time       of    the

  incident. There is nothing to disbelieve the

  time of occurrence.
iv. As per the post mortem report, the deceased
9
had suffered eight injuries. Dr. Aman Kapoor

(PW 2) has stated that the main injury was on

the   head   and       rest       of    the   injuries     were

apparently   as    a    result         of   the   fall.   These

injuries were swelling and abrasions.

v. The Trial Court gave undue importance to the

history mentioned at the time of admission in

DMC, Ludhiana wherein it is stated that the

deceased sustained injuries while travelling on

scooter when he was hit by someone over the

head. There might be some error in recording

the history, as the son who brought his father

to DMC, Ludhiana was under a state of shock on

account of the serious condition of his father.

This does not affect the merit of the case.

vi. If some structure existing little away from

the place of occurrence, has not been shown in

the site plan, it does not mean that the site

plan prepared by the Investigating Officer is
10
incorrect.         Minor    omissions         in   the   site   plan

does not mean that rough site plan prepared by

Investigation Officer is contradictory to the

scaled site plan.
vii.     There        is     no        reason      to    disbelief

prosecution’s         story       on    the    ground    that    the

arrest       was   made     on    03.08.1998.       It   is     quite

possible that the accused might have run away

apprehending his arrest.
viii. Parties are relatives. Because of mere

altercation,         there       was     no     reason    for    the

complainant to falsely implicate the appellant,

who is real nephew of the deceased. There is

only one accused and one injury was given by

the    accused.      Therefore,         possibility       of    false

implication is ruled out. Even the ‘Bahi’ was

recovered on the pointing out of the appellant.

ix. None of the family members of the appellant

or     any    other        independent        resident     of    the
11
village    came     forward        to   support    the   defence

version    of     the   appellant        apparently      for    the

reason     that     they    might        be     convinced      that

appellant was responsible for the death of the

deceased.
x. Ocular version is truthful and trust worthy

and is fully supported by the medical evidence.

xi. The appellant does not fall under exception

4 of
section 300
IPC as the occurrence had not

taken place all of a sudden and without any

predetermination.          The     appellant      came   to     the

spot having a grudge against the deceased due

to the quarrel that took place on the previous

day of the incident and also, the manner in

which the appellant gave a blow of wooden arm

of cot (‘Bahi’) with great force on the head of

an   old   and    feeble     man,       which    resulted      into

fracture of his skull and death on the next

day.
12
11.      Aggrieved      by   the     conviction   of    the     High

Court,   the    appellant      has    preferred    this       appeal

before this Court.
ANALYSIS:
12.      The prosecution has established that the

death of the deceased was homicidal. As per the

post   mortem    report,       the    deceased    had    suffered

eight injuries. Dr. Aman Kapoor (PW 2) states in

the report that the main injury was on the head

and both the eye witnesses Sukhraj Singh (PW 3)

and    Charanjit       Singh    (PW4)     have    claimed        the

appellant had hit their father on his head with a

‘Bahi’. The recovery of ‘Bahi’, i.e. the weapon

used to cause the fatal injury to the deceased was

recovered by police only after the appellant had

confessed about the place of hiding.
13.      We     are,     thus,        satisfied        that      the

prosecution      has,        beyond      reasonable           doubt,

established the occurrence in the manner as set
13
up. The deceased died due to the injury caused by

accused.              The   only    question       which    requires        our

consideration is with regard to whether the case

falls          within       the     ambit     of    culpable          homicide

amounting to murder punishable under
section 302
IPC as has been held by High Court or it was

culpable              homicide       not      amounting          to      murder

punishable             under
section    304
IPC,        as    has   been

pleaded by the counsel for the appellant in the

alternative.
14.       Distinction          between       whether       an    offence     is

culpable homicide amounting to murder or culpable

homicide not amounting to murder has been dealt by

this Court recently in the case of
Mohd. Rafiq vs.

State          of       Madhya     Pradesh3
after        taking      into

consideration earlier judgments on the point. The

Court held that even though it is difficult to

distinguish             whether      the     punishment         for    offence


3 (2021) 10 SCC 706
14
would fall under
section 302
or
section 304
of

IPC, there is a subtle distinction of degree of

intention   and    knowledge       involved   in   both   the

crimes. Relevant paragraphs of the judgment are

reproduced below:
“Para 11 ­ The question of whether in a given
    case, a homicide is murder, punishable under
Section 302
IPC, or culpable homicide, of
    either description, punishable under
Section
    304
IPC has engaged the attention of courts in
    this country for over one and a half century,
    since the enactment of the
IPC
; a welter of
    case law, on this aspect exists, including
    perhaps several hundred rulings by this court.
The use of the term “likely” in several places
    in respect of culpable homicide, highlights the
    element of uncertainty that the act of the
    accused may or may not have killed the person.
Section 300
IPC which defines murder, however
    refrains from the use of the term likely, which
    reveals absence of ambiguity left on behalf of
    the accused. The accused is for sure that his
    act will definitely cause death. It is often
    difficult   to   distinguish    between   culpable
    homicide and murder as both, involve death.
    Yet, there is a subtle distinction of intention
    and knowledge involved in both the crimes. This
    difference lies in the degree of the act. There
    is a very wide variance of degree of intention
    and knowledge among both the crimes.
    Para 12 ­ The decision in
State of Andhra
    Pradesh v. Rayavarapu Punnayya & Anr.
notes the
    important    distinction     between    the    two
    provisions, and their differing, but subtle
    distinction. The court pertinently pointed out
    that:
12. In the scheme of the Penal Code,
       “culpable homicide” is genus and murder
15
its specie. All murder is “culpable
   homicide” but not vice­ versa. Speaking
   generally,     “culpable      homicide”     sans
   “special characteristics of murder”, is
   “culpable    homicide     not    amounting    to
   murder”.    For    the   purpose    of    fixing
   punishment, proportionate to the gravity
   of   this    generic     offence,     the   Code
   practically recognises three degrees of
   culpable homicide. The first is, what may
   be called, “culpable homicide of the first
   degree”. This is the greatest form of
   culpable homicide, which is defined in
Section 300
as “murder”. The second may be
   termed as “culpable homicide of the second
   degree”. This is punishable under the
   first part of
Section 304
. Then, there is
   “culpable homicide of the third degree”.
This is the lowest type of culpable
   homicide and the punishment provided for
   it   is,   also,     the   lowest   among    the
   punishments provided for the three grades.
   Culpable homicide of this degree is
   punishable under the second part of
Section 304
.
13. The academic distinction between “murder”
and “culpable homicide not amounting to murder”
has vexed the courts for more than a century.
The confusion is caused, if courts losing sight
of the true scope and meaning of the terms used
by the legislature in these sections, allow
themselves     to      be    drawn     into     minute
abstractions. The safest way of approach to the
interpretation      and    application     of    these
provisions seems to be to keep in focus the
keywords used in the various clauses of
Sections 299
and
300
;
Para 13 ­ The considerations that should weigh
with courts, in discerning whether an act is
punishable as murder, or culpable homicide, not
amounting    to     murder,     were    outlined    in
Pulicherla Nagaraju @ Nagaraja Reddy v State of
Andhra Pradesh
. This court observed that:
“29. Therefore, the Court should proceed
   to   decide     the    pivotal    question    of
   intention, with care and caution, as that
16
will decide whether the case falls under
Section 302
or 304 Part I or 304 Part II.
Many    petty   or    insignificant  matters
­plucking of a fruit, straying of cattle,
quarrel of children, utterance of a rude
word or even an objectionable glance, may
lead to altercations and group clashes
culminating in deaths. Usual motives like
revenge, greed, jealousy or suspicion may
be totally absent in such cases. There may
be   no    intention.    There  may   be  no
premeditation. In fact, there may not even
be criminality. At the other end of the
spectrum, there may be cases of murder
where the accused attempts to avoid the
penalty for murder by attempting to put
forth a case that there was no intention
to cause death. It is for the courts to
ensure that the cases of murder punishable
under
Section 302
, are not converted into
offences punishable under
Section 304
Part
I/II, or cases of culpable homicide not
amounting to murder are treated as murder
punishable     under
Section   302
.   The
intention to cause death can be gathered
generally from a combination of a few or
several of the following, among other,
circumstances; (i) nature of the weapon
used; (ii) whether the weapon was carried
by the accused or was picked up from the
spot; (iii) whether the blow is aimed at a
vital part of the body; (iv) the amount of
force employed in causing injury; (v)
whether the act was in the course of
sudden quarrel or sudden fight or free for
all fight; (vi) whether the incident
occurs by chance or whether there was any
premeditation; (vii) whether there was any
prior enmity or whether the deceased was a
stranger; (viii) whether there was any
grave and sudden provocation, and if so,
the cause for such provocation; (ix)
whether it was in the heat of passion; (x)
whether the person inflicting the injury
has taken undue advantage or has acted in
a cruel and unusual manner; (xi) whether
17
the accused dealt a single blow or several
        blows. The above list of circumstances is,
        of course, not exhaustive and there may be
        several other special circumstances with
        reference to individual cases which may
        throw light on the question of intention.”
15.    Intention         plays    a    vital       role    in    criminal

jurisprudence. An offence may not be said to be

committed if the prosecution fails to prove the

intention      to      commit     that       crime.       Intention       is

pivotal       to       decide     whether         the      accused        has

committed culpable homicide amounting to murder or

culpable homicide not amounting to murder. Along

with intention, knowledge and the degree of crime,

i.e.    how    the       deceased          was    killed,       plays      an

important role in deciding.
16.       In the present case, the appellant had no

intention to kill his uncle. Lack of intention can

easily be seen through the acts committed by the

appellant. He was furious about getting yelled by

his    uncle       a     day     before,         which     acted     as     a

provocation        for    the    accused.         The     appellant       was
18
armed with a wooden leg of the cot in his hand

which cannot be termed as a dangerous weapon. He

had    given     a     single       blow    to    the    deceased      and

therefore it cannot be said that the appellant had

intention of killing the deceased who was his own

uncle. Maybe he wanted to punish his uncle for the

reprimand, he received the previous day. Further

it    cannot     be    said     that       the    appellant      had   the

knowledge that the deceased would die through a

single blow.
17.       We     are    thus        of     the    opinion     that     the

deceased          is not liable to be convicted under
section    302
IPC     but     would       be    liable    to    be

convicted under
section 304
Part­II
IPC
.
18.       The appellant was arrested on 09.08.1998

and was released on 13.07.2001 after the acquittal

by the Trial Court. He again surrendered after the

conviction by the High Court on 04.10.2014. He has

already        undergone        more       than    eight      years     of
19
incarceration. His sentence shall be reduced from

life imprisonment to period already undergone. The

fine imposed by the High Court would remain as it

is.
19. Accordingly, the Appeals are partly allowed.
The judgment of the High Court is modified to the

following extent:
(i) The    conviction       and     sentence       of   life

  imprisonment     under
Section     302
IPC   is   set­

  aside.
(ii) The appellant is convicted under
Section

  304
Part­II
IPC
.
(iii)     The   appellant     is   awarded    sentence    of

  the period already undergone along with fine as

  imposed by the High Court.
20
(iv) The appellant may be released forthwith, if

  he is not wanted in any other criminal case.
………………………..J.
                                   (A.S. BOPANNA)



                                     ……………………….J.
                                    (VIKRAM NATH)

NEW DELHI
JUNE 16, 2022
21
ITEM NO.104                  COURT NO.2                      SECTION II­B

                S U P R E M E C O U R T O F          I N D I A
                        RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                   Criminal Appeal    Nos.2405­2406/2014

MAJOR SINGH                                                  Appellant(s)

                                     VERSUS

THE STATE OF PUNJAB & ANR.                                   Respondent(s)

(FOR SUSPENSION OF SENTENCE ON IA No. 15298/2018, FOR [STAY OF
DIRECTION FOR PAYMENT OF FINE OF RS.5,000/­] ON IA 15299/2018 AND
FOR EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T. ON IA 15300/2018)

Date : 16­06­2022 These matters were called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.S. BOPANNA
           HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIKRAM NATH
                      (VACATION BENCH)

For Appellant(s)
                      Mr. Gagan Gupta, AOR
For Respondent(s)
                      Mr. R.K. Rathore, Adv.
Ms. Jaspreet Gogia, AOR

           UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                              O R D E R
1.   Application seeking exemption from filing official translation
of Annexures is allowed.
2.   Application seeking stay of direction for payment of fine of
Rs.5,000/­ is rejected.
3.   The   Appeals   are   partly    allowed,   in   terms    of   the   signed
Reportable Order.
4.   The appellant may be released forthwith, if he is not wanted
in any other criminal case.
(VISHAL ANAND)                                  (DIPTI KHURANA)
ASTT. REGISTRAR­cum­PS                         ASSISTANT REGISTRAR
(Signed Reportable Order is placed on the file)