[Cites
3
, Cited by
80
]
Supreme Court of India
Maninderjit Singh Bitta vs Union Of India & Ors on 8 December, 2011
Equivalent citations: AIR 2012 SUPREME COURT 348, 2012 AIR SCW 193, 2012 (2) AIR JHAR R 697, 2011 (13) SCALE 359, 2012 (1) SCC 707, AIR 2012 SC (CIVIL) 298, (2012) 1 CURCC 113, (2012) 2 TAC 19, (2011) 13 SCALE 359, (2012) 1 ACC 144, (2012) 2 BOM CR 597
Bench:
Swatanter Kumar
,
A.K. Patnaik
,
S.H. Kapadia
1



                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA


                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION



                      IA NOS. 10, 16, 17 AND 18



                                       IN



             WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.510 OF 2005



Maninderjit Singh Bitta                                                            ... 

Petitioner



                                    Versus



Union of India & Ors.                                                               ...  

Respondents





                                  O R D E R
1.    This   order   is   in   continuation   of   the   orders   dated   30th 



August, 2011 and 13th October, 2011.  The directions contained 



in   these   orders   shall   be  mutatis   mutandis  applicable   with   the 



directions contained in the present order.
2.    Despite   the   above   orders   of   this   Court,   majority   of   the 



States   have   not   fully   implemented   the   scheme   regulating 



issuance   and   fixation   of   High   Security   Registration   Plates 



(HSRP).     From   the   affidavits   filed   on   behalf   of   the   respective
2
States,   it   is   clear   that   they   have   not   been   vigilant   enough   to 



take appropriate steps for initiation and completion of the HSRP 



scheme   and,   in   any   case,   not   with   required   expeditiousness.
On   25th  November,   2011,   we   heard   the   learned   counsel 



appearing for different States and perused the affidavits placed 



on   record.     However,   some   of   the   States   have   not   even   been 



courteous enough to file affidavits of compliance and have orally 



prayed   for   extension   of   time.     In   these   circumstances,   it   has 



become   necessary   for   us   to   deal   individually   with   the   case   of 



each State.
Andaman & Nicobar Islands (Union Territory)
3.    As   per   the   affidavit,   Andaman   &   Nicobar   administration 



has already finalized and signed the agreement for awarding the 



contract to the successful bidder on 21st October, 2011 and the 



work   was   to   be   commenced   within   30   days   of   signing   of   this 



contract   which   has   not   commenced   as   yet.     They   prayed   for 



further extension of time to complete the implementation of the 



scheme.   As prayed, we grant period upto 31st  March, 2012 for 



the   Union   Territory   to   complete   the   implementation   of   the 



scheme without fail.
3
Andhra Pradesh
4.    It   is   the   case   of   the   State   of   Andhra   Pradesh   that   it 



published  the   notice   inviting   the  tenders  on   8th  October,  2011 



and the due date of the tender bids was 26th  November, 2011.
The   State   claims   that   it   has   prepared   a   comprehensive 



framework   to   implement   the   HSRP   scheme   and   authorized 



Andhra   Pradesh   State   Road   Transport   Corporation   to   roll   out 



the end to end solution for the project.  It has decided to have a  



competitive   bidding   process   by   segregating   the   tender   into 



different   sections   i.e.   one   for   manufacturing,   another   for 



embossing, hot stamping and printing of HSRP and yet another 



to  supply  the  same  to  the  Corporation  for   installation.    Again, 



the process adopted by the State of Andhra Pradesh is not only  



in violation of the directions contained in paragraphs 39 and 40 



of   the   judgment   of   this   Court   in   the   case   of
Association   of  



Registration Plates  v.  Union of  India
[(2005) 1 SCC 679], but is 



also   contrary   to   the   Notification   dated   16th  September,   2011 



which   was   issued   under   Sub-section   (3)   of
Section   109
of   the  



Motor   Vehicles   Act,   1988   and   called   the   Motor   Vehicles   (New 



High Security Registration Plates) Order, 2001.  This Order does 



not permit the  completion of the  HSRP scheme in  the  manner 



sought to be adopted by the State of Andhra Pradesh. The State
4
was   to   award   the   contract   but   the   same   has   not   so   far   been  



awarded.     In   the   circumstances   afore-noticed,   we   direct   the 



State   of   Andhra   Pradesh   to   issue   fresh   tender,   award   the  



contract   and   commence   the   implementation   of   the   scheme 



positively   by   29th  February,   2012.     It   has   assured   this   Court 



that now it would positively abide by the time schedule and do 



the needful.
Arunachal Pradesh
5.    Arunachal   Pradesh   had   invited   tenders   but   all   the 



tenderers   were   disqualified   resulting   in   the   State   being 



compelled   to   invite   fresh   tenders.     Re-tender   process   had 



already   been   started   and   the   process   was   to   be   completed   by  



18th  November,   2011.     However,   it   prayed   for   three   weeks 



extension   to   award   the   contract   and   sign   the   agreement   with 



the successful bidder.  It is further stated on behalf of the State  



that the scheme shall be fully implemented in the entire State  



by 31st March, 2012.  By way of a final opportunity, the time, as 



prayed for, is granted.
Assam
6.    State   of   Assam   has   also   started   the   process   but   is   yet   to 



complete   the   formalities   and   sign   the   deed   of   agreement.     An
5
inspection of the factories is to be conducted by 15th November, 



2011   and   the   tender   valuation   has   to   be   completed   by   1st 



January, 2012.     On behalf of the State, it is prayed that it be 



allowed time till January, 2012 to award the contract and sign  



the   agreement   with   the   successful   tenderer.       Further,   it   is 



submitted that for complete implementation of the scheme, time 



be extended till April, 2012.   Keeping in view the fact that the 



State has to put in some efforts and has certain limitations, in 



the interest of justice, we grant, by way of final opportunity, the  



extension of time, as prayed for.  The contract shall be awarded  



and   agreement   be   signed   by   31st  January,   2012   and   the 



implementation of the scheme be completed by 30th April, 2012.
Bihar
7.    In the affidavit filed on behalf of the  State of Bihar, it has 



been stated that the tenders were published on 21st September, 



2011.     Due   date   for   submission   of   tenders   was   7th  October, 



2011.  The financial bids were opened on 4th October, 2011, but 



because   of   completion   of   formalities,   delay   has   been   caused.
Resultantly, six weeks extension has been prayed for on behalf 



of the State of Bihar.
6
8.    We   may   notice   that   the   implementation   by   the   State   of 



Bihar is defective in law.
In fact, it violates the directions of this 



Court contained in the case of
Association of Registration Plates
(supra) as well as the other directions contained in the orders of 



this Court as afore-referred.
9.    Learned   senior   counsel,   Mr.   Ranjit   Kumar,   appearing   on 



behalf of the State has impressed upon the Court that in order 



to   achieve   greater   competitive   price   and   not   to   depend   on   a  



single supplier, the State of Bihar, after following the procedure, 



has   short-listed   four   bidders.     The   State   proposes   to   award 



supply   and   fixation   of   HSRP   to   all   these   four   bidders   for   the  



same part of the State.  It is also his contention that paragraphs 



39 and 40 of this Court in the judgment in the case
Association  



of   Registration   Plates
(supra)   do   not   contemplate   selecting   one 



manufacturer for supply of the HSRP.  We are not convinced by  



this submission.  Paragraphs 39 and 40 of the judgment of this 



Court clearly lay down that selecting one manufacturer through 



the   process   of   open   competition   does   not   result   in   creation   of  



any monopoly.   This Court had rejected such a contention and 



directed   the   maintenance   of   record   and   supervision   by   one 



manufacturer, which would  be impossible if there were `multi-
7
manufacturers'   instead   of   one   as   suppliers.                  The   actual 


operation   of   the   scheme   through   the   premises   of   Regional 



Transport Officers (RTOs) would get complicated and confused, 



if   multi-manufacturers   are   involved.     Even   in   our   order   dated 



13th  October,   2011,   we   had   put   any   such   controversy   at   rest  



and directed all the States to follow the directions contained in  



the above-mentioned paragraphs of the said earlier judgment of 



this Court.  We have no reason to take any different view and it  



will be in the interest of all concerned that the directions of this 



Court, as aforestated, are implemented by the State without any 



further delay.   It shall not only be advisable but appropriate to 



maintain   a   uniform   practice   all   over   the   country.    For   these 



reasons, we reject the contention raised on behalf of the State of 



Bihar.     The   State   need   not   issue   any   fresh   tender   but   may 



award   the   contract   to   any   of   the   four   short-listed   bidders, 



whosoever is more beneficial to the State and is in a position to  



discharge   the   contractual   obligations   as   per   the   terms   and 



conditions of the tender and the judgments of this Court in this 



regard.     Let   the   needful   be   done   by   the   State   of   Bihar   by   31st 



December,   2011   and   all   the   initial   steps   should   be   taken   for 



implementing the scheme of HSRP by 31st  March, 2012.   Every 



possible   effort   should   be   made   by   the   State   to   complete   the
8
implementation of the scheme at the earliest.
Chandigarh
10. Chandigarh   administration   was   awaiting   the   approval   of 


the   Central   Government,   Ministry   of   Road   Transport   and 



Highways,   which   has   been   received   on   18th  November,   2011 



and   they   have   also   received   the   permission   from   the   Election 



Commissioner   for   going   ahead   with   the   awarding   of   the 



contract.   It is submitted that by 31st  March, 2012, they would 



award   the   contract,   commence   the   implementation   of   the 



scheme for manufacture and fixation of HSRP and efforts would 



even be made to complete the implementation by that date.   In 



view   of   the   unequivocal   assurance   given   in   this   behalf, 



Chandigarh   Administration,   by   way   of   last   opportunity,   is 



granted time upto 31st March, 2012.
Chhattisgarh
11.            State   of   Chhattisgarh   has   invited   tenders,   opened 



the   final   bids  on  27th  September,  2011  and   it  is  stated   by  the 



State that it will award the contract by 31st  January, 2012 and 



implement the scheme by 30th April, 2012.  In view of the steps 



taken and prayer for extension of time, we grant time as prayed
9
for.
Delhi
12. The   tenders   which   were   invited   for   awarding   the   work   of 


manufacture   and   fixation   of   HSRP   were   opened   on   23rd  June, 



2011.   Financial bids were opened on 28th  June, 2011 and the 



successful   bidder   has   been   finalized.     According   to   the   stand 



taken by the Delhi Government, the rate schedule has also been 



finalized   by   the   Chief   Secretary.     However,   it   remains   to   be 



finally   accepted   by   the   Delhi   Integrated   Multimodal   Transit 



System (DIMTS) which has been constituted by the Government 



as  a special  Purpose  Vehicle  for  overseeing transport  in  Delhi.
The   Delhi   Government   still   has   not   implemented   the   scheme 



and, in fact, has not even awarded the contract so far.   It has 



been stated that firstly the terms and conditions of the  tender 



were  challenged by one  M/s. Tonnejes Eastern by filing a writ 



petition   before   the   Delhi   High   Court   wherein   the   High   Court 



had refused the prayer for interim stay.  This order of the High 



Court   dated   10th  June,   2011   was   challenged   before   the 



Supreme Court. The special leave petition against the non-grant 



of the interim order was dismissed by this Court on 23 rd  June, 



2011.   However, special leave petition filed against the order of  



dismissal   of   the  writ   petition   before   the   High  Court   vide  order
10
dated 26th  August, 2011 is pending before this Court, in which 



no interim order has been passed.
13. Be that as it may, to some extent, the procedure adopted by 


the Delhi Government is not in conformity with the judgments 



of   this   Court.     From   the   documents   now   filed   on   record,   it 



appears that DIMTS has reserved onto itself the power to select 



more than one vendor for the project.  It is also stipulated in the 



draft   agreement   that   the   supplier   of   the   plate   shall   notify   the 



purchaser   in   writing   of   all   sub-contracts   awarded   under   the 



contract.     We   make   it   clear   that   neither   Rule   50   of   the   Motor 



Vehicles   Rules,   1989     (for   short,   the   `Rules'),   Motor   Vehicles  



(New   High   Security   Registration   Plates)   Order,   2011   nor   the 



judgments of this Court permit sub-contracts to be awarded by 



the contractor to whom the award for manufacture and fixation 



of HSRP is awarded.   Furthermore, in their affidavit dated 26 th 



November,   2011   it   has   been   stated   that   the   DIMTS   is   also 



taking   other   steps   and   it   has   divided   the   implementation 



process   into   two   parts:   -   Firstly,   procurement   of   blank   HSRP 



confirming to Rule 50 of the Rules and personalization of plates 



by embossing, hot stamping of number plates, quality checking, 



printing   of   third   number   plate,   set   matching,   dispatch, 



transportation   and   installation   of   HSRP.         Secondly,   it   is   not
11
permissible to bifurcate the process under different heads or in 



parts.     It   is   a   mandatory   requirement   that   one   person   should 



exclusively be responsible for the entire process in the interest 



of   security.     Thus,   we   make   it   clear   that   DIMTS,   when   it   is 



getting   the   HSRP   manufactured   from   the   contractor,   such 



manufacture   should   be   firstly   from   a   single   contractor   and 



secondly it should, without fail, be under the direct supervision 



and control of DIMTS.  They should not let the sub-contractors 



or   other   parties   to   have   control   over   the   manufacturing 



processing   and   fixation   of   HSRP   in   any   manner,   whatsoever.
They   should   ensure   that   one   single   person   is   responsible   for 



manufacturing,   affixation   of   seals,   imprinting   of   numbers   and 



affixation   of   HSRP   on   the   vehicles   in   the   NCT   of   Delhi.     The  



Government   has   prayed   for   extension   of   time.     We   extend   the 



period   for   implementation   of   the   scheme   till   31st  December, 



2011, by which date, all steps, complete in all respects, should  



be taken by the Delhi Government.
Gujarat
14. The   State   of   Gujarat   had   issued   the   tender   notice   and 


considered even the persons not possessed of `TYPE APPROVAL 



CERTIFICATE'.     However,   they   have   added   a   condition   that 



upon awarding of the contract and before manufacturing HSRP,
12
the   TYPE   APPROVAL   CERTIFICATE   duly   signed   by   the 



competent authority should be submitted, at most within three 



months.   Due date for  submission  of tender  was 20th  October, 



2011.     Five   bids   had   been   received.     Technical   bids   had   been  



opened.     Financial   bids   are   to   be   opened   on   28th  November, 



2011   and   the   agreement   would   be   signed   by   15th  April,   2012.
We do not contribute to the method that has been adopted by 



the   State   of   Gujarat   for   implementation   of   the   scheme.     They 



ought   to   have   acted   in   consonance   with   the   directions   of   this 



Court.  Be that as it may, since the conditions contained in the 



directions of this Court have not been waived and only a period  



has   been   prescribed   to   submit   the   `TYPE   APPROVAL 



CERTIFICATE',   we   do   not   consider   it   appropriate   to   direct   the 



State to hold the entire tender process afresh.   But we make it  



clear   that   the   agreement   should   be   signed   and   the 



implementation  of scheme  should positively commence  by 30th 



April, 2012.   We also make it clear that no further time would 



be granted to the State of Gujarat in this behalf.
Haryana
15. State   of   Haryana,   in   furtherance   to   the   order   dated   13th 


October, 2011 passed by this Court in a contempt petition has 



deposited Rs.50,000/- as costs and Rs.2,000/- as fine imposed
13
on each of the officers.  The State has not filed any affidavit and 



for   the   same,   no   appropriate   reason   is   stated   on   its   behalf.
However,   it   is   stated   by   the   counsel   for   the   State   that   it   has  



invited the  tenders and even opened the financial bids on 14th 



September, 2011.  Only contract has to be awarded and scheme 



is   to   be   implemented.     For   this,   it   is   prayed   that   they   would 



complete   all   the   formalities   and   sign   the   contract   by   31st 



December,   2011   and   implement   the   scheme   in   its   entirety   by 



the   end   of   April,   2012.     We   accept   the   prayer   of   the   State   of  



Haryana and, by way of last opportunity, permit them time for 



finalization   of   contract   till   31st  December,   2011   and   for 



implementation   of   the   scheme   in   its   entirety   upto  30th  April, 



2012.
Himachal Pradesh
16. The State of Himachal Pradesh has completed the  process 


of   awarding   the   contract   for   manufacture   and   fixation   of   the 



HSRP. They claimed that all new vehicles have been affixed with 



the HSRP as on 15th November, 2011 and, for old vehicles, they 



prayed   for   grant   of   further   time.     The   prayer   made   on   their 



behalf   to   extend   the   time   till   December,   2013   is   unjust   and 



without   any   rational  basis.   However,   in   the   interest   of   justice, 



we   grant   time   for   the   complete   implementation   of   the   scheme
14
till 15th June, 2012.
Jammu & Kashmir
17. State   of   Jammu   &   Kashmir   has   already   selected   the 


successful bidder and the letter of intent is to be issued to the  



party.   The   same   shall   be   issued   within   three   weeks   from   the  



date   of   passing   of   this   order  and   the   entire   scheme   shall   be 



implemented   by   31st  March,   2012   in   the   State   of   Jammu   & 



Kashmir.     Since  the  State   has  taken   some   steps,   we   find  that 



the  request for  extension  of time  is reasonable  and, by  way of 



last opportunity, the time prayed for is granted.
Jharkhand
18. The   State   of   Jharkhand   has   finalized   the   tenders   on   21st 


October, 2011 but the agreement has not yet been signed and 



formalities in that regard remain to be completed.  According to 



the   counsel   appearing   for   the   State,   it   shall   complete   the 



remaining  formalities  at  the  earliest and, in   fact,  complete  the 



implementation   of   the   scheme   by   30th  April,   2012.     By  way   of 



last opportunity, the prayer is allowed.
Kerala
19. In   the   affidavit   filed   and   from   the   stand   taken   before   this 


Court   on   behalf   of   the   State   of   Kerala,   it   is   pointed   out   that 



tender   notice   was   published   but   validity   of   the   earlier   tender
15
has expired on 29th June, 2011.  There is an order of status quo 



passed by the Supreme Court which is in force and, therefore,  



the   State   is   not   in   a   position   to   take   appropriate   steps   for 



implementing the scheme.  At the request of the State of Kerala, 



we grant extension of time and adjourn the matter in regard to 



State of Kerala to be taken up immediately after 31st December, 



2011.   In the meanwhile, we also grant liberty to the parties in 



SLP   (C)   No.13630-31   of   2011   to   make   a   mention   before   the 



concerned Bench at the earliest.
Lakshdweep (U.T.)
20. Lakshdweep had published e-tender on 27th  August, 2011.
But   the   tender   had   to   be   cancelled   as   only   one   bidder   had 



responded   to   the   bid.     Re-tender   is   stated   to   have   been 



published on 10th October, 2011 and due date for receipt of the 



bids was 9th November, 2011.  They prayed for extension of time 



to award the tender.  We make it clear that the Union Territory 



of Lakshdweep shall proceed with finalization of the re-tender in 



accordance   with   the   judgments   of   this   Court   without   any 



further   delay   and   finalize   the   entire   process   by   30th  January, 



2012.     They   shall   also   ensure   that   implementation   of   the 



scheme is commenced by 30th April, 2012 without fail.
16
Madhya Pradesh
21. The   State   of   Madhya   Pradesh   has   prayed   for   extension   of 


four   months   to   award   the   contract   and   commence 



implementation of the scheme.   The reason given for the delay 



is   that   the   reply   to   queries   raised   by   potential   bidders   was 



replied   with   delay   and   the   last   dates   for   the   same   had   to   be  



rescheduled.     This   reason   is   least   convincing.     However,   the 



schedule of dates has already been declared and published and 



the parties have acted thereupon.   Thus, it is clear that by 31st 



January,   2012,   the   contract   should   be   awarded   and 



immediately   thereafter,   the   commencement   of   implementation 



of   the   scheme   should   begin.   Endeavour   should   be   made   to 



complete   the   implementation   at   the   earliest   and,   in   any   case, 



not later than 30th April, 2012.
Manipur
22. The State of Manipur, as per its affidavit, has completed the 


process.   However, the agreement has not been signed and the 



State has not commenced implementation of the scheme as yet.
At the request of the State, we grant time for commencement of 



the implementation of the scheme for manufacture and fixation 



of   HSRP   by   31st  December,   2011.     Let   the   affidavit   of   full 



compliance be filed thereafter.
17
Mizoram
23. The   bid   of   M/s.   Shimit   Utsch   India   Ltd.   is   stated   to   have 


been authorized by the Council of Ministers.  However, the firm 



has quoted higher rates than it had quoted to the State of West 



Bengal.     The   Government   of   Mizoram   is   negotiating   with   the 



successful   tenderer   and   the   negotiations   are   likely   to   be 



completed within a short period.   Let a final decision be taken 



by the concerned authorities positively by 31st December, 2011.
Implementation   of   the   scheme   should   commence   immediately 



thereafter and implementation be completed, as prayed for, by 



31st March, 2012, with no further extension of time.
Nagaland
24. The State of Nagaland has implemented the scheme vide its 


Notification dated 6th July, 2011 for all new vehicles, but for old 



vehicles,   they   have   prayed   for   two   years'   further   time   to 



implement   the   scheme.     We   see   no   reason,   once   the   contract  



has been awarded and the State has implemented the  scheme 



for new vehicles, why the State should require such a long time 



for  catering  to   the   old  vehicles  in   the  State.   Again,   by   way  of 



last   opportunity,   we   grant   time   to   the   State   of   Nagaland   upto 



15th June, 2012 to implement the scheme in the entire State for 



all vehicles and to submit affidavit of compliance.
18
Orissa
25. Process   of   inviting   tenders   had   been   completed  and 


decision to get the documents of the bidders audited was taken 



on 24th October, 2011.  They submit that final decision to award 



the contract shall positively be taken by 31st January, 2012 and 



scheme shall be implemented in its entirety by 30th April, 2012.
The time, as prayed for, is granted with a clear direction that no  



extension would be granted.
Punjab
26. The   State   of   Punjab   has   invited   the   bids,   financial 


evaluation   has   been   done   and   bids   were   opened   on   18th 



October,   2011.     No   affidavit   has   been   filed   but   it   has   been 



stated   that   the   process   of   awarding   of   the   contract   shall   be 



concluded   by   15th  January,   2012   and   the   scheme   shall   be 



implemented  in  the  entire  State  by  30th  April,  2012.    Time,  as 



prayed for, is granted by way of last and final opportunity.
Puducherry/Pondicherry
27. Union Territory of Pondicherry has filed an affidavit stating 


that letter of acceptance of tender has been issued on 16 th May, 



2011 but the tender had to be cancelled on 19th  October, 2011 



because   of   failure   on   the   part   of   the   successful   tenderer   to 



submit the security deposit as per the terms and conditions of
19
the   tender.     It   is   also   stated   that   the   tenderer   had   claimed 



higher rates than the rates offered by him in the State of West 



Bengal and the Union Territory of Andaman & Nicobar Islands 



but   certain   negotiations   are   going   on   and   the   State   may   even 



invite fresh tenders.   In either event, the State would complete  



the   entire   process   of   commencing   the   implementation   of   the 



scheme within four months.   In other words, they would invite  



fresh   tenders,   finalise   the   same,   enter   into   contract   and 



commence   the   manufacture   and   fixation   of   HSRP   on   the 



vehicles in the Union Territory of Pondicherry. The time of four 



months,   as   prayed   for,   is   granted.     Let   the   needful   be   done 



positively by 31st March, 2012.
Sikkim
28. As   per   the   affidavit   filed,   the   State   of   Sikkim   has   taken 


steps   and   the   entire   implementation   of   the   scheme   shall   be 



completed   by   31st  March,   2012.     The   time,   as   prayed   for,   is 



granted with  a  clear  direction  that  no  further  extension  would 



be granted.
Tamil Nadu
29. Affidavit on behalf of the State of Tamil Nadu has been filed 


stating that last date for respective tenders was 15th November, 



2011.   In   the   meanwhile,   the   Model   Code   of   Conduct   for
20
elections   came   into   force   w.e.f.   21st  September,   2011   to   22nd 



October, 2011.   Thereafter, the matter would be processed and 



the State would finalize awarding of the contract and commence 



implementation of the scheme for fixation of HSRP by the end of  



February  2012.   In view of  the   definite  statement  on   behalf  of 



the   State   and   by   way   of   last   opportunity,   the   time   is   granted 



upto 29th February, 2012.
Tripura
30. The   State   of   Tripura   has   filed   no   affidavit.     However,   a  


stand was taken before the Court on its behalf that there was a 



stay   for   awarding   the   contract   which   has   since   been   vacated 



and   the   tender   process   would   be   completed   expeditiously.     As 



prayed,  we  grant  three  months  time   to  the  State  to  award  the 



contract   as   well   as   to   commence   the   implementation   of   the 



scheme.  Needful be done by 29th February, 2012, by way of last 



opportunity and no further time would be granted.
Uttar Pradesh
31. As   per   the   affidavit   filed   on   behalf   of   the   State   of   Uttar 


Pradesh,   the   notice   for   inviting   tenders   had   been   published.
Last date for submission of tenders was 5th  July, 2011.   Seven 



bids were received, though no contract has so far been awarded
21
and   no   agreement  has  been  signed  as  yet.   Request   had  been 



made on behalf of the State for extension of time.  We may also 



notice that according to the State, a writ petition had been filed 



in   the   High   Court   of   Allahabad   to   quash   the   tender   for 



manufacture   of   these   registration   plates.     There   is   no   interim 



stay granted by the High Court.  We make it clear that the State 



of   Uttar   Pradesh   should   ensure   manufacture   and   affixation   of 



HSRP   through   a   single   process   and   person  in   terms   of   the 



judgment of this Court.  The Evaluation Committee should meet 



and take a final decision.  The contract should be awarded and 



the   implementation   of   the   scheme   should   commence   within 



three months  from  the  date  of passing of this order as prayed 



for.  By way of last opportunity, the period is extended upto 29 th 



February, 2012.
Uttarakhand
32. As   per   the   affidavit   filed   on   behalf   of   the   State   of 


Uttarakhand,   it   had   invited   the   tenders   and   evaluated   the 



technical bids on 8th  November, 2011.   The financial bids were 



to be considered on 11th November, 2011.  The Government has 



approved  the   issuance   of   the   letter   of  acceptance   but  it   is  not 



clear from the affidavit whether the awarding of the contract is  



actually   complete   or   not   and   whether   agreement   has   been
22
signed   or   not.     Let   all   formalities   in   regard   to   awarding   of 



contract be completed by 31st  December, 2011 and the scheme 



should   be   fully   implemented   by   30th  April,   2012.     It   is   made 



clear   that   no   further   extension   would   be   granted   for   this 



purpose.
West Bengal
33. This State has filed an affidavit wherein it is submitted that 


in two RTOs of the State, there has been partial implementation 



of   the   scheme.     We   are   unable   to   see   any   justification   in   the  



stand of the State Government for partial implementation of the 



scheme   but,   in   the   interest   of   justice   and   by   way   of   last 



opportunity, we grant the State time upto 31st January, 2011 to 



implement   the   scheme   in   the   rest   of   the   State.     This   time   is 



being given as prayed for by the learned counsel appearing for 



the   State.     We   make   it   clear   that   no   further   extension   will   be 



granted in this regard.
34. The states of Karnataka, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Goa 


and   Union   Territories   of   Daman   &   Diu   and   Dadara   &   Nagar  



Haveli   have   not   filed   affidavits   in   furtherance   to   the   orders   of  



this Court dated 13th  October, 2011.   We may also notice that 



both the Union Territories above-referred have not even issued 



tenders, much less taken any further steps to comply with the
23
directions of this Court.  Non-filing of affidavits itself is a matter  



of concern for this Court.   It has  caused serious difficulties for 



this Court in dealing with this case meaningfully and effectively.
From   the  affidavits on record  which  were filed by these  States 



and   Union   Territories,  it  appears  that   the  litigation   is  pending 



in regard to the tender process itself in the Courts for the States 



of   Maharashtra,   Rajasthan,   Goa   and   Karnataka   and   for   non-
filing   of   affidavits,   these   States/Union   Territories   have   already 



violated the orders of the Court.  It is not clear from the record 



as   to   what   is   the   stage   of   these   proceedings   and   whether   any  



order   of   stay/injunction   has   been   passed   by   the   Courts,   as   a 



consequence   of   which,   it   is   not   possible   for   the   respective 



State/Union   Territory   to   pursue   the   matter   any   further   and 



finalize   the   awarding   of   contracts   in   accordance   with   the 



directions of this Court.   It was expected of all these States and 



Union   Territories   to   file   proper   affidavits.     We   grant   time   upto 



31st December, 2011 to take appropriate steps to get the interim 



orders   vacated,   if   there   are   any,   and   then   to   file   affidavit 



positively by the date aforestated.
35. The Union Territories of Daman & Diu and Dadara & Nagar 


Haveli should explain as to why no steps at all have been taken  



by them in furtherance to various orders of this Court.
24
36. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties 


and   perused   the   documents   on   record,   we   consider   it 



imperative to pass certain general directions in addition to the  



above specific directions passed by us in regard to every State 



or Union Territory, as the case may be.  Thus, we also pass the 



following general directions :
1.    Affidavits   of   compliance   and   undertakings   to   comply   with 



         the   directions   of   the   Court,   as   contained   in   different 



         orders   of   this   Court,   should   be   filed   within   four   weeks 



         from   25th     November,   2011.              The   affidavits-cum-
undertakings   shall   be   filed   by   the   Secretary   (Transport) 



         and   the   Commissioner   (Transport)   of   respective   States 



         and   Union   Territories.     The   time   schedule   specified   in 



         this order shall be strictly adhered to.   We make it clear  



         that   no   further   time   shall   be   granted   by   the   Court   for 



         this purpose.
2.    In   the   event   of   default   and   non-compliance   of   any   of   the  



         directions contained in this order by any authority, this 



         Court would be compelled to initiate proceedings against 



         such officer/officers in accordance with the provisions of 



         the
Contempt   of   Courts   Act,   1971
,   without   any   further 



         notice to them.
25
3.    This   matter   shall   be   listed   before   the   Registrar   (Judl.)   of 



         this   Court   on   5th  January,   2012.     The   Registrar   shall 



         verify   and   submit   a   report   to   this   Court   as   to   which   of 



         the   State/Union   Territory   and   their   respective   officers 



         have   not   complied   with   the   directions   of   this   Court   as 



         contained in this order.  The report of the Registrar shall  



         be submitted and the matter be placed before the Court 



         on 20th January, 2012.
4.    We are of the considered view that various matters pending 



         before   this   Court,   wherein   challenge   has   been   raised   to 



         the   tender   process   commenced   and/or   finalized   by   the 



         respective States/Union Territories for implementation of 



         the   HSRP   scheme,   should   be   listed   before   one   and   the 



         same Court.   Then alone, the effective implementation of 



         the directions of the Court is possible.   Thus, the matter 



         should be placed before Hon'ble the Chief Justice on the 



         administrative side for appropriate orders at the earliest.
5.    On   behalf   of   the   petitioner   and   some   of   the   States,   a 



         question has been raised before us that contractors have 



         responded to the notices for tender in consortium.   This 



         is being done primarily for  the purpose of satisfying the 



         condition   of   specialized   experience   for   manufacture   and
26
affixation of HSRP.  However, after award of the contract, 



        the   partner   possessing   expertise   (Type   Approval 



        Certificate, approval etc.) in the consortium may walk out 



        from   the   performance   of   the   contract.                     In   this 



        circumstance,   the   very   purpose   would   stand   frustrated.
We find merit in this submission but would refrain from 



        issuing any direction in that behalf, at this stage.  It will 



        be   for   the   concerned   State/Union   Territory   to   take 



        appropriate decision with reference to the facts of a given 



        case and in accordance with law.   Prima facie, it appears 



        to us that it would be in the interest of all concerned that 



        all the members of the consortium including the member 



        possessing   the   expertise   should   continue   as   such   till 



        performance of the contract.
6.    In   the   interest   of   justice   and   to   ensure   proper 



        implementation   of   the   judgments   and   directions   of   this 



        Court,   as   contained   in   its   various   orders,   in   regard   to 



        manufacturing   and   affixation   of     the   HSRP,   it   is 



        imperative   for   this   Court   to   direct   that   it   will   be   in   the 



        fitness of things and even the judicial proprietary would 



        demand   that   no   High   Court   should   pass   any   interim 



        orders cancelling or staying the tender process in relation
27
to implementation of the scheme.  While so directing, we 



             grant liberty to the parties to make a mention before this 



             Court   after   they   have   instituted   their   petitions,   if   any, 



             before   the   High   Court   and   interim   orders   have   been 



             declined in furtherance to the observations aforemade.
37. With the above directions and at the cost of repetition, we 


direct all the authorities in the State/Union Territory hierarchy 



to   ensure  that   these   directions   should   be   complied   without 



default and delay.
38. Accordingly, all IAs stand disposed of.  This order shall also 


be   treated   as   an   order   in   the   main   petition   and   the   main 



petition alone shall be listed for hearing on the next date.
.................................CJI.
(S.H. Kapadia)





                                                     ...................................J.

                                                          (A.K. Patnaik)





                                                     ...................................J.

                                               (Swatanter Kumar)

New Delhi;
December 08, 2011