[Cites
17
, Cited by
4
]
Andhra HC (Pre-Telangana)
Saipriya Estates Reptd. By Its Managing ... vs V.V.L. Sujatha And Anr. on 13 March, 2008
Equivalent citations: 2008(3)ALT125, AIR 2008 ANDHRA PRADESH 166, 2008 (5) ALL LJ NOC 988, 2008 A I H C (NOC) 607 (AP), 2008 AIHC NOC 712, (2012) 3 ANDHLD 255, (2009) 1 CIVLJ 234, 2008 (2) ARBI LR 585, (2008) 67 ALLINDCAS 727 (AP), (2008) 2 ARBILR 585, (2008) 3 ANDH LT 125
ORDER
 

C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy, J.
1. This Writ Petition is filed for a Writ of Prohibition to prohibit the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum-III, Hyderabad (for short "the District Forum") from entertaining C.C. No. 1026 of 2007 and to direct the District Forum to refer the dispute for Arbitration under Clause 15 of the Development Agreement dated 21-7-2005.
2. The facts lie in a narrow compass. The petitioner and respondent No. 1 entered into a Development Agreement on 21-7-2005, whereunder respondent No. 1 handed over 700 Sq. yards of open land for construction of a residential complex to the petitioner. The petitioner and respondent No. 1 agreed to share the constructed area in the ratio of 55:45 respectively. On the ground that the petitioner failed to carry out its part of contractual obligations under the said agreement, respondent No. 1 approached the District Forum by filing C.C. No. 1026 of 2007 under
Section 12
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (for short "the 1986 Act") seeking the following reliefs:
(a) To direct the opposite party to hand over the possession of the completed share of 45% to the complainant as per the agreed specification of the development agreement after obtaining the occupation certificate from the local authority;
(b) To direct the opposite party to pay agreed rent for alternate accommodation @ Rs. 7000/- per month from March, 2006 to December, 2007 i.e., till the date of filing the present complaint, which is amounting to Rs. 1,47,000/- and further direct the opposite party to pay same till the date of handing over of 45% furnished share of Flats to the complainant;
(c) To direct the opposite party to pay agreed damages @ Rs. 25,000/- per month, which commence from January, 2006 is amounting to Rs. 6,00,000/- till December, 2007 further direct the opposite party to pay same till the date of handing over the 45% furnished share of flats to the complainant;
(d) To award compensation of Rs. 2,00,000/- (Two lakh only) for mental agony suffered by the complainant and her family; and
(e) To award the costs of the complaint and pass any such other order/orders as this Hon'ble Forum deems fit and proper in the interest of justice.
3. The petitioner filed I.A. No. 41 of 2008 before the District Forum under
Section 8(1)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short "the 1996 Act") for referring the dispute for arbitration. In its application, the petitioner referred to and relied upon Clause 15 of the agreement, which provides for settlement of disputes arising out of the said agreement through arbitration under the provisions of the 1996 Act. The District Forum by order dated 26-2-2008 dismissed the said application. Assailing the same, the petitioner filed the present Writ Petition for the reliefs as mentioned above.
4. Heard Sri S.R. Sanku, learned Counsel for the petitioner and perused the record.
5. The District Forum in its order, while rejecting the application for reference of the dispute for arbitration, held that under
Section 3
of the 1986 Act the remedies made available under the said Act are in addition to and not in derogation of the remedies available under the other laws. The District Forum also relied on the judgments of the Supreme Court in
Fair Air Engineers Pvt. Ltd. v. N.K. Modi
, Orissa Lift Irrigation Corporation Ltd. v. Birra Kishore Rout 1991
CPC
579 (NC) and National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Satbhushan Jain 1993 CCJ 160.
6. At the hearing, Sri S.R. Sanku contended that the District Forum erred in relying upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in
FAIR AIR ENGINEERS
(1 supra) on the ground that
the said judgment
was rendered in a case arising under
Section 34
of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (for short "the 1940 Act"), the language of which is different from
Section 8
of the 1996 Act. He further submitted that the language of
Section 8
is couched in mandatory terms leaving no discretion for any judicial authority other than referring the dispute brought before it, which is the subject matter of arbitration agreement, for arbitration in accordance with the arbitration agreement.
For this purpose, he relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Hindusthan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. v. Pinkcity Midway Petroleums  and the Constitution Bench
judgment of the Supreme Court in
S.B.P. & Co. v. Patel Engineering Ltd.
.
7. I have carefully considered the submissions of the learned Counsel for the petitioner and perused the judgments cited by him.
In
Fair Air Engineers
(1 supra) one of the parties to the arbitration agreement filed an application before the State Commission under the provisions of the 1986 Act seeking stay of the consumer dispute raised by the other party to the agreement under Section 34 of the 1940 Act. The State Commission stayed the proceedings and referred the dispute for arbitration. The National Commission reversed the said order by holding that the proceedings before the Fora under the 1986 Act are not legal proceedings nor the Commission is a judicial authority and, hence, application under Section 34 of the 1940 Act was not maintainable. The said order was questioned in Civil Appeal by filing an application for Special Leave before the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court reversed the finding that the proceedings before the Consumer Fora are not judicial proceedings within the meaning of Section 34 of the 1940 Act and held that these Fora are juridical authorities and the proceedings before them are judicial proceedings as they have the trappings of a Civil Court. The Supreme Court, however, sustained the order of the National Commission in declining to refer the dispute for arbitration - by holding that
Section 3
of the 1986 Act envisages that its provisions are in addition to and not in derogation of any other law in force - and held that the legislature intended to provide a remedy in addition to the remedies, such as arbitration, and that in view of the object of the 1986 Act and the provisions of
Section 3
thereof it would be appropriate for the Fora created under the said Act to proceed with the matters in accordance with the provisions of the said Act rather than relegating the parties to arbitration proceedings as provided by a contract entered into between the parties.
To arrive at this conclusion, the Supreme Court relied upon its judgment in
Lucknow Development Authority v. M.K. Gupta
(1994) 1 SCC 243, which considered the Scheme and object of the 1986 Act.
8. It is true, as contended by the learned Counsel for the petitioner, that there is a difference in the language of Section 34 of the 1940 Act and
Section 8
of the 1996 Act. While the former provision allowed discretion to the judicial authorities in the matter of reference of disputes to arbitration,
Section 8
is couched in a peremptory language which gives no room for a judicial authority to decline to refer the dispute to arbitration once it is satisfied that an arbitration agreement exists between the parties and the disputes raised before it are covered by such an agreement.
9.
In
Hindusthan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
(4 supra) the Supreme Court held that
Section 8
of the 1996 Act in clear terms mandates that a judicial authority before which an action is brought in a matter which is subject matter of an arbitration agreement to refer such parties to arbitration, and that the language of the said Section is unambiguous. The Supreme Court also held that the Civil Court discharges administrative function and, therefore, it cannot go into the question whether the Arbitral Tribunal has jurisdiction to decide the said issue. This conclusion is based on the Constitution Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in Konkan Rly.
Corporation Ltd. v. Rani Constructions (P) Ltd.  A
seven Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in M/s.
S.B.P. & Co.
(5 supra), however, overruled the decision in Konkan Rly.
Corporation Ltd. (7 supra) by holding that the power exercised by the Chief Justice of the High Court or the Chief Justice of India under
Section 11(6)
of the 1996 Act is not an administrative power but it is a quasi judicial power and in case of designation of a judge of the High Court or of the Supreme Court, the power that is exercised by the designated judge would be that of the Chief Justice as conferred by the Statute.
10.
In
Hindusthan Petroleum Corporation Ltd.
(4 supra), the question which arose for consideration was - whether, in the face of the mandatory provisions of
Section 8
of the 1996 Act, the Civil Court had the power to decide the dispute raised in a civil suit without relegating the parties to arbitration? In that case, the provisions of the 1986 Act did not fall for consideration. Therefore, in my considered view, in deciding the question raised by the petitioner
,
the said judgment
will not be of any help to the petitioner because in the absence of a provision such as
Section 3
of the 1986 Act a judicial authority is not left with any discretion except to refer the dispute to arbitration in view of the peremptory language of
Section 8
of the 1996 Act.
11.
In
Lucknow Development Authority
(6 supra) the Supreme Court held that the object of the 1986 Act was to secure social purpose to promote the facilities in a comprehending manner for settlement of issues involved in the consumer complaints and to assess the damages; that in construing the object of the Act, the interests of the consumers, which the Act seeks to protect, are given predominance; and that the Act has departed from the settled legal Fora provided under
the Code of Civil Procedure
. The Supreme
Court further held
that the importance of the 1986 Act is to promote the welfare of the society by enabling the consumers to participate directly in the market economy and it attempts to remove the helplessness of a consumer which he faces against powerful businessmen, described as 'network of rackets' or a society in which 'producers have secured power' to rob the rest or as the might of public bodies which are degenerating into storehouses of inaction where papers do not move from one desk to another as a matter of duty and responsibility but for extraneous consideration leaving the common man helpless, bewildered and shocked. The Supreme Court took note of the malady becoming so rampant, widespread and deep that the society, instead of bothering, complaining and fighting against it, is accepting it as a part of life, and that the 1986 Act, therefore, intends to secure inexpensive and expeditious consumer service.
12.
In
Fair Air Engineers Pvt. Ltd.
(1 supra), while considering the scope of Section 34 of the 1940 Act and the desirability of relegating the parties to arbitration, the Supreme Court held as under:
Accordingly, it must be held that the provisions of the Act are to be construed widely to give effect to the object and purpose of the Act. It is seen that
Section 3
envisages that the provisions of the Act are in addition to and are not in derogation of any other law in force. It is true, as rightly contended by Shri. Suri, that the words "in derogation of any other law for the time being in force" would be given proper meaning and effect and if the complaint is not stayed and the parties are not relegated to the arbitration, the Act purports to operate in derogation of the provisions of the
Arbitration Act
. Prima facie, the contention appears to be plausible but on construction and conspectus of the provisions of the Act we think that the contention is not well-founded. The Parliament is aware of the provisions of the Arbitration Act and the Contract Act and the consequential remedy available under
Section 9
of the Code of Civil Procedure, i. e. , to avail of right of civil action in a competent Court of civil jurisdiction. Nonetheless, the Act provides the additional remedy.
13. In Para 13 of the judgment, the Supreme Court also noticed
Section 8
of the 1996 Act, which at that time was in force in the shape of third Ordinance, 1996. Though there is a qualitative difference between the language of
Section 34
of the 1940 Act and
Section 8
of the 1996 Act and the case arose under the 1940 Act, the Supreme Court still referred to
Section 8
of the 1996 Ordinance.
14. Having regard to the interpretation given by the Supreme Court in
Fair AIR Engineers Pvt. Ltd.
(1 supra) with regard to
Section 3
of the 1986 Act and the ratio in
Lucknow Development Authority
(6 supra), I am of the view that the 1986 Act, being a special enactment, which created an additional remedy in favour of the consumers by raising consumer disputes before the Fora constituted under the said Act,
Section 8
of the 1996 Act does not have the effect of taking away such a remedy from the consumers as in the case of civil suits, which are in the nature of common law remedies. To my mind, the true purport of
Section 3
of the 1986 Act is that if a party chooses to avail a remedy other than the consumer dispute, he shall be free to do so because the remedy under the 1986 Act is not in derogation of the other remedies available to such a party. But, conversely if he chooses to avail the remedy before the Consumer Fora, such a right cannot be denied to him on the ground of availability of an alternative remedy, such as arbitration. Put it briefly,
Section 3
of the 1986 Act is intended to provide an additional remedy to a party and the same is not meant to deny such a remedy to him.
15. In this view of the matter, in my opinion, the order passed by the District Forum does not suffer from any legal infirmity and it cannot be said that the District Forum has inherent lack of jurisdiction to entertain and adjudicate the complaint filed by respondent No. 1 before it for issuing a Writ of Prohibition.
16. For the aforementioned reasons, the Writ Petition is dismissed.