[Cites
26
, Cited by
48
]
Supreme Court of India
Tata Consultancy Services vs State Of Andhra Pradesh on 5 November, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2005 SUPREME COURT 371, 2004 AIR SCW 6583, 2005 CLC 128 (SC), 2005 (1) COM LJ 25 SC, 2005 (8) ACE 373, 2005 (1) SCC 308, 2004 (9) SCALE 349, (2005) 1 COMLJ 25, (2004) 4 KHCACJ 318 (SC), 2005 (3) SRJ 182, 2004 (4) KHCACJ 318, 2004 (4) LRI 902, 2004 (7) SLT 681, (2004) 10 JT 64 (SC), (2004) 141 TAXMAN 132, (2006) 33 PTC 652, (2004) 192 CURTAXREP 257, (2004) 117 ECR 257, (2004) 137 STC 620, (2004) 57 KANTLJ(TRIB) 345, (2004) 8 SUPREME 629, (2004) 9 SCALE 349, (2004) 271 ITR 401, (2005) 5 SCJ 37
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2582 of 1998

PETITIONER:
Tata Consultancy Services					

RESPONDENT:
State of Andhra Pradesh						

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 05/11/2004

BENCH:
S.B. Sinha

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
WITH

CIVIL APPEAL NOs. 2584, 2585 & 2586/98


S.B. SINHA, J :
INTRODUCTION:
Whether an intellectual property contained in floppies, disks or CD-
ROMs would be 'goods' within the meaning of
Andhra Pradesh General 
Sales Tax Act, 1957
(hereinafter called as 'the Act') is the question involved 
in this appeal which arises out of a judgment and order dated 12th December, 
1996 passed by the Andhra Pradesh High Court.
"Goods" : Meaning
	The said expression has been defined in
Section 2(b)
to, inter alia, 
mean all kinds of moveable property and includes all materials, articles and 
commodities. The amplitude of the said expression is required to be 
considered with a  view to answer the question involved in this appeal.
The expression 'goods' is not a term of art.  Its meaning varies from 
statute to statute.  The term 'goods' had been defined in the Act as also in 
Clause (12) of
Article 366
of the Constitution to include all materials, 
commodities and articles. Commodity is an expression of wide connotation 
and includes every thing of use or value which can be an object of trade and 
commerce.
In
Jagir Singh and Others Vs. State of Bihar and another
, etc. etc., 
AIR 1976 SC 997] it is stated:
"20. The general rule of construction is not only to 
look at the words but to look at the context, the 
collocation and the object of such words relating to 
such matter and interpret the meaning according to 
what would appear to be the meaning intended to 
be conveyed by the use of the words under the 
circumstances.  Sometimes definition clauses 
create qualification by expressions like "unless the 
context otherwise requires"; or "unless the 
contrary intention appears"; or "if not inconsistent 
with the context or subject-matter".  "Parliament 
would legislate to little purpose", said Lord 
Macnaghten in Netherseal Co. v. Bourne, (1889) 
14 AC 228, "if the objects of its care might 
supplement or undo the work of legislation by 
making a definition clause of their own.  People 
cannot escape from the obligation of a statute by 
putting a private interpretation on its language."
The courts will always examine the real nature of 
the transaction by which it is sought to evade the 
tax."
In Words and Phrases, Volume 7A, Permanent Edition at page 590, 
'commodity' has been defined as under:
"A "commodity" is an article of trade, a movable 
article of value; something that is bought and sold. 
U.S. v. Sischo, D.C. Wash., 262 F. 1001, 1005.
The term "commodity" includes every movable 
thing that is bought or sold except animals.  
Peterson v. Currier, 62 III. App. 163.
"Commodity" meaning that which affords 
convenience or advantage, especially in 
commerce, including everything movable which is 
bought and sold. McKeon v. Wolf, 77 III. App.
325."
The definition of 'goods' in
Sales of Goods Act
is also of wide 
import which means every kind of movable property.  Property has been 
defined therein to mean the general property in goods and not merely a 
special property.  It is not much in dispute that 'goods' would comprehend 
tangible and intangible properties, materials, commodities and articles and 
also corporeal an incorporeal materials, articles and commodities. If a 
distinction is sought to be made between tangible and intangible properties, 
materials, commodities and  articles and also corporeal and incorporeal 
materials, the definition of goods will have to be rewritten of comprising 
tangible goods only which is impermissible.  This Court, therefore, will have 
to confine itself to the question as to whether the concerned software would 
come within the purview of "goods".  In the Constitution, goods as such is 
not defined.  An expansive definition with the said expression has been 
given which is indicated by the expression "includes".  Such an expression is 
also of wide amplitude.  [See
Pradeep Kumar Biswas Vs. Indian Institute of 
Chemical Biology
, (2002) 5 SCC 111, para 5 & 6].
When the word 'includes' is used in an interpretation clause, it must 
be construed as comprehending not only such things as they signify 
according to their nature and import but also those things which the 
interpretation clause declares that they shall include.  [See
Scientific 
Engineering House Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of Income-tax, Andhra 
Pradesh
(1986) 1 SCC 11].
RE: SUBMISSION OF BEHALF OF THE APPELLANT
 	Reference by Mr. Sorabjee to the provisions of
Copyright Act
, in my 
opinion, was not apposite.
Copyright Act and the Sales Tax Act are also not statutes in pari 
materia and as such the definition contained in the former should not be 
applied in the latter.  [See
Jagatram Ahuja Vs. Commr. of Gift-tax, 
Hyderabad
AIR 2000 SC 3195, p. 3201]

 	In absence of incorporation or reference, it is trite that it is not 
permissible to interpret a word in accordance with its definition in other 
statute and more so when the same is not dealing with any cognate subject.
[See
State of Kerala Vs. Mathai Verghese & Ors.
(1986) 4 SCC 746, p. 753 
and
Feroze N. Dotivala Vs. P.M. Wadhwani & Ors.
(2003) 1 SCC 433, p. 
442]

	It may not be necessary for us to rely upon the decisions of this Court 
in
H. Anraj Vs. Government of T.N.
[(1986) 1 SCC 414] the correctness 
whereof has been doubted in
Sunrise Associates Vs. NCT of Delhi
[(2000) 
10 SCC 420].
It is also not necessary to rely upon the Australian decision, 
Pont Data Australia Pty Ltd. Vs. ASX Operations Pty Ltd. & Anr. [1990 
(93) Australian Law Reports 523] which is said to have been reversed in Re:
ASX Operations Pty Ltd. and Australian Stock Exchange Ltd. and Pont Data 
Australia Pty Ltd.[FED No. 710 Trade Practices (1991) ATPR para 41-069 
97 ALR 513/19 IPR 323 27 FCR 460.
However, we may notice that the Federal Court of Australia while 
reversing the judgment was of the opinion that as the definition of 'goods' 
contained in Sub-Section (4) of
Section 4
of the TP Act included gas and 
electricity, the same would not be held to mean further including "encoded 
electrical impulses".  It was, however, noticed:
"We should add that in Toby Constructions 
Products Pty Ltd. v Computa Bar (Sales) Pty Ltd. 
(1983) 2 NSWLR 48, Rogers J. held that a sale of 
a computer system, comprising both hardware and 
software, was a sale of "goods" within the 
meaning both of the
Sale of Goods Act
1923 
(N.S.W.) and the warranties implied by
Part V of 
the TP Act
.  His Honour said (supra) at 54), with 
reference to United States authorities, that he did 
not wish it to be thought he was of the view that 
software by itself may not be "goods".  This is a 
question which is left open after the present 
appeal, which, as will be apparent, has decided a 
narrower point."
The standard works on software by Mr. Rahul Matthan and Mr. Roger 
S. Pressman, relied upon by Mr. Sorabjee, may be relevant for proper 
understanding as to what a software is and what is the nature and character 
of software and in ordinary parlance may contrast a book, ordinary video or 
audio cassette but it is well settled that the applicability of the statute would 
depend upon its purport and object.  Taxability of a software has its history 
in other countries.  Its journey in American courts started in the Seventies.  
There had been a difference of opinion in different jurisdictions as regards 
taxability of the software.  The majority of the courts held that it is 
intangible property, but the Federal Supreme Court said that it is not so.  The 
State Legislatures made amendments as a result whereof a shift in the 
approach started.  Having regard to the changes in definition even the 
American Courts began holding that tax can be imposed on such softwares.
In Advent Systems Ltd. vs. Unisys Corpn, 925 F. 2d 670 (3rd Cir. 
1991), relied on by Mr. Sorabjee, the court was concerned  with 
interpretation of uniform civil code which "applied to transactions in goods".  
The goods therein were defined as "all things (including specially 
manufactured goods) which are moveable at the time of the identification for 
sale".    It was held :
"Computer programs are the product of an intellectual 
process, but once implanted in a medium are widely 
distributed to computer owners.  An analogy can be 
drawn to a compact disc recording of an orchestral 
rendition.  The music is produced by the artistry of 
musicians and in itself is not a "good," but when 
transferred to a laser-readable disc becomes a readily 
merchantable commodity.  Similarly, when a professor 
delivers a lecture, it is not a good, but, when transcribed 
as a book, it becomes a good.
That a computer program may be copyrightable as 
intellectual property does not alter the fact that once in 
the form of a floppy disc or other medium, the program 
is tangible, moveable and available in the  marketplace.  
The fact that some programs may be tailored for 
specific purposes need not alter their status as "goods"
because the Code definition includes "specially 
manufactured goods."
The topic has stimulated academic commentary with 
the majority espousing the view that software fits 
within the definition of a "good" in the U.C.C.   

Applying the U.C.C. to computer software transactions 
offers substantial benefits to litigants and the courts.  
The Code offers a uniform body of law on a wide range 
of questions likely to arise in computer software 
disputes: implied warranties, consequential damages, 
disclaimers  of liability, the statute of limitations, to 
name a few.
The importance of software to the commercial world 
and the advantages to be gained by the uniformity 
inherent in the U.C.C. are strong polity arguments 
favoring inclusion.  The contrary arguments are not 
persuasive, and we hold that software is a "good"
within the definition in the Code."
In Colonial Life Insurance Co. vs. Electronic Data Systems Corp. 817 
F. Suppl. 235 (supra), Advent Systems Ltd. (supra) was followed.
Linda A. Sharp, J.D., in an Article titled "Computer Software or 
Printout Transactions as subject to  State Sales or Use Tax", published in 36 
ALR 5th 33, noticed the development of law as well as technological 
development of computers and opined that a tape containing a copy of a 
canned programme does not lose its tangible character  because its content is 
a reproduction of the product of intellectual effort just as the phonorecord 
does not become intangible because it is a reproduction of the product of 
artistic effort.  The learned author referred to a large number of case laws 
wherein such a statement of law was enunciated.  In the article various 
statutes defining software as tangible goods  had also been taken notice of.
Strong reliance has been placed by Mr. Sorabjee on a judgment of 
Illinois Supreme Court in First National Bank of Springfield vs.  Department 
of Revenue, [421 N.E.2d 175, 85 III2d 84, 421 NE2d 175], wherein software 
was held to be intangible personal property on the premise :
"The tapes were certainly not the only medium 
through which the information could be transferred.  In 
this way, the tapes differ from a movie film, a 
phonograph record or a book, whereby the media used 
are the only practicable ways of preserving  those 
articles.  Thus, while those articles and the apes are 
similar in that they physically represent the transfer of 
ideas or artistic processes, whereas computer programs 
are separable from the tapes.  Not only may software 
information be conveyed any number of ways, but it may 
even be copied off of the tapes and stored, sing another 
medium. (see Bryant & Mather, Property Taxation of  
Computer Software, 18 N.Y.L.F. 59, 67 (1972).  In short, 
it is not the tapes which are the substance of the 
transaction is, in instance, the transfer of intangible 
personal property and, as such, is not taxable. Under the 
Illinois Use Tax Act."
The said decision was rendered in 1981.  However, subsequently in 
Comptroller of the Treasury vs. Equitable Trust Company [464 A.2d 248], 
an earlier decision of the  Tennessee Court in Commerce Union Bank vs. 
Tidwell, [538 *473 S.W.2d 405], as also First National Bank of Springfield 
(supra), were considered wherein it was observed :
"We can take judicial notice, based on modern human 
experience, that the technology, exists for producing a 
copy of a movie film on disc, of a phonograph record on 
tape, and of a book on microfiche.  We have previously 
discussed how the program copy is not separated  from 
the tape, when it is used in the computer.  See B.U. Note, 
supra, at 188-89.  To remove the program copy from the 
magnetic tape requires that it be overwritten, or 
obliterated in a magnetic field, in the way in which one  
dictating on tape makes corrections or wipes the tape 
clean."
Thus, the court found a change in the concept and noticed a departure 
from earlier view that the computer software was intangible property.  The 
argument of severability which had held the field was also negatived. 
Noticing several other judgments, it was held :
"What is troublesome about (the tax court) 
approach is the fact that, while a substantial portion of 
the software is of a tangible nature, i.e. punched cards, 
magnetic tapes, instructions covering operation or 
applications, (for property tax purposes)  the remainder 
consists of personal services to be rendered after 
purpose."
In the aforementioned premise, it also negatived the contention which 
incidentally has been raised by Mr. Sorabjee  that the price paid for a copy 
of a canned programme reflects the cost of developing the programme which 
the proprietor hopes to recover, with profit, by spreading the cost among its 
customers, stating :
"Simply because the canned program on tape is much 
more expensive than the typical phonorecord, the 
program tape is not any less tangible."
In Compuserve, INC vs. Lingley [535 N.E. 2d 360], the court 
disagreed  with the opinions contained in the earlier judgments and stated 
the law in the following terms :
"Thus, the essence of the transaction in the sale 
of computer software was  the purchase of nontaxable 
intangible information.  The Missouri Supreme Court in 
James and the Texas Court of Civil Appeals in First 
National Bank of Fort Worth also used an essence-or- 
purpose-of- the-transaction test to determine that 
computer software is intangible property.
The Supreme Court of Ohio in Interactive 
Information Systems, Inc. vs. Limbach (1985), 18 Ohio 
st. 3d 309, 311, 18 OBR 356, 357-358, 480 N.E. 2d 1124, 
1126, in determining the taxability of computer hardware 
also recognized that computer programs are intangible 
property when the court stated :
"Prior to encoding the tape, the 
appellee is dealing with intangibles-ideas, plans, 
procedures, formulas, etc.; and, although these 
intangibles are in some respects transformed or 
converted (or 'organized') into a different state or 
form, such transformation or conversion is not 
'manufacturing' because no 'material or thing' has 
been transformed or converted." (Emphasis sic.)

The Supreme Court of Ohio also distinguished that 
the tapes were tangible, while the computer information 
was intangible.
The courts that have found computer software to 
be tangible have based their decisions on the fact that the 
computer program was coded on a tangible medium, such 
as a computer tape.  See Citizens & Southern Systems, 
Inc. vs. South Carolina Tax Comm. (1984), 280   S.C. 
138, 311 S.E. 2d 717; Hasbro Industries, Inc. vs. Norberg 
(R.I. 1985), 487 A.2d 124; Chittenden Trust Co. v. King 
(1983), 143 Vt. 271, 465 A.2d 1100; and Comptroller of 
the Treasury v. Equitable Trust Co. (1983), 296 Md. 459, 
464 A.2d 248 (finding that only noncustomized  
computer software is tangible property)."
It is true that in Compuserve, Inc. (supra), the court found that the 
computer software developed by the appellants therein was intangible 
property, but a perusal of the said judgment shows the other views of the 
other courts were noticed therein wherein computer software was held to be 
a tangible property on the ground that the computer programme was coded 
on a tangible medium such as a computer tape.
Northeast Datacom, Inc. et al. vs. City of Wallingford  [212 
Conn.639, 563 A2d 688, was rendered on the premise of the severability 
doctrine.  The said judgment, however,  was  rendered keeping in view the 
statute levying tax on personal property wherein the phrase "tangible 
personal property' was added by amendment in 1961 by Public Act 61 No.
24.

In South Central Bell Telephone Co. v. Sidney J. Barthelemny, et al. 
[643 So. 2d 1240 : 36 A.L.R. 5th 689], the Supreme Court of Louisiana 
noticed the definition of 'tangible personal property' which was in the 
following terms :
"Personal property which may be seen, weighed, 
measured, felt or touched, or is in any other manner 
perceptible to the senses.  The term 'tangible personal 
property' shall not include stocks, bonds, notes or other 
obligations or securities."
It was held :
"The term "tangible personal property" set forth in 
the City Code, and its synonymous Civil Code concept 
"corporeal movable", must be given their property 
intended meaning.  Physical recordings of computer 
software are not incorporeal rights to be comprehended 
by the understanding.  Rather, they are part of the 
physical world.  For the reasons set out below, we hold 
the computer software at issue in this case constitutes 
corporeal property under out civilian concept of that 
term, and thus, is tangible personal property, taxable 
under ' 56-21 of the City Code."
The court, however,  noticed that the shift in the trend was not 
uniform.  Having regard to the fact that the computer software became the 
knowledge and understanding and upon discussing the characteristics of 
computer software and classification thereof as tangible or intangible under 
Louisiana law, it was held :
"The software itself, i.e. the physical copy, is not 
merely a right or an idea to be comprehended by the 
understanding.  The purchaser of computer software 
neither desires nor receives mere knowledge, but rather 
receives a certain arrangement of matter that will make 
his or her computer perform a desired function.  This 13 
arrangement of matter, physically recorded on some 
tangible medium, constitutes a corporeal body.
We agree with Bell and the court of appeal that the 
form of the delivery of the software-magnetic tape or 
electronic transfer via modem- is of no relevance.   
However, we disagree with Bell and the court of  appeal 
that the essence or real object of the transaction was 
intangible property .  That the software can be transferred 
to various media i.e. from tape to disc, or tape to hard 
drive, or even that it can be transferred over the telephone 
lines, doles not take away from the fact that the software 
was ultimately recorded and stored in physical form upon 
a physical object.  See Crockett, supra, at 872-74; Shontz, 
at 168-70; Cowdrey, supra, at 188-90.  As the court of 
appeal explained, and as Bell readily admits, the 
programs cannot be utilized by Bell until they have been 
recorded into the memory of the electronic telephone 
switch.  93-1072, at p. 6, 631 So.2d at 1342.  The essence 
of the transaction was not merely to obtain the  intangible 
"knowledge" or "information", but rather, was to obtain 
recorded knowledge stored in some sort of physical form 
that Bell's computers could use.  Recorded as such, the 
software is not merely an incorporeal idea to be 
comprehended, and would be of  no use if it were.  
Rather, the software is given physical existence to make 
certain desired physical things happen.
One cannot escape the fact that software, recorded 
in physical form, becomes inextricably intertwined with, 
or part and parcel of the corporeal object upon which it is 
recorded , be that a disc, tape, hard drive, or other device.  
Crockett, supra, at 871072; Cowdrey, Supre, at 188-90.  
That the information can be transferred and then 
physically recorded on another medium is of no moment, 
and does not make computer software any different than 
any other type of recorded information that can be 
transferred to another medium such as fil, video tape, 
audio tape, or books."
It was further opined :
"It is now common knowledge that books, music, 
and even movies or other audio/visual combinations can 
be copied from one medium to another.  They are also all 
available on computer in such forms as floppy disc, tape, 
and CD-ROM.  Such movies, books, music, etc.can all 
be delivered by and/or copied from one medium to 
another, including electrical impulses with the use of a 
modem.  Assuming there is sufficient memory space 
available in the computer hard disc drive such movies, 
books, music, etc.can also be recorded into the 
permanent memory of the computer such as was done 
with the software in this case.
93-1072, at p. 4, 5. 631 So.2d at 1346-47 
(dissenting opinion).  See also Shontz. Supra, at 168-170; 
Harris, supra, at 187.
That the information, knowledge, story, or idea, 
physically manifested in recorded form, can be 
transferred from one medium to 15 another does not 
affect the nature of that physical manifestation as 
corporeal, or tangible.  Shontz, supra, at 168-170.  
Likewise, that the software can be transferred from 1248 
one type of physical recordation, e.g., tape, to another 
type, e.g., disk or hard drive, does not alter the nature of 
the software, Shontz, supra, at 168-170; it still has 
corporeal qualities and is inextricably intertwined with  a 
corporeal object.  The software must be stored in 
physical form on some tangible object somewhere"
Reversing the findings of the court below that the computer software 
constitutes intellectual property, it was opined :
"In sum, once the "information" or "knowledge" is 
transformed into physical existence and recorded in 
physical form, it is corporeal property.  The physical 
recordation of this software  is not an incorporeal right to 
be comprehended.  Therefore we hold  that the switching 
system software and the data processing software 
involved here is tangible personal property and thus is 
taxable by the City of New Orleans."
St. Albans City :
Mr. Sorabjee submitted that this Court
Associated Cement Companies 
Ltd. Vs. Commissioner of Customs
[(2001) 4 SCC 593] has misapplied the 
principles contained in St. Albans City and District Council Vs. International 
Computers [1996 (4) All ER 481].
Our attention in this behalf has been drawn to the judgment of Sir Iain 
Glidewell which is in the following terms:
"During the course of the hearing, the word 
'software' was used to include both the (tangible) 
disk onto which the COMCIS program had been 
encoded and the (intangible) program itself.  In 
order to answer the question, however, it is 
necessary to distinguish between the program and 
the disk carrying the program.
In both the Sale of Goods Act, 1979, s 61, 
and the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982, 
s.18, the definition of goods includes 'all personal 
chattels other than things in action and money'.  
Clearly, a disk is within this definition.  Equally 
clearly, a program, of itself, is not."
As regard utility of an instruction manual, it was observed:
"As I have already said, the program itself is not 
'goods' within the statutory definition.  Thus a 
matter of the program in the way I have described 
does not, in my view, constitute a transfer of 
goods.  It follows that in such circumstances there 
is no statutory implication of terms as to quality or 
fitness for purpose."
The question which arose in that case was as to whether the defendant 
therein had breached its contract to supply the plaintiffs with a computer 
system to be used in administering their collection of community charge by 
providing valid software which significantly overstated the relevant 
population of their area and, thus, caused them to suffer a loss of revenue.  
The suit for damages was allowed.  It was held by the Court of Appeals that 
the submission on behalf of the appellant was that the question as to whether 
as between the plaintiffs and the defendant the plaintiffs dealt as consumer 
or on the defendant's written standard terms of business within
Section 3(1)
in the light of the definition of 'business' in
Section 14
was answered in the 
negative on the ground that one cannot be said to deal on another's standard 
terms of business, negotiate with those terms before entering into the 
contract.
Glidewell, J. noticed that in that case the evidence was that in relation 
to many of the programme releases, an employee of ICL went to St. Albans' 
premises where the computer was installed taking with him a disk on which 
the new programme was encoded and himself performed the exercise of 
transferring the programme into the computer.  The learned Judge despite 
holding that the programme itself is not 'goods' held that such term would 
employ to all types of contracts that the programme will be reasonably 
capable of achieving the intended purpose.
The definition of goods in the said Act does not merely include 
personal chattels but all articles, commodities and materials.  The definition 
of goods in the said Act was wider in term than in Sale of Goods Act, 1979 
and the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982.  Furthermore, here, we are 
not concerned with a programme which is not a part of the disk but a 
programme contained in a disk.
Strict Interpretation or Literal Interpretation :
We, in this case, are not concerned with the technical meaning of 
computer and computer programme as in a fiscal statute plain meaning rule 
is applied.  [See Partington Vs. Attorney-General, (1869) LR 4 HL 100, p. 
122]

 	In interpreting an expression used in a legal sense, the courts are 
required to ascertain the precise connotation which it possesses in law.
It is furthermore trite that a court should not be over zealous in 
searching ambiguities or obscurities in words which are plain.  [See
Inland 
Revenue Commissioner Vs. Rossminster Ltd.
(1980) 1 All ER 80, p. 90]

 	It is now well-settled that when an expression is capable of more than 
one meaning, the Court would attempt to resolve that ambiguity in a manner 
consistent with the purpose of the provisions and with regard to the 
consequences of the alternative constructions.
[See Clark & Tokeley Ltd. 
(t/a Spellbrook) Vs. Oakes [1998 (4) All ER 353].
In Inland Revenue Commissioners Vs. Trustees of Sir John Aird's 
Settlement [1984] Ch. 382, it is stated:
"Two methods of statutory interpretation have at 
times been adopted by the court.  One, sometimes 
called literalist, is to make a meticulous 
examination of the precise words used.  The other 
sometimes called purposive, is to consider the 
object of the relevant provision in the light of the 
other provisions of the Act  the general 
intendment of the provisions.  They are not 
mutually exclusive and both have their part to play 
even in the interpretation of a taxing statute."
In
Indian Handicrafts Emporium and Others Vs. Union of India and 
Others
[(2003) 7 SCC 589] this Court expounded the theories of purposive 
construction.
[See also
Ramesh Mehta Vs. Sanwal Chand Singhvi and Ors
, 
JT 2004 (Suppl.1) SC 274]
	
 	Francis Bennion in his oft quoted treatise "Statutory Interpretation" at 
pages 368 & 369 states:
"Subsection (2) Where the enactment is 
grammatically ambiguous, the opposing 
constructions put forward are likely to be 
alternative meanings each of which is 
grammatically possible.  Where on the other hand 
the enactment is grammatically capable of one 
meaning only, the opposing constructions are 
likely to contrast an emphasized version of the 
literal meaning with a strained construction.  In the 
latter case the court will tend to prefer the literal 
meaning, wishing to reject the idea that there is 
any doubt.
Example 149.2 In a tax avoidance case concerning 
capital transfer tax, the Court of Appeal were 
called on to construe the
Finance Act
1975 Sch 5 
para 6(7) as originally enacted.  Counsel for the 
Inland Revenue put forward several alternative 
arguments on construction, but the court preferred 
the one based on the unglossed literal meaning.  It 
may be conjectured however that the other 
arguments helped to convince the court that the
Inland Revenue
's case was to be preferred."
A statute ordinarily must be literally construed.  Such a literal 
construction would not be denied only because the consequence to comply 
the same may lead to a penalty.  This aspect of the matter has been 
considered by this Court in
Indian Handicrafts Emporium
(supra).  
Proceeding on the basis that there existed a dichotomy, the Court ultimately 
held that the resolution will have to be reached by reading the entire statute 
as a whole.
[See also
Reema Aggarwal Vs. Anupam and Others
, (2004) 3 
SCC 199]  

	In
Balram Kumawat Vs. Union of India and Others
[(2003) 7 SCC 
628] this Court held:
"The Courts will  reject that construction which 
will defeat the plain intention of the Legislature 
even though there may be some inexactitude in the 
language used.  Reducing the legislation futility 
shall be avoided and in a case where the intention 
of the Legislature cannot be given effect to, the 
Courts would accept the bolder construction for 
the purpose of bringing about an effective result.  
The Courts, when rule of purposive construction is 
gaining momentum, should be very reluctant to 
hold that Parliament has achieved nothing by the 
language it used when it is tolerably plain what it 
seeks to achieve."
Referring to its earlier decisions, this Court opined :
"36. These decisions are authorities for the 
proposition that the rule of strict construction of a 
regulatory/penal statute may not be adhered to, if 
thereby the plain intention of  Parliament to 
combat crimes of special nature would be 
defeated."
[See also
Swedish Match AB & Anr. Vs. Securities & Exchange Board, 
India & Anr.
, 2004 (7) SCALE 158]

 	So long natural meaning for the charging section is adhered to and 
when the law is certain, then a strange meaning thereto should not be given. 
 [See Indian Banks' Association, Bombay and Ors. Vs. M/s. Devkala 
Consultancy Services and Ors., JT 2004 (4) SC 587]
 	Although normally a taxing statute is to be strictly construed but when 
the statutory provision is reasonable akin to only one meaning, the principles 
of strict construction may not be adhered to.  [See Commnr. of Central 
Excise, Pondicherry Vs. M/s. ACER India Ltd., 2004 (8) SCALE 169]
 	
Determination :
A software may be intellectual property but such personal intellectual 
property contained in a medium is bought and sold.  It is an article of value.  
It is sold in various forms like  floppies, disks, CD-ROMs, punch cards, 
magnetic tapes, etc.  Each one of the mediums in which the intellectual 
property is contained is a marketable commodity.  They are visible to senses.  
They may be a medium through which the intellectual property is transferred 
but for the purpose of determining the question as regard leviability of the 
tax under a fiscal statute, it may not make a difference.  A programme 
containing instructions in computer language is subject matter of a licence.  
It has its value to the buyer.  It is useful to the person who intends to use the 
hardware, viz., the computer in an effective manner so as to enable him to 
obtain the desired results.  It indisputably becomes an object of trade and 
commerce.  These mediums containing the intellectual property are not only 
easily available in the market for a price but are circulated as a commodity 
in the market.  Only because an instruction manual designed to instruct use 
and installation of the supplier programme is supplied with the software, the 
same would not necessarily mean that it would cease to be a 'goods'.  Such 
instructions contained in the manual are supplied with several other goods 
including electronic ones.  What is essential for an article to become goods 
is its marketability.
At this juncture, we may notice the meaning of canned software as 
under:
"(7) 'Canned ?software'?means that is not specifically 
created for a particular consumer.  The sale or lease of, or 
granting a license to use, canned software is not 
automatic data processing and computer services, but is 
the sale of tangible personal property.  When a vendor, in 
a single transaction, sells canned software that has been 
modified or customized for that particular consumer, the 
transaction will be considered the sale of tangible 
personal property if the charge for the modification 
constitutes no more than half of the price of the sale."
[See STATE-CASE APP-CT,OH-TAXRPTR 402-978 Ohio Board of 
Tax Appeals, Aeroquip Cop. Page 9 of 12]

 The software marketed by the Appellants herein indisputably is 
canned software and, thus, as would appear from the discussions made 
hereinbefore, would be exigible to sales tax.
It is not in dispute that when a programme is created it is necessary to 
encode it, upload the same and thereafter unloaded.  Indian law, as noticed 
by my learned Brother, Variava, J., does not make any distinction between 
tangible property and intangible property.  A 'goods' may be a tangible 
property or an intangible one.  It would become goods provided it has the 
attributes thereof having regard to (a) its utility; (b) capable of being bought 
and sold; and (c) capable of transmitted, transferred, delivered, stored and 
possessed.  If a software whether customized or non-customized satisfies 
these attributes, the same would be goods.  Unlike the American Courts, 
Supreme Court of India have also not gone into the question of severability.
Recently, in Commnr. Of Central Excise, Pondicherry Vs. M/s. ACER 
India Ltd. [2004 (8) SCALE 169] this Court has held that operational 
software loaded in the hard disk does not lose its character as tangible goods.
If a canned software  otherwise is 'goods', the Court cannot say it is 
not because it is an intellectual property which would tantamount to 
rewriting the judgment.
In
Madan Lal Fakirchand Dudhediya vs. Shree 
Changdeo Sugar Mills Ltd.
[(1962) Suppl. 3 SCR 973], this Court held that 
the court cannot rewrite the provisions of law which clearly is the function 
of the Legislature which interprets them.
I respectfully agree with the opinion of Variava, J. that the appellant 
herein is liable to pay sales tax on the softwares marketted by it and the 
appeals should be dismissed.