[Cites
17
, Cited by
105
]
Supreme Court of India
The Printers (Mysore) Ltd vs M.A. Rasheed & Ors on 5 April, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2004 SC 603
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
S.B. Sinha
,
S.H. Kapadia
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  4593 of 1999

PETITIONER:
The Printers (Mysore) Ltd.

RESPONDENT:
M.A.  Rasheed & Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 05/04/2004

BENCH:
CJI, S.B. Sinha & S.H. Kapadia.

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

S.B. SINHA,  J :
INTRODUCTION:
Validity of a sale deed dated 19.6.1985 executed by the 
Bangalore Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as 
'the Authority') in favour of the appellant herein was 
questioned by the first respondent before the High Court by 
way of a public interest litigation which has been allowed 
by reason of the impugned judgment.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND:
The appellant is a company incorporated under the
Companies Act
engaged in printing and publishing of 
newspapers and periodicals.  For grant of  allotment of a 
suitable plot  for establishing an industry, an application 
was filed by it before the said Authority and upon 
consideration thereof, a plot admeasuring 1 acre 20 guntas 
under the Byrasandra-Travaekere-Madivala (BTM) was allotted 
on a consideration of Rs.1,87,500/-.   On the said amount 
having been deposited by the appellant, a deed of sale was 
executed in its favour by the authority on or about 
29.6.1985.  The appellant was also put in possession 
thereof.   A licence for  fencing the property was also 
obtained by the appellant.
In 1988, a public interest litigation was filed by the 
First Respondent herein, inter alia, on the ground that the 
impugned alienation was against public policy and, thus, 
illegal and void having regard to the fact neither any 
public auction was held therefor; nor any tender was called 
for; nor any public advertisement for sale of the said land 
was issued.
The contention of the appellant in the aforementioned 
writ petition, inter alia, was that the said writ petition 
in the nature of public interest litigation was in fact 
filed by the First Respondent at the instance of one S.A. 
Krishnappa who had been unsuccessful at earlier stages in 
his attempt to stall the acquisition proceedings.  It was 
contended that one Mohd. Ibrahim had also filed a suit to 
achieve the same purpose but it was dismissed.  In the said 
writ petition the locus of the writ petitioner was also 
questioned.
A learned Single Judge of the High Court allowed the 
said writ application by an order dated 29.1.1996 holding 
that the allotment in favour of the appellant herein by the 
Authority being a bulk one, the same was contrary to the 
provisions of the
Bangalore Development Authority Act
(for 
short 'the Act').
Aggrieved by and dissatisfied therewith, the appellant 
preferred a Letters Patent Appeal.  A Division Bench of the 
High Court dismissed the same holding that establishment of 
an industry cannot be termed as a step towards development 
of the Bangalore Metropolitan Area.  Noticing that under the 
the Act three different sets of rules had been framed and 
interpreting
Section 38
thereof, it was held that the 
provisions of the rules would govern the transfer of land.
SUBMISSIONS:
Mr. Shanti Bhushan, learned Senior Counsel appearing on 
behalf of the appellant assailing the impugned judgment, 
would submit that the High Court committed a manifest error 
insofar as it failed to take into consideration that there 
was no legal impediment for allotment of the land by the 
Authority to the appellant for the purpose of setting up of 
an industry for printing and publishing of newspapers.  The 
learned counsel would urge that the power to lease, sell or 
otherwise transfer an immovable property having been 
conferred on the Authority under the Act, no illegality can 
be said to have been committed in transferring the land in 
question in favour of the appellant.  Establishment of an 
industry for printing and publishing newspapers, it was 
argued, comes within the purview of development of the 
metropolitan area.  Mr.Shanti Bhushan would urge that
Section 38
of the Act confers an unrestricted power to 
lease, sell or transfer movable or immovable property for 
the purpose of any development scheme.
Mr. S.N. Bhat, learned Senior Counsel appearing on 
behalf of the first respondent, on the other hand, would 
contend that the land in question having been earmarked for 
housing, the same could not have been allotted in favour of 
the appellant without any tender having been issued or 
without issuing any advertisement therefor.  The High Court, 
Mr. Bhat would contend, has rightly set aside the allotment 
made by the Authority in favour of the appellant having 
regard to the provision contained in
Section 38
of the Act.  
Bulk allotment, the learned counsel would argue, is covered 
by
Section 38B
of the Act which admittedly is not attracted 
in the instant case.
STATUTORY PROVISIONS :
The said Act was enacted for the establishment of a 
development  of a Development Authority for the development 
of the City of Bangalore and areas adjacent thereto and for 
matters connected therewith.
'Development'  has  been defined in
Section 2(j)
to 
mean :
""Development" with its grammatical 
variations means the carrying out of 
building, engineering, or other 
operations in or over or under land or 
the making of any material change in any 
building or land and includes 
redevelopment'"
Chapter III of the Act
provides for development 
schemes.  In terms of
Section 15
of the Act, the Authority 
may  draw up  detailed schemes for the development of 
Bangalore Metropolitan Area and with the previous approval 
of the Government undertake from time to time any works for 
the Bangalore Metropolitan Area  and incur expenditure 
therefor and also for framing and  execution of  development 
schemes.  It is also entitled to take up any new  or 
additional scheme from time to time.
Sections 38
of the Act reads thus :
"38. Power of Authority to lease, sell 
or transfer property.-Subject to such 
restrictions, conditions and 
limitations as may be prescribed, the 
authority shall have power to lease, 
sell or otherwise transfer any movable 
or immovable property which belongs to 
it, and to appropriate or apply any 
land vested in or acquired by it for 
the formation of open spaces or for 
building purposes or in any other 
manner for the purpose of any 
development scheme."
Section 38-B
of the Act provides as under :
"38-B. Power of Authority to make bulk 
allotment.  Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act or Development 
Scheme sanctioned under this Act, the 
authority may, subject to any 
restriction, condition and limitation 
as may be prescribed, make bulk 
allotment by way of sale,  lease or 
otherwise of any land which belongs to 
it or is vested in it or acquired by 
it for the purpose of any development 
scheme.
(i)	to the State Government; or
(ii)	to the Central Government, or
(iii)	to any Corporation, Body or 
Organisation owned or controlled 
by the Central Government or the 
State Government; or
(iv)	to any Housing Cooperative 
Society registered under the 
Karnataka Cooperative Societies 
Act, 1959 (Karnataka Act 11 of 
1959); or
(v)	to any society registered under 
the Karnataka Societies 
Registration Act, 1960 (Karnataka 
Act 7 of 1960); or
(vi)	to a trust created wholly for 
charitable, educational or 
religious purpose:
Provided that prior approval of the 
Government shall be obtained for 
allotment of land to any category 
listed above."
FINDINGS:
The first respondent in paragraph 3 of the writ 
petition  averred :
"...In the said Link Road, huge 
Industrial Estates have come up and 
potentiality of the acquired lands being 
increased by leaps and bounds..."
The alienation of the land in question in favour of the 
appellant herein, as noticed hereinbefore, was questioned 
only on the ground that no auction was held nor any tender 
therefor was called for and furthermore no public 
advertisement was issued prior to making of the impugned 
allotment.  No contention had been raised in the writ 
petition to the effect that the land could not be alienated 
by the Authority for setting up of an industrial 
undertaking.  In fact, as noticed hereinbefore, the first 
respondent in the writ petition accepted that huge 
industrial area had come up as a result whereof the 
potentiality of the acquired lands had been increased by 
leaps and bounds.  The thrust of the writ petition was, 
thus, on legality of the acquisition of the land or amount 
of compensation payable therefor.
The Division Bench of the High Court, in our opinion, 
misconstrued and misinterpreted the provision of
Section 38
of the Act.  A bare perusal of the of the said provision 
would demonstrate that the Authority has power to lease, 
sell or otherwise transfer any movable or immovable property 
belonging to it, subject to such restrictions,  conditions 
and limitations, as may be prescribed. The State of 
Karnataka has framed three rules under the Act, namely,  (i) 
Bangalore Development Authority (Allotment of Sites) Rules, 
1982; (ii) Bangalore Development Authority (Allotment of 
Buildings under Self Financing Housing Scheme) Rules, 1982; 
and (iii) Bangalore Development Authority (Disposal of 
Corner Sites and Commercial Sites) Rules, 1984.
It is beyond any cavil that the provisions of the 
aforementioned three sets of  rules were not applicable to 
the allotment in question.  If the provisions of the said 
rules are not applicable in the instant case, the question 
of power of the Authority being restricted, conditioned or 
limited in selling or otherwise transferring the property 
would not arise.
In
Surinder Singh Vs. Central Government and Others
[(1986) 4 SCC 667], it was held:
"6. The High Court has held that the 
disposal of property forming part of the 
compensation pool was "subject" to the 
rules framed as contemplated by
Sections 
8
and
40
of the Act and since no rules 
had been framed by the Central 
Government with regard to the disposal 
of the urban agricultural property 
forming part of the compensation pool, 
the authority constituted under the Act 
had no jurisdiction to dispose of urban 
agricultural property by auction sale. 
Unless rules were framed as contemplated 
by the Act, according to the High Court 
the Central Government had no authority 
in law to issue executive directions for 
the sale and disposal of urban 
agricultural property. This view was 
taken, placing reliance on an earlier 
decision of a Division Bench of that 
court in
Bishan Singh v. Central 
Government
. [(1961) 63 Punj LR 75].
The 
Division Bench in
Bishan
case [(1961) 63 
Punj LR 75] took the view that since the 
disposal of the compensation pool 
property was subject to the rules that 
may be made, and as no rules had been 
framed, the Central Government had no 
authority in law to issue administrative 
directions providing for the transfer of 
the urban agricultural land by auction 
sale. In our opinion the view taken by 
the High Court is incorrect. Where a 
statute confers powers on an authority 
to do certain acts or exercise power in 
respect of certain matters, subject to 
rules, the exercise of power conferred 
by the statute does not depend on the 
existence of rules unless the statute 
expressly provides for the same. In 
other words framing of the rules is not 
condition precedent to the exercise of 
the power expressly and unconditionally 
conferred by the statute. The expression 
"subject to the rules" only means, in 
accordance with the rules, if any. If 
rules are framed, the powers so 
conferred on authority could be 
exercised in accordance with these 
rules. But if no rules are framed there 
is no void and the authority is not 
precluded from exercising the power 
conferred by the statute."
In
Ashok Leyland Ltd. Vs. State of Tamil Nadu & Anr.
[2004 (1) SCALE 224] this Court noticed:
"Subject to" is an expression 
whereby limitation is expressed.  The 
order is conclusive for all purposes.
This Court further noticed the dictionary meaning of 
"subject to" stating:
"Furthermore, the expression 'subject 
to' must be given effect to.
In Black's Law Dictionary, Fifth 
Edition at page  1278 the expression 
"Subject to"  has  been defined as 
under :
"Liable, subordinate, subservient, 
inferior,	obedient to; governed or 
affected by; provided that;
provided, answerable for. Homan v. 
Employers Reinsurance Corp,., 345 
Mo. 650, 136 S.W. 2d 289, 302"
Reliance placed by Mr. Bhat in
K.R.C.S. Balakrishna 
Chetty and Sons & Co. vs. The State of Madras
[AIR 1961 SC 
1152] is misplaced.  In that case, an exemption provision 
contained in Section 5 of the Madras General Sales Tax Act 
was invoked which could be granted only subject to such 
restrictions and conditions, as may be prescribed and in 
that context it was held :
"...On a proper interpretation of the 
section it only means that the exemption 
under the licence is conditional upon 
the observance of the conditions 
prescribed and upon the restrictions 
which are imposed by and under the Act 
whether in the rules or in the licence 
itself; that is, a licensee is exempt 
from assessment as long as he conforms 
to the conditions of the licence and not 
that he is entitled to exemption whether 
the conditions upon which the licence is 
given are fulfilled or not.  The use of 
the words "subject to" has reference 
to effectuating the intention of the law 
and the correct meaning, in our opinion, 
is "conditional upon.""
In the instant case, it would appear, that no 
restriction, condition or limitation has been prescribed and 
in that view of the matter, the High Court, in our opinion, 
committed a manifest error in holding that the provisions of 
the said rules would apply to any transfer made by the 
Authority in favour of any person.  A similar question came 
up for consideration before this Court in
Chairman & MD, 
BPL Ltd. vs. S.P. Gururaja and Others
[(2003 8 SCC 567].   
This Court
in that case
examined in details the provisions 
of the said Act vis-`-vis the
Karnataka Industrial Areas 
Development Act, 1966
.  Therein also  allotment of a peace 
of land in favour of an industrial undertaking was in 
question.
The Court referred to a large number of decisions 
including
Guruvayoor Devaswom Managing Committee and Another 
vs. C.K. Rajan and Others
[(2003) 7 SCC 546] and held :
"Mr. Subba Rao referred to N.M. Thomas 
(supra) for the proposition that court 
is also a 'State' within the meaning of
Article 12
but that would not mean that 
in a given case the court shall assume 
the role of the Executive Government of 
the State.  Statutory functions are 
assigned to the State by the Legislature 
and not by the Court.  The Courts while 
exercising its jurisdiction ordinarily 
must remind itself about the doctrine of 
separation of powers which, however, 
although does not mean that the Court 
shall not step-in in any circumstance 
whatsoever but the Court while 
exercising its power must also remind 
itself about the rule of self-restraint.
The Courts, as indicated hereinbefore, 
ordinarily is reluctant to assume the 
functions of the statutory 
functionaries.  It allows them to 
perform their duties at the first 
instance.
The court steps in by Mandamus when the 
State fails to perform its duty.  It 
shall also step in when the discretion 
is exercised but the same has not been 
done legally and validly.  It steps in 
by way of a judicial review over the 
orders passed.  Existence of alternative 
remedy albeit is no bar to exercise 
jurisdiction under
Article 226
of the 
Constitution of India but ordinarily it 
will not do so unless it is found that 
an order has been passed wholly without 
jurisdiction or contradictory to the 
constitutional or statutory provisions 
or where an order has been passed 
without complying with the principles of 
natural justice. (See Whirlpool 
Corporation Vs. Registrar of Trade 
Marks, Mumbai and Others (1998) 8 SCC
1).
Exercise of self-restraint, thus, should 
be adhered to, subject of course to, 
just exceptions."
Dawn Oliver in Constitutional Reform in the UK under 
the heading 'The Courts and Theories of Democracy, 
Citizenship, and Good Governance' at page 105 states:
"However, this concept of democracy as 
rights-based with limited governmental 
power, and in particular of the role of 
the courts in a democracy, carries high 
risks for the judges - and for the 
public.  Courts may interfere 
inadvisedly in public administration.  
The case of Bromley London Borough 
Council v. Greater London Council 
([1983] 1 AC 768, HL) is a classic 
example.  The House of Lords quashed the 
GLC cheap fares policy as being based on 
a misreading of the statutory 
provisions, but were accused of 
themselves misunderstanding transport 
policy in so doing.  The courts are not 
experts in policy and public 
administration - hence Jowell's point 
that the courts should not step beyond 
their institutional capacity 
(Jowell,2000).  Acceptance of this 
approach is reflected in the judgments 
of Laws LJ in International Transport 
Roth GmbH Vs. Secretary of State for the 
Home Department ([2002] EWCA Civ 158, 
[2002] 3 WLR 344) and of Lord Nimmo 
Smith in Adams v. Lord Advocate (Court 
of Session, Times, 8 August 2002) in 
which a distinction was drawn between 
areas where the subject matter lies 
within the expertise of the courts (for 
instance, criminal justice, including 
sentencing and detention of individuals) 
and those which were more appropriate 
for decision by democratically elected 
and accountable bodies.  If the courts 
step outside the area of their 
institutional competence, government may 
react by getting Parliament to legislate 
to oust the jurisdiction of the courts 
altogether.  Such a step would undermine 
the rule of law.  Government and public 
opinion may come to question the 
legitimacy of the judges exercising 
judicial review against Ministers and 
thus undermine the authority of the 
courts and the rule of law."
The said decision squarely applies to the fact of the 
present case.  Section 38-B which was inserted  by Act No.17 
of 1994 w.e.f. 20.12.1975 cannot have any application to the 
facts and circumstances of the instant case.  The provisions 
of
Section 38
and 38B operate in different fields.  By 
reason of
Section 38B
of the Act, the legislature 
contemplated bulk transfer of land in favour of the 
Authorities mentioned therein which, may carry out the 
development scheme or deal with the matter in accordance 
with law.  The High Court, in our opinion, has not correctly 
applied the principles of law governing the field inasmuch 
as it cannot be said that allotment of a plot measuring 1 
acre 20 guntas is a bulk allotment.  Whenever an allotment 
of land is made for industrial purpose, it cannot be 
restricted to a small peace of land.  The extent of land 
sought to be allotted must be commensurate with the purpose 
for which the same is made.
Reliance placed by Mr. Bhat upon
Padma vs. Hiralal 
Motilal Desarda & Ors.
[2002 (6) SCALE 683] is again 
misplaced.  In that case, it was categorically held that the 
sale of bulk land by an institution like CIDCO was an 
anathema to its objective and purpose or its establishment.  
Such alienation was held to be contrary to the law dealing 
with development planning.  It was further found therein 
that the land in question was required as buffer for 
maintaining the ecology balance. Such is not the position 
herein.
Furthermore, the writ petition should not have been 
entertained keeping in view the fact that it was filed about 
three years after making of the allotment and execution of 
the deed of sale.  The High Court should have dismissed the 
writ petition on the ground of delay and laches on the part 
of the first respondent.  The Division Bench of the High 
Court also does not appear to have considered the plea taken 
by the appellant herein to the effect that the first 
respondent had been set up by certain interested persons.  
In a public interest litigation, the Court should, when such 
a plea is raised, determine the same.
For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgment 
cannot be sustained.  It is accordingly set aside. The 
appeal is allowed. The writ petition filed by the respondent 
stands dismissed.  No costs.