[Cites
106
, Cited by
2062
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of West Bengal vs Kesoram Industries Ltd. And Ors on 15 January, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2005 SUPREME COURT 1646, 2004 AIR SCW 5998, (2004) 1 JT 375 (SC), 2005 (2) SLT 401, 2004 (1) SCALE 425, 2004 (1) LRI 325, 2004 (10) SCC 201, 2004 (2) ACE 1, 2005 (1) COM LJ 123 SC, 2004 (1) JT 375, (2004) 266 ITR 721, (2004) 1 SUPREME 590, (2004) 1 SCALE 425, (2004) 21 INDLD 1, (2004) 187 CURTAXREP 219
Author:
R.C. Lahoti
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
R.C. Lahoti
,
B.N. Agrawal
,
Ar. Lakshmanan
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1532-1533 of 1993

PETITIONER:
The State of West Bengal				

RESPONDENT:
Kesoram Industries Ltd. and Ors.			   

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 15/01/2004

BENCH:
CJI, R.C. LAHOTI, B.N. AGRAWAL & Dr. AR. LAKSHMANAN.

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

C.A.  Nos. 1532-1533 OF 1993 
(With C.A. Nos.3518-3519 of 1992, 5149-54 of 1992, C.A. No.2350 of 
1993, C.A.No.7614 of 1994, C.A. Nos......................................................of 
2004 (Arising out of  SLP (C) Nos.3986 of 1993, 11596 and 17549 of 
1994).
W.P.(C) Nos. 262 of 1997

The Terai Indian Planters' Association & Anr.           ...Appellants

Versus

The State of West Bengal & Ors.			   ...Respondents
(With W.P.(C) Nos.515, 641,642 of 1997, W.P.(C) Nos.347,360 
of 1999, W.P.(C) Nos.50, 553 of 2000, W.P.(C) Nos.207,288,389 
of 2001 and W.P.(C) No.81 of 2003)



W.P.(C) No.247/1995 

Bengal Brickfield Owners' Assn. & Anr.		     ... Appellants

Versus

State of West Bengal & Ors.				  ....Respondents
(With W.P.(C) No.412/1995)
Civil Appeal No.5027/2000
Anil Kumar Singh						     ... Appellant
Versus

Collector, Sonbhadra District & Ors.		  ....Respondents

(With C.A.Nos.6643 to  6650 of 2000, 6894 of 2000 and 
C.A.No.1077 of 2001)

R.C. Lahoti, J.
This batch of matters, some appeals by special leave under
Article 136
of the Constitution and some writ petitions filed in 
this Court, raise a few questions of constitutional significance 
centering around Entries 52, 54 and 97 in List I and Entries 23, 
49, 50 and 66 in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution of India as also the extent and purport of the 
residuary power of legislation vested in the Union of India.  
Cesses on coal bearing land, levied in exercise of the power 
conferred by State Legislation, have been struck down by a 
Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court.  In exercise of the 
same power conferred by State legislation whereunder cesses 
were levied on coal bearing land, cesses have also been levied 
on tea plantation land which are the subject-matter of writ 
petitions filed in this Court.  The Bengal Brickfield Owners' 
Association have also come up to this Court by filing a writ 
petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution, laying challenge to 
the same cesses levied on the removal of brick earth.  These 
three sets of matters arise from West Bengal.  The High Court of 
Allahabad has upheld the constitutional validity of cess levied in 
the State of U.P. on minor minerals which decisions are the 
subject-matter of civil appeals filed under
Article 136
of the 
Constitution.  For the sake of convenience, we would call these 
matters, respectively as (A) 'Coal Matters', (B) 'Tea Matters', (C)  
'Brick Earth Matters', and (D) 'Minor Mineral Matters'. Inasmuch 
as the basic constitutional questions arising for decision in all 
these matters are the same, all the matters have been heard 
analogously.
We would first set out the facts in brief and so far as 
relevant for appreciating the issues arising for decision and 
thereafter deal with the same.
(A)  Coal Matters

	A Division  Bench of the Calcutta High Court has, vide its 
judgment dated 25.11.92 reported as
Kesoram Industries Ltd. 
(Textiles Division) Vs. Coal India Ltd.
, AIR 1993 Calcutta 78, 
struck down certain levies by way of cess on coal as 
unconstitutional for want of legislative competence in the State 
Legislature.  Feeling aggrieved, the State of West Bengal has 
come up in appeal by special leave.
The levies which are the subject matter of   challenge   are 
as under:
The Cess Act, 1980
"
S.5
All immovable property to be 
liable to a road cess and public works 
cess.  From and after the commencement of 
this Act in any district or part of a district, all 
immovable property situate therein except as 
otherwise in (
Section 2
) provided, shall be 
liable to the payment of a road cess and a 
public works cess."
"
S.6
Cesses how to be assessed.  
The road cess and the public works cess

[shall be assessed___
(a) in respect of lands on the annual 
value thereof,
(b) in respect of all mines and quarries, 
on the annual dispatches therefrom, and,
(c) in respect of tramways, railways and 
other immovable property, on the annual net 
profit thereof, ascertained respectively as in 
this Act prescribed]

and the rates at which such cesses 
respectively shall be levied for each year shall 
be determined for such year in the manner in 
this Act prescribed:
Provided that___

(1)	the rates of such road cess and 
public works cess shall not exceed six paise 
and twenty-five paise respectively on each 
rupee of such annual value,

(2)	the rates of each of such road cess 
and public works cess shall not exceed___
(i)	fifty paise on each tonne of coal, 
minerals or sand of such annual dispatches, 
and
(ii)	six paise on each rupee of such 
annual net profits,

Explanation. ___  For the purposes of this 
proviso, one tonne of coke shall be counted as 
one and a quarter tonne of coal."
2.
West Bengal Primary Education 
Act, 1973
"78.	Education cess. ___ (1) All 
immovable properties on which road and public 
works cesses are assessed, [or all such 
properties which are liable to such assessment] 
according to the provisions of the
Cess Act, 
1880
, shall be liable to the payment of 
education cess.
(2)	The rate of the education cess shall 
be determined by the state Government by 
notification and shall not exceed___
(a)[in respect of lands, other than a tea 
estate] ten paise on each rupee of the annual 
value thereof;
(aa)	xxx		xxx		xxx
(b)	in respect of coal mines [five per 
centum of the value of coal] on the dispatches 
therefrom;
(c) 	in respect of quarries and mines 
other than coal mines, [one rupee on each 
tonne of materials or minerals other than coal 
on the annual dispatches therefrom]


Explanation. ___ For the purpose of clause
(b) the expression 'value of coal' shall mean___
(i) in the case of dispatches of coal as a 
result of sale thereof, the prices charged by 
the owner of a coal mine for such coal, but 
excluding any sum separately charged as tax, 
cess, duty, fee or royalty for payment of such 
sum to Government to a local body, or any 
other sum as may be prescribed or
(ii) in the case of dispatches other than 
those referred to in item(i), the prices 
chargeable by the owner of a coal mine for 
such coal if they were dispatched as a result of 
sale thereof, but excluding any sum separately 
chargeable as tax, cess, duty, fee or ___ royalty 
for payment of such sum to Government or a 
local body or any other sum as may be 
prescribed:
Provided that if more than one price is 
chargeable for the same variety of coal, the 
maximum price chargeable for that variety of 
coal shall be taken as the basis of valuation for 
the purpose of this item."
3.
West Bengal Rural Employment 
and Production Act, 1976
.
"
S.4
.  Rural employment cess. ___ (1) 
On and from the commencement of this Act, all 
immovable properties on which road and public 
work cesses [are assessed or liable to be 
assessed] according to the provisions of the
Cess Act, 1880
, shall be liable to the payment 
of rural employment cess;
Provided that on raiyat who is exempted 
from paying revenue in respect of his holding 
under clause (a) of sub-sec.(1) of
S.23B
of the 
West Bengal Land Reforms Act, 1955 shall be 
liable to pay rural employment cess.
(2)  The rural employment cess shall be 
levied annually___
(a) [in respect of lands, other than a tea 
estate,] at the rate of six paise on each rupee 
of development value thereof;
(aa)	xxx		xxx		xxx
(b) 	in respect of coal mines, at the 
rate of [thirty-five paise per centum] on each 
tonne of coal on the xxx dispatches therefrom;
(c) 	in respect of mines other than coal 
mines and quarries, [at the rate of fifty paise 
on each tonne of materials other than coal on 
the annual dispatches therefrom]

Explanation. ___ For the purpose of clause
(b) the expression 'value of coal' shall mean___
(i) in the case of dispatches of coal as a 
result of sale thereof, the prices charged by 
the owner of a coal mine for such coal but 
excluding any sum separately charged as tax, 
cess, duty, fee or royalty for payment of such 
sum to Government or a local body, or any 
other sum as may be prescribed, or
(ii)	in the case of dispatches, other 
than those referred to in item (i), the prices 
chargeable by the owner of a coal mine for 
such coal if they were dispatched as a result of 
sale thereof, but excluding any sum separately 
chargeable as tax, cess, duty, fee or royalty for 
payment of such sum to Government or a local 
body, or any other sum as may be prescribed:
Provided that if more than one price is 
chargeable for the same variety of coal, the 
maximum price chargeable for that variety of 
coal shall be taken as the basis of valuation for 
the purpose of this item."
All the three legislations above-referred to are State 
enactments.  The provisions of the
West Bengal Primary 
Education Act, 1973
and the
West Bengal Rural Employment and 
Production Act, 1976
, which levied cess were amended by the 
West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1992 with effect 
from 1-4-1992. The text of the said Amendment Act is as 
follows:
"West Bengal Act II of 1992

THE WEST BENGAL TAXATION LAWS
(AMENDMENT) ACT, 1992.
[Passed by the West Bengal Legislature]

[Assent of the Governor was first published in 
the Calcutta Gazette, Extraordinary, of the 27th 
March, 1992.]
An Act
to amend the
West Bengal Primary 
Education Act, 1973
and the
West Bengal Rural 
Employment and Production Act, 1976
.
WHERAS it is expedient to amend the
West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973
and 
the
West Bengal Rural Employment and 
Production Act, 1976
, for the purposes and in 
the manner hereinafter appearing:
It is hereby enacted in the Forty-third 
Year of the Republic of India, by the 
Legislature of West Bengal, as follows:-
1.	(1)
This Act
may be called the West 
Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1992.
(2)   It shall come into force on the 1st 
day of April, 1992.
(
Section 2
.)
2.
In the West Bengal Primary Education Act, 
1973
,___

(1) in
section 78
for sub-section (2), the 
following sub-section shall be substituted:___

'(2)  The education cess shall be levied 
annually___
(a) in respect of land, except when a 
cess is leviable and payable under clause
(b) or clause (c) of sub-section (2A), at 
the rate of ten paise on each rupee of 
annual value thereof as assessed under 
the
Cess Act, 1880
;
(b)  in respect of a coal-bearing land, at 
the rate of five per centum of the annual 
value of the coal-bearing land as defined 
in clause (1) of
Section 2
of the West 
Bengal Rural Employment and Production 
Act, 1976;
(c) in respect of a mineral-bearing land 
(other than coal-bearing land) or quarry, 
at the rate of one rupee on each tonne of 
minerals (other than coal) or materials 
despatched within the meaning of clause 
(1b) of
Section 2
of the West Bengal 
Rural Employment and Production Act, 
1976, from such mineral bearing land or 
quarry;
Provided that when in the coal-
bearing land referred to in clause (b) 
there is no production of coal for more 
than two consecutive years, such land 
shall be liable for levy of cess in respect 
of any year immediately succeeding the 
said two consecutive years in accordance 
with clause (a):
Provided further that where no 
despatch of minerals or materials is 
made during a period of more than two 
consecutive years from the mineral-
bearing land or quarry as referred to in 
clause (c), such land or quarry shall be 
liable for levy of cess in respect of any 
year immediately succeeding the said 
two consecutive years in accordance with 
clause (a).
Explanation. ___ For the purposes of this 
chapter, 'coal-bearing land' shall have the 
same meaning as in clause (1a) of
Section 2
of 
the West Bengal Rural Employment and 
Production Act, 1976.'.
(2)	in section 78A,___
(a)  for clause (a), the following clause 
shall be substituted:-
"(a) the education cess payable for a 
year under sub-section (1) of section 78 
in respect of coal-bearing land referred 
to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of that 
section shall be paid by the owner of 
such coal-bearing land in such manner, 
at such intervals and by such dates as 
may be prescribed;";
(b)  for clause (b), the following clause 
shall be substituted:-
"(b)  every owner of a coal-bearing land 
shall furnish a declaration relating to a 
year showing the amount of education 
cess payable by him under clause (a) in 
such form and by such date as may be 
prescribed and to such authority as may 
be notified by the State Government in 
this behalf in the Official Gazette 
(hereinafter referred to as the notified 
authority);";
(c) in clause (c),__
(i) for the words "coal mine", 
wherever they occur, the words 
"coal-bearing land" shall be 
substituted;
(ii) for the word "return", wherever 
it occurs, the word "declaration"
shall be substituted;
(iii)for the word "period", wherever 
it occurs, the word "year" shall be 
substituted;
(d)  for clause (d), the following clause 
shall be substituted:-
"(d)  the education cess under 
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of 
section 78 shall be assessed by the 
notified authority in the manner 
prescribed, and if the declaration 
under clause (b) is not accepted, 
the owner of the coal-bearing land 
shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard before 
making such assessment;";
(e)  in clause (g), for the words "coal mine" in  
the two places where they occur, the words 
"coal-bearing land" shall be substituted;
(f)   for clause (ga), the following clause shall 
be substituted:-
"(ga)  where an owner of a coal-bearing 
land furnishes a declaration referred to in 
clause (b) in respect of any year by the 
prescribed date or thereafter, but fails to 
make full payment of education cess 
payable in respect of such period by such 
date, as may be prescribed under clause
(a), he shall pay a simple interest at the 
rate of two per centum for each English 
calendar month of default in payment 
under clause (a) from the first day of 
such month next following the prescribed 
date up to the month preceding the 
month of full payment of such cess or up 
to the month prior to the month of 
assessment under clause (d) in respect 
of such period, whichever is earlier, upon 
so much of the amount of education cess 
payable by him according to clause (a) 
as remains unpaid at the end of each 
such month of default;"
(g)  for clause (gb), the following clause shall 
be substituted:-
"(gb)  where an owner of a coal-bearing 
land fails to furnish a declaration referred 
to in clause (b) in respect of any year by 
the prescribed date or thereafter before 
the assessment under clause (d) in 
respect of such year and, on such 
assessment, full amount of education 
cess payable for such year is found not 
to have been paid in the manner and by 
the date prescribed under clause (a), he 
shall pay a simple interest at the rate of 
two per centum for each English calendar 
month of default in payment under 
clause (a) from the first day of the 
month next following the prescribed date 
for such payment up to the month 
preceding the month of full payment of 
education  cess under clause (a) or up to 
the month prior to the month of such 
assessment under clause (d), whichever 
is earlier, upon so much of the amount of 
education cess payable by him according 
to clause (a) as remains unpaid at the 
end of each such month of default:
Provided that where the education 
cess payable under clause (a) is not paid 
in the manner prescribed under that 
clause by the owner of a coal-bearing 
land, the notified authority shall, while 
making the assessment under clause (d) 
in respect of a year, apportion on the 
basis of such assessment the education 
cess payable in accordance with clause
(a);";
(h)  in clause (gc), for the words "coal mine", 
the words "coal-bearing land" shall be 
substituted;
(i)  in clause (ge), for the words "coal mine", 
the words "coal-bearing land" shall be 
substituted;
(j)  for clause (gf), the following clause shall be 
substituted:-
"(gf)  interest under clause (ga) or 
clause (gb) shall be payable in respect of 
payment of education cess which falls 
due on any day after the 30th day of 
April, 1992, and interest under clause 
(gc) shall be payable in respect of 
assessment for which notices of demand 
of education cess under clause (d) are 
issued on or after the date of 
commencement of the West Bengal 
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1992:
Provided that interest under clause 
(ga) or clause (gb) in respect of any 
period ended on or before the 31st day of 
March, 1992, or interest under clause 
(gc) in respect of assessment, for which  
notices of demand of education cess 
under clause (d) are issued before the 
date of commencement of the West 
Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 
1992, shall continue to be payable in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act 
as they stood immediately before the 
coming into force of the aforesaid Act as 
if the aforesaid Act had not come into 
force;";
(k)  in clause (gh), for the words "coal mine", 
the words "coal-bearing land" shall be 
substituted;
(l)  in clause (gi), for the words "coal mine", 
the words "coal-bearing land" shall be 
substituted;
(m)  in clause (gj), for the words "coal mine", 
the words "coal-bearing land" shall be 
substituted;
"3.
In the West Bengal Rural Employment and 
Production Act, 1976
, ___ 

(1) in
Section 2
, ___
(a) for clause (1), the following clauses 
shall be substituted___
(1)	"annual value of coal-bearing 
land", in relation to a financial year, means 
one-half of the value of coal, produced from 
such coal-bearing land during the two years 
immediately preceding that financial year, the 
value of coal being that as could have been 
fetched by the entire production of coal during 
the said two immediately preceding years, had 
the owner of such coal-bearing land sold such 
coal at the price or prices excluding the 
amount of tax, cess, fee, duty, royalty, 
crushing charge, washing charge, transport 
charge or any other amount as may be 
prescribed, that prevailed on the date 
immediately preceding the first day of that 
financial year.
Explanation. ___ Where different prices 
are prevailing on the date immediately 
preceding the first date of that financial year 
for different grades or qualities of coal, the 
value of coal of each grade or quality produced 
during the two years immediately preceding 
that financial year shall be determined 
accordingly;
(1a) "coal-bearing land" means holding 
or holdings of land having one or more seams 
of coal comprising the area of a coal mine;
(1b)  'despatched', for a financial year, 
shall, in relation to a mineral-bearing land 
(other than coal-bearing land) or a quarry, 
mean one-half the quantity of minerals, or 
minerals, despatched during two years 
immediately preceding that financial year from 
such mineral-bearing land or quarry;
(1c)  'development value' means a sum 
equivalent to five times the annual value of 
land as assessed under the
Cess Act, 1880
;';
(b) 	after clause (3), the following 
clause shall be added and shall be deemed 
always to have been added:-
'(4)	'year' means a financial year as 
defined in clause (15) of
Section 3
of the 
Bengal General Clauses Act, 1899;';
 (2)  in
section 4
, for sub-section (2), the 
following sub-section shall be substituted:-
"(2)  The rural employment cess shall be 
levied annually___
(a) in respect of land, except when a 
cess is leviable and payable under clause
(b) or clause (c) or sub-section (2A), at 
the rate of six paise on each rupee of 
development value thereof;
(b)  in respect of a coal-bearing land, at 
the rate of thirty-five per centum of the 
annual value of coal-bearing land as 
defined in clause (1) of
Section 2
;
(c) in respect of a mineral-bearing land 
(other than coal-bearing land) or quarry, 
at the rate of fifty paise on each tonne of 
minerals (other than coal) or materials 
despatched therefrom:
(g)  for clause (gb), the following clause shall 
be substituted:-
"(gb)  where an owner of a coal-bearing 
land fails to furnish a declaration referred 
to in clause (b) in respect of any year by 
the prescribed date or thereafter before 
the assessment under clause (d) in 
respect of such year and, on such 
assessment, full amount of rural 
employment cess payable for such year 
is found not to have been paid in the 
manner and by the date prescribed 
under clause (a), he shall pay a simple 
interest at the rate of two per centum for 
each English calendar month of default in 
payment under clause (a) from the first 
day of the month next following the 
prescribed date for such payment up to 
the month preceding the month of full 
payment of rural employment cess under 
clause (a) or up to the month prior to the 
month of such assessment under clause
(d), whichever is earlier,  upon so much 
of the amount of rural employment cess 
payable by him according to clause (a) 
as remains unpaid at the end of each 
such month of default:
Provided that where the rural 
employment cess payable under clause
(a) is not paid in the manner prescribed 
under that clause by the owner of a coal-
bearing land, the notified authority shall, 
while making the assessment under 
clause (d) in respect of a year, apportion 
on the basis of such assessment the rural 
employment cess payable in accordance 
with clause (a);";
(h)  in clause (gc), for the words "coal mine", 
the words "coal-bearing land" shall be 
substituted;
(i)  in clause (ge), for the words "coal mine", 
the words "coal-bearing land" shall be 
substituted;
(j)  for clause (gf), the following clause shall be 
substituted:-
"(gf)  interest under clause (ga) or 
clause (gb) shall be payable in respect of 
payment of rural employment cess which 
falls due on any day after the 30th day of 
April, 1992, and interest under clause 
(gc) shall be payable in respect of 
assessments for which notices of demand 
of rural employment cess under clause
(d) are issued on or after the date of 
commencement of the West Bengal 
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1992:
Provided that interest under clause 
(ga) or clause (gb) in respect of any 
period ended on or before the 31st day of 
March, 1992, or interest under clause 
(gc) in respect of assessments for which 
notices of demand of rural employment 
cess under clause (d) are issued before 
the date of commencement of the West 
Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 
1992, shall continue to be payable in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act 
as they stood before the coming into 
force of the said Act as if the said Act 
had not come into force;";
(k)  in clause (gh), for the words "coal mine", 
the words "coal-bearing land" shall be 
substituted;
(l)  in clause (gi), for the words "coal mine", 
the words "coal-bearing land" shall be 
substituted;
(m)  in clause (gj), for the words "coal mine", 
the words "coal-bearing land" shall be 
substituted;
_____

By order of the Governor
R. BHATTACHARYYA,
Secy. to the Govt. of West Bengal."
It is the constitutional validity of the amendment in the 
two legislations, given effect to from 1.4.92, which was 
successfully  impugned in the High Court and  is  sought to be 
restored in these appeals.
The High Court has placed reliance mainly on two decisions 
of this Court, namely
India Cement Ltd. & Ors. Vs. State of 
Tamil Nadu & Ors.
, (1990) 1 SCC 12 (Seven-Judges Bench 
decision) and Orissa Cement Ltd. Vs. State of Orissa & Ors., 
1991 Supp.(1) SCC 430 (Three-Judges Bench decision).  In both 
these decisions the levy of cess impugned therein was struck 
down as unconstitutional.  The High Court of Calcutta has held 
that the levy impugned herein is similar to the one  held ultra 
vires the legislative competence of the State twice by the 
Supreme Court, and hence the same was  liable to be struck 
down.
In the opinion of the High Court,  the cess is assessed and 
computed on the basis of value of coal produced from the coal 
bearing land, and coal bearing land has been defined to mean 
land having one or more seams of coal comprising the area of a 
coal mine. Therefore, it is the production of coal from a coal 
mine which is the basic event for the levies and the cess is to be 
levied at 35 per centum of the 'annual value of the coal bearing 
land', which, as per definition, is directly related to the value of 
coal produced from the coal mines.  The value of the coal has 
been related to the price.  Explanation to Clause (1) of sub-
Section (2) of the 1922 Act, as amended by the 1976 Act, makes 
the real nature of the levy clearer by providing that where 
different prices are prevailing on the relevant date for different 
grades or qualities of coal, the value of coal of each grade or 
quality shall be relevant.  The High Court has concluded that the 
cess cannot be said to be on land so as to be covered by Entry 
49 in Schedule II.  On behalf of the writ petitioner__ respondents, 
the judgment of the High Court has been supported on similar 
grounds as were successfully urged before the High Court and  
which we shall presently deal with.  On the other hand, the 
learned counsel for the appellant-State of West Bengal has 
submitted that having regard to the real nature of the levy, it 
clearly falls within the legislative field of Entry 49 in List II.
(B)  Tea matters

The writ petitions in which the validity of the levy of cesses 
relatable to tea estates is involved has an interesting legislative 
history behind it.  By virtue of the West Bengal Taxation Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 1981, amendments were effected in the 
provisions of the
West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973
, and 
the
West Bengal Rural Employment And Production Act, 1976
.  
Cesses were sought to be levied upon certain lands and buildings 
in the State for raising funds for the purpose of providing 
primary education throughout the State and to provide for 
employment in rural areas.  Different rates in respect of lands, 
coal mines and other mines on annual basis were provided.  Tea 
estates were carved out as a separate category and a separate 
rate was prescribed therefor as under.
"
Section 4(2)
: The rural employment cess shall be levied 
annually -
(a)	in respect of lands, other than a tea 
estate, at the rate of six paise on each rupee of 
development value thereof;
(aa) 	in respect of a tea estate at such rate, 
not exceeding ruppes six on each kilogram of 
tea on the despatches from such tea estate of 
tea grown therein, as the State Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix 
in this behalf :
Provided that in calculating the 
despatches of tea for the purpose of levy of 
rural employment cess, such despatches for 
sale made at such tea auction centers as may 
be recognized by the State Government by 
notification in the Official Gazette shall be 
excluded:
Provided further that the State 
Government, may fix different rates on 
despatches of different classes of tea.
Explanation. - For the purpose of this 
section, 'tea' means the plant Camelia Sinensis 
(L) O. Kuntze as well as all varities of the 
product known commercially as tea made from 
the leaves of the plant Camelia Sinensis (L) O. 
Kuntze, including green tea and green tea 
leaves, processed or unprocessed."
Sub-section (4) was introduced in
Section 4
which empowered 
the State Government to exempt "such categories of dispatches 
or such percentage of dispatches from the liability to pay the 
whole or any part of the rural employment cess or reduce the 
rate..." . By another amendment effected in 1982, the first 
proviso to clause (aa) in
Section 4(2)
was omitted.  Several 
notifications were issued by the Government from time to time 
as contemplated by
Section 4(2)
.
The constitutional validity of the abovesaid amendment 
was challenged successfully in
Buxa Dooars Tea Company 
Ltd. and Ors. Vs. State of West Bengal and Ors.
-  (1989) 3 
SCC 211.  The decision is by a Bench of two learned Judges.  
The levy of cess having been struck down, the State became 
liable to refund the cess already collected and the relevant 
schemes which were financed by the cessess so collected came 
under jeopardy.  The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Second 
Amendment) Act, 1989 was enacted, which is under challenge 
herein.
Section 2
of the impugned Act contains amendments to
West Bengal Primary Education Act
while
Section 3
sets out the 
amendments to
West Bengal Rural Employment and Production 
Act, 1976
. As mentioned hereinbefore, it would be enough to 
notice the gist of the amendments made in one of the two Acts 
of 1976 since the amendments in both   are identical.
Clause (aa) in sub-section (2) of
Section 4
was omitted 
with effect from 1.4.1981.  After sub-section (2), sub-section (2-
A) was introduced with retrospective effect from 1.4.1981.  Sub-
section (2-A) reads :
(2-A) The rural employment cess shall be 
levied annually on a tea estate at the rate of 
twelve paise for each kilogram of green tea 
leaves produced in such estate.
Explanation. - For the purposes of this 
sub-section, sub-section (3) and Section 4-B-
(i)	'green tea leaves' shall mean the 
plucked and unprocessed green leaves of the 
plant Camelia Sinensis (L) O. Kuntze;
(ii)	'tea estate' shall mean any land 
used or intended to be used for growing plant 
Camelia Sinensis (L) O.Kuntze and producing 
green tea leaves from such plant, and shall 
include land comprised in a factory or 
workshop for producing any variety of the 
product known commercially as 'tea' made 
from the leaves of such plant and for housing 
the persons employed in the tea estate and 
other lands for  purposes ancillary to the 
growing of such plant and producing green tea 
leaves from such plant."
Clause (a) in sub-section (3) was also substituted which 
had the effect of making the owner of the tea estate liable for 
the said cess.  The other provisions require the owner of the tea 
estate to maintain a true and correct account of green tea leaves 
produced in the tea estate.  Sub-section (4) was also 
substituted.  The substituted sub-section (4) empowered the 
State Government to exempt from the cess such categories of 
tea estates producing green tea leaves not exceeding two lakh 
fifty thousand kilograms and located in such area as may be 
specified in such notification.
Section 4-B
contains the validation 
clause.  It says that any cess collected for the period prior to the 
said Amendment Act shall be deemed to have been validly levied 
by it and collected under the
Amended Act
.  Any assessment 
made or other proceedings taken in that behalf for assessing  
and collecting the said tax were also to be deemed to have been 
taken under the
Amended Act
.
Goodricke Group Ltd. & ors. filed a writ petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India in this Court.  The levy of 
cesses under both the State enactments as amended by the 
West Bengal Taxation Laws (Second Amendment) Act, 1989 was 
impugned.  A few matters raising a similar challenge and 
pending in various High Courts were also withdrawn to this 
Court.  All the matters were heard and decided by a three-
Judges Bench of this Court, vide judgment dated November 25, 
1994, reported as
Goodricke Group Ltd. and Ors. Vs. State 
of West Bengal and Ors.
- (1995) Supp. 1 SCC 707.
The 
decision of this Court in
India Cement  Ltd. and Ors.    Vs.  
State of Tamil Nadu & Ors.
(1990) 1 SCC 12 (seven-judges 
Bench) and Orissa Cement Limited Vs. State of Orissa & 
Ors. (1991) Suppl.1 SCC 430 (three-judges Bench) were cited 
before the three-judges Bench in Goodricke.  Both the decisions 
were distinguished and the constitutional validity of the 1989 
amendments was upheld.  The writ petitions were dismissed.
It appears that a similar cess was levied by a pari materia 
provision enacted by the State Legislature of Orissa as the
Orissa Rural Employment, Education and Production Act, 1982
.  
The cess was on land bearing coal and minerals.  Challenge to 
the constitutional validity of such cess was successfully laid 
before this Court, and the Orissa Legislation was struck down as 
unconstitutional and ultra vires the competence of the State 
Legislature in
State of Orissa Vs. Mahanadi Coal Fields 
Limited
(1995) Suppl.2 SCC 686 decided on April 21, 1995.
On 30.3.1996 a writ petition under
Article 32
of the 
Constitution of India has been filed in this Court laying challenge 
to the constitutional validity of the very same amendments 
which were unsuccessfully impugned in the
Goodricke
's case.
The writ petitioners in the Tea Matters have in their 
petition stated a few grounds in support of the relief sought for.  
However, a perusal of the grounds reveals that in substance the 
challenges is only one, i.e., the decision in Goodricke runs 
counter to the view of the law taken by Seven-Judges Bench in 
India Cement and three-Judges Bench in Orissa Cement; 
Goodricke was rightly not followed in Mahanadi Coal Fields; 
rather Mahanadi Coal Fields has whittled down the authority of 
Goodricke and that being the position of law the impugned cess 
is ultra vires the power of the State Legislature and deserves to 
be pronounced so.  In short,  the same challenge as was laid and 
turned down in Goodricke, is reiterated drawing support from 
the decisions of this Court previous and subsequent to 
Goodricke, and seeks the overruling of Goodricke.
(C)  Brick-Earth Matters
The Bengal Brickfield Owners' Association, being a 
representative body of the persons engaged in the activity of 
brick manufacturing and owning brickfields as also one of the 
brickfield owners, have joined in filing a writ petition before this 
Court wherein the constitutional validity of the very same 
provisions as contained in the
Cess Act, 1880
, the
West Bengal 
Primary Education Act, 1973
and the
West Bengal Rural 
Employment and Production Act, 1976
( both as amended by the 
Bengal Taxation Laws Amendment Act, 1992) has been put in 
issue, as has been subjected to challenge by the coal mine 
owners and the tea estate owners disputing the levy of cess 
allegedly on coal and tea.  The grounds of challenge, briefly 
stated, are three in number:  firstly, that brick-earth is a minor 
mineral to which the
Mines and Minerals Development and 
Regulation Act, 1957
, applies and by virtue of the declaration 
made by
Section 2
of the Act by reference to Entry 54 in 
Schedule I of the Constitution, the field relating to such minor 
minerals is entirely covered by the Central Legislation and hence 
the State Legislations are not competent to levy the impugned 
cess; secondly, that the levy is on the dispatch of minor minerals 
for sale while the process of manufacturing bricks does not 
involve any dispatch of the brick-earth inasmuch as the brick-
earth is consumed then and there, on the brickfield itself, in the 
process of manufacturing of bricks, and there being no dispatch 
of brick-earth, the cess is not leviable; and thirdly, that the State 
Government is not empowered to levy any cess on either the 
extraction of brick-earth or on the dispatch of brick-earth.  In 
support of these three grounds, it is further submitted that the 
same quantity of brick-earth is subjected by Central Legislation 
to payment of royalty which is a tax, and the same quantity of 
brick-earth is sought to be levied with cess which is incompetent 
so far as the State Legislature is concerned.  The writ petition 
places reliance on the decisions of this Court in
India Cement 
Ltd. & Ors
(supra), Orissa Cement Ltd. (supra) and
Buxa 
Dooars Tea Company Ltd. and Ors.
(supra).  Some of the 
members of the petitioner association were served with demand 
notices.  The relief sought for in the petition is striking down of 
the relevant provisions of the three State Legislations as ultra 
vires the Constitution and quashing of the demand notices.   The 
reason for filing the petition in this Court, as stated in the writ 
petition, is that the provisions sought to be impugned herein 
have already   been declared ultra vires by the High Court of 
Calcutta in relation to 'tea', an appeal against which decision has 
been filed in this Court and by an interim order the operation of 
the judgment of the High Court was stayed.
According to the respondents, the cess sought to  be levied 
by the impugned State Legislation is in the nature of fee and not 
tax.  The purpose of levying fee, as stated in the Preamble to the 
relevant legislation, is rendering different services to the society 
and for public benefit.  The cesses have been levied by the State 
Government for securing of welfare to the people by the State as 
is enshrined in Part IV of the Constitution of India by providing 
communication facilities, removal of illiteracy and rural 
employment to the poor living below the poverty line.  The 
impugned legislations levying the cess, do not encroach upon the 
field covered by the Central legislation.  The brick-klin owners 
extract the brick-earth as an item of trade.  From every 100 cft 
of brick-earth which weighs 5 metric tones, 1382 bricks are 
manufactured.  The dispatch of 1382 bricks means the dispatch 
of 100 cft or 5 metric tones of brick-earth.  A brickfield owner 
performs dual functions: firstly, he extracts a quantum of brick-
earth from the quarry, and secondly, he dispatches the same for 
manufacture of bricks in the same quarry-field.  The brickfield 
owner is an extractor of brick-earth and also a manufacturer of 
bricks.  The element of dispatch is kept hidden.  That is why the 
cess is now assessed on annual dispatches.  Dispatch, in the 
context of brick-earth, means removal of brick-earth from one 
place to another which may be within the same complex and for 
domestic or captive use or consumption.  In any case, the 
removal of brick-earth involved in the process cannot escape 
assessment.
(D) Minor Mineral Matters
This batch of appeals puts in issue the judgment dated 
1.3.2000 delivered by a Division Bench of the Allahabad High 
Court (reported as
Ram Dhani Singh Vs.  Collector, 
Sonbhadra and Ors.
- AIR 2001 Allahabad 5), upholding the 
constitutional validity of a cess on mineral rights levied under 
Section 35 of the U.P. Special Area Development Authorities Act, 
1986, read with Rule 3 of the Shakti Nagar Special Area 
Development Authority (Cess on Mineral Rights) Rules, 1997 
(herein referred to briefly as '
SADA Act
' and 'SADA Cess Rules' 
respectively).  There was a bunch of 73 writ petitions filed in the 
High Court which have all been dismissed.  The challenge is 
being pursued in this Court by ten writ petitioners through these 
appeals by special leave.
The Governor of Uttar Pradesh promulgated U.P. 
Ordinance No.15 of 1985, which was repealed by U.P. Special 
Area Development Authorities Act, 1986 (U.P. Act No.9 of 1986), 
containing identical provisions as were contained in the 
preceding Ordinance.  The said Act received the assent of the 
President of India on 19.3.1986 and was published in U.P. 
Gazette of that day.
Section 35
of the Act provides as under :
"35. Cess on mineral rights.-
(1) Subject to any limitations imposed by 
Parliament by law relating to mineral 
development, the Authority may impose a 
cess on mineral rights at such rate as may 
be prescribed.
(2)  Any Cess imposed under this section shall 
be subject to confirmation by the State 
Government and shall be leviable with 
effect from such date as may be appointed 
by the State Government in this behalf."
On 24.2.1997, in exercise of the power conferred by
Section 35
of the Act, the Governor made the Shakti Nagar 
Special Area Development Authority (Cess on Mineral Rights) 
Rules, 1997, which were published on the same day in the U.P. 
Gazette and came into force.  Rule 2(b) and Rule 3(1) and (2), 
relevant for our purpose, are extracted and reproduced 
hereunder :
"2. In these rules, unless there is anything 
repugnant in the subject or context__
(a)		xxx			xxx			xxx
(b)  "Mineral Rights" means rights conferred on 
a lessee under a mining lease granted or 
renewed for mining operations in relation 
to Minerals (providing operation for 
raising, winning or extracting coal) as 
defined in the
Mines and Minerals 
(Regulation and Development) Act, 1957
(Act No.67 of 1957"
"3.(1) The Authority may, subject to sub-rules 
(2) and (3) impose a cess on mineral 
rights on such minerals and minor 
minerals and at such rates are specified 
below :
MINERAL/MINOR 
MINERAL
MINIMUM 
RATE
MAXIMUM
 RATE
(1) Cess on Coal
Rs.5.00
(per ton)
Rs.10.00
(per ton)
(2) Cess on Stone, 
Coarse Sind/Sand
Rs.2.00
(Per Cubic 
metre)
Rs.5.00
(Per Cubic 
metre)

(2) The rates shall not be less than the 
minimum rates or more than the maximum 
rates specified in sub-rule (1) and shall be 
determined by the Authority by a special 
resolution which shall be subject to 
confirmation by the State Government."
In exercise of the power conferred by the Act and the Rules, the 
State Government proceeded to levy cess and take steps for 
recovery thereof by serving notices and issuing citations on the 
several stone crushers (which the appellants are), who extract 
stone as mineral and convert the same into metal by a process 
of crushing.  They filed the writ petitions disputing the levy and 
the demand by the State Government.
On behalf of the writ-petitioners, the SADA Cess Rules as 
also the legislative competence of the State Legislature to enact
Section 35
of the SADA Act were challenged on the ground that 
the
MMDR Act, 1957
, having been enacted containing a 
declaration under
Section 2
as contemplated by Entry 54 of List-
I and the Act being applicable to Sonbhadra falling within the 
State of U.P. as well, the State Legislature was denuded of its 
power to enact the impugned law and levy the impugned cess.  
It was also submitted that the impugned cess would have the 
effect of adding to the royalty already being paid and thereby 
increasing the same, which was ultra vires the power of the 
State Government as that power was exercisable only by the 
Central Government.
The High Court has held the SADA Act, the SADA Cess 
Rules and the levy of cess thereunder within the competence of 
State Legislature by reference to Entry 5 in List II.
Reference to Constitution Bench
Since the appeals referable to coal matters and the writ 
petition referable to tea matters raised common issues, the 
cases were taken up for hearing together.  On 12.10.1999, the 
conflict amongst several decisions of this Court  was brought to 
the notice of the three-judges Bench hearing the matter which 
passed the following order :
"Great emphasis has been placed by 
learned counsel for the State of West Bengal 
upon the judgment of a Bench of three learned 
Judges in
Goodricke Group Ltd. & Ors. Vs. 
State of West Bengal & Ors.
[1995 Suppl. (1) 
SCC 707].
Quite apart from the fact that 
there are pending proceedings in this Court 
seeking to reconcile the judgment in Goodricke 
with that in
State of Orissa & Ors. V. Mahanadi 
Coalfields Ltd. & Ors.
[1995 Suppl.(2) SCC 
686], we find some difficulty in accepting as 
correct the view taken by Goodricke, 
particularly having regard to the earlier 
decision (of a Bench of two learned Judges) in 
Buxa Dooars Tea Co.Ltd. Vs. State of West 
Bengal [(1989) 3 SCC 211].  We think, 
therefore, that these matters should be heard 
by a Constitution bench.
The papers and proceedings may, 
accordingly, be placed before the Hon'ble Chief 
Justice for appropriate directions."
The brick-earth matters were also clubbed with the 
abovesaid matters for hearing.
The impugned judgment of the High Court of Allahabad in 
Minor Mineral Matters has placed reliance on the decision of this 
Court in
Goodricke Group Ltd. and Ors. Vs.  State of West 
Bengal and Ors.
- (1995) Supp. 1 SCC 707.  The correctness 
of
the said decision
was in issue in Civil Appeal Nos.1532-33 of 
1993 and batch matters and hence these appeals were also 
directed to be placed before the Constitution Bench for hearing.
This is how the four sets of matters have been listed 
before and heard by the Constitution Bench.
Relevant Entries and principles of interpretation
Before we proceed to examine the merits of the 
submissions and counter submissions made on behalf the 
parties, it will be useful to recapitulate and summarise a few 
principles relevant for interpreting entries classified and grouped 
into the three Lists of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.  
The law is legion on the point and the principles which are being 
briefly stated hereinafter are more than settled.  These principles 
are referred to in the several decisions which we shall be 
referring to hereinafter. So far as the principles are concerned 
they have been followed invariably in all the decisions, however 
diverse results have followed based on facts of individual cases 
and manner of application of such principles to the facts of those 
cases.
The relevant entries to which reference would be required 
to be made during the course of this judgment are extracted and 
reproduced herein:-
"SEVENTH SCHEDULE
(
Article 246
)

List I - Union List
52.  	Industries, the control of which by the 
Union is declared by Parliament by law to 
be expedient in the public interest.
54.	Regulation of mines and mineral 
development to the extent to which such 
regulation and development under the 
control of the Union is declared by 
Parliament by law to be expedient in the 
public interest.
96.	Fees in respect of any of the matters in 
this List, but not including fees taken in 
any court.
97.	Any other matter not enumerated in List 
II or List III including any tax not 
mentioned in either of those Lists.
List II - State List
23.	Regulation of mines and mineral 
development subject to the provisions of 
List I with respect to regulation and 
development under the control of the 
Union.
49.	Taxes on lands and buildings.
50.	Taxes on mineral rights subject to any 
limitations imposed by Parliament by law 
relating to mineral development.
66.	Fees in respect of any of the matter in 
this List, but not including fees taken in 
any court."
Article 245
of the Constitution is the fountain source of 
legislative power.  It provides - subject to the provisions of this 
Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the whole or any 
part of the territory of India, and the Legislature of a State may 
make laws for the whole or any part of the State.  The legislative 
field between the Parliament and the Legislature of any State is 
divided by
Article 246
of the Constitution.  Parliament has 
exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters 
enumerated in List I in Seventh Schedule, called the 'Union List'.  
Subject to the said power of the Parliament, the Legislature of 
any State has power to make laws with respect to any of the 
matters enumerated in List III, called the 'Concurrent List'. 
Subject to the abovesaid two, the Legislature of any State has 
exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters 
enumerated in List II, called the 'State List'.
Under
Article 248
the exclusive power of Parliament to make laws extends to any 
matter not enumerated in the Concurrent List or State List.  The 
power of making any law imposing a tax not mentioned in the 
Concurrent List or State List vests in Parliament.  This is what is 
called the residuary power vesting in Parliament.  The principles 
have been succinctly summarized and restated by a Bench of 
three learned Judges of this Court on a review of the available 
decisions in M/s.
Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. & Ors. Vs. 
State of Bihar & Ors.
, -  (1983)  4 SCC 45.  They are-
(1)	the various entries in the three Lists are not 'powers' of 
legislation but 'fields' of legislation.  The Constitution 
effects a complete separation of the taxing power of the 
Union and of the States under
Article 246.
There is no 
overlapping anywhere in the taxing power and the 
Constitution gives independent sources of taxation to the 
Union and the States.
(2)	In spite of the fields of legislation having been demarcated, 
the question of repugnancy between law made by 
Parliament and a law made by the State Legislature may 
arise only in cases when both the legislations occupy the 
same field with respect to one of the matters enumerated 
in the Concurrent List and a direct conflict is seen.  If there 
is a repugnancy due to overlapping found between List II 
on the one hand and List I and List III on the other, the 
State law will be ultra vires and shall have to give way to 
the Union law.
(3)	Taxation is considered to be a distinct matter for purposes 
of legislative competence.  There is a distinction made 
between general subjects of legislation and taxation.  The 
general subjects of legislation are dealt with in one group 
of entries and power of taxation in a separate group.  The 
power to tax cannot be deduced from a general legislative 
entry as an ancillary power.
(4)	The entries in the List being merely topics or fields of 
legislation, they must receive a liberal construction 
inspired by a broad and generous spirit and not in a 
narrow pedantic sense.  The words and expressions 
employed in drafting the entries must be given the widest 
possible interpretation.   This is because, to quote 
V.Ramaswami, J., the allocation of the subjects to the lists  
is not by way of scientific or logical definition but by way of 
a mere simplex enumeratio of broad categories. A power 
to legislate as to the principal matter specifically 
mentioned in the entry shall also include within its expanse 
the legislations touching incidental and ancillary matters.
(5)	Where the legislative competence of a Legislature of any 
State is questioned on the ground that it encroaches upon 
the legislative competence of Parliament to enact a law, 
the question one has to ask is whether the legislation 
relates to any of the entries in Lists I or III.  If it does, no 
further question need be asked and Parliament's legislative 
competence must be upheld.  Where there are three Lists 
containing a large number of entries, there is bound to be 
some overlapping among them.  In such a situation the 
doctrine of pith and substance has to be applied to 
determine as to which entry does a given piece of 
legislation relate.  Once it is so determined, any incidental 
trenching on the field reserved to the other Legislature is 
of no consequence. The Court has to look at the substance 
of the matter.  The doctrine of pith and substance is 
sometimes expressed in terms of ascertaining the true 
character of legislation.  The name given by the Legislature 
to the legislation is immaterial.  Regard must be had to the 
enactment as a whole, to its main objects and to the scope 
and effect of its provisions.  Incidental and superficial 
encroachments are to be disregarded.
(6)	The doctrine of occupied field applies only when there is a 
clash between the Union and the State Lists within an area 
common to both.  There the doctrine of pith and substance 
is to be applied and if the impugned legislation 
substantially falls within the power expressly conferred 
upon the Legislature which enacted it, an incidental 
encroaching in the field assigned to another Legislature is 
to be ignored.  While reading the three Lists, List I has 
priority over Lists III and II, and List III has priority over   
List II.  However, still, the predominance of the Union List 
would not prevent the State Legislature from dealing with 
any matter within List II though it may incidentally affect 
any item in List I.
(emphasis supplied)

Tax Legislation
The abovestated are general principles.  Legislations in the 
field of taxation and economic activities need special 
consideration and are to be viewed with larger flexibility in 
approach.  Observations of the Constitution Bench in
R.K. Garg 
Vs. Union of India & Ors.
, (1981) 4 SCC 676, are apposite, 
wherein this Court has emphasized a greater latitude - like play 
in the joints - being allowed to the Legislature because it has to 
deal with complex problems which do not admit of solution 
through any doctrinaire or straitjacket formula.  In this field the 
Court should feel more inclined to give judicial deference to 
legislative judgment.
Their Lordships quoted with approval the 
following statement of Frankfurter, J. in Morey Vs. Doud, 
(1957) 354 US 457:-
"In the utilities, tax and economic 
regulation cases, there are good reasons for 
judicial self-restraint if not judicial deference to 
legislative judgment.  The legislature after all 
has the affirmative responsibility.  The Courts 
have only the power to destroy, not to 
reconstruct.  When these are added to the 
complexity of economic regulation, the 
uncertainty, the liability to error, the 
bewildering conflict of the experts, and the 
number of times the judges have been 
overruled by events, self-limitation can be 
seen to be the path to judicial wisdom and 
institutional prestige and stability".
Their Lordships further observed that the Courts ought to adopt 
a pragmatic approach in solving problems rather than measuring 
the propositions by abstract symmetry.  The exact wisdom and 
nice adaptations of remedies may not be possible.  Even 
crudities and inequities have to be accommodated in complicated 
tax and economic legislations.
We now proceed to enter a deeper dimension in the field of 
tax legislation by considering the problem of devising the 
measure of taxation.  This aspect has been dealt with in detail in
Union of India & Ors. Vs. Bombay Tyre International Ltd.
, 
(1983) 4 SCC 210.
Tracing the principles from the leading 
authority of Re.: a reference under the Government of 
Ireland Act 1920 and
Section 3
of the Finance Act 
(Northern Ireland) 1934, (1936) A.C. 352, passing through
Ralla Ram Vs. Province of East Punjab
, 1948 FCR 207, and 
treading through the law as it has developed through judicial 
pronouncements one after the other, this Court has made subtle 
observations therein. It has been long recognized that the 
measure employed for assessing a tax must not be confused 
with the nature of the tax. A tax has two elements: first, the 
person, thing or activity on which the tax is imposed, and 
secondly, the amount of tax.  The amount may be measured in 
many ways; but a distinction between the subject matter of a 
tax and the standard by which the amount of tax is measured 
must not be lost sight of.  These are described respectively as 
the subject of a tax and the measure of a tax.  It is true that the 
standard adopted as a measure of the levy may be indicative of 
the nature of the tax, but it does not necessarily determine it.  
The nature of the mechanism by which the tax is to be assessed 
is not decisive of the essential characteristic of the particular tax 
charged, though it may throw light on the general character of 
the tax.
Here we may refer to certain illustrative cases of well 
settled authority - the authority which has not been shaken so 
far and has rather withstood the test of times.
Taxation - measure of levy not suggestive of nature of tax
- illustrative cases

	In
Ralla Ram
(supra) the Federal Court held that a tax on 
buildings under Section 3 of the Punjab Urban Immovable 
Property Tax Act, 1940, measured by a percentage of the annual 
value of such building, remained a tax on buildings even though 
the measure of annual value of a building was also adopted as a 
standard for determining income from property under the
Income Tax Act
.  The same standard was adopted as a measure 
for the two levies, yet the levies remained separate imposts by 
virtue of their distinctive nature. The measure adopted, it was 
held, could not be identified with the nature of the tax levied.
In M/s.
Sainik Motors, Jodhpur Vs. State of 
Rajasthan
, (1962) 1 SCR 517, a tax on passengers and goods 
was assessed as a rate on the fares and freights payable by the 
owners of the motor vehicles.  The contention that the levy was 
a tax upon income and not upon passengers and goods was 
repelled by this Court.  The Court pointed out that though the 
measure of the tax is furnished by the fares and freights it does 
not cease to be a tax on passengers and goods.
In
D.G. Gouse & Co. Vs. State of Kerala
, (1980) 2 SCC 
410, the Court examined the different modes available to the 
Legislature for measuring the levy of tax on buildings.  The Court 
upheld the provision made by the Legislature linking the levy 
with the annual value of the building and prescribing a uniformed 
formula for determining its capital value and for calculating the 
tax.
In
The Hingir-Rampur Coal Co. Ltd. Vs. State of 
Orissa
, (1961) 2 SCR 537, the form in which the levy was 
imposed was held to be an impermissible test for defining in 
itself the character of the levy.  It was argued that the method 
of determining the rate of levy was by reference to the minerals 
produced by the mines and, therefore, it was levy in the nature 
of a duty of excise.  This Court held that the method thus 
adopted may be relevant in considering the character of the 
impost but its effect must be weighed alongwith and in the light 
of the other relevant circumstances.
Referring to  Bombay 
Tyre International Ltd.
(supra), the
Court further held
that it 
is clear that when enacting a measure to serve as a standard for 
assessing the levy, the Legislature need not contour it along 
lines which spell out the character of the levy itself.  A broader 
based standard of reference is permissible to be adopted for the 
purpose of determining the measure of the levy.  Any standard 
which maintains a nexus with the essential character of the levy 
can be regarded as a valid basis for assessing the measure of 
the levy.
Meaning of 'Lands' - as used in Entry 49 in List II
	The word 'land' __ as used in Entry 49 in List II, came up 
for the consideration of this Court in
Anant Mills Vs. State of 
Gujarat
, (1975) 2 SCC 175.  It was held that the word 'land' 
cannot be assigned a narrow meaning so as to confine it to the 
surface of the earth.  It includes all strata above or below.  In 
other words, the word 'land' includes not only the surface of the 
earth but everything under or over it, and has in its legal 
significance an indefinite extent upward and downward.  The 
four-Judges' Bench upheld the validity of the law levying tax in 
respect of area occupied by underground lines by reference to 
Entry 49 in List II, holding it to be a tax on land only.
Ample authority is available for the concept that under 
Entry 49 in List II the land remains a land without regard to the 
use to which it is being subjected.  It is open for the Legislature 
to ignore the nature of the user and tax the land.  At the same 
time it is also permissible to identify, for the  purpose of 
classification, the land by reference to its user. While taxing the 
land it is open for the Legislature to consider the land which 
produces a particular growth or is useful for a particular utility 
and to classify it separately and tax the same.  Different pieces 
of land identically situated otherwise, but being subjected to 
different uses, or having  different potential, are capable of being 
classified separately without incurring the wrath of
Article 14
of 
the Constitution.  The Constitution Bench in Kunnathat 
Thathunni Moopil Nair etc. Vs. State of Kerala & Anr. 
(1961) 3 SCR 77, held that the land on which a forest stands is 
not to be excluded necessarily from Entry 49.  The erstwhile 
Entry 19 of Schedule II applied to 'forest'.  Their Lordships held 
that the use of the word 'forest' in Entry 19 could not be pressed 
into service to cut down the plain meaning of the word 'land' in 
Entry 49.  It was permissible to tax the land on which a forest 
stands by reference to Entry 49.
In
Ajoy Kumar Mukherjee 
Vs. Local Board of Barpeta
, (1965) 3 SCR 47, the appellant, a 
land holder, held a hatt (or market) on his land. The Local Board 
asked the appellant to take out a licence and pay Rs.600/-, later 
Rs.700/-, by way of licence fee for holding the market.  It was 
urged that the impost was unconstitutional, inter alia, on the 
ground that the tax was actually imposed on the market, which 
infringed
Article 14
of the Constitution, and also because the 
State Legislature had no legislative competence to tax a market.  
The Local Board relied on Entry 49 in List II.  The appellant 
urged that Entries 45 to 63 which deal with taxes do not 
contemplate a tax on markets.  Repelling the plea, the 
Constitution Bench held that the tax was on the land though the 
charges arise only when the land is used for a market.  The tax 
remained a tax on land in spite of the imposition being 
dependant upon the user of the land as a market.  The tax was 
an annual tax as contrasted to a tax for each day on which the 
market was held.  The owner or occupier of the land was 
responsible for payment of tax on an annual basis.  The amount 
of tax depended upon the area of the land on which the market 
was held and the importance of the market.  Thus, the tax was 
held to be a tax on land, though the incidence depended upon 
the use of the land as a market.
In
Vivian Joseph Ferreira & Anr. Vs. The Municipal 
Corporation of Greater Bombay & Ors.
, (1972) 1 SCC 70, the 
tax was confined to the residential tenanted buildings.  The 
classification was held to be valid.
In
The Government of 
Andhra Pradesh & Anr. Vs. Hindustan Machine Tools Ltd.
, 
(1975) 2 SCC 274, house tax was levied on the buildings.  The 
new definition of 'house' included 'a factory'.  However, the 
house tax was levied only on the building occupied by the factory 
and not on the machinery and furniture. The State Legislature 
claimed competence to do so under Entry 49, List II.  The power 
to tax a building, exercisable without reference to the use to 
which the building is put, was held to be valid.  In the opinion of 
the Court, it was irrelevant that the building was occupied by a 
factory which could not conduct its activities without the 
machinery and furniture.
Once it is held that the land or building is available to be 
taxed, it does not matter to what use the land is being subjected 
though the nature of the user may enable land of one particular 
user being classified separately from the land being subjected to 
another kind of user.  The tax would remain a tax on land.  It 
cannot be urged that what is being taxed is not the land but the 
nature of its user.  So also it is permissible to adopt myriad 
forms and methods of valuation for the purpose of quantifying 
the tax.
In
Ralla Ram  Vs.  The Province of East Punjabu
- 
1948 FCR 207, the Federal Court made it clear that every effort 
should be made as far as possible to reconcile the seeming 
conflict between the provisions of the Provincial Legislation and 
the Federal Legislation.  Unless the court forms an opinion that 
the extent of the alleged invasion by a Provincial Legislature into 
the field of the Federal Legislature is so great as would justify 
the view that in pith and substance the impugned tax is a tax 
within the domain of the Federal Legislature, the levy of tax 
would not be liable to be struck down.
The test
laid down in
Sir 
Byramjee Jeejeebhoy's case (AIR 1940 Bom 65) by the Full 
Bench of Bombay High Court was approved.
In Assistant Commissioner of Urban Land Tax Madras 
and Ors. etc.  Vs.  Buckingham and Carnatic Co. Ltd. etc. - 
(1969) 2 SCC 55, for the purpose of attracting the applicability 
of Entry 49 in List II, so as to cover the impugned levy of tax on 
lands and buildings, the Constitution Bench laid down twin tests, 
namely, (i) that such tax is directly imposed on lands and 
buildings, and (ii) that it bears a definite relation to it.  Once 
these tests were satisfied, it was open for the State Legislature, 
for the purpose of levying tax, to adopt the annual value or the 
capital value of the lands and buildings for determining the 
incidence of tax.  Merely, on account of such methodology 
having been adopted, the State Legislature cannot be accused of 
having encroached upon Entries 86, 87 or 88 of List I.  Entry 86 
in List I proceeds on the Principle of Aggregation and tax is 
imposed on the totality of the value of  all the assets.  It is quite 
permissible to separate lands and buildings for the purpose of 
taxation under Entry 49 in List II.  There is no reason for 
restricting the amplitude of the language used in the Entry 49 in 
List II.  The levy of tax, calculated at the rate of a certain per 
centum of the market value of the urban land was held to be 
intra vires the powers of the State Legislature and not trenching 
upon Entry 86 in List I.  So is the view taken by another 
Constitution Bench in Shri Prithvi Cotton Mills Ltd., etc.  Vs.  
Broach Borough Municipality and Ors., (1969) 2 SCC 283, 
where the submission that the levy was not a rate on lands and 
buildings as appropriately understood, but rather a tax on capital 
value  was discarded.
M/s. R.R. Engineering Co., etc. Vs. Zila Parishad, 
Bareilly and Anr. etc. - (1980) 3 SCC 330, is a case of 
circumstance and properties tax levied on the basis of income 
which the assessee receives from his profession, trade, calling or 
property.  The plea that the tax was a tax on income was 
discarded.  The test propounded by the Constitution Bench is 
that an excessive levy on circumstance may tend to blur the 
distinction between a tax on income and a tax on circumstances.  
Income will then cease to be a measure or yardstick of the tax 
and will become the very subject-matter of the tax.  Restraint in 
this behalf is a prudent prescription for the local authorities to 
follow.  The Constitution Bench observed that it was only a 
matter of convenience that income was adopted as a yardstick or 
measure for assessing the tax and the evolvement of such 
mechanism was not conclusive on the nature of tax.
We are inclined to make a reference to a few selected Full 
Bench decisions of different High Courts which have been cited 
with approval before this Court in many of the decisions to which 
we are making reference during the course of this judgment.
In
Sir Byramjee Jeejeebhoy  Vs.  Province of Bombay 
and Ors. - A.I.R.
1940 Bombay 65 (F.B.) the Provincial 
Government levied a tax at the rate of 5%  of the annual letting 
value in the City of Bombay on the buildings and lands.  The 
buildings were classified by reference to their annual letting 
value, and exception from payment of tax was also carved out in 
favour of such buildings as remained vacant and unproductive of 
rent for the specified period.  It was urged that the impugned 
tax purported or desired to tax the value.  Placing reliance on 
the Federal Court's decision in  'In Re: C. P. Motor Spirit Act , 
1939' (1939 FCR 18) Chief Justice Beaumont held that the 
impugned tax was a tax on lands and buildings.  Three 
submissions were made in support of the challenge: (i) that the 
tax is graded by reference to the annual value of the property 
charged, (ii) that an allowance was available to be made in 
respect of vacant properties,  and (iii) that the basis of the tax 
was the same as the basis on which tax on income from property 
was imposed by
Sections 6
and
9
of Income Tax Act and, 
therefore in reality the rate was a tax on income.  Beaumont, 
C.J. held that regard must be had to the pith and substance of 
the impugned tax and not merely to the form.  All the items in 
the Provincial List must be so construed as to exclude taxes on 
income.  The tax is charged on lands and buildings and it is 
based on the estimated rent which the property would fetch.  
Such a value may bear very little relation to the actual income of 
the property.  It is imposed without any relation to the capital 
value except insofar as such value can be ascertained by 
reference to the rateable value.  It did not make any difference if 
the arbitrary basis which was adopted for the purpose of the rate 
might as well be applied for ascertaining the capital value as for 
ascertaining income.  The fact that some concession is allowed 
to the small owner, a concession which may be based as much 
on political as on economic considerations and that an allowance 
may be made where the property is shown to produce no 
income, a fact which may be taken to show that the estimated 
value was found to be erroneous, cannot alter the nature of the 
tax.  The concept that in case of conflict between the Federal List 
and Provincial List, an entry in the Federal List may be given a 
more restricted meaning, was endorsed.  The legality of the levy 
was upheld.
In
District Board of Farrukhabad  Vs.  Prag Dutt and 
Ors.
- AIR 1948 Allahabad 382 (F.B.), a tax on 'circumstances 
and property' was under challenge.  It was urged that it was a 
tax on income.  Chief Justice Malik held that the fundamental 
difference between the tax on 'income' and a tax on 
'circumstances and property' is that income tax can only be 
levied if there is income and if there is no income, no tax is 
payable.  But in the case of 'circumstances and property' tax, 
where a man's status has to be determined, his total business 
turnover may be considered for purposes of taxation, though he 
may not have earned any taxable income.
The State of Punjab Vs. The Union of India
through 
the Secrtary to Government Finance Department, 
Government of India, New Delhi - AIR 1971 Punjab & 
Haryana 155 (F.B.), is a Five-Judges Bench decision delivered by 
Chief Justice Harbans Singh.  Conflict was noticed between List I, 
Entry 86 and List II, Entry 49.  Dealing with the scope of Entry 
49 in List II, it was held that it empowers the State Legislatures 
to directly tax lands and buildings, and for determining the basis 
of the tax the State Legislature may take either the area, annual 
rental value, market value or the capital value of the land as a 
basis for calculating and quantifying the tax on land.  Merely 
because tax was calculated on the basis of annual rental value, it  
will not turn it into a tax on income, and if it is based on capital 
value, it will not turn it into a tax on capital value.
Yet another angle which the Constitutional Courts would 
advisedly do better to keep in view while dealing with a tax 
legislation, in the light of the purported conflict between the 
powers of the Union and the State to legislate, which was stated 
forcefully and which was logically based on an analytical 
examination of constitutional scheme by Jeevan Reddy, J. in
S.R. Bomai and Ors. Vs. Union of India
, (1994) 3 SCC 1,  
may be touched.  Our Constitution has a federal structure.  
Several provisions of the Constitution unmistakably show that 
the Founding Fathers intended to create a strong centre.  The 
historical background relevant at the time of the framing of the 
Constitution warranted a strong centre naturally and necessarily.  
This bias of the framers towards the centre is found reflected in 
the distribution of legislative heads between the Centre and the 
States.  More important heads of legislation are placed in List I.  
In the Concurrent List the parliamentary enactment is given 
primacy, irrespective of the fact whether such enactment is 
earlier or later in point of time to a State enactment on the same 
subject matter.  The residuary power to legislate is with the 
Centre.  By the Forty-second Amendment a few of the entries in 
List II were omitted or transferred to other lists.
Articles 249
to 
252 further demonstrate the primacy of Parliament, allowing it 
liberty to encroach on the field meant exclusively for the State 
legislation though subject to certain conditions being satisfied.  
In the matter of finances, the States appear to have been placed 
in a less favourable position.  True, the Centre has been given 
more powers but the same is accompanied by certain additional 
responsibilities as well.  The Constitution is an organic living 
document.  Its outlook and expression as perceived and 
expressed by the interpreters of the Constitution must be 
dynamic and keep pace with the changing times.  Though the 
basics and fundamentals of the Constitution remain unalterable, 
the interpretation of the flexible provisions of the Constitution 
can be accompanied by dynamism and lean, in case of conflict, 
in favour of the weaker or the one who is more needy.  Several 
taxes are collected by the Centre and allocation of revenue is 
made to States from time to time.  The Centre consuming the 
lion's share of revenue has attracted good amount of criticism at 
the hands of the States and financial experts.  The interpretation 
of Entries can afford to strike a balance, or at least try to remove 
imbalance, so far as it can.  Any conscious whittling down of the 
powers of the State can be guarded against by the Courts. "Let it 
be said that the federalism in the Indian Constitution is not a 
matter of administrative convenience, but one of principle - the 
outcome of our own historical process and a recognition of the 
ground realities."   Quoting from M.C. Setalvad, Tagore Law 
Lectures "Union and State relations under the Indian 
Constitution" ( Eastern Law House, Calcutta, 1974), Jeevan 
Reddy, J. observed - "It is enough to note that our Constitution 
has certainly a bias towards the Centre vis-`-vis the States.......It 
is equally necessary to emphasise that Courts should be careful 
not to upset the delicately-crafted constitutional scheme by a 
process of interpretation."
The Conflict - a cautious evaluation of "India Cement"
We will now refer to and deal with those cases which have 
led to the three learned Judges of this Court, placing the matter 
for consideration by a Constitution Bench.  We would refer to the 
cases mentioned in the order of reference and also to those 
cases which were heavily relied upon on behalf of the 
respondents, disputing the validity of the impugned tax.  
Immediately, we take up India Cement.
In
India Cement Ltd. and Ors.  Vs. State of Tamil 
Nadu and Ors.
- (1990)  1 SCC 12, what was impugned was a 
levy of cess on  royalty and the question was, whether such cess 
on royalty is within the competence of the State Legislature.  
The appellant was required to pay, by the Madras Panchayats 
Act, 1958, local cess at the rate of 45 paise per rupee of the 
royalty already being paid.  The question formulated by the 
Court, as arising for decision was : is cess on royalty a demand 
of land revenue or additional royalty?  The Court found that the 
royalty was payable by the appellant as prescribed under the 
lease deed.  The rates of the royalty were fixed under the
Mines 
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957
, which is 
a Central Act, passed under Entry 54 in List I, by which the 
control of mines and minerals has been taken over by the 
Central Government.    The State Legislature sought  to justify 
and sustain the levy by reference to Entry 49, 50 or 45 in List II.  
Cess is a tax and is generally used when the levy is for some 
special administrative expense, suggested by the name of the 
cess, such as health cess, education cess, road cess etc.  This is 
a well-settled position of law.  The levy was sought to be 
justified under Entry 45 in List II by including it within the 
meaning of land revenue, and in the alternative under Entry 49 
in List II as tax on lands.  The challenge to the constitutional 
validity of the levy was upheld.  We would briefly state the 
reasoning which prevailed with the learned Judges.
G.L. Oza, J. delivered a separate concurring opinion.  The 
majority opinion expressed through Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. (as 
his Lordship then was),  first clarified the distinction between 
'royalty' and 'land revenue'.  'Land revenue' is connotative of the 
share in the produce of land which the king or the Government is 
entitled to receive.  'Royalty' is a charge payable on the 
extraction of minerals from the land.  A cess on royalty cannot, 
therefore, be called additional land revenue and as such the 
State was disabled from imposing tax on royalty.  There is a 
clear distinction between 'tax directly on land' and 'tax on 
income arising from land'.  Royalty is indirectly connected with 
land and a cess on royalty cannot be called a tax directly on land 
as a unit.  The levy could also not be sustained under Entry 50 in 
List II which deals with taxes on mineral rights subject to 
limitation imposed by Parliament relating to mineral 
development.  Assuming that the tax in pith and substance fell 
to Entry 50 in List II, it would be controlled by a legislation under 
Entry 54 in List I.

A  Division  Bench decision  of  Mysore  High Court in  M/s
Laxminarayana Mining Co., Bangalore and Anr. Vs. Taluk 
Development Board and Anr.
- AIR 1972 Mysore 299 was 
cited with approval in India Cement.  The Mysore High Court 
struck down as violative of
MMDR Act, 1957
a licence fee on 
mining manganese or iron ore etc. imposed by a State 
Legislation.  A perusal of the judgment of the Mysore High Court 
shows that the impost was by way of licence fee on the mining 
of certain minerals.  Regulation and development of mines and 
minerals was undertaken by the Central Legislation and 
therefore the power of the State Legislature  under Entries 23 
and 52 in List-II got denuded in the field of regulation and 
development covered by the Central Legislation.  The Division 
Bench vide para 6 held "it is therefore clear that to the extent 
the Central Act makes provision regarding the regulation and 
development of minerals, the powers of the State Legislatures 
under Entry 23 of List II stand curtailed". The State Government 
had sought to defend the licence fee on the ground that it was in 
the nature of a tax and not a licence fee.  This plea has been 
specifically noted by the High Court and dealt with.  However, 
what is significant to note is the revelation, made by careful 
reading of the judgment, that provision for licence fee was made 
in the Central Legislation and licence fee was sought to be 
imposed by the State too.  In fact, the licence fee was a step 
trenching upon the field of regulation and therefore was liable to 
be struck down on this ground alone.  Yet, another reasoning 
which prevailed with the High Court was that Section 143 of the 
State Act, which was not inconsistent with the Central Act, was 
relied on by the State Government as conferring power on it to 
levy the impugned licence fee.  On that plea the High Court 
formed an opinion that on the framing of Section 143 of the 
State Act it did not in express terms authorize a levy of fee or 
tax.    The High Court observed - "It (Section 143) cannot also 
be construed as conferring such a power on the respondents to 
levy a tax or fee on mining, in view of the well-settled and 
statutory construction that a Court construing a provision of law 
must presume that the intention of the authority in making it 
was not to exceed its power but to enact it validly".  The ratio of 
the decision of the Mysore High Court is that provision for 
licenses and license fees, operating in the field of regulation of 
mines and minerals is not available to be made by State 
legislation - in view of the declaration in terms of Entry 54 in List 
I.  

In our view, the decision by Mysore High Court cannot be 
read so widely as laying down the law that Union's power to 
regulate and control results in depriving the States of their 
power to levy tax or fee within their legislative competence 
without trenching upon the field of regulation and control.  There 
is a distinction between power to regulate and control and power 
to tax, the two being distinct and that difference has not been 
kept in view by the Mysore High Court.
(A diversion from main issue) Royalty, if tax?
	We would like to avail this opportunity for pointing out an 
error, attributable either to a stenographer's devil or to sheer 
inadvertence, having crept into the majority judgment in
India 
Cement Ltd.
's case (supra).  The error is apparent and only 
needs a careful reading to detect.
We feel constrained - rather 
duty-bound - to say so, lest a reading of the judgment 
containing such an error - just an error of one word - should 
continue to cause the likely embarrassment and have adverse 
effect on the subsequent judicial pronouncements which would 
follow
India Cement Ltd.
's case, feeling bound and rightly, by
the said judgment
having the force of pronouncement by seven- 
Judges Bench.  Para 34 of the report reads as under :
"In the aforesaid view of the matter, we are of 
the opinion that royalty is a tax, and as such a 
cess on royalty being a tax on royalty, is 
beyond the competence of the State legislature 
because Section 9 of the Central Act covers the 
field and the State legislature is denuded of its 
competence under Entry 23 of List II.  In any 
event, we are of the opinion that cess on 
royalty cannot be sustained under Entry 49 of 
List II as being a tax on land.  Royalty on 
mineral rights is not a tax on land but a 
payment for the user of land."
(underlining by us)
	
In the first sentence the word 'royalty' occurring in the 
expression - 'royalty is a tax', is clearly an error.  What the 
majority wished to say, and has in fact said, is - 'cess on royalty 
is a tax'.  The correct words to be printed in the judgment should 
have been 'cess on royalty' in place of 'royalty' only.  The words 
'cess on' appear to have been inadvertently or erroneously 
omitted while typing the text of judgment.  This is clear from 
reading the judgment in its entirety.  Vide para 22 and 31, which 
precede  para 34 above said, their Lordships have held that 
'royalty' is not a tax.  Even the last line of para 34 records 
'royalty on mineral rights is not a tax on land but a payment for 
the user of land'.  The very first sentence of the para records in 
quick succession '......as such a cess on royalty being a tax on 
royalty, is beyond the competence of the State legislature....'.  
What their Lordships have intended to record is '......that cess on 
royalty is a tax, and as such a cess on royalty being a tax on 
royalty is beyond the competence of the State Legislature.....'.  
That makes correct and sensible reading.  A doubtful expression 
occurring in a judgment, apparently by mistake or inadvertence, 
ought to be read by assuming that the Court had intended to say 
only that which is correct according to the settled position of law, 
and the apparent error should be ignored, far from making any 
capital out of it, giving way to the correct expression which 
ought to be implied or necessarily read in the context, also 
having regard to what has been said a little before and a little 
after.  No learned Judge would consciously author a judgment 
which is self-inconsistent or incorporates passages repugnant to 
each other.  Vide para 22, their Lordships have clearly held that 
there is no entry in Schedule II which enables the State to 
impose a tax on royalty and, therefore, the State was 
incompetent to impose such a tax (cess).  The cess which has an 
incidence of an additional charge on royalty and not a tax on 
land, cannot apparently be justified as falling under Entry 49 in 
List II.
It is of significance for the issue before us, to determine 
the nature of royalty and whether it is a tax, and if not, then, 
what it is.  Until the pronouncement of this Court in
India 
Cement
(supra), it has been the uniform and unanimous judicial 
opinion that royalty is not a tax.
First we will refer to certain dictionaries oft-cited in courts 
of law.
Words and Phrases, Permanent Edition (Vol.37A, page
597)-
""Royalty" is the share of the produce reserved 
to owner for permitting another to exploit and 
use property.  The word "royalty" means 
compensation paid to landlord by occupier of 
land for species of occupation allowed by 
contract between them.  "Royalty" is a share of 
the product or profit (as of a mine, forest, etc.) 
reserved by the owner for permitting another 
to use his property."
Stroud's Judicial Dictionary of Words and Phrases 
(Sixth Edition, 2000, Vol.3, page 2341) -
"the word "royalties" signifies, in mining 
leases, that part of the reddendum which is 
variable, and depends upon the quantity of 
minerals gotten or the agreed payment to a 
patentee on every article made according to 
the patent.  Rights or privileges for which 
remuneration is payable in the form of a 
royalty"
Words and Phrases, Legally Defined (Third Edition, 
1990, Vol.4, page 112) -
"A royalty, in the sense in which the word is 
used in connection with mining leases, is a 
payment to the lessor proportionate to the 
amount of the demised mineral worked within 
a specified period"
Wharton's Law Lexicon (Fourteenth Edition, page 893) -
"Royalty, payment to a patentee by 
agreement on every article made according to 
his patent; or to an author by a publisher on 
every copy of his book sold; or to the owner of 
minerals for the right of working the same on 
every ton or other weight raised."
Mozley & Whiteley's Law Dictionary (Eleventh Edition, 
1993, page 243) -
"A pro rata payment to a grantor or lessor, on 
the working of the property leased, or 
otherwise on the profits of the grant of lease.  
The word is especially used in reference to 
mines, patents and copyrights."
Prem's Judicial Dictionary (1992, Vol.2, page 1458) -
"royalties are payments which the Government 
may demand for the appropriation of minerals, 
timber or other property belonging to the 
Government.  Two important features of 
royalty have to be noticed, they are, that the 
payment made for the privilege of removing 
the articles is in proportion to the quantity 
removed, and the basis of the payment is an 
agreement."
Black's Law Dictionary (Seventh Edition, p.1330) -
"Royalty - A share of the product or profit from 
real property, reserved by the grantor of a 
mineral lease, in exchange for the lessee's 
right to mine or drill on the land.
Mineral Royalty : A right to a share of income 
from mineral production."
In D.K. Trivedi & Sons. &
Ors. Vs. State of Gujarat & 
Ors.
, 1986 (Supp) SCC 20, a Bench of two learned Judges of 
this Court dealt with "rent", "royalty" and "dead rent" and held 
as follows.  Rent is an integral part of the concept of a lease.  It 
is the consideration from the lessee to the lessor for the demise 
of the property to him.  In a mining lease the consideration 
usually moving from the lessee to the lessor is the rent of the 
area leased (often called surface rent), dead rent and royalty.  
Since the mining lease confers upon the lessee the right not 
merely to enjoy the property as under an ordinary lease but also 
to extract minerals from the land and to appropriate them for his 
own use or benefit, in addition to the usual rent for the area 
demised, the lessee is required to pay a certain amount in 
respect of the minerals extracted proportionate to the quantity 
so extracted.  Such payment is called "royalty".  It may, 
however, be that the mine is not worked properly so as not to 
yield enough return to the lessor in the shape of royalty.  In 
order to ensure for the lessor a regular income, regardless of 
whether the mine is worked or not, a fixed amount is provided to 
be paid to him by the lessee.  This is called "dead rent".  "Dead 
rent" is calculated on the basis of the area leased while "royalty" 
is calculated on the quantity of minerals extracted or removed.  
Thus, while dead rent is a fixed return to the lessor, royalty is a 
return which varies with the quantity of minerals extracted or 
removed.  Since dead rent and royalty are both a return to the 
lessor in respect of the area leased, looked at from one point of 
view dead rent can be described as the minimum guaranteed 
amount of royalty payable to the lessor but calculated on the 
basis of the area leased, and not on the quantity of minerals 
extracted or removed.
In
H.R.S. Murthy Vs. Collector of 
Chittor
, (1964) 6 SCR 666, too the Constitution Bench of this 
Court had defined Royalty to mean 'the payment made for the 
materials or minerals won from the land'.
The judicial opinion as prevailing amongst the High Courts 
may be noticed.  A Full Bench of the High Court of Orissa held in
Laxmi Narayan Agarwalla & Ors. Vs. State of Orissa & 
Ors.
, AIR 1983 Orissa 210, 'Royalty is the payment made for the 
minerals extracted; it is not tax'.
In Surajdin Laxmanlal  Vs.  
State of M.P., Nagpur and Ors. - AIR 1960 M.P. 129, a 
Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh referred to 
the Wharton's Law Lexicon and Mozley & Whiteley's Law 
Dictionary and said - "royalties are payments which the 
Government may demand for the appropriation of minerals, 
timber or other property belonging to the Government."  The 
High Court opined that there are two important features of 
royalty: (i) the payment is in proportion to the quantity 
removed; and (ii) the basis of the payment is an agreement.
Drawing a distinction between 'royalty' and 'tax', a Division 
Bench of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana High Court held 
in
Dr. Shanti Saroop Sharma and Anr.  Vs.  State of Punjab 
and Ors.
- AIR 1969 Punjab & Haryana 79 as under -
"if a person is merely in occupation of land 
which contains minor minerals, he is not liable 
to pay any royalty, but it is only when he holds 
a mining lease and by virtue of that extracts 
one or more minor minerals that he is called 
upon to pay royalty to the Government where 
the lease is in respect of the land in which 
minor minerals vest in the Government.   
Royalty thus has its basis in the contract.  For 
payment to the owner of the minerals for the 
privilege of extracting the minor minerals 
computed on the basis of the quantity actually 
extracted and removed from the leased area.  
It is more akin to rent or compensation 
payable to an owner by the occupier or lessee 
of land for its use or exploitation of the 
resources contained therein.  Merely because 
the provision with regard to royalty is made by 
virtue of the rules relating to the regulation of 
the mining leases and a uniform rate is 
prescribed, it does not follow that it is a 
compulsory exaction in the nature of tax or 
impost."
A Division Bench of Gujarat High Court in
Saurashtra 
Cement & Chemical Industries Ltd., Ranavav  Vs.  Union of 
India and Anr.
- AIR 1979 Gujarat 180, emphatically said -
"royalty may not be a fee but it is not a tax.  It 
is a payment for the mineral which is removed 
or consumed by the holder of the mining lease.  
The minerals themselves, - the property 
beneath the soil - belong to the Union.  When 
the holder of a mining lease removes these 
minerals or consumes them, he can do so only 
on payment of its price or value.  Therefore, 
royalty is a share which the Union claims in the 
minerals which have been won from the soil by 
the lessee and which otherwise belong to it.  
Royalty is a share in such minerals and not a 
tax in the form of a compulsory exaction.  It is 
not compulsory because anyone who applies 
for a mining lease to win minerals for being 
removed or consumed must pay its price.  If 
he does not want to pay the price, he may not 
apply for a mining lease.  Royalty which is a 
share of the owner of the minerals - the Union
- won by the lessee from the soil with the 
authority of the Union can never be said to be 
an imposition on the holder of a mining lease.
We need not further multiply the authorities.  Suffice it to 
say that until the pronouncement in India Cement, nobody 
doubted the correctness of 'royalty' not being a tax.
Such has been the position even subsequent to the 
pronouncement in India Cement.
In
Inderjeet Singh Sial & Anr.  Vs.  Karam Chand 
Thapar & Ors.
- (1995) 6 SCC 166, a Bench of two learned 
judges held that -
"In its primary and natural sense 'royalty', in 
the legal world, is known as the equivalent or 
translation of jura regalia or jura regia.  Royal 
rights and prerogatives of a sovereign are 
covered thereunder.  In its secondary sense 
the word 'royalty' would signify, as in mining 
leases, that part of the reddendum, variable 
though, payable in cash or kind, for rights and 
privileges obtained.  It is found in the clause of 
the deed by which the grantor reserves 
something to himself out of that which he 
grants.  It may even be a clause reserving rent 
in a lease, whereby the lessor reserves 
something for himself out of that which he 
grants."
In
Ajit Singh  Vs.  Union of India & Ors.
- 1995 Supp. 
(4) SCC 224, another Bench of two learned Judges held that the 
grant of mining lease involves grant of a privilege by the State.  
In both these decisions India Cement's is not noticed.
In
Quarry Owners' Association  Vs.  State of Bihar & 
Ors.
- (2000) 8 SCC 655, a Bench of two learned Judges was 
faced with a submission, based on India Cement and 
subsequent decisions following it, that royalty is a tax.  The 
learned Judges found it difficult to accept the concept but tried 
to wriggle out of the situation by observing -
"royalty includes the price for the consideration 
of parting with the right and privilege of the 
owner, namely, the State Government who 
owns the mineral.  In other words, the 
royalty/dead rent, which a lessee or licensee 
pays, includes the price of the minerals which 
are the property of the State.  Both royalty and 
dead rent are integral parts of a lease.  Thus, it 
does not constitute usual tax as commonly 
understood but includes return for the 
consideration for parting with its property."
In India Cement (vide para 31, SCC) decisions of four 
High Courts holding 'Royalty is not tax' have been noted without 
any adverse comment.  Rather, the view seems to have been 
noted with tacit approval.  Earlier (vide para 21, SCC) the 
connotative  meaning of royalty being 'share in the produce of 
land' has been noted.  But for the first sentence (in para 34, 
SCC) which we find to be an apparent error, no where else has 
the majority judgment held royalty to be a tax.
How the abovenoted inadvertent error in India Cement 
has resulted into throwing on the loop line the movement of later 
case law on this point may be noticed.
In
State of M.P. Vs. 
Mahalaxmi Fabric Mills Ltd. and Ors.
- 1995 Supp. (1) SCC 
642 (decision by a Bench of three learned Judges) and 
Saurashtra Cement and Chemicals Industries and Anr. 
etc.etc. Vs. Union of India and Ors. - (2001) 1 SCC 91 
(decision by a Bench of two learned Judges) para 34 (from SCC) 
in India Cement has been quoted verbatim and dealt with.
In
Mahalaxmi Fabric Mills Ltd. and Ors.
's case (supra), the 
Court noticed several dictionaries defining royalty and also the 
decisions of High Courts available and stated that traditionally 
speaking royalty is an amount which is paid under contract of 
lease by the lessee to the lessor, namely, the State 
Governments concerned and it is commensurate with the quality 
of minerals extracted.  But then (vide para 12), the Court felt 
bound by the view taken in India Cement, reiterated in Orissa 
Cement, to hold that royalty is a tax. The point that there was 
apparently a 'typographical error' in para 34 in India Cement 
was specifically raised but was rejected.
In
Saurashtra 
Cement and Chemicals Industries and Anr.
(supra) too the 
Court felt itself bound by the decision in
Mahalaxmi Fabric 
Mills Ltd. and Ors
(supra), backed by India Cement, and 
therefore held royalty to be tax.
We have clearly pointed out the said error, as we are fully 
convinced in that regard and feel ourselves obliged 
constitutionally, legally and morally to do so, lest the said error 
should cause any further harm to the trend of jurisprudential 
thought centering  around the meaning of 'royalty'.  We hold 
that royalty is not tax.  Royalty is paid to the owner of land who 
may be a private person and may not necessarily be State.  A 
private person owning the land is entitled to charge royalty but 
not tax.  The lessor receives royalty as his income and for the 
lessee the royalty paid is an expenditure incurred.  Royalty 
cannot be tax.  We declare that even in India Cement it was 
not the finding of the Court that royalty is a tax.  A statement 
caused by an apparent typographical or inadvertent error in a 
judgment of the Court should not be misunderstood as 
declaration of such law by the Court.  We also record our 
express dissent with that part of the judgment in Mahalaxmi 
Fabric Mills Ltd. and Ors. which says (vide para 12 of SSC 
report) that there was no 'typographical error' in India Cement 
and that the said conclusion that royalty is a tax logically flew 
from the earlier paragraphs of the judgment.
Inter-relationship of Schedule I Entry 54 and Schedule II 
Entry 23
	
With the abovesaid reflection of ours on clarifying India 
Cement, clarification now we proceed to examine the the inter-
relationship of Schedule I Entry 54 and Schedule II Entry 23 
which have been quoted and reproduced in the earlier part of 
this judgment.
Conflict in Entries (in the three Lists in Seventh Schedule)
	The analysis of decided cases as made by eminent 
constitutional jurist H.M. Seervai in his work on Constitutional 
Law of India (Fourth/Silver Jubilee Edition, Vol.3) is apposite. 
Vide para 22.168, he states __ "In Gov.-Gen. in
Council Vs. 
Madras
, 1945 FCR 179, the Privy Council laid down important 
principles for interpreting apparently conflicting legislative 
entries in general, and apparently conflicting tax entries in 
particular.  The Privy Council held, first, that though a tax in List 
I (e.g. a duty of excise) and a tax in List II (e.g. a tax on the 
sale of goods) of the
Government of India Act, 1935
,  may 
overlap, in fact there would  be no overlapping in law, if the 
taxes were separate and distinct imposts; secondly, that the 
machinery of tax collection did not affect the real nature of a tax.  
Another principle for reconciling apparently conflicting tax entries 
follows from the fact that a tax has two elements : the person, 
thing or activity on which the tax is imposed, and the amount of 
the tax.  The amount may be measured in many ways; but 
decided cases establish a clear distinction between the subject 
matter of a tax and the standard by which the amount of tax is 
measured.  These two elements are described as the subject of a 
tax and the measure of a tax.
In
D.G. Gouse Vs. Kerala
- 
(1980) 2 SCC 410, which is considered later, the above passage 
was quoted with approval by the Supreme Court as stating 
precisely the two elements involved in almost all tax cases, 
namely, the subject of a tax and the  measure of a tax."
It is necessary to examine the scheme underlying the 
Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.  We are relieved of the 
need of embarking upon any maiden voyage in this direction in 
view of the availability of a Constitution Bench decision in
M.P.V. 
Sundararamier & Co. Vs. The State of Andhra Pradesh & 
Anr.
, (1958) SCR 1422. Venkatarama Aiyar, J., speaking for the 
Constitution Bench, traced the history of legislations preceding 
the Constitution, analysed the scheme underlying the division of 
legislative powers between the Centre and the States and then 
succinctly summed up the quintessence of the analysis.  It was 
held, inter alia:
1.	In List I, Entries 1 to 81 mention the 
several matters over which Parliament has 
authority to legislate.  Entries 82 to 92 
enumerate the taxes which could be imposed 
by a law of Parliament.  An examination of 
these two groups of Entries shows that while 
the main subject of legislation figures in the 
first group; a tax in relation thereto is 
separately mentioned in the second.
2.	In  List II, Entries 1 to 44 form one 
group mentioning the subjects on which the 
States could legislate. Entries 45 to 63 in that 
List form another group, and they deal with 
taxes.
3.	Taxation is not intended to be comprised 
in the main subject in which it might on an 
extended construction be regarded as included, 
but is treated as a distinct matter for purposes 
of legislative competence.  And this distinction 
is also manifest in the language of
Art.248
, 
Cls.(1) and (2) and of Entry 97 in List I of the 
Constitution. Under the scheme of the Entries 
in the Lists, taxation is regarded as a distinct 
matter and is separately set out.
4.	The entries in the Legislative Lists must 
be construed broadly and not narrowly or in a 
pedantic manner.
5.	The entries in the two Lists - List I and II
- must be construed, if possible, so as to avoid 
conflict.  Faced with a suggested conflict 
between entries in List I and List II, what has 
first to be decided is whether there is any 
conflict.  If there is none, the question of 
application of the non-obstante clause 'subject 
to' does not arise.  And, if there be conflict, the 
correct approach to the question is to see 
whether it was possible to effect a 
reconciliation between the two Entries so as to 
avoid a conflict and overlapping.
Illustration
 
If it is possible to construe Entry 42 in 
List I as not including tax on inter-state sales it 
should be so construed and the power to levy 
such tax must be held to be included in Entry 
54 in List II (Entries as they existed pre-Forty 
Second Amendment, 1976) (See: Governor 
General in Council  Vs.  Province of Madras
- AIR 1945 PC 98, and Province of Madras  
Vs.  Bodder Paidenna & Sons - AIR 1942 FC
33)
6.	In the event of a dispute arising it should 
be determined by applying the doctrine of pith 
and substance to find out whether between 
two Entries assigned to two different 
legislatures the particular subject of the 
legislation falls within the ambit of the one or 
the other.  Where there is a clear and  
irreconcilable conflict of jurisdiction between 
the Centre and a provincial legislature it is the 
law of the Centre that must prevail.
[underlining by us]
Referring to M.P.V. Sundararamier & Co.
(supra) 
Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. (as his Lordship then was) speaking for 
six out of the seven Judges constituting the Bench in
Synthetics 
and Chemicals Ltd. & Ors.  Vs.  State of U.P. & Ors.
- 
(1990) 1 SCC 109 held that under the constitutional scheme of 
division of powers in the Seventh Schedule, there are separate 
entries pertaining to taxation and other laws.  A tax cannot be 
levied under a general entry.
The abovesaid principles continue to hold the field and 
have been followed in cases after cases.
General power of 'Regulation and Control' does not 
include power of taxation
 	
 	One thing, which too is well settled by a series of decisions 
is that the power of "regulation and control" is separate and 
distinct from the power of taxation.  How this principle has been 
applied in myriad situations may be illustratively noticed.
The Constitution Bench in The Hingir-Rampur Coal 
Co.Ltd. &
Ors. Vs. The State of Orissa & Ors.
etc. - (1961) 2 
SCR 537, was faced with a challenge to the constitutional validity 
of the Orissa Mining Areas Development Fund Act, 1952.  The 
petitioner-company was engaged in producing and selling coal 
excavated from its collieries at Rampur in the State of Orissa.
The Act
and the Rules framed and the notification issued 
thereunder levied the payment of cess on the petitioner's 
Rampur Colliery.  The cause of action had arisen to the petitioner 
therein on account of the communications made to the company 
in March 1959 calling  upon them to file monthly returns for the 
assessment of the cess which was levied by issuance of a 
notification dated June 24, 1958.
The challenge to the constitutional validity of the levy 
imposed by the impugned Act came to be examined by reference 
to Entry 54 in List I read with the
Mines and Minerals (Regulation 
and Development) Act, 1948
(Act No. 53 of 1948) as also by 
reference to Entry 52 in List I read with the
Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951
(Act No.65 of 1951).  
On behalf of the State of Orissa, the levy was defended as a fee 
relatable to Entries 23 and 66 in List II.  The Constitution Bench 
entered into an enquiry as to what is the primary object of the 
levy and the essential purpose which it is intended to achieve.  It 
was observed that its primary object and the essential purpose 
must be distinguished from its ultimate or incidental results  or 
consequences, as that is the true test in determining the 
character of the levy.  The submission that the impugned levy 
could be either duty of excise or tax, was dismissed.  The 
Constitution Bench held that the form in which the levy is 
imposed and the extent of the levy, i.e., being too high, do not 
alter the character of the levy from a fee into that of a duty of 
excise.  The Constitution Bench laid down the features which 
would distinguish excise from a tax or fee and also the features  
which distinguish a tax from   a fee though there is no  generic  
difference in a tax and a fee, both being compulsory exactions of 
money by public authorities.
The scheme of the impugned Orissa Act was examined in-
depth and their Lordships found that the cess levied by the 
impugned Act was a fee.
The Act
was passed for the purpose of 
the development of mining areas in the State.  Orissa is a poor 
State carrying in its womb a lot of mineral wealth of great 
potential value, but the areas where its mineral wealth is located 
lack infrastructure which would enable the exploitation of 
minerals.  The primary and the principal object of the Act was to 
develop the mineral areas in the State and to assist more 
efficient and extended exploitation of its mineral wealth.  The 
cess levied did not become a part of the consolidated fund and 
was not subject to an appropriation in that behalf ; it went into 
the special fund earmarked for carrying out the purpose of the 
Act and thus its existence established a correlation between the 
cess and the purpose for which it was levied, satisfying the 
element of quid pro quo in the scheme.  The scheme of the Act 
showed that the cess was levied against the class of persons 
owning mines in the notified area and to enable the State 
Government to render specific services to the said class by 
developing the notified mineral area.    Its application was 
regulated by a statute and was confined to its purposes.  There 
was a definite correlation between the impost and the purpose of 
the Act which was to render services to the notified area.  These 
features of the Act impressed upon the levy the character of a 
fee as distinct from a tax.
The inter-relationship of Entries 23 and 66 in List II  qua 
Entry 54 in List I was so stated by the Constitution Bench:-
"The effect of reading the two Entries 
together is clear.  The  jurisdiction  of the 
State Legislature under Entry 23 is 
subject to the limitation imposed by the 
latter part of the said Entry.  If 
Parliament by its law has declared that 
regulation and development  of mines 
should in public interest be under the 
control of the Union, to the extent of 
such declaration the jurisdiction of the 
State Legislature is excluded.  In other 
words, if a Central Act has been passed 
which contains a declaration by 
Parliament as required by Entry 54, and 
if the said declaration covers the field 
occupied by the impugned Act the 
impugned Act would be ultra vires, not 
because of any repugnance between the 
two statutes but because the State 
Legislature had no jurisdiction to pass 
the law.  The limitation imposed by the 
latter part of Entry 23 is a limitation on 
the legislative competence of the State 
Legislature itself."
The Constitution Bench then proceeded to test the validity 
of the cess by reference to two Central Acts, namely
(A) the 
Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1948
(Act No.53 of 1948) and
(B) The Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951
(Act No.65 of 1951).
(A) Act
No.53 of 1948 is a pre-constitutional piece of 
Central legislation.  It was found that the applicability of the Act 
which was initially attracted to mines as well as oil fields 
remained confined to oil fields in view of the subsequent 
parliamentary enactment, i.e., the
MMDR Act, 1957
(Act No.67 
of 1957).  Therefore, the question which remained to be 
examined was only   for the year 1952 as at that time the Act 
No.53 of 1948 applied to mines as well as oil fields.  The factual 
constitutional position was that Act No.53 of 1948 ceased to 
apply to Orissa post-constitution and assuming it applied yet 
there was no such declaration post-constitution made by 
Parliament as is referred to in Entry 23 in List II read with Entry 
54 in List I and therefore in either case the validity of the said 
State Legislation was not impaired in spite of the finding 
recorded by the Court that 'there can be no doubt that the field 
covered by the impugned (State) Act is covered by the Central 
Act 53 of 1948'.
(B) What is significant for our purpose is the law
laid down 
by
the Constitution Bench as to the validity of the impugned 
State legislation by reference to Act No. 65 of 1951,
Section 2
whereof contained a declaration - "it is hereby declared that it is 
expedient in the public interest that the Union should take under 
its control the industries specified in the First Schedule" as 
contemplated  by Entry 52 in List I to which Entry 23 in List II is 
subject.  The first schedule included coal as an article as to 
which the industry engaged in the manufacture or production 
was brought within the purview of the Act.  Section 9 
empowered the Central Government to levy cess for the purpose 
of the Act on all goods manufactured or produced in any 
scheduled industries including coal.  The Constitution Bench held 
that the Central Act was passed to provide for the development 
and regulation of certain industries one of which undoubtedly is 
coal mining industry.  The declaration made by
Section 2
of the 
Act covered the same field as is covered by the impugned State 
Act.  Then the Constitution Bench held :-
".........but in dealing with this question it 
is important to bear in mind the doctrine 
of pith and substance.  We have already 
noticed that in pith and substance the 
impugned Act is concerned with the 
development of the mining areas notified 
under it.  The Central Act, on the other 
hand, deals more directly with the 
control of all industries including of 
course the industry of coal.  Chapter II of 
this Act provides for the constitution of 
the Central Advisory Council and 
Development Councils, Chapter III deals 
with the regulation of scheduled 
industries, Chapter IIIA provides for the 
direct management or control of 
industrial undertakings by Central 
Government in certain cases, and 
Chapter IIIB is concerned with the topic 
of control of supply, distribution, price, 
etc. of certain articles.  The last chapter 
deals with miscellaneous incidental 
matters.  The functions of the 
Development Councils constituted under 
this Act prescribed by
S.6(4)
bring out 
the real purpose and object of the Act.  
It is to increase the efficiency or 
productivity in the scheduled industry or 
group of scheduled industries, to 
improve or develop the service that such 
industry or group of industries renders or 
could render to the community, or to 
enable such industry or group of 
industries  to render such service more 
economically.  Section 9 authorises the 
imposition of cess on scheduled 
industries in  certain cases.  Section 9(4) 
provides that the Central Government 
may hand over the proceeds of the cass 
to the Development Council there 
specified  and that the Development 
Council shall utilize the said proceeds to 
achieve the objects mentioned in cls. (a) 
to (d).  These objects include the 
promotion of scientific and  industrial 
research, of improvements in design and 
quality, and the provision for the training 
of technicians and labour in such 
industry or group of industries.  It would 
thus be seen that the object of the Act is 
to regulate the scheduled industries with 
a view to improvement and development 
of the service that they may render to 
the society, and thus assist the solution 
of the larger problem of national 
economy.  It is difficult to hold that the 
field covered by the declaration made by
S.2
of this Act, considered in the light of 
its several provisions, is the same as the 
field covered by the impugned Act.  That 
being so, it cannot be said that as a 
result of Entry 52 read with Act LXL of 
1951 the vires of the impugned Act can 
be successfully challenged.
Our conclusion, therefore, is that 
the impugned Act is relatable to Entries 
23 and 66 in List II of the Seventh 
Schedule, and its validity is not impaired 
or affected by Entries 52 and 54 in List I 
read with the Act LXV of 1951 and Act 
LIII of 1948 respectively.  In view of this 
conclusion it is unnecessary to consider 
whether the impugned Act can be 
justified under Entry 50 in List II, or 
whether it is relatable to Entry 24 in List 
III and as such suffers from the vice of 
repugnancy with the Central Act XXXII of 
1947."
[Underlining by us]

In spite of having held that the Central Act of 1951 was 
attracted to coal industries, their Lordships, by applying the 
doctrine of pith and substance, refused to annul the levy of cess 
under the impugned Orissa Act based on the following 
distinction:-
Central Act, 1951
State Legislation of 1952
Deals more directly with the 
control of all industries 
including the industry of coal 
with a view to improvement 
and development of the service 
that they may render to the 
society and thus assist the 
solution of the larger problem 
of national economy.
Is concerned with the 
development of the mining 
areas notified under it.
Though both were cesses, one levied by the Central Act 
and the other levied by the State Act, inasmuch as they had 
different fields to operate, Entries 52 and 54 in List I were held 
not to have any adverse or denuding effect on the legislative 
competence of the State referable to Entries 23 and 66 in List II.
As a result, the writ petitions laying challenge to the 
constitutional validity of Orissa Act of 1952 were directed to be 
dismissed.
The distinction: Here we will pause for a moment with a 
view to highlight a feature of singular significance in The Hingir-
Rampur Coal Co. as it would be the decisive factor for the 
applicability of the ratio of the case ___ where it would apply and 
where it would not.
Section 6
of Act No.43 of 1948 which came 
up for the consideration of the Constitution Bench, specifically 
provides:-
"6.  	Power to make rules as respects minerals 
development __ (1)  The Central Government 
may, by notification in the official Gazette, 
make rules for the conservation and 
development of minerals.
(2)  In particular, and without prejudice to the 
generality of the foregoing power, such rules 
may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:-
xxx		xxx		xxx		xxx
(i)  the levy and collection of royalties, 
fees or taxes in respect of minerals mined, 
quarried, excavated or collected;
xxx		xxx		xxx		xxx
10.	Rules to be laid before the Legislature__ 
All rules made under any of the provisions of 
this Act shall be laid before the Central 
Legislature as soon as may be after they are 
made."
Thus, the power to levy and collect fees or taxes in respect of 
minerals mined, quarried, excavated or collected was expressly 
conferred on the Central Government by a specific provision 
made in that regard by the Act itself.  Because the power to levy 
tax or fee was appropriated to itself by a Central Legislation it 
was held that the impugned Orissa Act - a State Legislation, 
could not have provided for the levy of a fee as by virtue of the 
Central Legislation, the Union having exercised its power to 
legislate, the field was covered and excepted from the legislative 
competence of the State.  Yet the recovery was held not liable to 
be annulled inasmuch as the Central Act No.53 of 1948 was a 
pre-Constitution Legislation and as to which a declaration in 
terms of Entry 54 in List I was not made by the Parliament after 
the coming into force of the Constitution.
As to the Central Act of 1951, though it contained a 
declaration as contemplated by Entry 52 of List I, and though it 
applied to several goods including coal, the doctrine of pith and 
substance when correctly applied showed that the Central Act 
was intended for improvement of service while the State Act of 
1952 was intended to deal with development of mining areas 
and the latter was valid.
The MMDR Act, 1957
, which we are called upon to deal 
with, stands on much better footing for the writ petitioners 
herein as it does not contain any provision similar to Sections 6 
and 10 of the Central Act No.53 of 1948 or Section 9 of the 
Central Act No.65 of 1951.
Challenge to levy under the abovesaid Orissa Act 27 of 
1952 did not come to an end with Hinger-Rampur Coal Co..  It 
was once again raised in the High Court with  success and the 
State of Orissa came up in appeal which was heard and decided 
by a Constitution Bench in State of Orissa & Anr. Vs. M/s 
M.A. Tulloch and Co. - (1964) 4 SCR 461.  The respondent  
writ-petitioner was working  a manganese mine in the State of 
Orissa under a lease granted under the provisions of the
MMRD 
Act, 1948
.  The fee levied under the Orissa Act for the period of 
six quarters from September 30, 1956, to   March 31, 1958, was 
under challenge.
The MMDR Act
1957 came into force w.e.f. 
June 1, 1958.  The recovery impugned, therefore, related to the 
period pre-
MMDR Act
1957 i.e. for the period during which
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act
1951 was 
applicable.  The recovery was sought to be effected after the 
enactment and coming into force of the Act No.67 of 1957, 
though the recovery was referable to the period prior to it.  It 
was held that the demand was liable to be raised for the period 
for which it was raised and the validity of the demand was an 
issue concluded by Hingir-Rampur Coal Co.. The demand 
having validly accrued prior to June 1, 1958, the recovery 
thereof could be validly enforced, notwithstanding the repeal of 
Act No.65 of 1951, on the general principles of interpretation of 
statutes as also under
Section 6
of the General Clauses Act. 
Reiterating the findings in Hingir-Rampur Coal Co. the 
Constitution Bench held that the impugned Act empowered the 
State Government to levy a fee on a percentage of the value of 
the mined ore at the pit's mouth, the collections being intended 
for the development of the "mining areas" in the State.  This 
finding is very significant.
The Constitution Bench laid down  the following principles 
which are relevant for our purpose :-
(1)	Entry 23 of the State List vests in the State Legislature 
power to enact laws on the subject of 'regulation of mines 
and mineral development subject to the provisions of List I 
with respect to regulation and development under the 
control of the Union'.  It would be seen that "subject to"
the provisions of List I the power of the State to enact 
Legislation on the topic of "mines and mineral 
development" is plenary.  The relevant provision in List I 
is, as already noticed, Entry 54 of the Union List.
(2)	To the extent to which the Union Government had taken 
under its control the regulation and development of 
minerals that much (i.e. to that extent) was withdrawn 
from the ambit of the power of the State Legislature under 
Entry 23 and legislation of the State which had rested on 
the existence of power under that entry would, to the 
extent of that control, be superseded or rendered 
ineffective, for here we have a case not of mere 
repugnancy between the provisions of the two enactments 
but of a denudation or deprivation of State legislative 
power by the declaration which Parliament is empowered 
to make, and has made.
(3) 	The States would lose legislative competence only to the 
"extent to which regulation and development under the 
control of the Union has been declared by Parliament to be 
expedient in the public interest".
(4)	It would be logical first to examine and analyse the State 
Act and determine its purpose, width and scope and the 
area of its operation and then consider to what "extent" 
the Central Act cuts into it or trenches on it.
As to the MMDR Act, 1957
, the Constitution Bench in M.A. 
Tulloch observed by reference to
Section 18
of the Act that the 
intention of Parliament was to cover the entire field and thus to 
leave no scope for the argument that until rules were framed 
there was no inconsistency and no supersession of the State Act.
The following holding of the above Constitution Bench is 
again worth noting :
"......that technically speaking the power 
to levy a fee is under the entries in the 
three lists treated as a subject-matter of 
an independent grant of legislative 
power, but whether it is an incidental 
power related to a legislative head or an 
independent legislative power it is 
beyond dispute that in order that a fee 
may validity be imposed the subject-
matter or the main head of legislation in 
connection with which the fee is imposed 
is within legislative power.  The material 
words of the Entries are : "Fees in 
respect of any of the matters in this 
List".  It is, therefore, a prerequisite for 
the valid imposition of a fee that it is in 
respect of "a matter in the List".  If by 
reason of the declaration by Parliament 
the entire subject-matter of 
"conservation and development of 
minerals" has been taken over, for being 
dealt with by Parliament, thus depriving 
the State of the power which it therefor 
possessed, it would follow that the 
"matter" in the State List is, to the 
extent of the declaration, subtracted 
from the scope and ambit of Entry 23 of 
the State List.  There would, therefore, 
after the Central Act of 1957, be "no 
matter in the List" to which the fee could 
be related in order to render it valid."
In the last but one para of M.A. Tulloch this sentence 
occurs:- "If this were the true position about the effect of the 
Central Act 67 of 1957 as the liability to pay the fee which was 
the subject of the notices of the demand had accrued  prior to 
June 1, 1958, it would follow that these notices were valid and 
the amounts due thereunder could be recovered notwithstanding 
the disappearance of the Orissa Act by virtue of the superior 
legislation by the Union Parliament".  This observation, read out 
of the context and facts of the case alongwith the Court having 
referred to
Sections 18
and
25
of the MMDR Act 1957, creates 
an impression that the power to levy fee having been 
appropriated by the Central Legislation to the Central 
Government, the cess levied by the State would stand 
obliterated or repealed, is the holding by the Court. But that is 
not the ratio of the case and it could not have been because in 
Hingir-Rampur Coal Co. the Constitution Bench has clearly 
held to the contrary and the Constitution Bench in M.A. Tulloch 
has squarely followed the holding in Hingir-Rampur Coal Co..  
Nobody should act on an assumption that in M.A. Tulloch the 
Constitution Bench has held - much less as a ratio of the 
decision - that under Act No. 67 of 1957 the Central 
Government has appropriated to itself the power to levy tax or 
cess on minerals or mineral bearing land.  All that the Court has 
said  is that the 1957 enactment covers the field of legislation as 
to the regulation of mines and the development of minerals. As
Section 2
itself provides and indicates, the assumption of control 
in public interest by the Central Government is on (i) the 
regulation of mines, (ii) the development of minerals, and (iii) to 
the extent hereinafter provided. The scope and extent of 
declaration cannot and could not have been enlarged by the 
Court nor has it been done.  The effect is that no State 
Legislature shall have power to enact any legislation touching (i) 
the regulation of mines, (ii) the development of minerals, and
(iii) to the extent provided by Act No.67 of 1957.  The Preamble 
to the Central Act 67 of 1957 itself speaks ___ "
An Act
to provide 
for the development and regulation of mines and minerals under 
the control of the Union".  Tax and fee is not a subject dealt with 
by Act No.67 of 1957.  Let us demonstrate the same from the 
provisions of the Act and for that purpose relevant part of
Section 13
, sub-Section (1) and relevant part of sub-Section (2) 
of
Section 18
, sub-Section (3) of
Section 18
and
Section 25
are 
extracted and reproduced as under :
"13. Power of Central Government to 
make rules in respect of minerals. -
(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for regulating the grant of 
reconnaissance permits, prospecting 
licences and mining leases in respect of 
minerals and for purposes connected 
therewith.
(2) In particular, and without 
prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:
(a) to (h)	***		***
(i) the fixing and collection of fees 
for reconnaissance permits, prospecting 
licences or mining leases, surface rent, 
security deposit, fines, other fees or 
charges and the time within which and 
the manner in which the dead rent or 
royalty shall be payable;
18. Mineral development. - (1) 
It shall be the duty of the Central 
Government to take all such steps as 
may be necessary for the conservation 
and systematic development of minerals 
in India and for the protection of 
environment by preventing or controlling 
any pollution which may be caused by 
prospecting or mining operations and for 
such purposes the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make such rules as it thinks fit.
(2)	In particular, and without 
prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:
(a) to (o) - (Not reproduced)
(p)	the procedure for and the 
manner of imposition of fines for the 
contravention of any of the rules framed 
under this section and the authority who 
may impose such fines; and
(q)	the authority to which, the 
period  within which, the form and the 
manner in which applications for revision 
of any order passed by any authority 
under this Act and the rules made 
thereunder may be made, the fee to be 
paid and the documents which should 
accompany such applications.
(3)	All rules made under this 
section shall be binding on the 
Government.
25. Recovery of certain sums as 
arrears of land revenue. - Any rent, 
royalty, tax, fee or other sum due to the 
Government under this Act or the rules 
made thereunder or under the terms and 
conditions of any reconnaissance permit, 
prospecting  licence or mining lease may, 
on a certificate of such officer as may be 
specified by the State Government in this 
behalf by general or special order, be 
recovered in the same manner as an 
arrear of land revenue.
We have three comments to offer on M.A. Tulloch. Firstly, 
the provisions of the Act No.67 of 1957 did not directly come up 
for the scrutiny of the Constitution Bench as there was no 
demand raised after the commencement of this Act which was 
put in issue before the Constitution Bench; the Constitution 
Bench was only adjudicating upon the issue whether a liability to 
pay cess incurred under the previous Act could be enforced 
under Act No.67 of 1957 or in other words if Act No.67 of 1957 
had any castigating effect on the demand validly raised under 
the previous enactment.  Secondly, the extent to which power to 
legislate by the States was excluded by the Central Act No.65 of 
1951 was not a question dealt with in-depth as it was done in 
Hingir-Rampur Coal Co..  Thirdly, M.A. Tulloch, if not 
correctly read, creates a wrong impression that Act No.67 of 
1957 provides for levy of tax and fee, which in fact it does not.
Section 13(2)(i)
cannot be read as empowering the Central 
Government to levy any tax or fee.  The expression "other fees 
and charges" have to be interpreted ejusdem generis taking 
colour from other words and phrases employed in the same 
clause.  The word "charges" cannot and does include within its 
meaning any tax.  The expression "other fees or charges" must 
be assigned such meaning as to include therein only such fees 
and charges as are meant for regulation or development.
We are clear in our minds that  a power to levy tax or fee 
cannot be spelled out from
sections 13
,
18
and
25
of the Act 
No.67 of 1957.  It is well-settled that power to tax cannot be 
inferred by implication; there must be a charging section 
specifically empowering the State to levy tax.
Section 18 (2)(q)
speaks of fee to be paid on applications for revision and not on 
minerals, mineral rights or mining land.
Section 25
speaks of  
'recovery of tax and fee' amongst others.  Two observations are 
spontaneous.  Firstly, a provision for recovery, being a 
machinery  provision, cannot be read as empowering  the levy of 
tax or fee.  Secondly, it speaks of tax or fee being due to the 
Government without defining the same and without qualifying 
the word 'Government' with Central or State.  A perusal of 
several provisions of the  Act and in particular
Sections 9-A
,
15
,
15
(1-A) (a) and (g), 15(3), 17(3), 21(5), 25 goes to show that 
the power of recovery is invariably given to the State 
Government and obviously the word 'Government' in
Section 25
refers to the State Government, which only is empowered to 
recover the sums due as arrears of land revenue.
The relevant principles of law
laid down in
M.A. Tulloch, 
which we have extracted and reproduced hereinabove, do not 
run contrary to the view we are taking  in the present case.  The  
recovery  of fee  could have been held to be vitiated
in that case
because the field of mining activity in manganese ore was fully 
covered by the
MMDR Act, 1957
, and the levy under the 
impugned State Act, as found by the two Constitution Benches in 
Hingir-Rampur Coal Co. and M.A. Tulloch was being  
collected for the development of the mining areas in the State.  
The doctrine of pith and substance noted and applied in  Hingir-
Rampur Coal Co. has been restated in M.A. Tulloch wherein 
the Constitution Bench had said, as noted hereinabove, that the 
Orissa Act was concerned with the development of the mining 
areas notified under the Act while the Central Act on the other 
hand dealt more directly with the control of all industries 
including of course the industry of coal and the object of the 
Central Act was to regulate the scheduled industry with a view to 
make improvement and development of the service that they 
may render to the society and thus assisting the solution of the 
larger problem of the national economy.  In spite of the 
declaration made by Section 2 of the Central Act of 1951 
considered in the light of its several provisions it was found 
difficult to hold that the field covered by the Central Act was the 
same as the field covered by the impugned Orissa Act.  None of 
the two Constitution Benches have held that power to regulate 
and develop with which the Central Act of 1951 was concerned 
would include the power to levy tax and fee, which power shall 
have to be traced to some other entry in List I.  List I contains a 
general entry i.e. Entry 96 for levy of fee in respect of matters in 
List I but so far as levy of tax is concerned there are separate 
and specific entries (see Entries 82 to 92B in List I and Entries 
45 to 63 in List II).  Further in view of Entry 50 of List II, 
Parliament can by any law relating to mineral development limit 
or place limitations on the power of the State Legislatures to 
impose taxes on mineral rights.
Power to tax not a residuary power
Article 265
mandates - no tax shall be levied or collected 
except by authority of law.  The scheme of the Seventh Schedule 
reveals an exhaustive enumeration of legislative subjects, 
considerably enlarged over the predecessor
Government of India 
Act
.  Entry 97 in List I confers residuary powers on Parliament.
Article 248
of the Constitution which speaks of residuary powers 
of legislation confers exclusive power on Parliament to make any 
law with respect to any matter not enumerated in the 
Concurrent List or the State List. At the same time, it provides 
that such residuary power shall include the power of making any 
law imposing a tax not mentioned in either of those Lists.  It is, 
thus, clear that if any power to tax is clearly mentioned in List - 
II the same would not be available to be exercised by Parliament 
based on the assumption of residuary power.  The Seven-Judges 
Bench in
Union of India Vs. Harbhajan Singh Dhillon
, (1971) 
2 SCC 779, ruled, by a majority of 4:3, that the power to 
legislate in respect of a matter does not carry with it a power to 
impose a tax under our constitutional scheme.
According to 
Seervai (Constitutional Law of India, Fourth/Silver Jubilee 
Edition, Vol.3, para 22.191):- "Although in
Dhillon
's case 
conflicting views were expressed about the nature of the 
residuary power, the nature of that power was stated 
authoritatively in Kesvananda's Case, (1973) 4 SCC 225.
Earlier, 
in Golak Nath's case (AIR 1967 SC 1643), Subha Rao C.J. (for 
himself, Shah, Sikri, Shelat and Vaidyalingam JJ) had held that
Art. 368
only provided the procedure for the amendment of the 
Constitution, but that the power to amend the Constitution was 
to be found in the residuary power conferred on Parliament by 
Arts. 245 and 246(1) read with entry 97, List I and by
Art. 248.
Seven out of the nine judges who overruled Golak Nath's Case 
held, inter alia, that the power to amend the Constitution could 
not be located in the residuary powers of Parliament.  Hegde and 
Mukherjea JJ held that -
"It is obvious that these Lists have 
been very carefully prepared. They are 
by and large exhaustive.  Entry 97 in List 
I was included to meet some unexpected 
and unforeseen contingencies.  It is 
difficult to believe that our Constitution-
makers who were keenly conscious of 
the importance of the provision relating 
to the amendment of the Constitution 
and debated that question for several 
days, would have left the important 
power hidden in entry 97 of List I leaving 
to the off chance of the courts locating 
that power in that entry.  We are unable 
to agree with those learned judges when 
they sought to place reliance on Arts. 
245, 246 and 248 and entry 97 of List I 
for the purpose of locating the power of 
amendment in the residuary power 
conferred on the Union." (italics 
supplied)

 Similar views were expressed by five other judges.  
According to Seervai, "the law laid down in Kesavananda's Case 
is that if a subject of legislation was prominently present to the 
minds of the framer of our Constitution, they would not have left 
it to be found by courts in the residuary power; a fortiori, if a 
subject of legislative power was not only present to the minds of 
the framers but was expressly denied to Parliament, it cannot be 
located in the residuary power of Parliament."
Vide para 22.194 the eminent jurist poses a question:
"Does
Art. 248
add anything to the exclusive residuary power of 
Parliament under
Art. 246 (1)
read with Entry 97 List I to make 
laws in respect of "any other matter" not mentioned in List II 
and List III including any tax not mentioned in those Lists?" and 
answers by saying __ "The answer is 'No'."
As to the riddle arising in the context of mines and 
minerals development legislation by reference to the Entries in 
List I and List II, Seervai states ____ "the regulation of mines and 
mineral development is a subject of exclusive State legislation, 
but for the limitation placed upon that power by making it 
subject to the provisions in that behalf in List I.  If Parliament 
does not exercise its power under Entry 54, List I, the States' 
power under Entry 23, List II would remain intact.  If Parliament 
exercised its power under Entry 54, List I, only on a part of the 
field, as for example, major minerals, the States' legislative 
power over minor minerals would remain intact."    (para 22.195 
at p. 2433)

Power to tax must be express, else no power to tax	
There is nothing like an implied power to tax.  The source 
of power which does not specifically speak of taxation cannot be 
so interpreted by expanding its width as to include therein the 
power to tax by implication or by necessary inference.  States 
Cooley in Taxation (Vol.1, Fourth Edition) ___ "There is no such 
thing as taxation by implication.  The burden is always upon the 
taxing authority to point to the act of assembly which authorizes 
the imposition of the tax claimed." (para 122 at p.278).
Justice G.P. Singh in Principles of Statutory Interpretation 
(Eighth Edition, 2001) while dealing with general principles of 
strict construction of taxation statutes states __ "A taxing statute 
is to be strictly construed.  The well-established rule in the 
familiar words of Lord Wensleydale, reaffirmed by Lord Halsbury 
and Lord Simonds, means : "The subject is not to be taxed 
without clear words for that purpose; and also that every Act of 
Parliament must be read according to the natural construction of 
its words".  In a classic passage Lord Cairns stated the principle 
thus : "If the person sought to be taxed comes within the letter 
of the law he must be taxed, however great the hardship may 
appear to the judicial mind to be.  On the other hand, if the 
Crown seeking to recover the tax,  cannot bring the subject 
within the letter of the law, the subject is free, however 
apparently within the spirit of law the case might otherwise 
appear to be.  In other words, if there is admissible in any 
statute, what is called an equitable construction, certainly, such 
a construction is not admissible in a taxing statute where you 
can simply adhere to the words of the statute.  Viscount Simon 
quoted with approval a passage from Rowlatt, J. expressing the 
principle in the following words : "In a taxing Act one has to look 
merely at what is clearly said.  There is no room for any 
intendment.  There is no equity about a tax.  There is no 
presumption as to tax.  Nothing is to be read in, nothing is to be 
implied.  One can only look fairly at the language used." (at 
p.635)

	The judicial opinion of binding authority flowing from 
several pronouncements of this Court has settled these 
principles: (i) in interpreting a taxing statute, equitable 
considerations  are entirely out of place.  Taxing statutes cannot 
be interpreted on any presumption or assumption. A taxing 
statute has to be interpreted in the light of what is clearly 
expressed; it cannot imply anything which is not expressed; it 
cannot import provisions in the statute so as to supply any 
deficiency; (ii) before taxing any person it must be shown that 
he falls within the ambit of the charging section by clear words 
used in the Section; and (iii) if the words are ambiguous and 
open to two interpretations, the benefit of interpretation is given 
to the subject.  There is nothing unjust in the tax-payer escaping 
if the letter of the law fails to catch him on account of 
Legislature's failure to express itself clearly. (See, Justice G.P. 
Singh, ibid, pp.638-639).
Power to tax is not an incidental power. According to 
Seervai, although legislative power includes all incidental and 
subsidiary power, the power to impose a tax is not such a power 
under our Constitution.  It is for this reason that it was held that 
the power to legislate in respect of inter-state trade and 
commerce (Entry 42, List I, Schedule 7) did not carry with it the 
power to tax the sale of goods in inter-state trade and commerce 
before the insertion of Entry 92A in List I and such power 
belonged to the States under Entry 54 in List II. Entry 97 in List 
I also militated against the contention that the power to tax is an 
incidental power under our Constitution (See: Constitutional Law 
of India, H.M. Seervai, Fourth/Silver Jubilee  Edition, Vol.3, para 
22.20).
Power to regulate and control and power to tax ___ 
determining the nature of legislation by reference to the 
power exercised

	It is of paramount significance to note the difference 
between 'power to regulate and develop' and 'power to tax'.
	The primary purpose of taxation is to collect revenue.  
Power to tax may be exercised for the purpose of regulating an 
industry, commerce or any other activity; the purpose of levying 
such tax, an impost to be more correct, is the exercise of 
sovereign power for the purpose of effectuating regulation 
though incidentally the levy may contribute to the revenue.  
Cooley in his work on Taxation (Vol.1, Fourth Edition) deals with 
the subject in paragraphs 26 and 27.  "There are some cases in 
which levies are made and collected under the general 
designation of taxes, or under some term employed in revenue 
laws to indicate a particular class of taxes, where the imposition 
of the burden may fairly be referred to some other authority 
than to that branch of the sovereign power of the state under 
which the public revenues are apportioned and collected.  The 
reason is that the imposition has not for its object the raising of 
revenue but looks rather to the regulation of relative rights, 
privileges and duties as between individuals, to the conservation 
of order in the political society, to the encouragement of 
industry, and the discouragement of pernicious employments.  
Legislation for these purposes it would seem proper to look upon 
as being made in the exercise of that authority which is inherent 
in every sovereignty, to make all such rules and regulations as 
are needful to secure and preserve the public order, and to 
protect each individual in the enjoyment of his own rights and 
privileges by requiring the observance of rules of order, fairness 
and good neighborhood, by all around him.  This manifestation 
of the sovereign authority is usually spoken of as the police 
power.  The power to tax must be distinguished from an exercise 
of the police power. (State Vs. Tucker, 56 U.S. 516).  The 
political power 'is a very different one from the taxing power, in 
its essential principles, though the taxing power, when properly 
exercised, may indirectly tend to reach the end sought by the 
other in some cases."(p.94)  "The distinction between a demand 
of money under the police power and one made under the power 
to tax is not so much one of form as of substance." (p.95). The 
distinction between a levy in exercise of police power to regulate 
and the one which would be in nature of tax is illustrated by 
Cooley by reference to a license.  He says -  "So-called license 
taxes are of two kinds.  The one is a tax for the purpose of 
revenue.  The other, which is, strictly speaking, not a tax at all 
but merely an exercise of the police power, is a fee imposed for 
the purpose of regulation." (p.97)

	"Suppose a charge is imposed partly for revenue and 
partly for regulation.  Is it a tax or an exercise of the police 
power?  Other considerations than those which regard the 
production of revenue are admissible in levying taxes, and 
regulation may be kept in view when revenue is the main and 
primary purpose.  The right of any sovereignty to look beyond 
the immediate purpose to the general effect neither is nor can be 
disputed.  The government has general authority to raise a 
revenue and to choose the methods of doing so; it has also 
general authority over the regulation of relative rights, privileges 
and duties, and there is no rule of reason or policy in 
government which can require the legislature, when making laws 
with the one object in view, to exclude carefully from its 
attention the other.  Nevertheless cases of this nature are to be 
regarded as cases of taxation. If revenue is the primary purpose, 
the imposition is a tax. Only those cases where regulation is the 
primary purpose can be specially referred to the police power.    
If the primary purpose of the legislative body in imposing the 
charge is to regulate, the charge is not a tax even if it produces 
revenue for the public."
(Cooley, ibid, pp.98-99)
  
This Court in seven-Judges Bench decision in
Synthetics 
and Chemicals Ltd. & Ors. Vs.  State of U.P. & Ors.
- (1990) 
1 SCC 109, agreed that regulation is a necessary concomitant of 
the police power of the State.  However, it was an American 
doctrine and in the opinion of the Court it was not perhaps 
applicable as such in India.  The Court endorsed recognizing the 
power to regulate as a part of the sovereign power of the State 
exercisable by the competent legislature.  Brushing aside the 
need for discussion on the question - whether under the 
Constitution the States have police power or not, the Court 
accepted the position that the State has the power to regulate.  
However, in the garb of exercising the power to regulate, any 
fee or levy which has no connection with the cost or expenses of 
administering the regulation, cannot be imposed; only such levy 
can be justified as can be treated as part of regulatory measure.  
Thus, the State's power to regulate perhaps not as emanation of 
police power but as an expression of the sovereign power of the 
State has its limitations.  In our opinion, these observations of 
the Court lend support to the view which we have formed that a 
power to regulate, develop or control would not include within its 
ken a power to levy tax or fee except when it is only regulatory.  
Power to tax or levy for augmenting revenue shall continue to be 
exercisable by the Legislature in whom it vests i.e. the State 
Legislature in spite of regulation or control having been assumed 
by another legislature i.e. the Union.  State Legislation levying a 
tax in such manner or of such magnitude as can be 
demonstrated to be tampering or intermeddling with Center's 
regulation and control of an industry can perhaps be the 
exception to the rule just stated.
In
Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. & Ors.  Vs.  State of 
U.P. & Ors.
- (1990) 1 SCC 109 the question before the seven-
Judges Bench was as to the power of State to legislate on 
industrial alcohol as a subject.  Entry 8 in List II and Entry 33 in 
List III came up for consideration.  Their Lordships noticed the 
provisions of
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951
(as amended in 1956), especially Section 18-G thereof, and held 
that the provisions evinced clear intention of the Union to occupy 
the whole field relating to industrial alcohol and therefore the 
State could not claim to regulate it.  The power with regard to 
the control of alcoholic industries was considered and their 
Lordships concluded that in spite of the Central Legislation 
operating in the field the State was left with the following powers 
available to legislate in respect of alcohol -
"(a)	It may pass any legislation in the nature 
of prohibition of potable liquor referable 
to Entry 6 of List II and regulating 
powers.
(b)	It may lay down regulations to ensure 
that non-potable alcohol is not diverted 
and misused as a substitute for potable 
alcohol.
(c) 	The State may charge excise duty on 
potable alcohol and sales tax under Entry 
52 of List II.  However, sales tax cannot 
be charged on industrial alcohol in the 
present case, because under the Ethyl 
Alcohol (Price Control) Orders, sales tax 
cannot be charged by the State on 
industrial alcohol.
(d) 	However, in case State is rendering any 
service, as distinct from its claim of so-
called grant of privilege, it may charge 
fees based on quid pro quo.  See in this 
connection, the observation of Indian 
Mica case, (1971) 2 SCC 236."
It may be seen that the power to levy sales tax on 
industrial alcohol was available to the State but for the 
provisions of the Ethyl Alcohol (Price Control) Orders on account 
of which the State could not charge sales tax on industrial 
alcohol.  The State could levy any fee based on quid pro quo.  
The seven-Judges Bench decision lends support to the view we 
are taking that in the field occupied by the Centre for regulation 
and control, power to levy tax and fee is available to the State 
so long as it does not interfere with the regulation - the power 
assumed and occupied by the Union.
Before a seven-Judges Bench in
The Automobile 
Transport (Rajasthan) Ltd. Vs. The State of Rajasthan & 
Ors.
, (1963) 1 SCR 491, the question arose if State could make 
laws imposing regulatory restrictions on free trade, commerce 
and intercourse guaranteed by
Article 301
of Constitution and 
whether a State tax could be treated as impeding freedom under
Article 301
of Constitution.  The following statement of law by 
majority speaking through S.K. Das, J. (at pp.524-525) is very 
much in point for our purpose:-
"Such an interpretation  would, in our 
opinion, seriously affect the legislative power 
of the State Legislatures which power has been 
held to be plenary with regard to subjects in 
list II.  The States must also have revenue to 
carry out their administration and there are 
several items relating to the imposition of 
taxes in list II.  The Constitution-makers must 
have intended that under those items the 
States will be entitled to raise revenue for their 
own purposes.  If the widest view is accepted, 
then there would be for all practical purposes, 
an end of State autonomy even within the 
fields allotted to them under the distribution of 
powers envisaged by our Constitution.  An 
examination of the entries in the lists of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution would 
show that there are a large number of entries 
in the State list (list II) and the Concurrent list 
(list III) under which a State Legislature has 
power to make laws.  Under some of these 
entries the State Legislature may impose 
different kinds of taxes and duties, such as 
property tax, sales tax, excise duty etc., and 
legislation in respect of any one of these items 
may have an indirect effect on trade and 
commerce.  Even laws other than taxation 
laws, made under different entries in the lists
referred to above
, may indirectly or remotely 
affect trade and commerce.  If it be held that 
every law made by the Legislature of a State 
which has repercussion on tariffs, licensing, 
marketing regulations, price-control etc., must 
have the previous sanction of the President, 
then the Constitution in so far as it gives 
plenary power to the States and State 
Legislatures in the fields allocated to them 
would be meaningless."
Their Lordships also observed (at p.526-527) that the freedom 
guaranteed by
Article 301
does not mean freedom from taxation.  
The power of levying tax is essentially for the very existence of 
Government, though its exercise may be controlled by  
constitutional provisions made in that behalf.  Power to tax is not 
outside constitutional limitations.  It is for Parliament to exercise 
power in the field made available to it by Entry 52 and 54 in List 
I.  It is also for Parliament to state by law the limitations - and 
the sweep thereof - which it may choose to impose on field 
available to State for taxation by reference to Entry 50 in List II.  
It may not be for Courts to venture into enquiry in just an 
individual case to find and hold what tax would hamper mineral 
development if Parliament has chosen to observe silence by not 
legislating or failed to say something explicit.
A reasonable tax or fee levied by State legislation cannot, 
in our opinion, be construed as trenching upon Union's power 
and freedom to regulate and control mines and minerals.
India Cement and decisions post India Cement, based 
thereon :
India Cement is clearly distinguishable so far as the 
present cases are concerned.  As we have already pointed out it 
was a case of cess levied by Sate Legislature on royalty and not 
on mineral rights or land and buildings.  That is why the levy 
was held ultra vires.  Seervai's comment and objective criticism 
on India Cement is noteworthy (See - ibid, para 22.257 C).  
Royalty is income and State Legislatures are not competent to 
tax an income.  This single ground was enough to strike down 
the levy of cess impugned in India Cement.  Nothing more was 
needed.  The Orissa Cement Ltd. (supra) also, as the very 
opening part of the report shows, dealt with the levy of a cess by 
the State based on the royalty derived from mining lands which 
was held to be directly and squarely governed by India Cement 
and, therefore, struck down.
In
State of Orissa & Ors. Vs. Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. 
and Ors.
, 1995 Supp. (2) SCC 686, the impugned levy by the 
State Legislature was a tax of Rs.32 per thousand acre on coal 
bearing lands.  It was sought to be defended as falling under 
Entry 49 or in the alternative under Entry 23 or Entry 50 in List 
II.  The attack was that the legislation being one on mineral 
lands and mineral rights and the Parliament having enacted the
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957
, the 
field was entirely covered and the State Legislature was 
incompetent to levy the tax.  Reliance was placed on India 
Cement,  Orissa Cement and Buxa Dooars Tea Co.Ltd. 
(supra).  Only mineral bearing land and coal bearing land were 
the subject of the levy of tax.  The three-Judges Bench speaking 
through K.S. Paripoornan, J., concluded that the charging 
section of the impugned Act imposed a tax on the minerals also, 
and was not confined to a levy on land or surface characteristic 
of the land.  All non-mineral bearing lands and non-coal bearing 
lands were left out of the levy.  The levy was struck down as 
levying a tax not on land (related to surface characteristic of the 
land) but on minerals and mineral rights.
Goodricke
's case 
(supra) was cited before their Lordships and it was observed that 
in
Goodricke
's case the impugned levy was held to be a tax on 
land and that makes all the difference.
We find it difficult to subscribe to the reasoning adopted in 
Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd..
Buxa Dooars Tea Co. Ltd. and Ors.  Vs.  State of West 
Bengal and Ors.
- (1989) 3 SCC 211 is a two-Judges Bench 
decision.   Rural employment cess was levied at the rate of Rs.5 
per kg. on all dispatches of tea.  The rate was changed from 
time to time but that is not very material.  A careful reading of 
the report shows that the primary challenge was on the ground 
of the impugned cess being violative of
Article 14
and
301
of the 
Constitution as it had the direct and immediate effect of 
impeding the movement of goods throughout the territory of 
India.  The challenge was sustained.  Incidentally, and very 
briefly, their Lordships have in one paragraph also dealt with the 
question of legislative competence of the State Government by 
reference to Entry 49 in List II.   Their Lordships have observed, 
"if the legislation is in substance legislation in respect of 
dispatches of tea, legislative authority must be found for it with 
reference to some other entry.  No Entry in Lists II and III is 
pertinent.  Moreover, the Union had, in public interest, assumed 
control over the tea industry including the tea trade and control 
of tea prices."  Therefore, the Court concluded that the 
impugned legislation was also void for want of legislative 
competence as it pertained to a covered field.  Suffice it to 
observe that to the extent the learned Judges have dealt with 
the challenge by reference to legislative competence of the State 
Legislature under Entry 49 in List II, there is not much of 
discussion and is just incidental and the observations are too 
wide to be countenanced.
Another distinguishing  feature 
common to these decisions is that the distinction and 
demarcation of fields of operation between Central and State 
Acts by reference to the doctrine of pith and substance seems to 
have been not adverted to.
From Baijnath Kadio to Eastern Coalfields
	Before we proceed to deal with Goodricke, it will be 
necessary to complete the chain of thought by referring to four 
decisions and the law which developed therewith between the  
years 1970 and 1982 which can be termed a period by itself on 
the issues at hand.
In
Baijnath Kadio Vs. The State of Bihar and Ors.-
(1969) 3 SCC 838, the writ-petitioners were holding mining 
leases for minor minerals.  The State of Bihar amended the Bihar 
Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1964, whereby with effect from 
27.1.1964 the rates of  dead rent, royalty and surface rent were 
revised.  Additional demands were raised.  It was submitted that 
in view of the provisions contained in the
MMDR Act, 1957
incorporating (vide,
Section 2
thereof) a declaration within the 
meaning of Entry 54 in List I, it was not competent for the State 
Legislature to revise the rates as abovesaid.  This Court held 
that the whole of the legislative field relating to minor minerals 
was covered by the Central Legislation by virtue of the 
declaration made by
Section 2
and the enactment of
Section 15
in the Act, thereby leaving no scope for the enactment of the 
second proviso to
Section 10
of the Bihar Land Reforms Act 
whereunder the powers to increase the royalty, dead rent and 
surface rent were sought to be exercised.  There were pre-
existing old leases which could have been modified only by a 
legislative enactment made by the Parliament on the lines of
Section 16
of Act No.67 of 1957.  Any attempt to regulate such 
old mining leases will fall not in Entry 18 but in Entry 23 of List II 
even though the regulation incidentally touches them.  The pith 
and substance of the amendment of
Section 10
of the Bihar Land 
Reforms Act falls within Entry 23 although it incidentally touches 
land and not vice versa.  Entry 18 did not come to the rescue of 
the State Government and Entry 23 was subject to the 
provisions of List I.  The impugned provision and the action 
taken thereunder were held ultra vires the Constitution.  The 
decisions of this Court in The Hingir-Rampur Coal Co.Ltd. & 
Ors. and M/s M.A. Tulloch and Co. were referred to.  
However, the law
laid down by
the Constitution Bench (vide para
13) is significant.  It held :-
"..........It is open to Parliament to declare that it 
is expedient in the public interest that the 
control should rest in Central Government.  To 
what extent such a  declaration can go is for 
Parliament to determine and this must be 
commensurate with public interest.  Once this 
declaration is made and the extent laid down, 
the subject of legislation to the extent laid 
down becomes an exclusive subject for 
legislation by Parliament.  Any legislation by 
the State after such declaration and trenching 
upon the field disclosed in the declaration must 
necessarily be unconstitutional because that 
field is abstracted from the legislative 
competence of the State Legislature."
[underlining by us]
H.R.S. Murthy Vs. The Collector of Chittoor and Anr.
- 
(1964) 6 SCR 666 was a writ petition filed under
Article 32
of the 
Constitution laying challenge to the validity of notices of demand 
for the payment of land cess under the  Madras District Boards 
Act, 1920.  The mining lease dated September 15, 1953, 
authorised the lessee to work and win iron ore in a tract of land 
in Chittoor; dead rent, royalty and surface rent were payable 
under the mining lease.  The District Board levied land cess on 
the annual rental value of all occupied lands.  The challenge to 
the constitutional validity of the land cess was dismissed.  The 
Court held:-
(1)	It is therefore not possible to accept the contention, that 
the fact that the lessee or licensee pays a royalty on the 
mineral won, which is in excess of what he would pay if his 
right over the land extended only to the mere use of the 
surface land, places it in a category different from other 
types where the lessee uses the surface of the land alone.
In each case the rent which a lessee or licensee actually 
pays for the land being the test, it is manifest that the land 
cess is nothing else except a land tax.
(2)	When a question arises as to the precise head of legislative 
power under which a taxing statute has been passed, the 
subject for enquiry is what in truth and substance is the 
nature of the tax.  No doubt, in a sense but in a very 
remote sense, it has relationship to mining as also to the 
mineral won from the mine under a contract by which 
royalty is payable on the quantity of mineral extracted.  
But that, does not stamp it as a tax on either the 
extraction of the mineral or on the mineral right.  It is 
unnecessary for the purpose of this case to examine the 
question as to what exactly is a tax on mineral rights 
seeing that such  a tax is not leviable by Parliament but 
only by the State and the sole limitation on the State's 
power to levy the tax is that it must not interfere with a 
law made by Parliament as regards mineral development.  
Our attention was not invited to the provision of any such 
law enacted by Parliament.  In the context of Ss.78 and 79 
and the scheme of those provisions it is clear that the land 
cess is in truth a "tax on lands" within Entry 49 of the 
State List.
The only decisions referred to in H.R.S. Murthy were 
Hingir-Rampur Coal Co.Ltd. & Ors. and M.A. Tulloch.
In
State of Haryana and Anr. Vs. Chanan Mal
- (1977) 
1 SCC 340,  referring to the provisions of the
MMDR Act, 1957
and a State enactment of Haryana, (the constitutional validity 
whereof was under challenge) the Constitution Bench held that 
subject to the overall supervision of the Central Government, the 
State Government has a sphere of its own power and can take 
legally specified action under the Central Act and rules made 
thereunder.  Thus, the whole field of control and regulation 
under the provisions  of the Central Act 67 of 1957 cannot be 
said to be reserved for the Central Government.
Western Coalfields Ltd. Vs. Special Area 
Development Authority, Korba and Anr.
- (1982) 1 SCC 125 
is a Division Bench decision.  The M.P. Municipality Act, a State 
enactment, levied property tax payable by the owner of the land 
or buildings and could also be recovered from the occupier of the 
land or the building in certain contingencies.  The validity of the 
property tax was upheld by reference to Entry 5 (Local 
Government) read with Entry 49 (Taxes on lands and buildings) 
in List II.  The availability of the
MMDR Act, 1957
, and the 
declaration incorporated in
Section 2
thereof did not come in the 
way of the validity of the property tax inasmuch as the property 
tax levied by the State Government through municipalities had 
nothing to do with the development of mines.  The Court opined 
that the functions, powers and duties of municipalities did not 
become part of the occupied field by virtue of declaration under
Section 2
of the Act No.67 of 1957 and the competence of the 
State to enact laws for municipal administration will remain 
unaffected by that declaration.  Baijnath Kadio was 
distinguished.
Goodricke
's case
	Now, we come to
Goodricke
's case.  The impugned 
provisions were incorporated by the West Bengal Taxation Laws 
(Second Amendment) Act 1989 into the
West Bengal Primary 
Education Act, 1973
and the
West Bengal Rural Employment and 
Production Act, 1976
.  Both the amendments were identical and 
have been set out in the earlier part of this judgment.
While the State sought to justify the levy of impugned cess 
by reference to Entry 49 of List II, the writ petitioner laid 
challenge to the validity of levy on very many grounds.  It was 
submitted, firstly, that to bring the levy within the field of Entry 
49 of List II it must be directly upon the land whereas the levy in 
question is really a tax on production of tea, a subject covered 
by Entry 84 of List I; secondly, that a tax on land must be a 
constant figure whereas the impugned levy varies from year to 
year based as it is on the quantity of tea produced in a tea 
estate in a given year and where there is no production of tea 
leaves at all in a particular year, no cess would be payable by 
tea estate in that year; thirdly, that the definition of 'tea estate' 
further establishes the absence of any nexus between 'cess' and 
the 'land';  land covered by the factory and building and even 
fallow land, is included within the meaning of 'tea estate' and if 
no tea leaves are produced and plucked, there would not be levy 
on the estate at all;  and fourthly, that the levy is clearly invalid 
in view of the seven-Judges Bench decision of this Court in 
India Cement  and the three-Judges Bench decision in Orissa 
Cement.  It was urged that the impugned amendment was 
brought to remove the defect in the levy pointed out in Buxa 
Dooars,  but the flaw was persisting.  Jeevan Reddy, J., spoke 
for the three-Judges Bench, placing on record their unanimous 
opinion.  The Court noticed, vide para 10,  the real factual 
situation as generally obtains about the tea estate.  The 
definition of 'tea estate' as incorporated by the amendment is a 
well-understood entity and hence is legitimately and reasonably 
capable of being classified as a separate category for the 
purpose of taxation and the rate of tax.  The Court, on a near - 
exhaustive review of the available decisions on the point, arrived 
at a few conclusions which, so far as relevant for our purposes, 
are summed up as under:
(i) a financial levy must have a mode of 
assessment but the mode of assessment does 
not determine the character of a tax.  The 
nature of machinery for assessment is often 
complicated and is not of much assistance 
except insofar as it may throw light on the 
general character of the tax.  The annual value 
is not necessarily an actual income but only a 
standard by which income may be measured.
Merely because the same standard or 
mechanism of assessment has been adopted in 
a legislation covered by an entry under the 
Union List and also by a legislation covered by 
an entry in the State List, the latter legislation 
cannot be said to have encroached upon the 
field meant for the former;
(ii) the subject of tax is different from the 
measure of the levy;
(iii) merely because a tax on land or building is 
imposed by reference to its income or yield, it 
does not cease to be a tax on land or building.
The income or yield of the land/building is 
taken merely as a measure of the tax; it does 
not alter the nature or character of the levy.  It 
still remains a tax on land or building.  No one 
can say that a tax under a particular entry 
must be levied only in a particular manner.
The legislature is free to adopt such method of 
levy as it chooses.  So long as the essential 
character of levy is not departed from within 
the four corners of the particular entry, the 
manner of levying the tax would not have any 
vitiating effect;
(iv)  ample authority is available to hold that a 
tax on land within the meaning of Entry 49 of 
List II can be levied with reference to the yield 
or income.  Whether an agricultural land or an 
orchard or a tea estate, they do require some 
capital and labour to make them yield or to 
produce income which yield or income can 
without difficulty be taken as measure for 
quantifying the tax which would undoubtedly 
be a levy on the land;
(v)  it is not an essence of a tax, nor a 
condition of its validity, that the tax must be 
constant and uniform for all the years or for a 
particular number of years.  The tax on land or 
building can be levied and assessed by 
reference to previous year's income or yield.  
In short, it is open to the State Legislature to 
adopt such formula as it thinks appropriate for 
levying the tax and so long as the character of 
the tax remains the same as contemplated by 
the entry, it does not matter how the tax is 
calculated, measured or assessed;
(vi) it is permissible to classify land by 
reference to its user as a separate unit for the 
purpose of levy of cess.  Tea estate, as a 
separate category of land, is a valid 
classification;
(vii) the fact that the
Tea Act
empowers the 
Central Government to levy a duty or cess 
upon tea or tea leaves for the purposes of that 
Act, can in no manner deprive the State 
Legislature of its power to tax the land 
comprised in a tea estate.  By levying the cess 
the State Legislature is not seeking to control 
the cultivation of tea but only to levy the tax 
on land comprised in a tea estate.  The fact 
that ultimately the tax may have to be borne 
by the tea industry is no ground for holding 
that the said levy is upon the tea industry.
The State Legislature is not denuded of its 
power to levy a tax upon the land or upon a 
building merely because such land or building 
is held or owned by an industry which is 
governed by a central legislation.
On applying the abovesaid principles the Court concluded 
that taking the quantum of  yield of a tea estate for measuring 
the amount of tax is perfectly valid and cannot be equated to the 
situation in India Cement.  We may observe that the reasoning 
adopted in Goodricke accords with the reasoning in Hingir-
Rampur.
Having made an independent review of several judicial 
decisions and the several settled legal principles, as dealt with 
hereinabove, we are satisfied that the
Goodricke
's case (supra) 
was correctly decided and the law laid down therein is correct 
and supported by authority in abundance.  The distinguishing 
features which exclude the applicability of law
laid down in
India 
Cement and Orissa Cement to the fact situations like the ones 
we are called upon to deal with, were rightly pointed out in 
Goodricke and those very reasons additionally explained by us 
do not permit the cases on hand   being ruled by India Cement  
and Orissa Cement.
In a nutshell
	The relevant principles culled out from the preceding 
discussion are summarized as under:-
(1)	In the scheme of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, there 
exists a clear distinction between the general subjects of 
legislation and heads of taxation.  They are separately 
enumerated.
(2)	Power of 'regulation and control' is separate and distinct 
from the power of taxation and so are the two fields for purposes 
of legislation.  Taxation may be capable of being comprised in 
the main subject of general legislative head by placing an 
extended construction, but that is not the rule for deciding the 
appropriate legislative field for taxation between List I and List 
II.  As the fields of taxation are to be found clearly enumerated 
in Lists I and II, there can be no overlapping.  There may be 
overlapping in fact but there would be no overlapping in law. The 
subject matter of two taxes by reference to two Lists being 
different simply because the methodology or mechanism 
adopted for assessment and quantification is similar, the two 
taxes cannot be said to be overlapping. This is the distinction 
between the subject of a tax and the measure of a tax.
(3) 	The nature of tax levied is different from the measure of 
tax.  While the subject of tax is clear and well defined, the 
amount of tax is capable of being measured in many ways for 
the purpose of quantification.  Defining the subject of tax is a 
simple task; devising the measure of taxation is a far more 
complex exercise and therefore the legislature has to be given 
much more flexibility in the latter field.  The mechanism and 
method chosen by Legislature for quantification of tax is not 
decisive of the measure of tax though it may constitute one 
relevant factor out of many for throwing light on determining the 
general character of the tax.
(4)	Entries 52, 53 and 54 in List I are not heads of taxation.
They are general entries.  Fields of taxation covered by Entries 
49 and 50 in List II continue to remain with State Legislatures in 
spite of Union having enacted laws by reference to Entries 52, 
53, 54 in List I.  It is for the Union to legislate and impose 
limitations on States otherwise plenary power to levy taxes on 
mineral rights or taxes on lands (including mineral bearing 
lands) by reference to Entry 50 and 49 in List II and lay down 
the limitations on State's power, if it chooses to do so, and also 
to define the extent and sweep of such limitations.
(5)	The Entries in List I and List II must be so construed as to 
avoid any conflict.  If there is no conflict, an occasion for 
deriving assistance from non-obstante clause "subject to" does 
not arise.  If there is conflict, the correct approach is to find an 
answer to three questions step by step as under:
One -   Is it still possible to effect reconciliation between 
two Entries so as to avoid conflict and 
overlapping?
Two -  In which Entry the impugned legislation falls by 
finding out the pith and substance of the 
legislation?
and

Three -  Having determined the field of legislation wherein 
the impugned legislation falls by applying doctrine 
of  pith and substance, can an incidental 
trenching upon another field of legislation be 
ignored?
(6) 	'Land', the term as occurring in Entry 49 of List II, has a 
wide connotation.  Land remains land though it may be 
subjected to different user.  The nature of user of the land would 
not enable a piece of land being taken out of the meaning of 
land itself.   Different uses to which the land is subjected or is 
capable of being subjected provide basis for classifying land into 
different identifiable groups for the purpose of taxation.  The 
nature of user of one piece of land would enable that piece of 
land being classified separately from another piece of land which 
is being subjected to another kind of user, though the two pieces 
of land are identically situated except for the difference in nature 
of user.  The tax would remain a tax on land and would not 
become a tax on the nature of its user.
(7)	To be a tax on land, the levy must have some direct and 
definite relationship with the land.   So long as the tax is a tax 
on land by bearing such relationship with the land, it is open for 
the legislature for the purpose of levying tax to adopt any one of 
the well known modes of determining the value of the land such 
as annual or capital value of the land or its productivity.  The 
methodology adopted, having an indirect relationship with the 
land, would not alter the nature of the tax as being one on land.
(8)	The primary object and the essential purpose of legislation 
must be distinguished from its ultimate or incidental results or 
consequences, for determining the character of the levy.  A levy 
essentially in the nature of a tax and within the power of State 
Legislature cannot be annulled as unconstitutional merely 
because it may have an affect on the price of the commodity.  A 
State legislation, which makes provisions for levying a cess, 
whether by way of tax to augment the revenue resources of the 
State or by way of fee to render services as quid pro quo but 
without any intention of regulating and controlling the subject of 
the levy, cannot be said to have encroached upon the field of 
'regulation and control' belonging to the Central Government  by 
reason of the incidence of levy being permissible to be passed on 
to the buyer or consumer, and thereby affecting the price of the 
commodity or goods. Entry 23 in List II speaks of regulation of 
mines and mineral development subject to the provisions of List 
I with respect to regulation and development under the control 
of the Union.  Entries 52 and 54 of List I are both qualified by 
the expression "declared by Parliament by law to be expedient in 
the public interest".  A reading in juxtaposition shows that the 
declaration by Parliament must be for the 'control of industries' 
in Entry 52 and 'for regulation of mines or for mineral 
development' in Entry 54.  Such control, regulation or 
development must be 'expedient in the public interest'.
Legislation by the  Union in the field covered by Entries 52 and 
54 would not like a magic touch or a taboo denude the entire 
field forming subject matter of declaration to the State 
Legislatures.  Denial to the State would extend only to the 
extent of the declaration so made by Parliament.  In spite of 
declaration made by reference to Entry 52 or 54, the State 
would be free to act in the field left out from the declaration.  
The legislative power to tax by reference to Entries in List II is 
plenary unless the entry itself makes the field 'subject to' any 
other entry or abstracts the field by any limitations imposable 
and permissible.  A tax or fee levied by State with the object of 
augmenting its finances and in reasonable limits does not ipso 
facto trench upon regulation, development or control of the 
subject.  It is different if the tax or fee sought to be levied by 
State can itself be called regulatory, the primary purpose 
whereof is to regulate or control and augmentation of revenue or 
rendering service is only secondary or incidental.
(9)	The heads of taxation are clearly enumerated in Entries 83 
to 92B in List I and Entries 45 to 63 in List II.  List III, the 
Concurrent List, does not provide for any head of taxation.  
Entry 96 in List I, Entry 66 in List II and Entry 47 in List III deal 
with fees.  The residuary power of legislation in the field of 
taxation spelled out by
Article 248 (2)
and Entry 97  in List I can 
be applied only to such subjects as are not included in Entries 45 
to 63 of List II.  It follows that taxes on lands and buildings in 
Entry 49 of List II cannot be levied by the Union.  Taxes on 
mineral rights, a subject in Entry 50 of List II can also not be 
levied by the Union though as stated in Entry 50 itself the Union 
may impose limitations on the power of the State and such 
limitations, if any, imposed by the Parliament by law relating to 
mineral development and to that extent shall circumscribe the 
States' power to legislate.  Power to tax mineral rights is with 
the States; the power to lay down limitations on exercise of such 
power, in the interest of regulation, development or control, as 
the case may be, is with the Union.  This is the result achieved 
by homogeneous reading of Entry 50 in List II and Entries 52 
and 54 in List I.  So long as a tax or fee on mineral rights 
remains in pith and substance a tax for augmenting the revenue 
resources of the State or a fee for rendering services by the 
State and it does not impinge upon regulation of mines and 
mineral development or upon control of industry by the Central 
Government, it is not unconstitutional.
The Result - individual cases
(A) Coal Matters
	The amendments incorporated by the West Bengal 
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act 1992 w.e.f. 1.4.1992 into the 
provisions of the
West Bengal Primary Education Act
1973 and 
the
West Bengal Rural Employment and Production Act
1976 
classify the land into three categories: (i) coal-bearing land, (ii) 
mineral bearing land (other than coal-bearing land) or quarry 
and (iii) land other than the preceding two categories.  These 
three are well-defined classifications by reference to the user or 
quality and the nature of product which it is capable of yielding.  
The cess is levied on the land.  The method of quantifying the 
tax is by reference to the annual value thereof.  It is well-known 
that one of the major factors contributing to the value of the 
land is what it produces or is capable of producing.  Merely 
because the quantum of coal produced and dispatched or the 
quantum of mineral produced and dispatched from the land is 
the factor taken into consideration for determining the value of 
the land, it does not become a tax on coal or minerals.  Being a 
tax on land it is fully covered by Entry 49 in List II.  Assuming it 
to be a tax on mineral rights it would be covered by Entry 50 in 
List II.  Taxes on mineral rights lie within the legislative 
competence of the State Legislature "subject to" any limitation 
imposed by Parliament by law relating to mineral development.  
The Central legislation has not placed any limitation on the 
power of the States to legislate in the field of taxation on mineral 
rights.  The challenge to constitutional validity of State 
legislation is founded on non-availability of legislative field to 
State; it has not been the case of any of the writ petitioners that 
there are limitations enacted by Central legislation and the State 
of West Bengal has breached or crossed those limits. Simply 
because incidence of tax is capable of being passed on to buyers 
or consumers by the mine owners with an escalating affect on 
the price of the coal, it cannot be inferred that the tax has an 
adverse effect on mineral development.  Entry 23 in List II 
speaks of regulation of mines and mineral developments, subject 
to the provisions of List I with respect to regulation and 
development under the control of the Union.  The Central 
Legislation has taken over regulation and development of mines 
and mineral development in public interest.  By reference to 
Entry 50 of List II and Entry 54 in List I, the Central legislation 
has not cast any limitations on the State Legislature's power to 
tax mineral rights, or land for the matter of that.  The impugned 
cess is a tax on coal-bearing and mineral-bearing land.  It can at 
the most be construed to be a tax on mineral rights.  In either 
case, the impugned cess is covered by Entries 49 and 50 of List 
II.  The West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act 1992 must 
be and is held to be intra vires the Constitution.
We also hold that  Mahanadi Coalfields was not correctly 
decided in as much as India Cement Ltd. and Orissa Cement 
Ltd. were applied to the levy of a cess to which they did not 
apply.  The learned Judges, deciding Mahanadi Coalfields Ltd. 
were, with respect, not right in forming the opinion that the cess 
was levied on minerals and mineral rights and not on land and 
hence the conclusion reached therein that the State Legislature 
did not have the legislative competence and that the State 
legislation trenched upon a field already occupied by
Mines and 
Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act
1957, a Central 
Legislation is incorrect.
State of Orissa & Ors.  Vs.  Mahanadi 
Coalfields Ltd. and Ors.
, 1995 Supp. (2) SCC 686, is 
overruled.
(B) Tea Matters
	Inasmuch as we have held
Goodricke Group Ltd. and 
Ors. Vs. State of West Bengal and Ors.
- (1995) Supp. 1 SCC 
707 to have been correctly decided the impugned levy on tea 
estates as levied by the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Second 
Amendment) Act 1989, is held to be intra vires the Constitution.  
However, in brief, we may state that the impugned levy is of 
cesses on tea estates i.e. the land forming part of tea estates as 
defined in the impugned Act.  The land forming part of the tea 
estates is a well-defined classification.  Simply because the 
method for quantifying the tax is by reference to the yield of the 
land determinable by taking into account the quantum of tea 
produced and dispatched, it does not become a cess on tea or a 
tax on production of tea or a tax on income of land.
The Tea Act
of 1953 contains a declaration vide
Section 2
thereof that it is 
expedient in the public interest that the Union should take under 
its control the tea industry. The declaration is in terms of Entry 
52 in List I.  Union's assumption of control of tea as industry and 
as being expedient in the public interest, does not amount to 
vesting the power to tax or levy fee in the Central Government 
by reference to tea or on tea estates.
Section 25
of Tea Act 
empowers the Central Government to levy and collect excise 
duty on tea produces, which on collection shall be credited to the 
Consolidated Fund of India.  There is no other provision in
Tea 
Act
empowering levy of any tax or fee on tea or tea bearing 
land.  The impugned cess is a tax on tea-bearing land, a well-
defined classification and is covered by Entry 49 in List II.  We 
uphold the logic and reasoning assigned and conclusions drawn 
by this Court in Goodricke on all the counts.
(C) 	Brick Earth Matters
Brick earth is a minor mineral.  What we have stated about 
the impugned cess by reference to coal applies to brick earth as 
well.  The field as to taxation cannot be said to have been 
covered by Central Legislation by reference to Entry 54 in 
Schedule I.  Quantification of levy by reference to quantity of 
brick earth dispatched is a methodology adopted for the purpose 
of finding out the quantity of brick earth removed from the land.  
It has a definite and direct co-relation with the land.  There is no 
particular charm about the challenge developed by the writ 
petitioners laying emphasis on the meaning of the word 
"dispatched".  The gist and substance of what the legislature is 
taking into account is the brick earth actually removed.
"Dispatched" has the effect of taking into account the brick earth 
"removed" and not simply "moved" and left behind.  The average 
quantity of brick earth utilized in making bricks whether on the 
brick field itself or on a place nearby, does involve removal - and 
consequently dispatch __ of the brick earth from the place where 
it was to the place where it is captively consumed in making 
bricks.  The fact that methodology for working out the royalty 
payable and the cess payable is the same, does not have any 
detrimental effect on the constitutional validity of the cess 
whether it be treated as one on the land - classified by reference 
to its production, i.e., the brick earth or as one on mineral rights 
in brick earth. In either case it would be covered by Entries 49 or 
50 in List II. None of the pleas raised has any merit.
(D) 	Minor Mineral Matters
 	While narrating the facts, we have quoted in the earlier 
part of the judgment Section 35 of the U.P. Special Area 
Development Authorities Act, 1986
(SADA Act
, for short) which 
is the charging section and the Rules framed under the Act.  We 
refer to other relevant provisions of the Act in brief.
Section 3
of the SADA Act authorizes the State 
Government to declare by notification an area to be a special 
development area upon its forming an opinion that any area of 
special importance in the State needs to be developed in a 
planned manner. The authority is empowered to prepare a 
master plan for the special development area, to provide for the 
development of lands in the area, to compulsorily acquire land 
and so on.  The powers are drastic and all-oriented with the 
object of effecting a planned intensive and extensive 
development of an area as to which the State Government may 
have formed an opinion that it was an area of special 
importance.  Declaring an area as a special development area in 
view of its special importance and constituting an authority for 
the administration and management of the area entrusted with 
the obligation of its development is not a matter of empty  
formality.  The empowerment of the authority is accompanied by 
an obligation cast on it by the State Government through the 
special legislation of fulfilling the object behind the declaration of 
special area and constitution of the authority.
The Act
has been 
given an over-riding effect by virtue of Section 52 thereof.  Not 
only the area is taken out of the administration by the other 
bodies of local self-government such as municipality or 
panchayat, but any other master plan or development plan 
formulated by any other authority ceases to apply to such area.
It was contended on behalf of the writ petitioners-
appellants that whether a major or a minor mineral, by virtue of 
the provisions contained in the
MMDR Act, 1957
and U.P. Mine & 
Minerals Concession Rules 1963, framed in exercise of the power 
conferred by
Section 15
of the MMDR Act, the mineral rights in 
any land are subject to payment of royalty which is fixed.
Sections 8
and
9
of the MMDR Act confer the power to enhance 
or reduce the rate at which 	royalty or dead rent shall be 
payable in respect of any mineral.  Any cess levied by the State 
Government would have the effect of increasing the royalty.
Section 2
of the MMDR Act makes the requisite declaration to the 
effect that it is expedient in the public interest that the Union 
should take under its control the regulation of mines and the 
development of minerals 'to the extent hereinafter provided'.  
Such declaration is in the terms contemplated by Entry 54 of List 
I.  It was submitted that the levy of cess by the State 
Government would be clearly repugnant to the power reserved 
by the
Constitution and the MMDR Act
to be exercised only by 
the Central Government and hence the impugned levy of cess is 
repugnant to the central legislation.  To test the validity of the 
submission we have to examine the real nature of the levy and 
find out if such levy encroaches upon the field reserved for 
central legislation.
All the minerals form part of the land.  Minerals are 
conceived by the mother earth by the process of nature and 
nurtured over innumerable number of years and delivered on 
their assuming value and utility for the earthlings. Generally and 
broadly speaking - and that would suffice for our purpose, a 
mine is an excavation in the earth which yields minerals.  
Mineral is something which grows in a mine and is capable of 
being won or extracted so as to be subjected to a better or 
precious use.  Until extracted, the mineral forms part of the crust 
of the earth.  A mineral right, according to Black's Law Dictionary 
(Seventh Edition) is the right to search for, develop, and remove 
materials from the land.  It also means the right to receive a 
royalty based on the production of minerals which right is usually 
granted by a mineral lease.   In both the senses, the right vests 
in the owner of the land and is capable of being parted with.
It is well settled that it is for the legislature to draft a piece 
of legislation by making the choicest selection of words so as to 
give expression to its intention.  The ordinary rule of 
interpretation is that the words used by the legislature shall be 
given such meaning as legislature has chosen to assign them by 
coining definitions contained in the interpretation clause and in 
absence thereof the words would be given such meaning as they 
are susceptible of in the ordinary parlance, may be by having 
recourse to dictionaries.  However still, the interpretation is the 
exclusive privilege of the Constitutional Courts and the Court 
embarking upon the task of interpretation would place such 
meaning on the words as would effectuate the purpose of 
legislation avoiding absurdity, unreasonableness, incongruity and 
conflict.  As is with the words used so is with the language 
employed in drafting a piece of legislation.  That interpretation 
would be preferred which would avoid conflict between two fields 
of legislation and would rather import homogeneity.   It follows 
as a corollary of the abovesaid statement that while interpreting 
tax laws the Courts would be guided by the gist of the legislation 
instead of by the apparent meaning of the words used and the 
language employed. The Courts shall have regard to the object 
and the scheme of the tax law under consideration and the 
purpose for which the cess is levied, collected and intended to be 
used.  The Courts shall make endavour to search where the 
impact of the cess falls. The subject matter of levy is not to be 
confused with the method and manner of assessment or 
realisation.
It is true that once a central legislation declares regulation 
of mines and mineral development by law to be expedient in the 
public interest, the legislation relating to regulation of mines and 
development of minerals shall fall within the sweep of Entry 54 
of List I.   The entry has to be liberally and widely interpreted.  
Yet it cannot be lost sight of that the entry itself employs an 
expression "to the extent to which such regulation and 
development under the control of the Union is declared by 
Parliament by law" as qualifying the preceding expression stating 
the subject __ "regulation of mines and minerals development".
Section 2
of MMDR Act too qualifies the relevant declaration by 
suffixing to it the expression "to the extent hereinafter 
provided".
Section 15
of the Act has excepted and preserved the 
power of State Governments to make rules in respect of minor 
minerals.   The qualifying words used in Entry 54 of List I and in
Section 2
of the MMDR Act contain an in-built indication that in 
spite of an inclination on the part of the Courts to be liberal in 
assigning a wide meaning to the scope of the said provisions, the 
boundaries of limitation are there and the expanse of these 
provisions cannot be so stretched as to strike at the State 
Legislations which are adequately accommodated within the field 
of an Entry in List II which too shall have to be meaningfully and 
liberally construed.
The MMDR Act
enables control over the regulation of mines 
and the development of minerals being exercised by the Central 
Government through legislation.  The High Court has upheld the 
validity of the
SADA Act
by relating it to Entry 5 in List II which 
is 'local government'.  Any local government exercising the 
power of governance over a local area shall have to administer, 
manage and develop the area lying within its territory which 
cannot be done without raising funds.  It is usual for every piece 
of legislation giving birth to an institution of local government to 
feed it by incorporating provisions conferring power of 
generating funds for meeting the expenses of governance.
The 
SADA Act
intends to achieve a level of local governance which 
the usual models of local government such as boards and 
municipalities are not considered capable of achieving and that is 
why a special development area and a Special Area Development 
Authority.  The fund established under the Act meets expenses 
of administration needed to be incurred by the authority. The 
funds cannot be utilized for any purpose other than the 
administration of the Act.  There are pieces of land which though 
containing a mine yet fall within the territory of special 
development area.  It was pointed out by the respondents before 
the High Court that in spite of the Act having been enacted in 
the year 1986 the successive State Governments, which had 
preceded, did not take care of the legislation and it was only the 
then government which became conscious of its obligations 
under the
SADA Act
and commenced identifying special areas 
requiring development such as Sonbhadra. The imposition of 
cess envisaged through the
SADA Act
and the Rules was a step 
towards developing the special area.  It is a matter of common 
knowledge, and does not need any evidence to demonstrate, 
that mining activity carried on the land within the special area 
involves extraction, removal, loading-unloading, and 
transportation of the minerals accompanied by its natural 
consequences entailed on the environment and the infrastructure 
such as roads, water and power supply etc. within the special 
area.  The impugned cess can, therefore, be justified as a fee for 
rendering such services as would  improve the infrastructure and 
general development of the area the benefits whereof would be 
availed even by the stone crushers.  Entry 66 in List II is 
available to provide protective constitutional coverage to the 
impugned levy as fee.
As held in Goodricke Group Ltd., 1995 Supp.(1) SCC 
707, which we have held as correctly decided, this Court has 
noted the principle of law well established by several decisions 
that the measure of tax is not determinative of its essential 
character. The same transaction may involve two or more 
taxable events in its different aspects. Merely because the 
aspects overlap, such overlapping does not detract from the 
distinctiveness of the aspects.  In our opinion, there is no 
question of conflict solely on account of two aspects of the same 
transaction being utilized by two legislatures for two levies both 
of which may be taxes or fees or one of which may be a tax and 
other a fee falling within two fields of legislation respectively 
available to the two.
As we have pointed out earlier, a cess may be tax or fee.  
So far as the present case is concerned, this distinction does not 
need any further enquiry by reference to the facts of the case 
inasmuch as the impugned cess is constitutionally valid 
considered whether a tax or a fee. We do not propose to 
continue dealing therewith any more inasmuch as it would be an 
exercise in futility.  We would only place on record briefly our 
reasons for upholding the validity of the impugned levy whether 
a tax or a fee.
As a tax the impugned levy of cess is clearly covered by 
Entry 5 of List II (as the High Court has held, and we add) read   
with Entries 49, 50 and 66 of List II.  There is no challenge to 
the declaration of the area as a special development area and 
the constitution of Special Area Development Authority for the 
administration thereof.  In other words, the constitutional 
validity of the enactment as a whole and the rules framed 
thereunder is not put in issue.  What is under challenge is only 
the levy of cess.  There is nothing wrong in the state legislation 
levying cess by way of tax so as to generate its funds.  Although 
it is termed as a 'cess on mineral right', the impact thereof falls 
on the land delivering the minerals.  Thus, the levy of cess also 
falls within the scope of Entry 49 of List II.  Inasmuch as the 
levy on mineral rights does not contravene any of the limitations 
imposed by the Parliament by law relating to mineral 
development, it is also covered by Entry 50 of List II.  The power 
to levy any tax or fee lying within the legislative competence of 
the State Legislature can be delegated to any institution of local 
government constituted by law within the meaning of Entry 5 in 
List II.   The Entries 5, 23, 49, 50 and 66 of List II provide 
adequate constitutional coverage to the impugned levy of cess.  
True it is that the method of quantifying the cess is by reference 
to the quantum of mineral produced.  This would not alter the 
character of the levy. There are myriad methods of calculating 
the value of the land for the purpose of quantifying the tax 
reference whereto has already been made by us in the other part 
of this judgment.   Validity of cess upon the land quantified by 
reference to the quantity of its produce was held to be a levy on 
the land and hence constitutional in Ralla Ram, AIR 1949 FC 
81, Moopil Nair, AIR 1961 SC 552 and Ajoy Kumar 
Mukherjee, AIR 1965 SC 1561.  It does not become excise duty 
on manufacture and production of goods merely on account of 
having relation with the quantity of product yielded of the land.  
Rather it is a safe, sound and scientific method of determining 
the value of the land to which the product relates.  The levy of 
cess considered as a tax is constitutionally valid.
In
Western Coalfields Ltd. Vs. Special Area 
Development Authority, Korba & Anr.
, (1982) 1 SCC 125, 
the levy of a cess almost similar to the one in issue in the 
present case, came up for the consideration of this Court.  The 
levy was for the purpose of enabling the municipal 
administration to exercise its power and discharge its functions 
under the Act.  It was held that the declaration contained in
Section 2
of the MMDR Act does not have the effect of bringing 
the powers, duties and functions of the local authority within the 
purview of occupied field.  The power to levy tax on lands and 
buildings within their jurisdiction by the local authority was 
upheld by this Court.
The following observations of Constitution Bench in 
Hingir-Rampur Coal Co. squarely apply to
SADA Act
and SADA 
Rules for upholding their constitutional validity -
"............in pith and substance the impugned Act 
is concerned with the development of the 
mining areas notified under it.  The Central 
Act, on the other hand, deals more directly 
with the control of all industries including of 
course the industry of coal."
"The functions of the Development Councils 
constituted under this Act prescribed by
Section 6(4)
bring out the real purpose and 
object of the Act.  It is to increase the 
efficiency of productivity in the scheduled 
industry or group of scheduled industries, to 
improve or develop the service that such 
industry or group of industries renders or could 
render to the community, or to enable such 
industry or group of industries to render such 
service more economically."
"........the object of the (Central) Act is to 
regulate the scheduled industries with a view 
to improvement and development of the 
service that they may render to the society, 
and thus assist the solution of the larger 
problem of national economy.  It is difficult to 
hold that the field covered by the declaration 
made by
Section 2
of this Act, considered in 
the light of its several provisions, is the same 
as the field covered by the impugned Act.  
That being so, it cannot be said that as a result 
of Entry 52 read with Act LXV of 1951 the vires 
of the impugned Act can be successfully 
challenged."
"Our conclusion, therefore, is that the 
impugned Act is relatable to Entries 234 and 
66 in List II of the Seventh Schedule, and its 
validity is not impaired or affected by Entries 
52 and 54 in List I read with Act LXV of 1951 
and Act LIII of 1948 respectively."
As stated earlier also, the impugned cess can be justified 
as fee as well.  The term cess is commonly employed to connote 
a tax with a purpose or a tax allocated to a particular thing.  
However, it also means an assessment or levy.  Depending on 
the context and purpose of levy, cess may not be a tax; it may 
be a fee or fee as well.  It is not necessary that the services 
rendered from out of the fee collected should be directly in 
proportion with the amount of fee collected.  It is equally not 
necessary that the services rendered by the fee collected should 
remain confined to the persons from whom the fee has been 
collected.  Availability of indirect benefit and a general nexus 
between the persons bearing the burden of levy of fee and the 
services rendered out of the fee collected is enough to uphold 
the validity of the fee charged.  The levy of the impugned cess 
can equally be upheld by reference to Entry 66 read with Entry 5 
of Schedule II.
Royalty is not a tax.  The impugned cess by no stretch of 
imagination can be called a tax on tax.  The impugned levy also 
does not have the effect of increasing the royalty.  Simply 
because the royalty is levied by reference to the quantity of the 
minerals produced and the impugned cess too is quantified by 
taking into consideration the same quantity of the mineral 
produced, the latter does not become royalty.  The former is the 
rent of the land on which the mine is situated or the price of the 
privilege of winning the minerals from the land parted by the 
government in favour of the mining lessee.  The cess is a levy on 
mineral rights with impact on the land and quantified by 
reference to the quantum of minerals produced. The distinction, 
though fine, yet exists and is perceptible.
In our opinion
Ram Dhani Singh Vs. Collector, 
Sonbhadra & Ors.
- AIR 2001 All. 5 has been correctly 
decided.  We uphold and affirm the same.
End Result
	 C.A. Nos.1532-33 of 1993 (Coal Matters) are allowed.  The 
decision by Calcutta High Court [
Kesoram Industries Ltd. (Textile 
Division) Vs. Coal India Ltd.
- AIR 1993 Calcutta 78] is set aside.  
The writ petitions filed in the High Court of Calcutta shall stand 
dismissed.
Leave granted in SLP (C) Nos.3986 of 1993, 11596 and 
17549 of 1994.
C.A. Nos...............................of 2004 (Ambuja Cement Ltd. 
& Anr.  Vs.  State of West Bengal & Ors.) and C.A. Nos.3518-
3519, 5149-54 of 1992, C.A. No.2350 of 1993, C.A. No.7614 of 
1994 (Coal Matters) are directed to be dismissed.
W.P.(C) Nos.262 of 1997 (Tea matters) W.P.(C) Nos.515, 
641, 642 of 1997, W.P.(C) Nos.347, 360 of 2000, W.P.(C) 
Nos.50, 553 of 2000, W.P.(C) Nos.207,288,389 of 2001 and 
W.P.(C) No.81 of 2003 are directed to be dismissed.
	W.P.(C) No.247 of 1995 and W.P.(C) No.412 of 1995 
(Brick Earth Matters) are directed to be dismissed.
C.A.Nos.5027 of 2000, C.A.Nos.6643, 6644, 6645, 6646, 
6647, 6648, 6649, 6650, 6894 of 2000 and C.A.No.1077 of 2001 
(Minor Mineral Matters) are dismissed.  The decision by the 
Allahabad High Court  (
Ram Dhani Singh  Vs.  Collector, 
Sonbhadra & Ors.
- AIR 2001 Allahabad 5) is affirmed.
It would be useful to notice a few other relevant provisions 
of the
SADA Act
.
The Act
provides for the establishment of 
Special Area Development Authorities for the planned 
development of certain areas of Uttar Pardesh and for matters 
ancillary thereto.  The State Government, when it is of the 
opinion that any area of special importance in the State needs to 
be developed in a planned manner, may, under
Section 3
by 
issuing a notification, declare such area to be a special 
development area.  On such declaration the area is to be 
administered by the Special Area Development Authority.  The 
functions and the powers of the Authority have been enumerated 
under
Sections 6
and
7
as under :
"6.  Functions of the Authority : - The 
functions of the Special Area Development 
Authority shall be -
(i) to promote and secure development in 
a planned manner of the special 
development area for which it has 
been constituted;
(ii) to prepare development plan for the 
special development area;
(iii)  to implement the development plan 
after its approval by the State 
Government;
(iv)  for the purpose of implementation of 
the plan, to acquire, hold, develop, 
manage and dispose of land and other 
property;
(v)   to carry out building, engineering, 
mining operations and other 
operations and other construction 
activity;
(vi)   to execute works in connection with 
the supply of water and electricity and 
to provide such utilities and amenities 
as water, electricity, drainage and the 
like;
(vii)  to dispose of sewage and to provide 
and maintain other services and 
amenities;
(vii)  to provide for the municipal 
management of the special 
development area in the same 
manner as is done by Nagar 
Mahapalika under the Uttar Pradesh 
Nagar Mahapalika Adhiniyam, 1959;
(ix)  to otherwise perform all such 
functions as are necessary or 
expedient for the purpose of the 
planned development of the special 
development area and for purposes 
incidental thereto;
Provided that the functions specified 
in Clauses (viii) and (ix) shall not be 
performed unless so required by the 
State Government."
"7. Powers of the Authority.- The Special 
Area Development Authority shall. -
(a) for the purpose of municipal 
administration have the powers which 
a Nagar Mahapalika has under the 
Uttar Pradesh Nagar, Mahapalika 
Adhiniyam, 1959;
(b) for the purpose of taxation have the 
powers which a Nagar Mahapalika has 
in relation to a city under the Uttar 
Pradesh Nagar Mahapalika Adhiniyam, 
1959."
Under
Section 18
, all the money received by the Authority 
by way of cess have to be deposited in a fund which fund shall 
be applied towards meeting the expenses to be incurred by the 
Authority in the administration of the Act and for no other 
purpose.
On behalf of the petitioners reliance was placed on Entries 
53 and 54 of List I (Union List) of the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution for the purpose of submitting that the regulation 
and development of mines and minerals was within the 
legislative competence of the Parliament which reads as under :
"List I - Union List.
Entry No.53. Regulation and development of 
oilfields and mineral oil resources; petroleum 
and petroleum products; other liquids and 
substances declared by Parliament by law to 
be dangerously inflammable.
Entry No.54. Regulation of mines and minerals 
development to the extent to which such 
regulation and development under the control 
of the Union is declared by Parliament by law 
to be expedient in the public interest."
On behalf of the State Government reliance was placed on 
Entries 5, 49, 50 and 66 of List II (State List) of the Seventh 
Schedule to the Constitution which reads as under :
"List II - State List 
Entry No.5. Local government, that is to say, 
the Constitution and powers of municipal 
corporations, improvement trust district 
boards, mining settlement authorities and 
other local authorities for the purpose of local 
self-government or village administration.
Entry No.49.  Taxes on lands and buildings.
Entry No.50. Taxes on mineral rights subject to 
any limitations imposed by Parliament by law 
relating to mineral development.
Entry No.66.  Fees in respect of any of the 
matters in this List, but not including fees 
taken in any Court."
Having noticed the relevant entries and the statutory 
provisions as contained in the Act and the Rules, we may 
proceed to examine what the term 'cess' means.  Straightway 
we refer to the decision of this Court in
Kunwar Ram Nath and 
Ors.  Vs.  The Municipal Board, Pilibhit
- (1983) 3 SCC 357, 
wherein placing reliance on the Constitution Bench in
The 
Hingir-Rampur Coal Co., Ltd. and Ors.  Vs.  The State of 
Orissa and others
- AIR 1961 SC 459, it was held that a 'cess' 
may either be a tax or fee.  Where a 'cess' in a given context is a 
tax or a fee depends upon the purpose for which it is levied.  The 
primary object and the essential purposes of the levy must be 
distinguished from its ultimate or incidental results or 
consequences.  Between a tax and a fee there is not generate 
difference as both are compulsory exertion of money by public 
authorities.  However, a tax is imposed for public purposes and 
is not, and need not be supported by any consideration of 
service rendered in return; on the other hand, a fee is levied 
essentially for purposes rendered and as such there is an 
element of quid pro quo between the person who pays the fee 
and the public authority which imposes it.  The tax recovered 
goes into the consolidated fund which is utilize for all public 
purposes whereas a cess levied by way of fee does not become a 
part of the consolidated fund; it is earmarked and set apart for 
the purposes of services for which it is levied.  This conceptual 
distinction between the tax and the fee is to be kept in view but 
the fact remains that the scheme of the several entries in the 
three Lists empowers the appropriate legislatures to levy taxes 
and also empowers specifically the same legislature to levy fees 
in respect of the matters covered in the said Lists.  It is the fees 
taken in any court which only has been treated as a distinct 
Head.  Once we find the impugned cess within the legislative 
competence of the State Legislature, it would not be of much 
consequence whether it is in the nature of tax or fee.  By a 
separate judgment pronounced today in ............... we have set 
out and dealt with in framing details several principles of 
interpretation of entries contained in the three Lists of the 
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and the powers exercisable 
by the Union and the States particularly in relation with the laws 
dealing with taxes.  Those principles may be kept in view and we 
do not propose to repeat and restate those principles here.
tagged with the said C.A. Nos.1532-33/93 and others.  These 
appeals were heard along with the said appeals, as directed and 
listed.  However, we are disposing of the present appeals by a 
separate judgment as the facts of the case are little different 
though the principles of law governing the decision would almost 
be the same.  A reference to
the said decision
delivered by us is, 
therefore, necessary.
Para as deleted by HL in the draft 

(kept for safe side for the time-being)

 	Provided that when in the coal-bearing 
land referred to in clause (b), there is no 
production of coal for more than two 
consecutive years, such land shall be 
liable for levy of cess in respect of any 
year immediately succeeding the said 
two consecutive years in accordance with 
clause (a):
Provided further that where no dispatch 
of minerals or materials is made during a 
period of more than two consecutive 
years from the mineral-bearing land or 
quarry as referred to in clause (c), such 
land or quarry shall be liable for levy of 
cess in respect of any year immediately 
succeeding the said two consecutive 
years in accordance with clause(a)."
How the abovesaid error has resulted into shaping the 
development of case law needs to be noted and dealt with.
In
State of M.P. Vs. Mahalaxmi Fabric Mills Ltd. and Ors.
- 
1995 Suppl. (1) SCC 642 what was put in issue was the 
enhancement of royalty by the Central Government in exercise 
of the power conferred by
Section 9(3)
of the MMRD Act.  Based 
on the decision of India Cement cess on coal levied by State 
legislation was struck down by this Curt in the case of Orissa 
cement.  The State Governments were starved for revenue and 
therefore the Central Government stepped in to revise upwards 
the rates of royalty to augment the revenue of the States.  In 
exercise of its power under
Section 9(3)
the Central Government 
increased the rates of royalty.  The cealing for enhancement  of 
rates of royalty was removed by amending
Section 9(3)
.  The 
vires of the provision were put in issue.
A bench of three 
learned Judges of this Court  decided
Mahalaxmi Fabric Mills 
Ltd. and Ors.
's case (supra).
P. Kannadasan Vs. TISCO
	Our dealing with the available decisions may not be 
complete unless we make a reference to
P. Kannadasan & Ors. 
Vs. State of T.N. & Ors.
, (
1996) 5 SCC 670 and District 
Mining Officer & Ors. Vs. Tata Iron and Steel Co. & Anr.
, 
(2001) 7 SCC 358, the latter being a three-Judge Bench decision 
which has over-ruled the former being a decision by two-Judge 
Bench.  At the very outset we make it clear that the question 
which arose for decision in the said two decisions does not 
directly arise for decision in the cases before us.  However, it 
becomes necessary to deal with a few principles of constitutional 
significance dealt with therein by the two Benches in so far as 
relevant for our purpose.  We are not making any detailed 
statement of facts and the contentions advanced as it is not 
necessary and if necessary the reference can be had to the law 
reports of the two decisions.
Levy of a local cess at the rate of 45 p. on every rupee of 
land revenue payable to the government in respect of any land 
levied by Section 115 of the Tamil Nadu Panchayat Act 1958 was 
declared ultra vires the constitution in India Cement.  Following
the said decision
Orissa Cement declared incompetent the 
identical levies imposed by the States of Orissa, Bihar and 
Madhya Pradesh through State legislations.  These two decisions 
had a serious impact on the revenue of several State 
governments.  The Parliament stepped in coming to the rescue 
of the State governments.  Initially the President of India 
promulgated Cess and Other Taxes on Minerals (Validation) 
Ordinance 1992 on 15.2.1992, which was recognized by Act 
No.16 of 1992 w.e.f. 4.4.1992.  The ordinance and the Central 
Act both are brief legislations consisting of three sections merely 
the purpose whereof has been to provide constitutionally valid 
base for the sustainability of the cess for the period for which the 
State legislations had remained in operation until struck down by 
India Cement and Orissa Cement.  In substance, the two 
decisions referred to hereinabove which led to the promulgation 
of the ordinance and the enactment of the central legislation had 
struck down the State legislations by forming an opinion that the 
field of legislation having been appropriated to the Union of 
India, the States were not competent to enact the laws.  The 
ordinance and the Act removed the infirmity and altered the 
bases of legislations.  India Cement and Orissa Cement both 
have held that the State legislations would have been 
constitutionally valid if the subject matter thereof would have 
been enacted by the Parliament and that ________ was made 
good by promulgation of ordinance and the Act.  Thus, it is not 
correct to say that the ordinance and the Act had the effect of 
nullifying the judgments of the Courts; rather they adopted the 
devise of curing the defect as pointed out by this Court by 
removing the flawed foundation and substituting the 
constitutionally valid bases for the validity of the same 
legislation. The other constitutionally valid devise of legislation 
by incorporation was adopted by the Parliament.  The Central 
Act did not re-enact of the contents of the struck down State 
legislations in the Central Act and instead couched the Central 
Act in such language which has effect of all the relevant 
provisions of the scheduled State legislations being individually 
and specifically enacted by Parliament as being necessarily read 
forming part of the contents thereof and having been enacted 
with retrospective effect by the Parliament.  the existence of 
constitutional power vesting in the Parliament to enact tax laws 
having retrospective operation cannot be denied and was not 
denied.
The submission that the Central Act was only a piece of 
temporary legislation having a limited life to live was rejected 
and it was held that the Act, ever since the date of its 
enactment, became operative and would continue to remain in 
force until the Parliament chose to repeal it.
The constitutional validity of the same
Cess Validation Act
came to be examined once again in TISCO case wherein the 
Bench of three learned Judges examined the issue from the point 
of view of its applicability in the State of Bihar.  A perusal of the 
judgment of this Court in TISCO case shows that the Court has 
proceeded on certain premises which, with respect, we find 
difficult to sustain.  The Court held that the Parliament never re-
enacted the eleven Acts mentioned in the Schedule, but merely 
provided the legislative competence for those provisions in those 
Acts which related to cesses or taxes on minerals; that the 
Validation Act merely had the effect of validating the collections 
already made so that the States shall not be burdened with the 
liability of refunding the amount already collected under void law 
but the Validation Act cannot be construed to have conferred a 
right to make levy and collection of cesses or taxes on minerals 
which were collectable upto 4.4.1991; and that the Validation 
Act was a piece of temporary legislation which did not expressly 
conferred a right to levy and collect the cess for any period 
subsequent to 4.4.1991.  Suffice it to say that all the three 
reasonings, in our humble opinion and with respect to the 
learned Judges deciding the case, suffer from in-built fallacy.  
Firstly, it is not necessary to examine whether the Central Act is 
a temporary or permanent legislation.  The correct approach 
should have been to examine the impact and effect of the 
validating Act.  Does it give rise to any substantive rights and 
obligations?  If yes, the rights and obligations created thereby 
would continue to survive till satisfied.  The language of the 
validating Act did not create any distinction between the right of 
the States to retain the amount of cesses already realised and 
the right of the States to collect the cesses which having been 
validated were yet to be collected.  The text of the validating Act 
has been reproduced in P. Kannadasan case.  It is significant 
to note that TISCO has not struck down the Validation Act as 
constitutionally invalid; in spite of upholding the constitutional 
validity of the Act as was done by Patna High Court in the 
judgment impugned before this Court; all that this Court has 
done is to construe the effect of the Validation Act by expressing 
an opinion that the amount collected by the States was not liable 
to be refunded though fresh notices for collection and levy of 
dues in respect of liability accrued till 4.4.1991 could not be 
countenanced upon an interpretation of provisions of the 
Validation Act.  We find it difficult to countenance the view 
taken.  Once the Validation Act has been held to be 
constitutionally valid not only the action already taken 
thereunder but also the action subsequently taken for enforcing 
the rights and obligations incurred prior to the coming into force 
of the Act by operation of those laws which were validated would 
be constitutionally valid on the language of the Validation Act.  
The States were enforcing the liabilities validly incurred by the 
persons liable to cesses on behalf of the central government as 
the scheme of the
MMDR Act
1957 is.  There is nothing like 
deliberate and conscience omission of the saving clause by the 
Parliament in the Validation Act.  The authority of law in the 
States to raise demand and make collection of cess and tax on 
minerals under the validated provisions of the State laws clearly 
and necessarily follows.  In our opinion, P. Kannadasan was 
correctly decided.  Tata Iron and Steel Co. does not lay down 
the correct law.
The upshot of the above discussion is that levy of cess is held to 
be valid.
The West Bengal Primary Education Act, 1973
and
West 
Bengal Rural Employment and Production Act, 1976
, as amended by 
the West Bengal Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1992, with effect 
from 1.4.1992 are held intra vires the Constitution.  'Land' has 
been classified into three categories, i.e.  coal bearing land, 
mineral bearing land (other than coal bearing land) or quarry, and 
land other than the said two.  The classification into three 
categories is by reference to the character, quality and 
productivity of the land, i.e. what the land is capable of 
delivering.  The three categories of land are well defined 
classifications.  The classification serves the purpose sought to 
be achieved, that is, by levying cess at different rates 
consistently with the value of the land, determinable by the 
quality and nature of productivity offered by the land.  What is 
won from the land and what it delivers, is capable of being 
assessed, in terms of money, by finding out the quantity of coal 
or mineral or material extracted and dispatched.  The period of 
non-production qualifies for concession.  The mechanism for 
assessment of value of land cannot be determinative or decisive of 
the nature and character of tax which essentially remains a cess 
on land.  The impugned cess successfully withstands the test of 
constitutional validity on the principles laid down in Goodricke.  
India Cement and Orissa Cement do not apply.
C.A. Nos.1532-33 of 1993 - The State of West Bengal   
Vs.  Kesoram Industries Ltd. and Ors., are allowed.  The 
impugned judgment of the High Court is set aside.    The writ 
petitions filed in the High Court by the respondents are directed 
to be dismissed.
W.P.(C) No.262 of 1997 - The Terai Indian Planters' 
Association & Anr.  Vs.  The State of West Bengal and 
Ors., is devoid of any merit.
The challenge, led to the 
constitutional validity of levy of cess on tea estates, must be 
repelled in the light of the decision of this Court in
Goodricke
's 
case (supra) which we have held as laying down the correct 
position of law.  The abovesaid writ petition is dismissed.