[Cites
17
, Cited by
59
]
Supreme Court of India
Kachrulal Bhagirath Agrawal & Ors vs State Of Maharashtra & Ors on 22 September, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 4818, 2004 AIR SCW 5516, 2005 (1) UJ (SC) 85, 2005 (9) SCC 36, 2005 SCC(CRI) 1191, 2005 FAJ 65, 2004 (2) FAC 119, 2004 CRI(AP)PR(SC) 742, 2004 (7) ACE 464, 2004 (6) SLT 88, 2004 (8) SCALE 107, 2005 UJ(SC) 1 85, 2004 CRILR(SC MAH GUJ) 886, 2004 CRILR(SC&MP) 886, (2004) 22 ALLINDCAS 72 (SC), 2004 (10) SRJ 63, (2004) 7 SUPREME 72, (2005) 1 EASTCRIC 236, (2004) 2 FAC 119, (2004) 4 MAH LJ 963, (2005) 1 RAJ CRI C 98, (2004) 4 RECCRIR 415, (2004) 4 CURCRIR 136, (2004) 3 ALLCRIR 2764, (2004) 8 SCALE 107, (2005) 1 GCD 883 (SC), (2005) 1 ALLCRILR 22, (2004) 4 CRIMES 99, (2004) 4 RECCRIR 589, (2005) 1 BOMCR(CRI) 756, (2004) 50 ALLCRIC 445, (2004) 3 CHANDCRIC 206, (2004) 24 INDLD 60, 2005 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 548, 2004 (2) ANDHLT(CRI) 436 SC, (2004) 2 ANDHLT(CRI) 436, 2004 (2) ALD(CRL) 989, 2005 (1) BOM LR 499, 2005 BOM LR 1 499
Author:
Arijit Pasayat
Bench:
Arijit Pasayat
,
C.K. Thakker
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  1350 of 2003

PETITIONER:
Kachrulal Bhagirath Agrawal & Ors.

RESPONDENT:
State of Maharashtra & Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 22/09/2004

BENCH:
ARIJIT PASAYAT & C.K. THAKKER

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T



ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.
Legality of action taken and order passed  by learned Sub-
Divisional Magistrate, Sakoli  (for short 'SDM') under
Section 133
of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short the 'Code') having 
upheld by a learned Single Judge of the Bombay High Court, this appeal 
has been filed.  It is of relevance to note that the appellants had 
filed a revision before the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Gondia, 
questioning legality of the order dated 7.2.1989 passed by the SDM. The 
revisional authority held that the order passed by the SDM was not 
legal.  Thereafter a revision was filed by the five of the original 
applicants, who had initiated action before the SDM.  The High Court as 
noted above, by the impugned judgment held that the order passed by the 
SDM was legal and proper.  The revisional court should not have  
interfered with it.
Backgrounds facts as per the complainants are as follows:
The original non-applicant M/s. Ramchand Bhagirath is a 
proprietary concern of Bhagirath Ramchand Agrawal (since deceased). He 
was a commission agent in a Kirana goods and was also a wholesale 
dealer in dry chillies.  In Ansari Ward of Gondia city, he had a godown 
in a double storied building known as Vishnu Kunj where he used to 
store large quantity of chillies.  The applicants before learned SDM 
are residents of Ansari Ward which is mainly a residential locality.  
Present appellant No.1 being a wholesale dealer in dry chillies, 
everyday trucks loaded with dry chillies come to his godown and then 
the same are unloaded and stored in the godown.  Similarly, loading of 
dry chillies also goes on for distributing the same to his customers. 
This has been going on since several years and it appears to have 
become a routine thing.  The applicants however made a grievance that 
on account of storing of dry chillies in the godown as well as the work 
of loading and unloading thereof the health and physical comfort of the 
residents in that locality were affected and it has become practically 
impossible for them to bear any further.  According to them, the 
loading and unloading of chillies cause pollution with the result that 
many residents in the locality suffer from sneezing, coughing, asthma, 
irritation of skin and burning sensation.  The applicants, therefore, 
moved the Municipal Council for taking necessary action in this behalf.  
However, since the Municipal Council did not give any response, the 
applicants moved learned SDM, Gondia, under
Section 133
of the Code.  
The learned SDM, after finding that there was a prima facie case 
against the present applicants issued a conditional order dated 
12.3.1985 under
Section 133(1)(b)
of the Code with a notice to them to 
show cause as to why the same should not be confirmed and made 
absolute.  Pursuant to the said notice, the appellants appeared before 
learned SDM, Gondia, and filed reply.  In the said reply, it was 
submitted that the building "Vishnu Kunj" was being used as godown but 
it was denied that the loading and unloading of dry chillies pollutes 
the atmosphere and causes physical injury or discomfort to the 
residents of the locality.  It was pointed out that the godown is a 
pakka construction and that whenever loading and unloading is required 
to be done, water is sprinkled to avoid pollution.  This has been going 
on for about 20 years and nobody ever made any complaint in that 
behalf. Learned SDM, Gondia, allowed the parties to lead evidence in 
support of their respective contentions.  He recorded part of the 
evidence and thereafter the case was transferred to learned SDM, 
Sakoli, who completed the enquiry. Learned SDM, Sakoli, upon 
consideration of the evidence of the witnesses came to the following 
conclusions viz.:
(i)	People in general in the locality in sufficient number are 
suffering from the loading and unloading of dry chillies and 
its storage in the godown;
(ii)	It has resulted not only in their adverse health and 
discomfort but a few are permanently suffering in the sense 
that some of them are suffering from sickness and ailment;
(iii)	Even the witnesses of the non-applicant admitted that due to 
this business, there is discomfort and injury to physical 
health;
In this view of the matter, learned SDM, Sakoli, held that the 
applicants proved public nuisance and physical discomfort to them.  
Consequently, learned SDM, Sakoli, proceeded to pass an order under
Section 133
of the Code, operative part of which reads as follows:
"The non-applicant is hereby directed that he will 
not keep, store and transport chillies in the 
godown, Vishnu Kunj as the same is injurious to the 
health and physical comfort of the community and he 
shall also remove all the goods stored therein. This 
order shall be given effect from 22nd February, 1989.
Notice in form No.21 be issued to the non-
applicant."
Feeling aggrieved by this order, the present appellants preferred 
Criminal Revision Application No.17 of 1989 in the court of the 
Additional Sessions Judge, Gondia.  The learned Additional Sessions 
Judge proceeded to reassess the  evidence adduced by the parties and 
came to the conclusion that the learned SDM, committed error in holding 
that the business of the non-applicant causes public nuisance.  He 
further held that the learned SDM ignored the evidence adduced on 
behalf of the non-applicant and attached too much importance to the 
evidence of the applicants.  The learned Additional Sessions Judge 
further held that the learned SDM had arbitrarily used his discretion 
in favour of the original applicants and, therefore, it was a fit case 
to interfere with the impugned order.  In this view of the matter, the 
learned Additional Sessions Judge allowed the revision application 
filed by the original non-applicant and set aside the order passed by 
learned SDM.  A Criminal Revision Application was filed by some of the 
original applicants before the High Court to set aside the revisional 
order.
Originally, there were ten applicants, five of whom later on had 
withdrawn.  Therefore, five of the original applicants moved the High 
Court, which came to hold that the conditions requisite for passing of 
order under
Section 133(1)(b)
as well as final order under
Section 138
of the Code were not fulfilled. Accordingly it set aside order of the 
revisional Court.
In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the appellants 
submitted that the scope and ambit of
Section 133
has not been kept in 
view.  The evidence was not sufficient to show that community was 
affected by the conduct of keeping any goods by the appellant. It has 
not been established that such conduct of business was injurious to the 
health or physical comfort of the community.  It was pointed out that 
learned Additional Sessions Judge had analysed the factual and legal 
position to hold that the basic requirements for passing an order under
Section 133
of the Code were absent. Alternatively, it was submitted 
that the SDM had the jurisdiction to pass directions regulating conduct 
of the trade or keeping of the goods.  This aspect has not been 
examined by learned SDM and the High Court.  For pretty long time the 
appellant was carrying business without any grievance whatsoever by any 
member of the community. It was submitted that the appellant is a 
commission agent and there was no material to conclude that he was 
dealing in red chilly.  The non-dried chillies were stored and cannot 
in any manner create inconvenience or injuries to the health and legal 
comfort of the community. There was no material to show that the 
community as such was affected. In fact, because of business rivalry 
ten applicants had filed petitions before the learned SDM. Five of them 
later on realized that it was not worthwhile to proceed in the matter 
as the ingredients of
Section 133
of the Code were not satisfied and 
withdrew.
In response learned counsel for the respondents submitted that 
the learned SDM had elaborately examined the factual and legal 
position.
It was pointed out that while exercising revisional jurisdiction 
learned Sessions Judge should not have interfered with the well-
reasoned and well-merited order passed by the learned SDM.  The High 
Court, therefore, analysed the factual and legal position afresh and 
came to the conclusion that the order passed by the learned SDM under
Section 133
of the Code was justified.
Section 133
so far as it is relevant for our purpose reads as 
follows:
133. CONDITIONAL ORDER FOR REMOVAL OF NUISANCE.
(1) Whenever a District Magistrate or a Sub-
divisional Magistrate or any other Executive 
Magistrate specially empowered in this behalf by the 
State Government, on receiving the report of a 
police officer or other information and on taking 
such evidence (if any) as he thinks fit, considers -
(a) xx			xx			xx
(b) that the conduct of any trade or occupation, or 
the keeping of any goods or merchandise, is 
injurious to the health or physical comfort of the 
community, and that in consequence such trade or 
occupation should be prohibited or regulated or such 
goods or merchandise should be removed or the 
keeping thereof regulated; or
(c)to (f) xx			xx			xx 
such Magistrate may make a conditional order 
requiring the person causing such obstruction or 
nuisance, or carrying on such trade or occupation, 
or keeping any such goods or merchandise, or owning, 
possessing or controlling such building, tent, 
structure, substance, tank, well or excavation, or 
owning or possessing such animal or tree, within a 
time to be fixed in the order -
(i) xx				xx			xx
(ii) to desist from carrying on, or to remove or 
regulate in such manner as may be directed, such 
trade or occupation, or to remove such goods or 
merchandise, or to regulate the keeping thereof in 
such manner as may be directed; or
(iii) to (vi)	xx		  xx			xx
or, if he objects so to do, to appear before himself 
or some other Executive Magistrate subordinate to 
him at a time and place to be fixed by the order, 
and show cause, in the manner hereinafter provided, 
why the order should not be made absolute.
(2) No order duly made by a Magistrate under this 
section shall be called in question in any Civil 
Court.
xx				xx				xx"
A proceeding under
Section 133
is of a summary nature. It appears 
as a part of Chapter X of the Code which relates to maintenance of 
public order and tranquility. The Chapter has been classified into four 
categories.
Sections 129
to
132
come under the category of "unlawful 
assemblies".
Sections 133
to
143
come under the category of "public 
nuisance".
Section 144
comes under the category of "urgent cases of 
nuisance or apprehended danger" and the last category cover
Sections 
145
to
149
relating to "disputes as to immovable property".  Nuisances 
are of two kinds, i.e. (i) Public; and (ii) Private.  'Public nuisance' 
or 'common nuisance' as defined in
Section 268
of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (in short the '
IPC
') is an offence against the public either 
by doing a thing which tends to the annoyance of the whole community in 
general or by neglecting to do anything which the common good requires.  
It is an act or omission which causes any common injury, danger or 
annoyance to the public or to the people in general who dwell or occupy 
property in the vicinity.  'Private nuisance' on the other hand, 
affects some individuals as distinguished from the public at large.  
The remedies are of two kinds  civil and criminal.  The remedies under 
the civil law are of two kinds.  One is under
Section 91
of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (in short '
CPC
').  Under it a suit lies and the 
plaintiffs need not prove that they have sustained any special damage.  
The second remedy is a suit by a private individual for a special 
damage suffered by him.  There are three remedies under the criminal 
law.  The first relates to the prosecution under Chapter XIV of
IPC
.  
The second provides for summary proceedings under
Sections 133
to
144
of the Code, and the third relates to remedies under special or local 
laws.  Sub-section (2) of
Section 133
postulates that no order duly 
made by a Magistrate under this Section shall be called in question in 
any civil Court. The provisions of Chapter X of the Code should be so 
worked as not to become themselves a nuisance to the community at 
large.  Although every person is bound to so use his property that it 
may not work legal damage or harm to his neighbour, yet on the other 
hand, no one has a right to interfere with the free and full enjoyment 
by such person of his property, except on clear and absolute proof that 
such use of it by him is producing such legal damage or harm. 
Therefore, a lawful and necessary trade ought not to be interfered with 
unless it is proved to be injurious to the health or physical comfort 
of the community. Proceedings under
Section 133
are not intended to 
settle private disputes between different members of the public.  They 
are in fact intended to protect the public as a whole against 
inconvenience. A comparison between the provisions of
Section 133
and
144
of the Code shows that while the former is more specific the latter 
is more general.  Therefore, nuisance specially provided in the former 
section is taken out of the general provisions of the latter section.  
The proceedings under
Section 133
are more in the nature of civil 
proceedings than of criminal nature.
Section 133(1)(b)
relates to trade 
or occupation which is injurious to health or physical comfort.  It 
deals with itself physical comfort to the community and not with those 
which are in themselves nuisance but in the course of which public 
nuisance is committed.  In order to bring a trade or occupation within 
the operation of this Section, it must be shown that the interference 
with public comfort was considerable and a large section of the public 
was affected injuriously.  The word 'community' in Clause (b) of
Section 133(1)
cannot be taken to mean residents of a particular house.  
It means something wider, that is, the public at large or the residents 
of an entire locality.  The very fact that the provision occurs in a 
Chapter with "Public Nuisance" is indicative of this aspect.  It would, 
however, depend on the facts situation of each case and it would be 
hazardous to lay down any straitjacket formula.  
	The guns of
Section 133
go into action wherever there is public 
nuisance.  The public power of the Magistrate under the Code is a 
public duty to the members of the public who are victims of the 
nuisance, and so he shall exercise it when the jurisdictional facts are 
present.  "All power is a trust  that we are accountable for its 
exercise  that, from the people, and for the people, all springs and 
all must exist".  The conduct of the trade must be injurious in 
presenti to the health or physical comfort of the community.  There 
must, at any rate, be an imminent danger to the health or the physical 
comfort of the community in the locality in which the trade or 
occupation is conducted.  Unless there is such imminent danger to the 
health or physical comfort of that community or the conduct of the 
trade and occupation is in fact injurious to the health or the physical 
comfort of that community, an order under
Section 133
cannot be passed.  
A conjoint reading of
Sections 133
and
138
of the Code discloses that 
it is the function of the Magistrate to conduct an enquiry and to 
decide as to whether there was reliable evidence or not to come to the 
conclusion to act under
Section 133
.
Section 133
of the Code as noted above appears in Chapter X of 
the Code which deals with maintenance of public order and tranquility. 
It is a part of the heading "Public nuisance".  The term "nuisance" as 
used in law is not a term capable of exact definition and it has been 
pointed out in Halsbury's Laws of England that:
"even in the present day there is not entire 
agreement as to whether certain acts or omissions 
shall be classed as nuisances or whether they do not 
rather fall under other divisions of the law of 
tour".
In Vasant Manga Nikumba v. Baburao Bhikanna Naidu (1995 Supp (4) 
SCC 54) it was observed that nuisance is an inconvenience which 
materially interferes with the ordinary physical comfort of human 
existence. It is not capable of precise definition.  To bring in 
application of
Section 133
of the Code, there must be imminent danger 
to the property and consequential nuisance to the public. The nuisance 
is the concomitant act resulting in danger to the life or property due 
to likely collapse etc. The object and purpose behind
Section 133
of 
the Code is essentially to prevent public nuisance and involves a sense 
of urgency in the sense that if the Magistrate fails to take recourse 
immediately irreparable danger would be done to the public.  It applies 
to a condition of the nuisance at the time when the order is passed and 
it is not intended to apply to future likelihood or what may happen at 
some later point of time.  It does not deal with all potential 
nuisances and on the other hand applies when the nuisance is in 
existence. It has to be noted that sometimes there is confusion between
Section 133
and
Section 144
of the Code.  While the latter is a more 
general provision the former is more specific.  While the order under 
the former is conditional, the order under the latter is absolute.
[See
State of M.P. v. Kedia Leather & Liquor Ltd. and Ors.
(2003 
(7) SCC 389)].
In the background of legal principles set out above, the judgment 
of the High Court does not suffer from any infirmity.  
The residual question, however, is whether learned SDM could 
consider the suggestions, if any, given by the appellants, as to the 
manner in which goods can be stored or connected activities by passing 
order of a regulatory nature.  This is permissible by the provisions 
itself which provide that SDM can regulate such activities.  Therefore, 
without expressing any opinion on that matter for which material can be 
placed by the appellants before the learned SDM for appropriate orders 
in the matter, we direct that if any suggestion or alternative 
arrangement is brought to the notice of learned SDM it shall be 
considered in its proper perspective in accordance with law.      
	With the aforesaid observations, the appeal is dismissed.