[Cites
1
, Cited by
362
]
Supreme Court of India
Dolly Chhanda vs Chairman, Jee & Ors on 5 October, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 5043, 2005 (9) SCC 779, 2004 AIR SCW 5699, (2004) 8 JT 267 (SC), 2004 (10) SRJ 147, 2004 (8) SCALE 422, (2004) 23 ALLINDCAS 96 (SC), 2004 (6) SLT 285, 2004 (8) JT 267, (2004) 4 CTC 796 (SC), (2004) 4 MAD LJ 111, (2004) 7 SUPREME 297, (2004) 2 ORISSA LR 532, (2005) 2 PAT LJR 14, (2004) 4 SCT 546, (2004) 6 SERVLR 399, (2004) 8 SCALE 422, (2005) 59 ALL LR 164, (2004) 98 CUT LT 756, 2005 BLJR 1 426, (2005) 2 BLJ 44, (2004) 24 INDLD 282, (2004) 4 ALL WC 3203, 2005 SCC (L&S) 734
Bench:
R.C. Lahoti
,
G. P. Mathur
,
P. P. Naolekar
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  6506 of 2004

PETITIONER:
Dolly Chhanda

RESPONDENT:
Chairman, JEE & Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 05/10/2004

BENCH:
CJI R.C. LAHOTI, G. P. MATHUR & P. P. NAOLEKAR

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

(Arising out of S.L.P.(Civil) No.21153/2003)


G. P. MATHUR
1.	Leave granted.
2.	This appeal, by special leave, has been preferred against the judgment 
and order dated 31.10.2003 of High Court of Orissa by which the writ 
petition filed by the appellant for issuing a direction to the respondents to 
admit her in MBBS course was summarily dismissed.
3.	The appellant passed 10+2 (Science) Examination conducted by the 
Council of Higher Secondary Education, Orissa, in First Class.   As she 
was desirous of joining a medical course, she appeared in the Joint 
Entrance Examination, 2003 (for short 'JEE-2003') under the reserved MI 
category being daughter of an ex-serviceman  NK Manoranjan Chhanda 
who was discharged from armed forces on the ground of permanent 
disability.   Under Clause 2.1.4 of Information Brochure of JEE-2003 
certain percentage of seats are reserved for children/widows of personnel 
of armed/paramilitary forces of Orissa, killed/disabled in action during war 
or peace time operation.   Her rank in the JEE-2003 in the reserved MI 
category in the medical stream was 20 and accordingly she was called for 
counselling for admission to a medical college on 7.7.2003.   During the 
course of scrutiny of papers it was revealed that in the certificate dated 
29.6.2003 given to her father by the Zilla Sainik Board in Column No.3 
which pertained to "Disabled/killed in war/hostilities" the words "not 
eligible" were written.   Since the aforesaid certificate did not satisfy the 
requirement of the reserved MI category, her candidature was rejected.   
The candidates who had secured ranks at 24 and 26 in the aforesaid 
category were given admission.   She produced the disability certificate 
which was issued to her father by the army authorities, but in view of 
requirement of Clause 2.1.4 of the Information  Brochure  the  same was 
not accepted.    The appellant's father then requested the Zilla Sainik 
Board, Sambalpur to rectify the mistake, which issued a fresh certificate on 
16.7.2003 which mentioned "Permanently Disabled" in Column No.3.   
The appellant then again approached respondent no.1 with the aforesaid 
correct certificate, but no action was taken.   On coming to know that 
another round of counselling had been fixed for 29.10.2003 on account of 
increase in seat, the appellant went to the concerned centre and requested 
for being given admission on the basis of the fresh certificate issued by the 
Zilla Sainik Board, which certified that her father had been discharged 
from armed forces on the ground of permanent disability.   The candidates 
who had secured rank from 27 to 30 in the MI category were called for 
counselling, but the appellant's candidature was not considered.   The case 
of the appellant thus is that it was the Zilla Sainik Board which had 
committed the mistake in not issuing a correct certificate and the said 
mistake having been was rectified in the second certificate issued on 
16.7.2003, she was entitled for admission in a medical college as 
candidates securing lower ranks had already been admitted.
4.	The writ petition filed by the appellant was dismissed by the High 
Court on the ground that at the time of the counselling on 7.7.2003 the 
certificate furnished by the appellant did not bear any testimony that her 
father being a personnel of armed/paramilitary forces of Orissa had been 
disabled in action and consequently in terms of Clause 2.1.4 of the 
Information Brochure her claim that she belong to the reserved MI 
category had not been established.
5.	In the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents, it is 
admitted that the appellant had secured rank at serial no.20 in the medical 
stream in the JEE-2003 in the reserved MI category.   The stand taken is 
that as in the certificate produced by the appellant at the time of 
counselling on 7.7.2003, it was not mentioned that her father was a 
disabled personnel of the armed/paramilitary forces, her candidature was 
rejected.   It is further pleaded that since her candidature was rejected due 
to her ineligibility, she was not allowed to appear in the second 
counselling.  The fact that candidates who have secured ranks lower than 
the appellant in the reserved MI category have been given admission is not 
disputed.
6.	The appellant has filed a copy of the certificate dated 3.10.2001 issued 
by Signal Abhilekh Karyalaya, Signals Records, Post Bag No.5, Jabalpur 
(M.P.), which certifies that Ex-NK Manoranjan Chhanda resident of VPO 
Larambha, District Sambalpur (Orissa) is suffering from permanent 
disability.   The certificate produced by the appellant on 7.7.2003 was 
issued by Zilla Sainik Board on 28.6.2003 and in this certificate a mistake 
had crept in, namely, in Column No.3 pertaining to "Disabled/killed in 
war/hostilities", the words "not eligible"  were written.   This mistake was 
rectified in the second certificate issued by the Zilla Sainik Board on 
16.7.2003 where in Column  No.3  the words  "Permanently disabled"
were written.  The factual position, viz., that the appellant's father  
Manoranjan Chhanda was discharged from army on account of permanent 
disability is not at all disputed by the respondents.   Similarly, the 
correctness of the second certificate issued by the Zilla Sainik Board, 
Sambalpur, wherein it was mentioned that Ex-NK Manoranjan Chhanda 
had suffered permanent disability is also not disputed.   The only ground 
on which the appellant's candidature was rejected is that at the time of the 
counselling on 7.7.2003 she failed to produce the certificate to show that 
she belongs to a reserved category.
7.    The general rule is that while applying for any course of study or a 
post, a person must possess the eligibility qualification on the last date 
fixed for such purpose either in the admission brochure or in application 
form, as the case may be, unless there is an express provision to the 
contrary.  There can be no relaxation in this regard i.e. in the matter of 
holding the requisite eligibility qualification by the date fixed.   This has to 
be established by producing the necessary certificates, degrees or 
marksheets.   Similarly, in order to avail of the benefit of reservation or 
weightage etc. necessary certificates have to be produced.   These are 
documents in the nature of proof of holding of particular qualification or 
percentage of marks secured or entitlement for benefit of reservation.   
Depending upon the facts of a case, there can be some relaxation in the 
matter of submission of proof and it will not be proper to apply any rigid 
principle as it pertains in the domain of procedure.   Every infraction of  
the rule relating to submission of proof need not necessarily result in 
rejection of candidature.
8.	This principle was explained and applied in
Charles K. Skaria & Ors. 
v. Dr. C. Mathew & Ors.
1980 (2) SCC 752.   The controversy here related 
to admission to a post graduate course in medicine.   The relevant rule 
provided for addition of 10% marks if a candidate possessed a diploma in 
the relevant subject or sub-specialty and this benefit could be given only if 
the candidate's success in the diploma course was brought to the 
knowledge of the Selection Committee before completion of selection in 
an authentic or acceptable manner.   The Prospectus provided that the 
attested copies of statement of marks and other documents should be 
attached with every application.   Three such candidates were given 
admission who had not attached the certificate of having passed the 
diploma along with their applications. Their admission to post graduate 
course  was set aside by the High Court on the ground that their 
applications, wherein they claimed the benefit of diploma, were liable to be 
rejected as the requisite certificates had not been attached.  This Court 
speaking through Krishna Iyer, J. reversed the judgment of the High Court 
and held that the admission to the candidates had rightly been given as they 
had in fact passed the diploma before the date fixed.   The relevant parts of 
paras 20 and 24 of the judgment, where this principle was highlighted are 
being reproduced below :
"20.	There is nothing unreasonable or arbitrary in adding 10 
marks for holders of a diploma.   But to earn these extra 10 
marks, the diploma must be obtained at least on or before the 
last date for application, not later.   Proof of having obtained a 
diploma is different from the factum of having got it.   Has the 
candidate, in fact, secured a diploma before the final date of 
application for admission to the degree course ?   That is the 
primary question.   It is prudent to produce evidence of the 
diploma along with the application, but that is secondary.   
Relaxation of the date on the first is illegal, not so on the 
second.   Academic excellence, through a diploma for which 
extra mark is granted, cannot be denuded because proof is 
produced only later, yet before the date of actual selection.   
The emphasis is on the diploma; the proof thereof subserves the 
factum of possession of the diploma and is not an independent 
factor. ...
Mode of proof is geared to the goal of the qualification in 
question.    It is subversive of sound interpretation and realistic 
decoding of the prescription to telescope the two and make both 
mandatory in point of time.   What is essential is the possession 
of a diploma before the given date; what is ancillary is the safe 
mode of proof of the qualification.   To confuse between a fact 
and its proof is blurred perspicacity.   To make mandatory the 
date of acquiring the additional qualification before the last date 
for application makes sense.  But if it is unshakeably shown 
that the qualification has been acquired before the relevant date, 
as is the case here, to invalidate this merit factor because proof, 
though indubitable, was adduced a few days later but before the 
selection or in a manner not mentioned in the prospectus, but 
still above-board, is to make procedure not the handmaid but 
the mistress and form not as subservient to substance but as 
superior to the essence.
24.	 It is notorious that this formalistic, ritualistic, approach 
is unrealistic and is unwittingly traumatic, unjust and 
subversive of the purpose of the exercise.   This way of viewing 
problems dehumanizes the administrative, judicial and even 
legislative processes in the wider perspective of law for man 
and not man for law.   Much of hardship and harassment in 
administration flows from over-emphasis on the external rather 
than the essential.   We think the government and the selection 
committee rightly treated as directory (not mandatory) the mode 
of proving the holding of diplomas and as mandatory the actual 
possession of the diploma.  In actual life, we know how 
exasperatingly dilatory it is to get copies of degrees, decrees 
and deeds, not to speak of other authenticated documents like 
mark-lists from universities, why, even bail orders from courts 
and government orders from public offices"
9.	The appellant undoubtedly belonged to reserved MI category. She 
comes from a very humble background, her father was only a Naik in the 
armed forces.   He may not have noticed the mistake which had been 
committed by the Zilla Sainik Board while issuing the first certificate dated 
29.6.2003.   But it does not mean that the appellant should be denied her 
due when she produced a correct certificate at the stage of second 
counselling.   Those who secured rank lower than the appellant have 
already been admitted.   The view taken by the authorities in denying 
admission to the appellant is wholly unjust and illegal.
10.	The appellant had qualified in the JEE-2003 but the said academic 
year is already over.   But for this situation the fault lies with the 
respondents, who adopted a highly technical and rigid attitude and not with 
the appellant.   We are, therefore, of the opinion that the appellant should 
be given admission in MBBS course in any of the State medical colleges in 
the current academic year.
11.	The appeal is accordingly allowed with costs.   The judgment and 
order dated 31.10.2003 of the High Court is set aside.   The respondents 
are directed to give admission to the appellant in any one of the State 
medical colleges forthwith.   In case the State seats have already been filled 
up, one extra seat shall be created for her.