[Cites
29
, Cited by
33
]
Supreme Court of India
A.C. Razia vs Government Of Kerala & Ors on 12 January, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 2504, 2004 (2) SCC 621, 2004 AIR SCW 2803, 2004 (1) LRI 167, (2004) 1 JT 264 (SC), (2004) 15 ALLINDCAS 842 (SC), 2004 SCC(CRI) 618, 2004 (1) SLT 497, 2004 (15) ALLINDCAS 842, 2004 (1) JT 264, 2004 (1) SCALE 378, 2004 ALL MR(CRI) 2252, 2004 (1) ACE 341, (2004) 1 KHCACJ 429 (SC), (2004) 1 KER LT 836, (2004) 27 OCR 577, (2004) 2 RECCRIR 236, (2004) 1 CURCRIR 126, (2004) 1 SUPREME 489, (2004) 1 SCALE 378, (2004) 2 BOMCR(CRI) 68, (2004) 48 ALLCRIC 798, (2004) 1 CHANDCRIC 339, (2004) 2 ALLCRILR 756, (2004) 1 CRIMES 296, (2004) 113 ECR 486, (2004) 2 EFR 460, (2004) 15 INDLD 90
Author:
P. Venkatarama Reddi
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
P. Venkatarama Reddi
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  53 of 2004

PETITIONER:
A.C. Razia				

RESPONDENT:
Government of Kerala & Ors.	

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 12/01/2004

BENCH:
CJI. & P. VENKATARAMA REDDI.

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

With

Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 6 of 2003
ARISING OUT OF

SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRL.) NO. 153 OF 2003

P. Venkatarama Reddi, J.
Leave granted in S.L.P.(crl.) No. 153 of 2003.
Questioning the detention of the  petitioner's husband  
by name, P. Mohd. Kutty under the provisions of
Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of 
Smuggling Activities  Act
(COFEPOSA), Writ Petition (Crl.) 
No.6 of 2003 has been filed by her praying for the issuance 
of a writ of habeas corpus. The detention order was also 
challenged in the High Court of Kerala by way of a petition 
filed under
Article 226.
The Writ Petition was dismissed on 
29.11.2002.  The said judgment has been challenged in the 
Special Leave Petition.  The Special Leave Petition came up 
for hearing before a bench consisting of Rajendra Babu, J. 
and G.P. Mathur, J.   Rajendra Babu, J. allowed the writ 
petition by quashing the order of detention.  However, 
Mathur, J. held that the writ petition and the SLP were liable 
to be dismissed.  In view of this difference of opinion, the 
matter has been placed before this three Judge Bench.
	On 24.12.2000 the baggage of one Anodiyil Mammu, 
who was  waiting to take the flight to Dubai, was inspected 
at Trivandrum International Airport. He is related to the 
detenu. On such inspection, foreign currencies were found in 
a brief case and various other articles which he was 
carrying.  Some of the foreign currency notes were 
concealed in a cardboard carton.  The foreign currency was 
seized and the statement of Mr. Mammu was recorded under
Section 108
of the Customs Act.  He stated that the foreign 
currency was entrusted to him by P. Mohd. Kutty i.e. the 
detenu for conveying it to Dubai and handing it over to one 
Shafeek for which he was to be paid some remuneration. He 
gave various details as to how and from where he got the 
carton and foreign currency. On the same day and the next 
day, the statements of Mohd. Kutty, the detenu and various 
other persons, who were directly or indirectly involved in  
this operation, were recorded under
Section 108
of the 
Customs Act and they were substantially in conformity with 
the version of A. Mammu. Initially, Mohd. Kutty confessed to 
his involvement.  However, the statements were retracted 
later on.  Anodiyil Mammu claimed the ownership of foreign 
currency in his representation dated 15.01.2001 and  thus 
retracted from earlier statement. On the basis of the 
information together with the supporting material received 
from the Directorate of Revenue  (Intelligence), the order of 
detention was passed by the Government of Kerala (Home 
Department) on 19.4.2001.  However, the detenu could only 
be arrested on 24.6.2002.  The detenu was served with the 
order and grounds of detention together with the copies of 
various documents referred to in the grounds. The 
representation addressed to the detaining authority was sent 
by the detenu's wife on 13.7.2002 and the same was 
rejected by the State Government. The representation 
addressed to the Central Government was also rejected on 
29.7.2002.  The case of the detenu was referred to the 
Advisory Board and on the basis of the report received, the 
Government confirmed the detention order on 6.9.2002.  At 
that stage the writ petition under
Article 226
was filed in the 
Kerala High Court challenging the detention.
	The only point raised in the course of the arguments in 
the High Court was that the documents furnished to the 
detenu were not translated into Malayalam on account of 
which he was unable to make proper representation against 
his detention.  This contention was rejected by the Division 
Bench of the High Court, relying on the averments in the 
counter-affidavit filed  by the State.  The High Court referred 
to the fact that the documents duly translated into 
Malayalam were in fact furnished to the detenu and he 
acknowledged the same on 24.6.2002.  The High Court also 
observed that the detenu was familiar with the English 
language.  The contention, which was rejected by the High 
Court, has not been reiterated before this Court.  However, 
the only contention urged is that the disposal of the 
representation by the Central Government was not proper. 
As many of the crucial documents were in Malayalam, the 
officials  of the Central Government who dealt  with the case 
being unacquainted with Malayalam language, should have 
called  for translated copies of the documents.  The 
authorities of Central Government would not have, 
therefore, perused the relevant documents and in this sense 
there was no proper application of mind. It is submitted that  
the improper disposal of the representation has vitiated the 
detention and the continued detention is violative of
Articles 
21
and
22
of the Constitution.
Rajendra Babu, J. was of the view that for a proper 
consideration by the Central Government, there shall be full 
and independent application of mind on the representation 
and on all the documents which formed the basis of 
detention order. The grounds of detention and the 
documents upon which it is based should be 'strictly 
scrutinized'. For this purpose, the necessary documents 
should be translated into the language which could be 
understood by the concerned official without which full and 
independent application of mind cannot be ensured. Since 
the detaining authority had not placed the representation 
and the alleged documents in a translated form before the 
Central Government, the appellant's representation was not 
properly evaluated and therefore the guarantee under
Article 
22(5)
was violated.
G.P. Mathur, J. observed that the power under
Section 11
to revoke the order of detention is some kind of a 
supervisory power. If so, while considering the 
representation, it is not necessary for the Central 
Government to look into and thoroughly examine all those 
documents which have been supplied to the detenu along 
with grounds of detention. The principle that the documents 
which are not material and to which only casual reference 
was made in the grounds need not be supplied to the detenu 
will equally apply in the matter of consideration of 
representation by the Central Government. Basically, the 
Central Government is required to examine the pleas raised 
by the detenu in his representation and in the present case 
the detenu hardly raised any specific plea which would 
require perusal and examination of the document copies of 
which were supplied to the detenu. If the translation is to be 
insisted, it would often lead to delay and that itself may 
become a ground to invalidate the detention.
The only question on which the arguments have been 
addressed before us is whether there could be due 
application of mind on the part of the Central Government 
and proper disposal of the representation in the absence of 
English translated copies of documents relied on in the 
detention order? Though the answer to this question lies in a 
narrow compass, arguments on certain wider issues were 
addressed before us, keeping in view the differing view-
points expressed by the two Hon'ble Judges. The questions 
debated relate to the ambit of the guarantee incorporated in
Article 22(5)
vis-`-vis the consideration of representation by 
the Central Government and the nature and extent of power 
under
Section 11
of COFEPOSA Act. We have felt that it is 
desirable to marshal the thoughts on the subject and restate 
the principles with clarity. Hence, this wider discussion.
The law of preventive detention is a drastic law as it 
authorizes detention without trial in a court of law and is an 
encroachment on the liberty of an individual which is a 
cherished freedom under our Constitution.  At the same 
time, the need for such law in larger public or national 
interest has been recognized by the Constitution.  In order 
to mitigate the rigour of the law, certain minimum 
safeguards have been provided in the Constitution in  order 
to ensure that there is no unjustified detention and the 
detention should not continue unnecessarily.  The preventive 
detention laws such as the
COFEPOSA Act
, with which we 
are concerned, apart from ensuring the minimum safeguards 
expressly mandated by the Constitution, have supplemented 
to these safeguards especially by making provisions enabling 
scrutiny and review of detention order by more than one 
authority on the representation of the detenu or otherwise. 
By judicial interpretation, some more ancillary safeguards to 
effectuate the constitutional guarantees flowing from
Articles 
21
and
22
have been carved out.
The twin constitutional safeguards related to preventive 
detention are enshrined in clauses (4) and (5) of
Article 22.
Clause (4) prescribes a ban on the law authorising 
preventive detention for a period longer than 3 months 
unless the Advisory Board reports before the expiration of a 
period of 3 months that in its opinion there is sufficient 
cause for such detention. This is however subject to the 
exception laid down in sub-Clause (a) of
Article 22(7).
The 
Advisory Board is composed of persons who are, or have 
been or are qualified to be Judges of the High Court.  The 
proviso to Clause (4) further mandates that the detention 
cannot extend beyond the maximum period prescribed by a 
law made by the Parliament vide clause (7) of
Article 22.
We are concerned here with clause (5) of
Article 22.
The dual rights under clause (5) are : (i) the right to be 
informed as soon as may be of the grounds on which the 
order has been made, that is to say, the grounds on which 
the subjective satisfaction has been formed by the detaining 
authority and (ii) the right to be afforded the earliest 
opportunity of making a representation against the order of 
detention.  By judicial craftsmanship certain ancillary and 
concomitant rights have been read into this Article so as to 
effectuate the guarantees/safeguards envisaged by the 
Constitution under Clause (5) of
Article 22.
For instance, it 
has been laid down by this Court that the grounds of 
detention together with the supporting documents should be 
made available to the detenu in a language known to the 
detenu.  The duty to apprise the detenu of the right to make 
representation to one or more authorities who have power 
to reconsider or revoke the detention has been cast on the 
detaining authority.  So also the duty to consider the 
representation filed by or on behalf of the detenu with 
reasonable expedition has been emphasized in more than 
one case and where there was inordinate delay in the 
disposal of representation, the detention was set aside on 
that very ground.
In COFEPOSA Act
and cognate Acts, we find an array of 
statutory safeguards with regard to detention "in tune with 
the constitutional requirements" . Sub-section (2) of
Section 3
of COFEPOSA Act casts an obligation on the State 
Government to forward to the Central Government within 10 
days the report in respect of the detention order.  It is 
obvious that this provision is meant to enable the Central 
Government to address itself to the issue of detention at the 
earliest opportunity and to intervene in appropriate cases by 
exercising its power of revocation under
Section 11
.
Section 3(3)
of the Act provides that the grounds of 
detention shall be furnished ordinarily not later than 5 days 
after the detention.
Section 8
provides for constitution of 
Advisory Board, the procedure to be followed by the Board 
and the action to be taken by the Government on receipt of 
the opinion of the Board.
Section 10
prescribes the 
maximum period of detention which is one year or two 
years, depending on the applicability of
Section 9
.
Section 11
empowers the State Government or the Central 
Government, as the case may be, to revoke the detention 
order without prejudice to the power of the detaining 
authority to rescind the same under
Section 21
of the 
General Clauses Act.
The combined effect of the constitutional and statutory 
provisions from the point of view of the detenu's right to 
make  the representation is to provide more than one forum 
to re-examine or review the case of the detenu and to afford 
him various means of redressal of his grievance. Thus, the 
matter could be examined by (i) the Advisory Board, (ii) the 
detaining authority and (iii) the State or Central 
Governments acting under
Section 11
or on receipt of 
Advisory Board's opinion.  This is apart from the power of 
the Central Government to examine the validity of detention 
acting suo motu on receipt of report under
Section 3(2)
.  
Under Section 11  which is of immediate relevance in the 
present case, the Central Government has the power to 
revoke the orders made by (i) the State Government, (ii) an 
officer specially empowered by the State Government and
(iii) an officer specially empowered by the Central 
Government.  The order passed by an officer specially 
empowered by a State Government can be revoked by the 
State Government as well.  "The conferment of this power 
on the Central and the State Governments does not, 
however, detract from the power that is available to the 
authority that has made the order of detention to revoke it".  
This is ensured by the words "without prejudice to the 
provisions of
Section 21
of the General Clauses Act" in sub-
section (1) of
Section 11
(vide observations of the 
Constitution Bench in paragraph 22 in the case of Kamlesh 
Kumar vs. Union of India, [(1995) 4 SCC 51].
Whether the right to make a representation to the 
State or the Central Government under
Section 11
becomes an integral part of
Article 22(5)
or it remains to be 
a statutory safeguard only is the next aspect which merits 
discussion.  Clause (5) of
Article 22
does not, in express 
terms, spell out the authority to whom the representation 
has to be made.  Does it contemplate the representation 
being made to and considered by the detaining authority?  
Doubts in this respect have been cleared by the Constitution 
Bench in Kamlesh Kumar's case (supra) which is also a 
case arising under
COFEPOSA Act
.  In that case, the stand 
taken by the Union of India speaking through Additional 
Solicitor General was that the use of the word 'a' in singular 
indicates that only one representation is to be made and 
that representation is meant to be placed before the 
Advisory Board which is the only authority contemplated 
under the Constitution to consider such a representation.  
This contention was unhesitatingly rejected by the Court and 
it was observed that if such a restricted interpretation is to 
be given to the expression "making a representation against 
the order", the guarantee under clause (5) of
Article 22
may 
be rendered nugatory.  The Constitution Bench, having 
noted that
Article 22(5)
does not specify the authority to 
whom the representation is to be made, ruled thus :
"Since the object and purpose of the 
representation that is to be made by the person 
detained is to enable him to obtain relief at the 
earliest opportunity, the said representation has to 
be made to the authority which can grant such 
relief, i.e, the authority which can revoke the 
order of detention and set him at liberty.  The 
authority that has made the order of detention can 
also revoke it.  This right is inherent in the power 
to make the order.  It is recognized by
Section 21
of the General Clauses Act, 1897 though it does 
not flow from it.  It can, therefore, be said that
Article 22(5)
postulates that the person detained 
has a right to make a representation against the 
order of detention to the authority making the 
order.  In addition?, such a representation can be 
made to any other authority which is empowered 
by law to revoke the order of detention."
Adverting to the cases beginning with S.K.Abdul 
Karim [(1969) 1 SCC 433] in which it was held that the 
representation should be considered by the State 
Government  it was explained that all those cases related to 
orders of detention made by the District Magistrate under 
the
Preventive Detention Act
which specifically provides in
Section 7(1)
that the authority making the order of 
detention shall afford to the person detained the earliest 
opportunity of making a representation against the order to 
the 'appropriate government'.  It was observed that in those 
cases, the court was not required to consider whether the 
detaining authority should also consider the representation.  
However, it was noticed that in
Pankaj Kumar 
Chakrabarty vs. State of W.B.
, (1969) 3 SCC 400, the 
Constitution Bench did say that the detaining authority must 
consider the representation when so made.
Approving the 
majority view taken in
Amir Shad Khan vs. L. 
Hmingliana
, (1991) 4 SCC 39, the legal position as to the 
content of the right under
Article 22(5)
in the context of the 
opportunity to make representation has been succinctly 
stated thus in Kamlesh Kumar:
"
Article 22(5)
must, therefore, be construed to 
mean that the person detained has a right to 
make a representation against the order of 
detention which can be made not only to the 
Advisory Board but also to the detaining authority, 
i.e., the authority that has made the order of 
detention or the order for continuance of such 
detention, which is competent to give immediate 
relief by revoking the said order as well as to any 
other authority which is competent under law to 
revoke the order for detention and thereby give 
relief to the person detained.  The right to make a 
representation carries within it a corresponding 
obligation on the authority making the order of 
detention to inform the person detained of his 
right to make a representation against the order 
of detention to the authorities who are required to 
consider such a representation."
We get even a clearer idea of the exposition of law in 
this regard by referring to the three Judge Bench decision in
Amir Shad Khan
's case (supra) which was approvingly 
cited by the Constitution Bench in Kamlesh Kumar's case 
(supra). The following passage makes the legal position 
clear:
"Thus on a conjoint reading of
Section 21
of the 
General Clauses Act and
Section 11
of the Act it 
becomes clear that the power of revocation can be 
exercised by three authorities, namely, the officer 
of the State Government or the Central 
Government, the State Government as well as the 
Central Government.  The power of revocation 
conferred by
Section 8(f)
on the appropriate 
Government is clearly independent of this power.  
It is thus clear that
Section 8(f)
of the Act satisfies 
the requirement of
Article 22(4)
whereas
Section 
11
of the Act satisfies the requirement of the 
latter part of
Article 22(5)
of the Constitution.  The 
statutory provisions, therefore, when read in the 
context of the relevant clauses of
Article 22
make 
it clear that they are intended to satisfy the 
constitutional requirements and provide for 
enforcement of the right conferred on the detenu 
to represent against his detention order.  Viewed 
in this perspective it cannot be said that the power 
conferred by
Section 11
of the Act has no relation 
whatsoever with the constitutional obligation cast 
by
Article 22(5)."
Again, after referring to the observations in
Razia 
Umar Bakshi vs. Union of India
, [(1980) 3 SCR 1398], 
Ahmadi J. (as he then was) speaking for the majority 
observed thus :-
"This observation would show that the power of 
revocation conferred by
Section 11
of the Act has 
a nexus with the right of representation conferred 
on the detenu by
Article 22(5)
and, therefore, the 
State Government when requested to forward a 
copy of the representation to the Central 
Government is under an obligation to do so."
It is interesting to note that Punchi, J., though agreed 
with the conclusion of the majority, was not inclined to hold 
that
Section 11
of COFEPOSA Act was part of the 
constitutional guarantee under
Article 22(5).
The learned 
Judge made the following crucial remarks:-
"Have
Section 11
of the Act repealed, it causes no 
affectation to the constitutional guarantee under
Article 22(5)
of the Constitution.  Correspondingly,
Section 11
of the Act derives no sustenance from 
the said article.  Both operate in mutually 
exclusive fields, though not as combatants."
The reasoning of the  Constitution Bench in Kamlesh 
Kumar's case (supra) proceeded on similar lines as the 
majority view in
Amir Shad Khan
's case (supra).  
The emerging result of the above discussion is that the 
additional remedy or safeguard provided by
Section 11
has 
been projected into the fabric of
Article 22(5)
so as to be 
absorbed into the ambit of safeguard provided by the latter 
part of
Article 22(5).
A provision like
Section 11
may or 
may not be necessary to give effect to that safeguard,  but, 
once a provision like
Section 11
finds its place in the 
detention law, the detenu's constitutional right to make 
representation gets amplified.  His right extends to making 
representations to all those authorities who can grant him 
relief and the opportunity afforded to the detenu to submit 
such representations thus becomes a part of the guaranteed 
right under
Article 22(5).
That is how the ratio of the above 
decisions has to be understood.  In fact, that is how it has 
been understood by the detaining authority in the instant 
case.  We find at the end of the order a note to the effect 
that the detenu has the right to make representations to the 
detaining authority, the Central Government and COFEPOSA 
Advisory Board against the detention.  The addresses of the 
said authorities were also mentioned.
What then is the width and amplitude of the power 
exercisable under
Section 11
by the Central/State 
Governments to revoke the order of detention?  Are there 
inherent limitations in such power? This question assumes 
some relevance in resolving the controversy arising in the 
present case. The decisions of this Court starting from
Pankaj Kumar Chakrabarthy
's case [(1969) 3 SCC 
400] make it clear that there is qualitative difference 
between the manner of disposal of representation by the 
Government on the receipt of the report from the Advisory 
Board or otherwise and the manner of consideration by the 
Advisory Board.  It was observed
in
the above case
thus:
"whereas the Government considers the representation to 
ascertain whether the order is in conformity with its power 
under the relevant law, the Board considers such 
representation from the point of view of arriving at its 
opinion whether there is sufficient cause for detention."
These observations made in a series   of cases were in     
the context of
Preventive Detention Act
where the order of 
detention is passed by the District Magistrate who in turn 
has to afford to the detenu the earliest opportunity of 
making representation to the appropriate Government.  
However,   in
K.M.Abdulla Kunhi vs. Union of India
[(1991) 1   SCC 476] the Constitution Bench while dealing 
with the case under COFEPOSA adopted the same line of 
approach in regard to the powers of the Government in 
considering the representation.  While pointing out that the 
obligation of the Government to afford to the detenu an 
opportunity to make representation and to consider such 
representation is distinct from the obligation to refer the 
case of detenu along with the representation to the Advisory 
Board, it was observed thus:
"The Government considers the representation to 
ascertain essentially whether the order is in 
conformity with the power under the law.  The 
Board, on the other hand, considers the 
representation  and the case of the detenu to 
examine whether there is sufficient cause for 
detention.  The consideration by the Board is an 
additional safeguard and not a substitute for 
consideration of the representation by the 
Government.  The right to have the representation 
considered by the Government is safeguarded by 
Clause (5) of
Article 22
and it is independent  of 
the consideration of the detenu's case and his 
representation by the Advisory Board under 
Clause (4) of
Article 22
read with
Section 8(c)
of 
the Act."
Thus, the principle is well settled that the Government 
in exercise of the power under
Section 11
does not consider 
the question of sufficiency or adequacy of the grounds but it 
would only see whether the detention order is within the 
parameters of the power conferred under the statute. In 
other words, it will not review the case as if it is an original 
or appellate authority. That is why the power under
Section 11
has been described as supervisory in nature as 
pointed out by G.P. Mathur, J. taking support from the 
observations in
Sabir Ahmad  vs.  Union of India
[(1980) 3 SCC 295  and Sat Pal  vs. State of Punjab 
[(1982) 1 SCC 12].  Obviously, this supervisory power 
cannot be equated to the subjective satisfaction of the 
detaining authority or the power of the Advisory Board to 
examine whether there is sufficient  material for detention. 
The range of consideration by the Advisory Board is thus 
wider.
The proposition that the power conferred under
Section 11
is supervisory does not however mean that the 
exercise of power is purely discretionary or that the process 
of consideration could be casual and superficial. No doubt, 
as laid down in
Abdulla Kunhi
's case (vide para 19), there 
need not be a speaking order in disposing of such 
representation. However, the Government has a duty to 
consider the representation in proper perspective in order to 
see whether the order of detention is in conformity with law. 
The Government, should, quite apart from the points raised 
in the representation, apply its mind broadly to the question 
whether the detention is in accordance with law. For 
instance, if the material relied upon  by the detaining 
authority does not ex facie establish a nexus with the pre-
conditions for the exercise of the power or the conclusions of 
the detaining authority are found to be wholly perverse  or 
the prescribed procedure has not been followed by the 
detaining authority, the appropriate Government acting 
under
Section 11
has a duty to interfere and revoke the 
order of detention. In order to achieve this end, the Central 
Government must necessarily have regard to the 
representation, the report received from the State 
Government, the detention order and the material relied 
upon in the detention order or referred to in the 
representation. The exercise of the power under
Section 11
should not be a mere formality or a farce. Care and vigilance 
should inform the action of the Government while 
discharging its supervisory responsibility.
As observed in 
Haradhan Saha's case [(1975) 3 SCC 198] and 
reiterated in
K.M.Abdulla Kunhi
's case, what is required is 
"real and proper consideration".  The following observations 
in Abdul Karim,  are quite apposite in this context :
"But it is a necessary implication of the language 
of
Article 22(5)
that the State Government should 
consider the representation made by the detenu 
as soon as it is made, apply its mind to it and, if 
necessary, take appropriate action. In our opinion, 
the constitutional right to make a representation 
guaranteed by
Article 22(5)
must be taken to 
include by necessary implication the constitutional 
right to a proper consideration of the 
representation by the authority to whom it is 
made. The right of representation under
Article 
22(5)
is a valuable constitutional right and is not a 
mere formality."

 The same proposition has been highlighted by 
Rajendra Babu, J. by observing that "there should be full 
and independent application of mind".
The next and most relevant point to be considered in 
the present case is whether in the absence of translated 
copies of the relevant documents referred to in the detention 
order, there could have been proper and effective 
consideration by the Central Government. To put it in other 
words, whether the decision making process under
Section 11
of the Act is vitiated by non application of mind 
by reason of the fact that the translated copies of the 
documents were not available with the concerned officials of 
the Government who may be unacquainted with the 
particular language? In our view, the question whether any 
or all of the documents which formed the basis of the 
detention order should be before the Central Government or 
not, depends on the facts of each case. There can be no 
hard and fast rule that the appropriate Government called 
upon to take a decision under
Section 11
should necessarily 
have copies of all the documents relied upon by the 
detaining authority with the translated version thereof.
In 
the context of the guarantee under
Article 22(5)
, it was laid 
down that "if the documents which form the basis of the 
order of detention were not served on the detenu along with 
the grounds of the detention, in the eye of law, there would 
be no service of the grounds of detention and that 
circumstance would vitiate the detention and make it void ab 
initio (vide observations in
M. AhmedKutty Vs. U.O.I.
[(
1990) 2 SCC 1] and Shalini Soni Vs. U.O.I.
[(1980) 4 
SCC 544]).
It was also clarified in a series of decisions that 
it is unnecessary to furnish copies of documents to which 
casual or passing reference is made and which are not relied 
upon by the detaining authority (vide
LMS Ummu Saleema 
Vs. B.B. Gujaral
[(1981) 3 SCC 317 etc). We are of the 
view that the proposition
laid down by
this Court that the 
copies of translated documents  forming the basis of the 
detention order should be furnished to the detenu in order to 
give effect to the guarantee enshrined in
Article 22(5)
cannot be imported while dealing with the question in the 
context of exercise of power of revocation under
Section 11
on the basis of representation or otherwise. The question 
whether there was due consideration of representation has 
to be judged by general principles of administrative law. 
There is no  constitutional requirementexpress or 
necessarily implied that the authority considering the 
representation should have before it all the documents 
referred to in detention order with translated version 
thereof. But, the availability or non-availability of such 
documents with the empowered authority under
Section 11
will only have bearing on the manner of consideration of 
representation, which in turn depends on the facts of a 
particular case. The endeavor of the Court in this regard is 
only to assess whether there was fair and proper 
consideration by the Government by applying its mind to the 
crucial aspects warranting its attention. The necessity or 
otherwise of having copies of documents should be viewed 
in that light. The Court has to be satisfied that there was 
due application of mind to the crucial aspects. The points 
raised by the detenu in the representation would naturally 
assume importance, as pointed out by Mathur, J. though the 
Government ought not to confine itself to the points 
highlighted in the representation alone. If, for the purpose of 
appreciating the points in the representation, the documents 
are required to be seen, naturally, the Central Government 
will be failing in its duty if it does not call for the documents 
with translation. For instance, the detenu may say that a 
particular statement relied upon in the detention order is 
something different and it was misread. The document has 
to be necessarily seen to appreciate that point. That apart, 
the Government shall have a clear idea of the nature of 
incriminating material against the detenu. If the detention 
order does not spell out the details thereof, but only makes 
a bare reference, here again, the need to peruse the crucial 
documents or statements so as to judge the validity of 
detention does arise; otherwise the Central Government will 
not be fulfilling the supervisory responsibility cast on it in 
the manner expected of it. However, we hasten to add that 
there can be no rule similar to the one
laid down in
the 
context of detenu's right under the first part of Clause (5) of
Article 22.
The question whether there could have been due 
application of mind and proper consideration of 
representation by the Government in the absence of crucial 
documents/translated copies thereof has to be decided on 
case to case basis. The approach cannot be abstract and 
unrealistic. No inflexible rule of general application can be 
laid down. However, we would like to make it clear that if in 
a given case, the perusal of certain documents becomes 
necessary, it is no answer to say that the translation 
involves delay. It is trite to say that where there is 
reasonable explanation for delay, the detention does not get 
invalidated.
Now, let us examine the factual situation in the instant 
case.
A perusal of the detention order would reveal that the 
statements of Anodiyal Mammu, who was intercepted at the 
airport and that of the detenu and the statements of all 
others recorded under
Section 108
of Customs Act as      
well as the subsequent letters retracting from the earlier 
statements were referred to in the detention order 
elaborately and exhaustively.  The statements are almost 
verbatim extracted in the detention order. We find        
them at pages 29 to 49 of the Paper Book.  The contents of 
the letters received from the Assistant Commissioner of 
Customs and the counsel for A. Mammu have also been 
referred to in paras 10 and 17. When the detention       
order itself makes an elaborate reference to the 
statements/letters of concerned persons which were either 
relied upon or rejected by the detaining authority in the 
detention order, the authority exercising the power under
Section 11
would, in no way be handicapped in dealing with 
the issue in general and the representation in particular.    
In the representations made by the petitioner (detenu's 
wife)the English version of which were on the record of 
Central Government, the plea taken was that the statements 
were obtained under threat and coercion and that is        
why they retracted from the previous statements. Of course, 
certain other grounds were urged which are not relevant    
for the purpose of examining the issue with which we are 
concerned. On the facts alleged or points raised, there was 
really no need to have access to any of the documents 
referred to in the detention order. Having regard to this 
factual situation, we do not think that the Central 
Government should necessarily have the translated copies  
of the documents referred to and relied upon in the 
detention order and that the absence of such documents   
has vitiated the consideration of the representation, nor   
can it be said that there was no application of mind on the 
part of the Central Government for the simple reason that 
the translated copies of the documents were not      
available before it. The physical availability of such 
documents or translated version thereof, would have made 
no difference as regards the disposal of representation  or 
the consideration of the question whether the detention was 
in conformity with law. As already stated, the very perusal  
of the detention order would give a clear picture of the 
incriminating material relied upon by the detaining authority. 
In the circumstances, to insist on the perusal of original or 
true copies of statements and other documents referred to 
in the detention order would amount to insisting on an 
empty formality. The constitutional guarantee does not go to 
that extent.
Thus, the only contention raised before us touching on 
the validity of detention order has to be negatived. The writ 
petition and Criminal Appeal are therefore dismissed.