[Cites
17
, Cited by
77
]
Supreme Court of India
M.P. Rural Agriculture Extension ... vs State Of M.P. And Anr on 5 April, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 2020, 2004 (4) SCC 646, 2004 AIR SCW 2180, 2004 LAB. I. C. 1727, (2004) 2 LAB LN 729, (2004) 4 SCALE 260, (2005) 1 SERVLJ 12, (2005) 1 JAB LJ 36, (2004) 3 MAD LJ 139, 2004 SCC (L&S) 667, (2004) 3 JCR 16 (SC), (2004) 17 INDLD 372, (2004) 2 CURLR 538, (2004) 101 FACLR 691, (2004) 2 KER LT 265, (2004) 2 SCT 431, 2004 UJ(SC) 2 1283, (2004) 19 ALLINDCAS 836 (SC), (2004) 5 ALL WC 4232, (2004) 105 FJR 549, (2004) 2 LABLJ 1114, (2004) 3 SUPREME 110, (2004) 4 JT 446 (SC)
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
S.B. Sinha
,
S.H. Kapadia
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  3134 of 1999

PETITIONER:
M.P. Rural Agriculture Extension Officers Association

RESPONDENT:
State of M.P. and Anr.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 05/04/2004

BENCH:
CJI, S.B. Sinha & S.H. Kapadia.

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

S.B. SINHA, J :
Applicability of doctrine of 'equal pay for equal work' 
is involved in this appeal which arises out of a judgment 
and order dated 13.4.1998 passed by the High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh at Jabalpur in Writ Petition No.1550 of 1998.
BACKGROUND FACTS:
The appellant herein is an Association of Rural 
Agriculture Extension Officers (hereinafter referred to as 
'the Extension Officers').  They were originally appointed 
as Village Level Workers. They are matriculates.  The 
services of the Village Level Workers were transferred to 
the agriculture department of the State.  It framed rules in 
the year 1972.  On or about 9.4.1981, the designation of the 
Village Level Workers was changed to the Rural Agriculture 
Extension Officer by the State Government.  The State of 
Madhya Pradesh in exercise of the power conferred upon it 
under the Proviso appended to
Article 309
of the 
Constitution of India made rules known as 'Madhya Pradesh 
Revision of Pay Rules, 1983'.  Rule 3 of the said Rules 
reads as under :
"3. Revised Scale of Pay.- The revised 
scale of pay applicable to any post 
carrying existing scale shown in columns
2 and 3 of Annexures  I and II 
respectively shall be the corresponding 
pay-scale shown in column 4 thereof 
respect of that post."
By reason of the provisions of the said Rules, two 
different scales of pay were prescribed, namely, Rs.575-
880/- for non-graduates (Dying scale) and Rs.635-950/- for 
fresh recruitment and for existing B.Sc./B.Sc. Agriculture.  
By reason of an executive instruction dated 2/5.3.1984, the 
decision of the State Government was communicated to the 
Director, Agriculture, the relevant portion whereof is to 
the following effect:
"Essential educational qualification 
for the post of Rural Agricultural 
Extension Officer being graduation (for 
all departments) be fixed and all the 
graduates so employed be paid by the 
pay-scale of Rs.635-950/-.  All those 
graduate employees who were working to 
the posts in all departments prior to 
1.4.81 should be paid given a salary at 
the rate of Rs.635-950/-.
2.	*	*	*	*	*	*	*
3.	*	*	*	*	*	*	*

	This sanction endorsement vide 
notification No.5/385/84/Dept.1/Four 
dated 3.3.84 had been endorsed in the 
records of the Accountant General's 
Office."
Yet again by an amendment to the rule by a notification 
dated 5.9.1984 in sub-clause (2) in Part B of the said Rules 
the words "for new recruitments and for the qualification 
B.Sc./B.Sc. (Agri.) pass" were replaced by the words "for 
new recruitments and for graduates holding the degree".  
The appellant herein filed a writ petition before the High 
Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur praying, inter alia, for 
the following reliefs :
"b)	That the pay scale of Rural 
Agriculture Extension Officers be given 
in accordance with the ratio given in 
AIR 1984 Supreme Court 1221 and it 
should be enhanced with the cadres 
stated in the above paras by giving them 
maximum pay scale, as has been given to 
any one of those cadres."
On constitution of the Madhya Pradesh State 
Administrative Tribunal in the year 1988, however, the said 
writ petition was transferred thereto.  The Tribunal gave 
several opportunities to the respondents herein to file a 
return but despite its failure to do so and despite holding 
that a clear case of hostile discrimination has been made 
out in view of the decision of this Court in
Union of India 
and Another vs. P.V. Hariharan and Another
[(1997) 3 SCC 
568] = [JT 1997 SC 569] held that the grievances of the 
applicant regarding pay scale had to be dealt with by the 
Pay Commission.
A writ petition filed thereagainst before 
the Division Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court by the 
appellant was also dismissed in view of the judgment of this 
Court in
Hariharan
(supra) observing :
"...Moreso, there can always be a 
classification on the basis of 
graduation and non-graduation in the pay 
scale.  Thus, we are satisfied that 
there is no ground to interfere with the 
order.  Hence, this petition is 
dismissed."
SUBMISSIONS :
Dr. Rajeev Dhavan, learned Senior Counsel appearing on 
behalf of the appellant, would submit that the Tribunal as 
also the High Court went wrong in passing the impugned 
judgments and orders insofar as they failed to take into 
consideration that as by reason of the impugned rule no new 
post or cadre was created, sanction of different pay scale 
to the employees belonging to the same cadre was 
impermissible.  The purported classification between the two 
sets of employees whose posts are interchangeable and who 
are carrying out the same work and have undergone the same 
training could not have been placed in two different classes 
only on the basis of educational qualification, the learned 
Counsel submitted.  Dr. Dhavan would contend that as despite 
having been given several opportunities, the respondents 
herein failed to file return, they must be deemed to have 
admitted the contentions raised by the appellant herein 
before the Tribunal as correct and, thus, the Tribunal 
misdirected itself in refusing to grant any relief to the 
appellant despite arriving at a finding that the State has 
committed a hostile discrimination against the appellant.  
Educational qualification, Dr. Dhavan would urge, can be a 
valid criteria only where new cadre is created and where no 
minimum qualification was fixed at the time of initial 
appointment, but in a situation where the employees 
irrespective of their qualification had been performing the 
same functions in the same grade, the doctrine of equal pay 
for equal work would be applicable.
Drawing our attention to the report of the Pay Revision 
Commissions made on or about 13.10.1982 as also in the year 
1999, the learned counsel would submit that the State should 
have accepted the recommendations contained therein for 
grant of scale of pay to all Extension Officers irrespective 
of their educational qualification.  The learned counsel in 
support of his aforementioned contention has placed strong 
reliance on
State of Mysore vs. B. Basavalingappa
[(1986) 
Supp.
SCC 661], State of Madhya Pradesh and Another vs. 
Pramod Bhartiya and Others
[(
1993) 1 SCC 539] and Shyam Babu 
Verma and Others vs. Union of India and Others
[(1994) 2 SCC 
521].
The learned counsel would contend that the doctrine of 
classification should not be stretched too far and the same 
cannot be a basis for justifying an arbitrary action on the 
part of the State.  In support of the said contention, 
reliance has been placed on Col.
A.S. Iyer and Other vs. V. 
Balasubramanyam and Others
[(1980) 1 SCC 634].
Ms. Geetanjali Mohar, learned counsel appearing on 
behalf of the State of Chhattisgarh, on the other hand, 
would urge that the possession of a higher educational 
qualification has all along been held by this Court to be a 
valid classification for the purpose of fixing the scale of 
pay. Although the concerned employees had been performing 
similar duties and functions, the same would not mean, it 
was urged, that the employees cannot be granted different 
scale of pay on the basis of their educational 
qualification.
Article 14
of the Constitution of India. Ms. 
Mohan would argue, will have application only when a 
discrimination is made between the persons who are 
absolutely similarly situated and not otherwise.  Strong 
reliance in this behalf has been placed on
The State of 
Mysore and Another vs. P. Narasinga Rao
[
AIR 1968 SC 349] = 
[1968 (1) SCR 467], Mewa Ram Kanojia vs. All India Institute 
of Medical Sciences and Others
[(1989) 2 SCC 235], V. 
Markendeya and Others vs. State of Andhra Pradesh and Others 
[(1989) 3 SCC 191] and a recent decision of this Court in
Government of West Bengal vs. Tarun K. Roy and Others
[JT 
2003 (9) SC 130].
ANALYSIS:
Applicability of doctrine of equal pay for equal work 
on the touchstone of
Article 39(d)
read with
Article 14
of 
the Constitution of India will have to be considered for the 
purpose of the present case on the premise that save and 
except  disparity in educational qualification, the nature 
of work performed by Extension Officers is identical and 
they had undergone a similar training.  It is trite that the 
Pay Commission on or about 13.10.1982 and in the year 1999 
desired and recommended that the same scale of pay be given 
to the Extension Officers irrespective of their educational 
qualification, but it is not in dispute that the 
recommendations of the Pay Commission were not accepted by 
the State.  The relevant portion of the recommendations of 
the Pay Commission and the Order of the State Government 
thereupon respectively are as under :
"
Sl.
No.
Report of 
Pay
Commission
Chapter/Para 

Recommendations of Pay
Commission
Order of the State 
Government
5.
Twelve    17
& 18

(One) The present pay 
scale of Gram Sewak 
Rs.169-300 the said 
pay scale was 
recommended to be 
revised at S. No. five 
and this suggestion 
was proposed that all 
the Gram Sewak who 
passed the 6th 
months training course 
should be upgraded to 
pay scale of Rs.195-
330 as being revised 
grade. 
According to the 
amendment in the 
recruitment rules 
of this department 
the minimum 
qualification 
being graduation 
with Science or 
Agriculture and in 
future the Gram 
Sewak be placed on 
pay scale Rs.635-
950.  This pay 
scale will be 
given to Gram 
Sewaks who were 
only Agriculture 
graduate or 
Science graduate 
but other gram 
sewaks will be 
given the revised 
pay scale  Rs. 
575-880 as 
accepted pay 
scale.
											       "
We have noticed hereinbefore that the State issued an 
executive instruction directing that not only the fresh 
recruits shall be entitled to the pay scale of Rs.635-950/-, 
but also the graduate officers working even prior to 
1.4.1981 would be eligible therefor.  We have furthermore 
noticed that by reason of an amendment in the rules made in 
terms of notification dated 5.9.1984, the employees holding 
a degree as also the new recruits were to be placed in the 
said scale of pay.
ISSUE :
The primal question which arises for consideration is 
whether the aforementioned order of the State Government is 
discriminatory in nature.
FINDINGS :
The Pay Commissions are constituted for evaluating the 
duties and functions of the employees and the nature thereof 
vis-`-vis the educational qualifications required therefor.  
Although the Pay Commission is considered to be an expert 
body, the State in its wisdom and in furtherance of a valid 
policy decision may or may not accept its recommendations.  
The State in exercise of its jurisdiction conferred upon it 
by the proviso appended to
Article 309
of the Constitution 
of India can unilaterally make or amend the conditions of 
service of its employees by framing appropriate rules.  The 
State in terms of the said provision is also entitled to 
give a retrospective effect thereto.  A policy decision had 
been adopted by the State that the post of Extension 
Officers shall be filled up only by graduates.  Such a 
policy decision ex facie cannot be termed to be arbitrary or 
irrational attracting the wrath of
Article 14
of the 
Constitution of India.  A dying scale was provided by the 
State for the non-graduates.  Fresh recruitments were to be 
made only from amongst the persons who held the requisite 
educational qualification.  With a view to avoid any 
discrimination between the new recruits and the serving 
employees who possessed the same qualification, the State 
cannot be said to have acted illegally in granting a higher 
scale of pay also for the existing degree holders.
Article 14
, it is trite, does not forbid a reasonable 
classification.
Article 14
forbids class legislation but permits 
reasonable classification subject to the conditions that it 
is based on an intelligible differentia and that the 
differentia must have a rational relation to the object 
sought to be achieved. [See
Saurabh Chaudri and Ors. Vs. 
Union of India and Ors.
[2003 (9) SCALE 272] 


	Constitutional interpretation is  a difficult task.  
Its concept varies from statute to statute, fact to fact, 
situation to situation and subject matter to subject matter.
A classification based on educational qualification has been 
applied by a Constitution Bench of this Court as far back as 
in 1968 in
P. Narasinga Rao
(supra), wherein it was 
observed:
"It is well settled that though
Article 
14
forbids class legislation, it does 
not forbid reasonable classification for 
the purpose of legislation. When any 
impugned rule or statutory provision is 
assailed on the ground that it 
contravenes
Article 14
, its validity can 
be sustained if two tests are satisfied.
The first test is that the 
classification on which it is founded 
must be based on an intelligible 
differentia which distinguishes persons 
or things grouped together from others 
left out of the group, and the second 
test is that the differentia in question 
must have a reasonable relation to the 
object sought to be achieved by the rule 
or statutory provision in question. In 
other words, there must be some rational 
nexus between the basis of 
classification and the object intended 
to be achieved by the statute or the 
rule. As we have already stated.
Articles 14
and
16
form part of the same 
constitutional code of guarantees and 
supplement each other. In other words,
Art. 16
is only an instance of the 
application of the general rule of 
equality
laid down in
Art. 14
and it 
should be construed as such. Hence there 
is no denial of equality of opportunity 
unless the person who complains of 
discrimination is equally situated with 
the person or persons who are alleged to 
have been favoured.
Article 16 (1)
does 
not bar a reasonable classification of 
employees or reasonable tests for their 
selection."
The said dicta was applied by this Court in
Mewa Ram 
Kanojia
(supra), stating :
"5. While considering the question of 
application of principle of 'Equal pay 
for equal work' it has to be borne in 
mind that it is open to the State to 
classify employees on the basis of 
qualifications, duties and 
responsibilities of the posts concerned. 
If the classification has reasonable 
nexus with the objective sought to be 
achieved, efficiency in the 
administration, the State would be 
justified in prescribing different pay 
scale but if the classification does not 
stand the test of reasonable nexus and 
the classification is founded on unreal, 
and unreasonable basis it would be 
violative of
Articles 14
and
16
of the 
Constitution. Equality must be among the 
equals. Unequal cannot claim equality."
The principle was reiterated in
V. Markendeya
(supra), 
observing :
"13. In view of the above discussion we 
are of the opinion that where two 
classes of employees perform identical 
or similar duties and carrying out the 
same functions with the same measure of 
responsibility having same academic 
qualification, they would be entitled to 
equal pay. If the State denies them 
equality in pay, its action would be 
violative of
Articles 14
and
16
of the 
Constitution, and the court will strike 
down the discrimination and grant relief 
to the aggrieved employees. But before 
such relief is granted the court must 
consider and analyse the rationale 
behind the State action in prescribing 
two different scale of pay. If on an 
analysis of the relevant rules, orders, 
nature of duties, functions, measure of 
responsibility, and educational 
qualifications required for the relevant 
posts, the court finds that the 
classification made by the State in 
giving different treatment to the two 
classes of employees is founded on 
rational basis having nexus with the 
objects sought to be achieved, the 
classification must be upheld. Principle 
of equal pay for equal work is 
applicable among equals, it cannot be 
applied to unequals. Relief to an 
aggrieved person seeking to enforce the 
principles of equal pay for equal work 
can be granted only after it is 
demonstrated before the court that 
invidious discrimination is practised by 
the State in prescribing two different 
scales for the two classes of employees 
without there being any reasonable 
classification for the same. If the 
aggrieved employees fail to demonstrate 
discrimination, the principle of equal 
pay for equal work cannot be enforced by 
court in abstract. The question what 
scale should be provided to a particular 
class of service must be left to the 
executive and only when discrimination 
is practised amongst the equals, the 
court should intervene to undo the 
wrong, and to ensure equality among the 
similarly placed employees. The court 
however cannot prescribe equal scales of 
pay for different class of employees."
A Bench of three Judges in which two of us were parties 
reiterated the same principle in
Tarun K. Roy and Ors.
(supra).
The aforementioned decisions are authorities for the 
proposition that despite the fact that the employees have 
been performing similar duties and functions and their posts 
are interchangeable, a valid classification can be made on 
the basis of their educational qualification.  The 
observation of Krishna Iyer, J. in
V. Balasubramanyam
(supra) although is interesting but it appears that the fact 
of the matter involved therein did not warrant application 
of the said principle.
The view of Subba Rao, J. in
Lachhman Dass vs. State of 
Punjab and Others
[AIR 1963 SC 222] was a minority view.  
Venkatarama Aiyar, J. therein  speaking for the majority 
held :
"...The law is now well settled that 
while
Art. 14
prohibits discriminatory 
legislation directed against one 
individual or class of individuals, it 
does not forbid reasonable 
classification, and that for this 
purpose even one person or group of 
persons can be a class.  Professor 
Willis says in his Constitutional Law 
p.580 "a law applying to one person or 
one class of persons is constitutional 
if there is sufficient basis or reason 
for it".  This statement of the law was 
approved by this Court in
Chiranjit Lal 
Chowdhury vs. Union of India
, 1950 SCR 
869 : (AIR 1951 SC 41).  There the 
question was whether a law providing for 
the management and control by the 
Government, of a named company, the 
Sholapur Spinning & Weaving Company Ltd. 
was bad as offending
Art. 14.
It was 
held that even a single Company might, 
having regard to its features, be a 
category in itself and that unless it 
was shown that there were other 
Companies similarly circumstanced, the 
legislation must be presumed to be 
constitutional and the attack under
Art. 
14
must fail.
In
Ram Krishna Dalmia v. 
S.R. Tendolkar
, 1959 SCR 279 at p. 297 :
(AIR 1958 SC 538 at p. 547) this Court 
again examined in great detail the scope 
of
Art. 14
, and in enunciating the 
principles applicable in deciding 
whether a law is in contravention of 
that Article observed :
"that a law may be constitutional 
even though it relates to a single 
individual if on account of some special 
circumstances pr reasons applicable to 
him and not applicable to others that 
single individual may be treated as a 
class by himself."
Furthermore, as noticed hereinbefore, a valid 
classification based on educational qualification for the 
purpose of grant of pay has been upheld by the Constitution 
Bench of this Court in
P. Narasinga Rao
(supra).
In
B. Basavalingappa
(supra), a two-Judge Bench of this 
Court did not notice the earlier binding precedents of this 
Court.
In fact one of them, K.N. Singh, J., as the learned 
Chief Justice then was, was a party to the subsequent 
decision in
Mewa Ram Kanojia
(supra).  In that case no 
material was brought on records on the basis of which it 
could be contended that there was any substantial difference 
at that time between the two classifications although they 
were described differently.  It was in that situation 
observed :
"...It was argued that a diploma is a 
higher qualification than a certificate.  
But neither there is any curriculum on 
record nor any other material to draw 
that inference.  On the contrary this 
circumstance that at the time when 
respondent was recruited a diploma 
holder or a certificate holder both were 
entitled to be recruited as an 
Instructor on the same pay scale 
indicates that in those days the two 
were considered to be alike."
In
Pramod Bhartiya
(supra), Jeevan Reddy, J. 
categorically held that burden to prove that a 
discrimination has been committed is upon the petitioners.  
In that case petitioners failed to discharge their burden.
Yet again in
Shyam Babu Verma
(supra), N.P. Singh, J. 
speaking for a three-Judge Bench  observed :
"...The nature of work may be more or 
less the same but scale of pay may vary 
based on academic qualification or 
experience which justifies 
classification.  The principle of 'equal 
pay for equal work'	should not be 
applied in a mechanical or casual 
manner.  Classification made by a body 
of experts after full study and analysis 
of the work should not be disturbed 
except for strong reasons which indicate 
the classification made to be 
unreasonable.  Inequality of the men in 
different groups excludes applicability 
of the principle of 'equal pay for equal 
work' to them..."
True it may be that when recommendations are made by a 
Pay Commission, evaluation of job must be held to have been 
made but the same by itself may not be a ground to enforce 
the recommendations by issuing a writ of or in the nature of 
mandamus although the State did not accept the same in toto 
and made rules to the contrary by evolving a policy decision 
which cannot be said to arbitrary or discriminatory.
For the reasons aforementioned, we are of the opinion 
that no case has been made for our interference with the 
impugned judgment.  The appeal is dismissed accordingly.  No 
costs.