[Cites
21
, Cited by
208
]
Supreme Court of India
Association Of Registration Plates vs Union Of India & Ors on 30 November, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2005 SUPREME COURT 469, 2005 (1) SCC 679, 2004 AIR SCW 7074, 2004 (7) SLT 309, 2005 (2) SRJ 216, 2005 (1) CTLJ 14, 2004 (10) SCALE 60, 2004 (4) LRI 832, 2004 (8) ACE 607, (2005) 1 CTC 111 (SC), (2004) 10 JT 147 (SC), (2004) 10 SCALE 60, (2005) 1 CURCC 124, (2005) 1 SUPREME 700, (2005) 2 CURLJ(CCR) 41
Bench:
D. M. Dharmadhikari
,
Tarun Chatterjee
CASE NO.:
Writ Petition (civil)  41 of 2003

PETITIONER:
Association of Registration Plates

RESPONDENT:
Union of India & Ors. 

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 30/11/2004

BENCH:
Y. K. Sabharwal, D. M. Dharmadhikari & Tarun Chatterjee]

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

WITH 
WP  ( c) No. 24/03, TC ( c ) 30-31/03, TC ( c ) 32/03, TC ( c ) 38/03 
TC ( c ) 39-40/03, TC ( c ) 41/03 TC ( c ) 42/03, TC ( c ) 62/03, WP(c) 
56/03, WP(c ) 395/03, WP (c) 77/03.
Dharmadhikari J.
The present writ petition along with the cases transferred from 
various High Courts have been placed before this Bench on a 
difference of opinion  between Hon'ble Judges constituting the Division 
Bench.
The dispute concerns the terms and conditions of Notices 
Inviting Tenders [NITs] for supply of High Security Registration Plates 
to motor vehicles. The tenders have been issued by various State 
Governments on the guidelines circulated by the Central Government 
for implementing  the provisions of
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
(hereinafter referred to as 'the Act')  and the newly amended   Central 
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
The main grievance of the petitioner is that all Notices Inviting 
Tenders (NITs)  which have been issued by various State Governments 
contain conditions which seem to have been tailored to favour 
companies having foreign collaboration. The tender conditions  are 
described to be discriminatory under
Article 14
of the Constitution of 
India being aimed at excluding indigenous manufacturers from the 
tender process.  In all the cases the grievance is that the work of 
supply of High Security Registration Plates for all existing vehicles and 
new vehicles  is  being entrusted to a single license plates 
manufacturer in a State or a region and for a long period of  15 years 
thus creating monopoly in favour of selected  bidders to the complete 
exclusion of  all others in the field.  The contention advanced is that 
creation of monopoly in favour of few parties having connection with 
foreign concerns is violative of fundamental right of trade under
Articles 19 (1) (g)
and discriminatory under
Article 14
of Constitution 
of India.
A survey of the relevant provisions of the Act and Rules 
continuing the Scheme of High Security Registration Plates is 
necessary  for considering the merit of the petitioners' grievances.
The object of the new scheme is to curb the increasing menace 
of vehicle thefts and their usage in commission of crimes like murder, 
dacoity, kidnapping etc.  It is felt urgent to check usage of motor 
vehicles in terrorists activities. The Central Government on the 
recommendation of its Technical Committee has devised a system of 
High Security Registration Plates which will ensure public safety and 
security.  With the above purpose, Rule 50 of the Motor Vehicles Rules 
has been amended. Rule 50 was first amended on 28.03.2001, then 
on 24.09.2001 and lastly on 21.01.2003 w.e.f. 01.01.2004.  The 
relevant part of the rule in its amended form reads as under:
"Rule 50- Form and manner of display of registration marks on 
the motor vehicles -  (1) On or after commencement of this rule, the 
registration mark referred to in sub-section (6) of
Section 41
shall be 
displayed both at the front and at the rear of all motor vehicles clearly 
and legibly in the form of security license plate of the following 
specifications, namely: -
(i)	the plate shall be a solid unit made of 1.0 mm aluminium 
conforming to DIN 1745/DIN 1783 or ISO 7591.  Border edges and 
corners of the plate shall be rounded to avoid injuries to the extent of 
approx. 10 mm and  the plates must  have an embossed border.  The 
plate shall be suitable for hot stamping and reflective sheet has to be 
guaranteed for imperishable nature for minimum five years. The fast 
colouring of legend and border to be done by hot stamping;
(ii)	the plate should bear the letters "IND" in blue colour on the 
extreme left center of the plate.  The letter should be one fourth of the 
size of letters mentioned in rule 51 and should be buried into the foil 
or applied by hot stamping and should be integral part of the plate;
(iii)	each plate shall be protected against counterfeiting by applying 
chromium-based hologram, applied by hot stamping.  Stickers and 
adhesive labels are not permitted.  The plate shall bear a permanent 
consecutive identification number of minimum seven digits, to be laser 
branded into a reflective sheeting and hot stamping film shall bear a 
verification inscription;
(iv)	apart from the registration marks on the front and rear, the 
third registration mark in the form of self destructive type, chromium 
based hologram sticker shall be affixed on the left hand top side of the 
windshield of the vehicle.  The registration details such as registration 
number, registering authority, etc., shall be printed on the sticker.
The third registration mark shall be issued by the registering 
authorities/approved dealers of the license plates manufacturer along 
with the regular registration marks, and thereafter if such sticker is 
destroyed it shall be issued by the license plate manufacturer or his 
dealer;
(v)	the plate shall be fastened with non-removable/non-
reusable snap lock  fitting system on rear of the vehicle at the 
premises of the registering authority; The licence plates with all 
the above specifications and the specified registrations for a vehicle 
shall be issued by the registering authority or approved the licence 
plates manufacturers or their dealers.  The Central Road Research 
Institute, New Delhi or any of the agency authorized by the Central 
Government shall approve the license plates manufacturers  to the 
above specification;
(vi)	the size of the plate for different categories of vehicles shall be 
as follows:-
For two and three wheelers 			200 x 100 mm 

For light motor vehicles and
Passenger cars 				340 x 200 mm/
						500 x 120 mm 
For medium commercial vehicles 
Heavy commercial vehicles and 
Trailer/combination 				340 x 200 mm
Provided that this sub-rule shall apply to already registered vehicles 
two years from the date of commencement:
Provided further that the size of the registration plates for agricultural 
tractors shall be as follows:-
Front 		- 	285 x 45 mm 
			Rear 		- 	200 x 100 mm
2  to  6.        ......................................
[Underlining for pointed attention]

The rule in the above manner requires manufacture of such 
registration plates which would be non-reusable and non-replaceable.  
The technical specifications of the registration plates are such as to 
make identification of the vehicle and its tracking easier and certain.  
The other requirements contained in Rule 50 are that apart from 
regulating the aspect of issuing registration mark with use of specific 
kinds of letters and numerals, it seeks to ensure its safety and security 
by regulating issuance and fixation of number plate from the premises 
of the Regional Transport Office of the concerned area.  The RTO will 
issue registration number and also issue the plate itself.  Thus a high 
security number plate with specified technical features is to be issued 
under Governmental control and supervision.  The Scheme contained 
in Rule 50 substitutes the existing system where the registration 
number was given by the RTO and ordinary plate obtained from the 
open market. The implementation of the rule requires cooperation and 
coordination between the authorities of the State and the 
manufacturer of registration plates.
The source of power for providing Scheme of High Registration 
Plates by Rule 50 is traceable to Rule Making Power of Central 
Government contained in
Section 64
, clauses (a) to (e) of the Act  
which read as under:-
"
Section 64
. Power of Central Govt. to make rules. - The Central 
Government may make rules to provide for all or any of the following 
matter namely :-
(a)	the period within which and the form in which an application 
shall be made and the documents, particulars and information it shall 
accompany under sub-section (1) of
Section 41
;
(b)	the form in which the certificate of registration shall be made 
and the particulars and information it shall contain and the manner in 
which it shall be issued under sub-section (3) of
Section 41
;
(c)	the form and manner in which the particulars of the certificate 
of registration shall be entered in the records of the registering 
authority under sub-section (5) of
Section 41
;
(d)	the manner in which and the form in which the registration 
mark, the letters and figures and other particulars referred to in sub-
section (6) of
Section 41
shall be displayed and shown;
(e)	the period within which and the form in which the application 
shall be made and the particulars and information it shall contain 
under sub-section (8) of
Section 41
(f)	to  (o) ..............................
The Central Government has also issued the Motor Vehicles (New 
High Security Registration Plates) Order, 2001 in purported exercise of 
power under sub-section (3) of
Section 109
of the Act.  The relevant 
parts of the order of 2001 contained in sub-clauses (viii) to (xiv) read 
as under:-
"(i) to  (vii)		................
(viii)	The registration plates fitted in the rear of the vehicles shall be 
fastened with non-removable/non-resuable snap lock system. For the 
sake of better security, at least two such snap locks shall be fitted.
(ix)	No high security plate shall be affixed outside the premises of 
the registering authority.
(x)	The manufacturer  or the vendor selected by the State 
Transport Department for supply of such registration plates 
may be for the State as a whole or for any region of the State.
(xi)	The registration plate will be supplied to the motor vehicle 
owners by the vendor against the authorization by the Road Transport 
Officer or any other designated for the purpose by the State Transport 
Department.
(xii)	The replacement for any existing registration plate may be 
made by the concerned transport authority only after ensuring that  
the old plate has been surrendered and destroyed.
(xiii)	A proper record of the registration plates issued by the 
manufacturer or the vendor, authorized by the State Government, 
should be maintained on a daily basis and got tallied periodically with 
the records of the Transport Office.
(xiv)	Periodic audit shall be carried out by concerned ;testing 
agencies to ensure compliance of the requirements of the High 
Security Registration Plates. "
[Highlighted for emphasis]

According to the respondents, the source of power to issue the 
New High Security Registration Plates Order, 2001 is to be found in 
sub-
section 3
of
Section 109
. The petitioners have challenged the 
validity of the Registration Plates Order, 2001 (hereinafter shortly 
referred to as Order of 2001) which according to them is beyond 
provisions of the Act and has no legal efficacy.
The main features of the High Security Registration Plates as 
provided in Rule 50 and the order of 2001 are as follows:-
1.	It provides for a solid aluminium plate.
2.	The plate should be suitable for hot stamping and would be 
a reflective sheet.
3.	The plate should bear the letters "IND" in blue colour.
4.	It should have a chromium based hologram which shall 
also be hot stamped.
5.	There would be third registration mark which would be 
self-reflective being a chromium based hologram sticker 
and which would be affixed on the windshield of the 
vehicle.
6.	The plate on the rear shall be fastened with non-
removable/non-resuable snap lock fitting system

The above-mentioned features  to the High Security Registration 
Plates have been insisted upon for the following reasons:-
1.	Hot Chromium based hologram would prevent 
counterfeiting.
2.	The ingress  letter "IND" on the plate would secure 
national identity and  standardization.
3.	The laser etched 7 digits code to be given by the 
manufacturer to each plate is with a view that there should 
be a sequential identification of individual registration plate 
across the country. This would act as a watermark and not 
erasable by any mechanical or technical process.
4.	Snap lock to be fitted on the rear portions of the vehicle 
would be temper proof. Any attempt to remove the plate 
would break it.
5.	The reflective sheet of superior grade would be visible from 
a minimum of 200 meters.
6.	 The alpha-numeral would be easily readable and 
identifiable.
7.	On alpha-numeral border, ingress letters "IND" would 
prevent painting and screen printing which would act as 
protection and counterfeiting.
8.	The sticker to be affixed on the windshield would have 7 
digit laser code containing the engine number and the 
chassis number.  This was so designed to be self-
destructive upon removal.
After Rule 50 was amended and New High Registration Plates 
(amendment) Order, 2001 was issued in purported exercise of power 
under
Section 109(3)
of the Act. The Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways vide its letter dated 6.3.2002 circulated the minutes of 
meeting of 4.3.2001 held between the representatives of all States 
and Union Territories on introduction of the new system of the 
registration plates.  A series of meetings were held by the Union with 
the States. Eventually, on 6.3.2002 the Union laid down guidelines for 
incorporating necessary conditions in the Notices Inviting Tenders to 
be issued by the various States.  In substance, the guidelines suggest 
as follows:-
1.	The tender document would specify whether the appointment 
of vendor was for the whole State or for certain parts.
2.	The tender document would specify the terms of the bank 
guarantee .
3.	The tender document would require report back on certain 
aspects on "a periodic and regular basis".
4.	The bidder must furnish proof of past experience/expertise in 
this area or proof of the same with a collaborator.
NIT guidelines were later modified by letter dated 14.6.2002 sent 
by the Ministry.  It was suggested that the bidders may be asked to 
provide details about the  experience/capability of its collaborator to 
the satisfaction of the State Authorities.
On 16.9.2002, meeting was held between officials of Ministry, 
representatives of States/Union Territories and manufacturers of New 
Registration Plats wherein several issues pertaining to the introduction 
of the new system as well as the terms of NIT were discussed.  The 
minutes of the said meeting resulted in issuance of a clarificatory letter 
on 13.11.2002 wherein it is reiterated that the guidelines are 
suggestive in nature.  The main features of the guidelines issued after 
due deliberations between Union and States officials and the 
representatives of manufacturers are as follows:-
"The determination of the  physical and financial capability of the 
bidder was to be done by the State. A suggestion was voiced that 
instead of tender process the market process should be given  and all 
manufacturers would obtain technical approval certificate for being 
allowed to sell their product.  This led to clarification by the Secretary 
of Road Transport and Highways  that the State Transport  Authorities 
will have to exercise control over  issuance of registration plates. 
Representatives of certain States opposed to free open market 
situation having large vehicular population of cities and likelihood of 
successful tenderer neglecting the rural area having low vehicular 
population."
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways left the discretion 
to the States in the matter of issuing NIT but reiterated security and 
rural concerns.  On the guidelines given by Central Government and 
pursuant to joint deliberations between the officials of the Union, 
States and the manufacturers, several States issued Notices Inviting 
Tenders which led to filing of petitions in the High Courts of several 
States. The petitioners have challenged the terms and conditions of  
the NITs.  All those cases have been transferred to this Court for 
decision along with the writ petitions directly filed here.  It is not 
necessary to reproduce all the conditions in various Notices  Inviting 
tenders issued by different States.  The gist of impugned conditions in 
various NITs may be summerised as under:-
Condition (a)	Tenderer/bidder or the promoter or any of the 
members of joint venture should have sufficient experience in the 
field of registration plates and should be working at least in 5 
countries  for license plates and in a minimum of 3 countries 
with license plates having security features world-wide 
(necessary credentials from the Government of such country should be 
attached along with a performa as per annexure XIII duly filed in ) .  
Apart from the above credentials the tenderer/bidder should furnish 
"Type Approved Certificate" from Testing Agencies".
Condition (b):	The tenderers/bidders of the joint venture partners 
together must have a minimum annual turnover equivalent to 
INR 30 crores in the immediately preceding last year.  At least 25% 
of this turnover must be from the license plate business.  
Certificate confirming and the certification of the minimum 25% 
turnover being from licensed plates business will have to be provided 
duly attested by a Chartered Accountant/any bank to be attached in 
support of fulfillment of this condition.
Condition ( c):	The contract will be for a period of fifteen years 
commencing from the date of commencement of the scheme.  A 
detailed agreement shall be entered into between the successful 
bidder and the Government  for a period of fifteen years and 
government ensures that no second bidder will be approved during the 
currency of the contract in the State except in the case of termination 
of the contract in view of the strictest of adherence to High Security 
Features  and  to impose answerability on to the successful bidder. 
[Portions highlighted being under specific challenge] 

	We shall now take up for consideration the various submissions 
made by the counsel appearing for the petitioners in assailing certain 
conditions of the Notices Inviting Tenders issued by various States, 
provisions of the Rule 50 and the statutory order of 2001 issued to 
implement the scheme of High Security Registration Plates.
1)	Challenge to the impugned tender conditions.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners submit that the 
three conditions concerning experience and extent of business (the 
gist of which has been mentioned above) contained in the Notices 
Inviting Tenders, are per se discriminatory and unreasonable. They are 
apparently tailor-made to sub-serve the business interests of a class of 
manufacturers having foreign collaboration and for a cartel of 
companies. He further submitted that the above mentioned three 
clauses  which are substantially same in all the NITs issued by many of 
the States, make it mandatory for the bidders to enter into  
collaboration with the foreign collaborators. It becomes a pre-condition 
to participate in the bidding process. It envisages collaboration with 
few known foreign companies in the field of manufacture which alone 
can satisfy the tender conditions.  It is known to tendering authorities 
that there are not more than 1 or 2 companies that could satisfy the 
stringent eligibility conditions laid down in the NITs.
It is submitted  that Rule 50 as amended has inbuilt safeguards 
to ensure  the technical competence of the prospective manufacturer 
and  for controlled issuance of registration plates. The manufacturers 
can manufacture the said plates only after it has got type approved 
certificate from one of the autonomous certifying agencies.  Supply of 
the plates to the vehicle users can be made only after the grant of 
certificate of conformity of the standard of the production.  The States, 
therefore, can have no jurisdiction to decide or declare any of the 
manufacturers as competent or incompetent with respect to their 
technical competence.
To reinforce the challenge to the conditions and describing them 
as highly unreasonable and resulting in complete exclusion of 
indigenous  manufacturers, it is submitted that at present, registration 
plates with specified security features are in use only in some of the 
countries which are much smaller than India. They are Armenia, 
Columbia, Congo, Curacao, Ethiopia, Georgia, Iraq, Mali, Malta Oman, 
Palastine, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Uganda, Uragua, and Zambia.  The 
learned counsel argues that it is difficult to understand as to how the 
experience of working in the above mentioned small countries  with a 
very small vehicular population would be of any help as an experience 
for supplying registration plates for large vehicular population of India 
whose needs and requirements are of far greater magnitude and in no 
way comparable to the above mentioned small countries.  The total 
vehicular population of all above mentioned nations accumulated does 
not match the vehicular population of Delhi alone. Indigenous 
manufacturers  of High Security Plates can manufacture  and supply 
registration plates on their own strength  by complying with all 
standards and in conformity with all norms laid down in Rule 50 
without entering into collaboration with any foreign partner.
It is contended  that in the name of implementing the amended 
Rule 50, the States are imposing conditions in the  tender that would 
take away the existing rights of the manufacturers of plates in India.  
The implication of conditions is that indigenous manufacturers, 
although capable of fulfilling the requirements of Rule 50, are 
prohibited to do the business of manufacturing and supplying the High 
Security plates.  This violates their fundamental right under
Article 19 
(1) (g)
of the Constitution of India.
The further contention is that all security features for number 
plates have been specified for the first time in India and, therefore, 
insistence on possessing experience in five countries from the 
manufacturers is to eliminate manufacturers of India.  It is pointed out 
that as per the requirements of Rule 50 the plates are required to 
conform to DIN 1745/DIN 1783 or ISO 7591 standards (DIN of the 
German Standards and ISO of the World standards). The other 
security features are the additional features.  It is submitted that these 
standards have been used to suit only one or two manufacturers.  It is 
submitted that the laid down standards and security features are so 
laid down as to wipe out indigenous manufacturers from the field 
although Indian manufacturers are fully competent to be involved in 
the implementation of the new scheme of High Security plates.
To the condition laid down of prescribed minimum turnover of 
business, the challenge made on behalf of the petitioners is that fixing 
such high turnover for such a new business is only for the purpose of 
advancing the business interests of a group of companies having 
foreign links and support.  It is impossible for any indigenous 
manufacturers of security plates to have a turnover of approximately 
12.5 crores from the High Security Registration Plates which are 
sought to be introduced in India for the first time and the 
implementation of the project has not yet started in any of the States.
On the question of condition of a period of 15 years for 
supply of High Security Registration Plates the contention advanced is 
that it is an attempt to create monopoly in favour of one private 
company or a cartel of companies.  This is against public interest as it 
would leave the consumers/vehicle owners at the mercy of a sole 
successful bidder.  Award of a contract for a long term of 15 years 
would eliminate indigenous Type Approved manufacturers for a long 
period of time and would deprive the vehicle users of the number 
plates from the benefits of the competitive market.  In the event of 
further development of the technology of security plates, the State 
Government would be obliged to involve the same manufacturers who 
had been awarded the contract first of all.  The process of grant of 
Type Approved Certificate is a continuing process and award of 
contract for a long period of 15 years in favour of a single 
manufacturer would render grant of Type Approved Certificate to other 
manufacturers, inconsequential.   Referring to the relevant data  of the 
business of the respondent group companies working in collaboration 
with foreign companies as joint venture concerns, the petitioners 
highlights that if indigenous manufacturers are involved in 
implementation of scheme the plates can be made available only for 
Rs.  200-250 for two plates whereas creating monopoly right in favour 
of joint venture companies in foreign collaboration would hike the cost 
of plates to not less than Rs. 2,000/- per pair  in contrast to the 
market price of Rs. 800 to Rs. 900 per pair by the Indian 
manufacturers.
In conclusion, learned counsel for the petitioner 
submits that the tender conditions are arbitrary, irrelevant and tailor-
made to involve only certain joint venture companies in foreign 
collaboration. They aim at eliminating the indigenous manufacturers of 
plates.  The petitioners seek quashing of the impugned tender 
conditions.  Reliance is placed on
Sterling Computers  Vs. M.and N. 
Publications
[ 1993 (
1) SCC 445 and  Union of  India Vs. Dinesh 
Engineering
[ 2001 (8) SCC 491]


	The other counsel appearing in connected cases for the 
petitioners have submitted that selection of sole manufacturer for 
supply of registration plates has no justification either in law or on 
facts. On behalf of the petitioners, it is contended that grant of 
contract to more than one manufacturer would, in fact, ensure better 
and prompt services to the vehicle owners and minimize their 
inconvenience and possibility of black-marketing which might be there 
in case of monopoly. The submission is that regulated and disciplined 
multi-vendors system with registration of operating manufacturers and 
making them answerable and accountable is the only permissible 
method of implementation of the policy akin to that followed in other 
developed countries where no monopoly is created in favour of a sole 
manufacturer in the name of control and security.
On the economics of the project, the contention is that keeping 
in view large vehicular population of the country, benefits of a 
lucrative business are being unjustly conferred on a sole manufacturer 
for a long period of 15 years which is likely to give a profit of Rs.2500 
crores to the sole manufacturer in the first two years itself.
The learned counsel appearing for the Union of India, State 
Authorities and counsel appearing for the contesting manufacturers, in 
their replies, have tried to justify the manner and implementation of 
the policy contained in Rule 50. On behalf of the Union of India, 
learned Addl. Solicitor-General submitted that under Rule 50 read with 
the statutory order of 2001 issued under
section 109(3)
of the Act, the 
State Governments are legally competent  to formulate an appropriate 
policy for choosing a sole or more manufacturers in order to fulfill the 
object of affixation of security plates. The registration plates have to 
be issued and affixed on the premises of the registering authority and 
with its permission. It is submitted that the scheme contained in rule 
50 read with a statutory order of 2001 leaves it to the discretion of the 
State concerned to even choose a single manufacturer for the entire 
State or more that one manufacturer regionwise. Such a selection 
cannot be said to confer any monopoly right by the State to any 
private individual or concern. It is just like selection of an appropriate 
person for grant of a contract or largesse by the State on laid down 
criteria of experience and technical qualifications. A fair process of 
selection may eliminate persons or parties who may not be found 
technically, financially and on the basis of past experience sound to be 
awarded the contract. Reliance is placed on
Krishnan Kakkanth vs. 
Govt. of Kerala
[1997 (5) SCC 495];
Ugar Sugar Works Ltd., vs. 
Delhi Administration & Ors.
[2001 (3) SCC 635]; and
M.R.F. Ltd., 
vs. Inspector Kerala Govt. & Ors.
[1998 (8) SCC 227].
On behalf of State of West Bengal, the learned senior counsel 
appearing supported the manner of implementation of scheme 
contained in rule 50 and the conditions contained in the Notice Inviting 
Tenders [NITs]. It is submitted that the main objective of the 
competitive bidder process was to ensure that such manufacturers as 
selected by the State would be able to comply with the requirements 
of rule 50.  In selecting a suitable manufacturer, his capability and 
capacity to invest and build necessary infrastructure, has to be 
assessed so that through him, the scheme becomes operationable 
from the targeted  date 28.2.2003 and without any difficulty it remains 
so operational for a longer period so that all existing vehicles switch 
over to high security registration plates as also the newly purchased 
vehicles are fitted with such plates. The tender conditions are 
deliberately so framed as to eliminate newly floated companies 
commonly described as 'fly by night companies' which merely 
compete to obtain the contract but have neither technical nor financial 
capacity to fulfil the contract of such vast dimensions.
It is submitted that the tender conditions are formulated keeping 
into account the public interest consideration and aspects of high 
security. The States do not possess the requisite resources of its own 
to implement the scheme. It has, therefore,  to search  and select a 
dependable manufacturer. It is submitted that the tender conditions 
specifically require the manufacturer to conform to the technical 
specification of high security registration plates. It should be able to 
prove existence of requisite financial resources to integrate large 
number of RTOs in the State on an on-line platform. The manufacturer 
should have a permanent technical partner to the venture so that the 
technology support is assured for the entire period of contract. The 
manufacturer to be selected should have access to the requisite 
technology and should be in a position to upgrade, expand and upscale 
operation on a continuous and sustainable basis. It is necessary to 
have a long term contractual relationship so that State can fix liability 
on the manufacturer and make him answerable for damages or any 
defects in the registration plates or for improper implementation of the 
project. The requirement of the rule that registration number and 
plates will be issued on the premises of the RTO, is to maintain secrecy 
and security. For the above purpose, selection of one single 
manufacturer would ensure security aspects instead of more than one 
manufacturers operating from different points.
With regard to 15 years long term contract, it is submitted that it 
is also in public interest. The manufacturer who has to stake the 
money would have to make huge investment by installing high 
technology based networking at each RTO's office. A short-term 
contract would not, therefore, attract an experienced and reliable 
manufacturer. Long-term contract with fixed price for entire 15 years 
period is beneficial to the customers as there would be no price 
increase for the stipulated period irrespective of inflation. Fifteen years 
period has been chosen in proportion to the average road-worthy life 
of a vehicle in India.
Looking to the huge vehicular population of the country, the 
capacity of the manufacturer has to be as great because plates are to 
be fitted  to a very large number of existing vehicles within first two 
years. Thereafter, every year about one lakh vehicles in each State 
would be required to be fitted with the plates. If the bulk of contract is 
exhausted in the first two years, fresh manufacturers would not come 
forward to undertake the remaining work as it would not be cost- 
effective. A long-term contract was necessitated for various reasons 
such as necessity of huge investment for building infrastructure, 
uninterrupted supply of plates in the first two years and thereafter 
every year and the investment of such infrastructure requiring 
recovery over a long duration by way of supply. If the contract period 
is lowered, the cost of plate might go up as the huge investment will 
have to be recovered in a shorter period.
Justifying the selection of a single manufacturer for a region or 
an entire State, to ensure security considerations, the following factors 
have been highlighted as sub-serving the public interest :-
1.	That it would not be possible to implement the scheme since 
the scheme provides that the approved manufacturer would use 
the premises of the State RTO and lay down V-Sat links so that 
the entire state is networked on a common platform.
2.	It would be impossible for the State to provide all the TAC 
holders space and infrastructure in the RTO premises.
3.	It would be difficult for the state to identify the source of any 
counterfeiting in case there are multiple manufacturers. This 
would severely compromise the security considerations involved 
in the scheme.
4.	Different manufacturers would lead to variations in price 
between different manufacturers.
5.	The State is at disadvantage since all the manufacturers would 
prefer to concentrate on supplying only in Kolkata and would 
not go to the other far flung RTOs where he would recover the 
returns on his investment.
6.	In case more that one manufacturer operate within the state, it 
will lead to discrepancy and non-uniformity in price structure 
prevailing in different regions.
7.	Difficulty in assimilation of data from more than one 
manufacturer thus leading to disaggregated and confusing 
database signals. Such sensitive and security related business 
must be governed by uniform database management processes 
and unified standardized coding practices.
8.	Different manufacturers would mean that there would be 
variation in quality of the material and in terms of 
workmanship.
9.	Possible duplication of Registration Plates due to competition 
between manufacturer of different regions and lack of 
aggregated security controlled database management systems.
10.	Non-conformity of data of different manufacturers would lead to 
confusion  and integration of data from the State RTOs.
11.	Difficulty in fixing up the answerability on any one 
manufacturer for not following the prescribed procedure.
12.	Confidentiality of the public database would be severely 
compromised.
13.	Provision of Training of RTO personnel by each manufacturer 
would be a logistic nightmare and would lead to confusion and 
further lead to the system being compromised severely.
14.	It is also important to note that each registration plate has a 
unique number, and consequently, all the RTOs are required to 
be electronically connected to each other, if the vendors are 
allowed to proliferate, this connection would not be possible, 
and would lead to complete chaos.
By highlighting the above factors, it is submitted that if multiple 
manufacturers are involved in implementation of the policy, it is not 
likely to work satisfactorily. It is submitted that a single selected 
manufacturer would not just be marketing, servicing and providing a 
new product but would engage in assisting the State in fulfillment of 
statutory obligations to grant the high security registrations to the 
owners of motor-vehicles in accordance with the provisions of the Act 
and the Rules. It is submitted that tender conditions are suitably 
formulated  for performance guarantee, experience and understanding 
of business, financial strength, and capacity of creating and installing 
the entire infrastructure and networking. Finally, it is submitted that 
the eligibility criteria prescribed by the State is commensurate not only 
with the scale of operation and size of network to be created by the 
operator but also with statutory requirement of States' continued 
delivery of its obligations to vehicle owners without any interruption. It 
is contended that through open tender, identifying and selecting an 
approved manufacturer to discharge statutory duty of RTO is not an 
act of the State creating any monopoly in favour of any private party . 
The grievance of infringement of fundamental rights under
Article 
19(1)(g)
of the Constitution of India is misconceived. Reliance is 
placed on
Air India vs. Cochin International Airport Ltd.
, [2000(
2) 
SCC 617] and Asia Foundation & Construction Ltd. Vs. Trafalgar 
House Construction Ltd.
[1997 (1) SCC 738].
The learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent no. 5, 
has supported the submissions made on behalf of the Union of India 
and the State of West Bengal by advancing separate arguments  with 
additional reasons.
We shall separately deal with the submissions made on behalf of 
the petitioners on the interpretation of the provisions of rule 50 and 
the statutory order of 2001 issued under the provisions of the Act.
Taking up first the challenge to the impugned conditions in the 
Notices Inviting Tenders issued by various State authorities, we find 
sufficient force in submissions advanced on behalf of the Union and the 
State authorities and the contesting manufacturers. The State as the 
implementing authority has to ensure that scheme of high security 
plates is effectively implemented. Keeping in view the enormous work 
involved in switching over to new plates within two years for existing 
vehicles of such large numbers in each State, resort to 'trial and error' 
method would prove hazardous.  Its concern to get the right and most 
competent person cannot be questioned. It has to eliminate 
manufacturers who have developed recently just to enter into the new 
field. The insistence of the State to search for an experienced 
manufacturer with sound financial and technical capacity cannot be 
misunderstood. The relevant terms and conditions quoted above are 
so formulated to enable the State to adjudge the capability of a 
particular tenderer who can provide a fail-safe and sustainable delivery 
capacity. Only such tenderer has to be selected who can take 
responsibility for marketing, servicing and providing continuously the 
specified plates for vehicles in large number firstly in initial two years 
and annually in the next 13 years. The manufacturer chosen would, in 
fact, be a sort of an agent or medium of the RTOs concerned for 
fulfillment of the statutory obligations on them of  providing high 
security plates to vehicles in accordance with rule 50. Capacity and 
capability are two most relevant criteria for framing suitable conditions 
of any Notices Inviting Tenders. The impugned clauses by which it is 
stipulated that the tenderer individually or as a member of joint-
venture must have an experience in the field of registration plates in 
at least three countries, a common minimum net worth of Rs. 40 
crores and either joint-venture partner having a minimum annual 
turnover of at least Rs. 50 crores  and a minimum of 15% turnover of 
registration plates business have been, as stated, incorporated  as 
essential conditions to ensure that the manufacturer selected would be 
technically and financially competent to fulfil the contractual 
obligations which looking to the magnitude of the job requires huge 
investment qualitatively and quantitively.
In the course of hearing, it could not be seriously disputed by 
the parties that technical know-how for the high security registration 
plates is outside the country. It is true that many indigenous 
manufacturers are in a position to supply the plates on the basis of 
technical assistance available in and outside the country. There are 
many tenderer who possess Type Approval Certificates [TACs] but to 
ensure major quantity of supply in initial two years and periodical 
supply for new vehicles for a long period, only a manufacturer who is 
sound both technically and financially, is required. Learned Brother G. 
P. Mathur J., in his elaborate opinion expressed by him [See 2004(5) 
SCC 364] found a serious vice in the tender conditions that they 
necessarily intend to promote such companies which have foreign 
collaborations and exclude indigenous manufacturers.
It is not controverted that the technical 'know-how' for the 
manufacture of high security registration plates presently is available 
outside India. Technically and financially, competent indigenous 
manufacturers  are mostly those who are in collaborations with foreign 
companies engaged in such manufacturing activities. The scheme 
contemplated under rule 50 of registration plates is a new experiment  
for India. In the initial stages of its implementation, tender conditions 
encouraging such manufacturers who are in foreign collaborations 
cannot be held to be discriminatory to indigenous manufacturers. 
Keeping in view the nature of the contract and job involved particularly 
its magnitude and the huge investment for infrastructure required, 
attempt to select such manufacturer - may be having collaboration  
with foreign companies and experience in foreign countries cannot be 
held to be a deliberate attempt on the part of the State authorities to 
eliminate indigenous manufacturers.
In the matter of formulating conditions of a tender document 
and awarding a contract of the nature of ensuring supply of high 
security registration plates,  greater latitude is required to be 
conceded to the State authorities. Unless the action of tendering 
Authority is found to be malicious and misuse of  its  statutory powers, 
tender conditions are unassailable. On intensive examination of tender  
conditions, we do not find that they violate the equality clause under
Article 14
or encroach on fundamental rights of a class of intending 
tenderer under
Article 19
of the Constitution. On the basis of the 
submissions made on behalf of the Union and State authorities and the 
justification shown for the terms of the impugned tender conditions, 
we do not find that the clauses requiring experience in the field of 
supplying registration plates  in foreign countries and the quantum of 
business turnover are intended only to keep out of field indigenous 
manufacturers. It is explained that on the date of formulation of 
scheme in rule 50 and issuance of guidelines thereunder by Central 
Government, there were not many indigenous manufacturers in India 
with technical and financial capability to undertake the job of supply of 
such high dimension, on a long term basis and in a manner to ensure 
safety and security which is the prime  object to be achieved by the 
introduction of new sophisticated registration plates.
The notice inviting tender is  open to response by all and even if 
one single  manufacture is ultimately selected for a region or State, it 
cannot be said that the State has created monopoly  of business in 
favour of a private party. Rule 50 permits, the RTOs concerned 
themselves to implement the policy or to get it implemented through a 
selected approved manufacturer.
Selecting one manufacturer through a process of open 
competition is not creation of any monopoly,  as contended, in  
violation of
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution read with clause (6) of 
the said Article. As is sought to be pointed out, the implementation 
involves large network of operations of highly sophisticated materials. 
The manufacturer has to have embossing stations within the premises 
of the RTO. He has to maintain a data of each plate which he would be 
getting from his main unit. It has to be cross-checked by the RTO 
data. There has to be a server in the RTO's office which is linked with 
all RTOs'  in each State and thereon linked to the whole nation. 
Maintenance of record by one and supervision over its activity would 
be simpler for the State if there is one manufacturer instead of multi-
manufacturers as suppliers. The actual operation of the scheme 
through the RTOs in their premises would get complicated and 
confused if multi-manufacturers are involved. That would also 
seriously impair the high security concept in affixation of new plates on 
the vehicles. If there is a single manufacturer he can be forced to go 
and serve rural areas with thin vehicular population and less volume of 
business. Multi-manufacturers might concentrate only on urban areas 
with higher vehicular population.
The fifteen years contract period has also been supported by 
Union of Indian and State authorities. We find great substance in the 
submissions made on the data supplied as a justification for awarding 
contract for long period of 15 years. There would be a huge 
investment required towards the infrastructure by the selected 
manufacturer and the major return would be expected in initial period 
of two years although he would be bound down to render his services 
for future vehicles on periodically for a long period. Looking to the 
huge investment required and the nature of the job which is most 
sophisticated requiring network and infrastructure, a long term 
contract, if thought viable and feasible, cannot be faulted by the court. 
If there are two alternatives available of giving a short-term or a long-
term contract, it is not for the court to suggest that the short-term 
contract should be given. On the subject of business management, 
expertise is available with the State authorities. The policy has been 
chalked out and the tender conditions have been formulated after joint 
deliberations of authorities of the State and the intending 
manufacturers. Contract providing technical expertise, financial 
capability and experience qualifications with a long term of 15 years 
would serve a dual purpose of attracting sound parties to stake their 
money in undertaking the job of supply and safeguard public interest 
by ensuring that for a long period the work of affixation of security 
plates would continue uninterrupted in fulfillment of the object of the 
scheme contained in rule 50. Our considered opinion, therefore, is that 
none of the impugned clauses in the tender conditions can be held to 
be arbitrary or discriminatory deserving its striking down as prayed for 
on behalf of the petitioners.
There is no material on record to infer any mala fide design on 
the part of the tendering authority to favour parties having foreign 
collaborations and keep out of fray indigenous manufacturers. The 
high security plates is a sophisticated article - new for manufacturer in 
India. It is being introduced for the first time under the scheme 
contained in rule 50 of the Rules and the Act. At the time of issuance 
of Notices of Tender, technical know-how for manufacture of plates 
and its further development was undoubtedly outside the country. 
Only a few concerns in India having collaboration with foreign parties 
possessed the expertise and were available in the market. The terms 
of the notice inviting tender were formulated after joint deliberations 
of Central and State Authorities and the available manufacturers in the 
field. The terms of the tender prescribing quantum of turnover of its 
business and business in plates with fixation of long term period of the 
contract are said to have been incorporated to ensure uninterrupted 
supply of plates to a large number of existing vehicles within a period 
of two years and new vehicles for a long period in the coming years. It 
is easy to allege but difficult to accept that terms of the Notices 
Inviting Tenders which were fixed after joint deliberations between 
State authorities and intending tenderers were so tailored as to benefit 
only a certain identified manufacturers having foreign collaboration. 
Merely because few manufacturers like the petitioners do not qualify to 
submit tender, being not in a position to satisfy the terms and 
conditions laid down, the tender conditions cannot be held to be 
discriminatory.
Certain preconditions or qualifications for tenders have to be laid 
down to ensure that the contractor has the capacity and the resources 
to successfully execute the work,
Article 14
of the Constitution 
prohibits the government from arbitrarily choosing a contractor at its 
will and pleasure. It has to act reasonably, fairly and in public interest 
in awarding contract. At the same time, no person can claim 
fundamental right to carry on business with the government. All that 
he can claim is that in competing for the contract, he should not be 
unfairly treated and discriminated to the detriment of public interest. 
Undisputedly, the legal position which has been firmly established from 
various decisions of this Court, cited at the Bar (supra) is that 
government contracts are highly valuable assets and the court should 
be prepared to enforce standards of fairness on government in its 
dealings with tenderers and contractors.
The grievance that the terms of notice inviting tender in the 
present cases virtually creates a monopoly in favour of parties having 
foreign collaborations, is without substance. Selection of a competent 
contractor for assigning job of supply of a sophisticated article through 
an open tender procedure, is not an act of creating monopoly,  as is 
sought to be suggested on behalf of the petitioners. What has been 
argued is that the terms of the Notices Inviting Tenders deliberately 
exclude domestic manufacturers and new entrepreneurs in the field. In 
the absence of any indication from the record that the terms and 
conditions were tailor-made to promote parties with foreign 
collaborations and to exclude indigenous manufacturers,  judicial 
interference is uncalled for.
Challenge to the tender conditions on Paragraph 2 of Rule 
50(1)(v).
On behalf of the petitioners, paragraph 2 of rule 50(1)(v),  which 
is reproduced below, has been interpreted. The contention is that it 
does not contemplate selection of sole manufacturer for a State or a 
Region. The relevant paragraph 2 of rule 50(1)(v) reads thus :-
"Rule 50(1)(v). Form and manner of display of registration 
marks on the motor vehicles.  (1)...............
(i) to (iv)	...............................
..................
(v)    		....................
The licence plates with all the above specifications 
and the specified registrations for a vehicle shall be 
issued by the registering authority or approved 
licence plates manufacturers or their dealers.
The Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi or 
any of the agency authorized by the Central 
Government shall approve the license plates 
manufacturers to above specification.
[Emphasis supplied]

	Learned counsel for the petitioners argues that the use of the 
word "approved" in para 2 of clause (v) of rule 50(1) has to be given 
its natural meaning and cannot be read to mean "selected" through 
notice inviting tender. In this respect, it is further submitted that the 
rule making authority has used the word 'approved' and 'approve' 
twice in the same paragraph. The rule read harmoniously rules out 
selection of sole manufacturer through a tender process. The 
argument in substance is that every approved licence plate 
manufacturer can be entrusted with the job of supplying the 
registration plates and selection of one manufacturer for the job is 
against the intendment of the rule.
The above argument seems attractive but on closer scrutiny is 
unacceptable. The rule is interpreted to mean that the registration 
plates can either be issued by RTO to the exclusion of all others or all 
type approval certificate holders must be allowed to do business of 
supply in open market. In other words, according to the petitioners, 
the rule contemplates that if the registering authority does not supply 
the plates itself, it allows all TAC holders to do the business without 
any restriction.
In interpreting the rule, the object of the scheme providing for 
affixation of high security plates has to be kept in view. Where the 
RTO himself is not making the supply of plates, an approved 
registration plate manufacturer can be selected for supply. The legal 
obligation on the registering authority under rule 50(1)(v)  to issue 
specified kinds of registration plates implies issuance of such 
registration plates through a selected approved plate manufacturer. 
Paragraph 2 of clause (v) of rule 50(1), if reasonably construed, does 
not indicate any prohibition of selection of an approved plate 
manufacturer for assisting the registering authority to implement  the 
scheme of affixation high security registration plates to existing 
vehicles and new vehicles. Such an interpretation fulfils the object of 
the scheme. The interpretation sought to be placed by the petitioners 
on the said para of the rule would result in frustrating the high  
security aspect and object of the scheme of affixation of high security 
registration plates on vehicles.
Challenge to Para 4(x) of the Motor-Vehicels [New High 
Security Registration Plates] Order, 2001 issued in purported 
exercise of powers under
section 109(3)
of the Act.
Para 4(x) of the statutory Order, 2001 mentioned above, reads 
as under :-
"The manufacturer or the vendors selected by the State 
Transport Department for supply of such registration plates may 
be for the State as a whole or for any region of the State."
On behalf of the petitioners, it is submitted that para 4(x) of the 
statutory Order, 2001 is ultra vires
section 109 (3)
of the Act under 
which it is purported to have been issued.
Section 109
with its heading 
and the relevant sub-section (3) reads as under :-
"
Section 109
. General provision regarding construction and 
maintenance of vehicles. (1) 	Every motor vehicle shall be so 
constructed and so maintained as to be at all times under the effective 
control of the person driving the vehicle.
(2) 	Every motor vehicle shall be so constructed as to have right  
hand steering control unless it is equipped with a mechanical or 
electrical signaling device of a prescribed nature.
(3) 	If the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary 
or expedient so to do in public interest, it may by order published in 
the Official Gazette, notify that any article or process used by a 
manufacturer shall conform to such standard as may be 
specified in that order.
[Highlighted for interpretation].
It is contended that
section 109(3)
falls under Chapter VII which 
deals with construction, equipment and maintenance of motor 
vehicles. Registration of motor-vehicles falls under
Chapter IV of the 
Act
. Under
section 109(3)
, a direction or order can be issued only to a 
'manufacturer' defined in
section 2(21A)
to mean manufacturer of 
motor vehicles. It is submitted that a motor-vehicle manufactured by 
a manufacturer is sold to a dealer without a registration plate. 
Thereafter, the dealer sells the motor vehicle to a customer without 
registration plate. Chapter IV containing
section 39
to
65
deal with 
registration of motor vehicles of different types. The proviso to
section 
39
of the Act says : 'nothing in this section shall apply to motor vehicle 
in possession of a dealer subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government'.
Section 41
also points to the 
same position. It casts an obligation on the owner of a motor vehicle 
to obtain registration. The question of issuing a certificate of 
registration and assigning to a motor vehicle a registration mark arises 
only after sale of motor vehicle. Therefore, until the motor vehicle has 
been sold to a person by a dealer, the registering authority would not 
come into the picture and there is no occasion for assigning it a 
registration mark. A manufacturer of motor vehicle is not at all 
concerned with registration thereof by the registering authority. On the 
basis of above interpretation of provisions of the Act, the submission 
made is that under
section 109(3)
, the Central Government can only 
prescribe standards for any article or process used by the 
manufacturer in the manufacturing of the vehicle and not for 
selecting any manufacturer of registration plates to the exclusion of 
others. It is submitted that reading sub-section (3) with sub-section 
(1) & (2) of
section 109
of the Act, the position is     that the 
provisions have nothing to do with registration plates of the vehicles.
It is further submitted that power to issue directions as 
contained in para 4(x) of the statutory order of 2001, cannot be traced 
to any provision in chapter IV of the Act dealing with registration of 
motor vehicles or to the rule making power under
section 
64(d)
. It is submitted that any provision regarding registration plates 
can only be made by rule framed by Central Government in 
accordance with provisions of the Act. Sub-section (4) of
section 212
of the Act, prescribes a mandatory requirement of first publishing draft 
rule before making a final rule on any subject. Since in promulgating 
para 4(x) of the statutory order of 2001, mandatory requirement of
section 212(4)
has not been complied with, the impugned para of the 
said statutory order of 2001 cannot be supported even as a statutory 
rule. The other submission made on the subject is that provisions for 
selecting only one manufacturer for registration plates in a region or a 
State is not a subject of 'prescribing manner and form in which the 
registration mark' would be displayed on the motor vehicles. On the 
above ground, it is submitted that para 4(x) of the statutory order of 
2001 deserves to be struck down as ultra vires  the Act. It is violative 
of  the
Article 19(1)(g)
of the Constitution.
The above argument based on
section 109(3)
and the other 
provisions in
Chapter IV of the Act
have been suitably replied by the 
counsel appearing for the respondents. The reasoning advanced on 
behalf of the respondents is worthy of acceptance. The statutory order 
of 2001 is expressly issued under
section 109 (3)
of the Act which no 
doubt is concerned with construction, equipment and maintenance of 
motor vehicles. Sub-section (3) of
section 109
permits Central 
Government to "notify that any article or process used by a 
manufacturer shall conform to such standard as prescribed". The word 
"manufacturer" is defined in
section 2(21A)
of the Act to mean a 
person engaged in the manufacture of the motor vehicles but the 
definition clause is prefixed by the words "unless the context otherwise 
requires". In the context of sub-section (3) of
section 109
, an article to 
be affixed to the motor vehicle like a high security registration plates is 
covered by the use of expression "any article or process used by a 
manufacturer". 'In the context' if the provision contained in sub-
section 3
is read reasonably, an article' which is adjunct or necessarily 
attachable to a motor vehicle, would also be covered  in the said 
expression. The statutory order of 2001 is published in the official 
gazette. It does not fall outside the scope of sub-section (3) of
section 
109
of the Act. The expression 'any article or process used by a 
manufacturer' has to be construed 'in the context' as not to restrict the 
expression 'manufacturer' to only manufacturer of motor vehicles as 
defined under
section 2 (21A)
of the Act. The definition in the Act has 
to be construed according to the 'context' and if the 'context' 
otherwise indicates a meaningful interpretation is to be given to the 
words 'any article or process used by any manufacturer' as used in 
sub-
section 3
of
section 109
of the Act. Registration plates are not 
manufactured by the manufacturer of motor vehicles but for 
maintenance and operations of motor vehicles, registration plates are 
necessary. Therefore, manufacturer of registration plates can be 
subjected to certain standards by a statutory order to be notified and 
published in accordance with sub-section (3) of
section 109
of the Act. 
Any restrictive interpretation of the said sub-section is neither called 
for from the language of the sub-section nor the object of the 
provision. Reference is made to the opinion of learned Brother G.P. 
Mathur J., in these cases. For the reasons mentioned by us above, in 
our opinion, the statutory order  of 2001 and clause 4(x) thereof 
cannot be held to be beyond the purview of sub-
section 3
of
section 
109
of the Act. Clause 4(x) of the statutory order of 2001, could be 
issued under
section 109(3)
, as an aid to the fulfillment of provisions 
of high security registration plates contained in rule 50. Such power of 
the State to issue order containing clause 4(x) is not only supported 
by sub-
section 3
of
section 109
but by rule 50 itself.  Clause 4(x) of 
the statutory order of 2001 is merely enabling one and re-states what 
rule 50 contemplates. We also find force in the alternative submission 
made on behalf of the respondents that the statutory order including 
clause 4(x) can be supported as having been issued in exercise of 
executive power of the Central Government which is co-extensive with 
its legislative power.
For the above reasons, all the challenges made to the provisions 
of the rule, statutory order or the tender conditions fail. All the 
petitions directly filed in this Court and transferred to this Court from 
High Courts are, hereby, dismissed.
In the circumstances, we direct that the parties shall bear their 
own costs in all these cases.