[Cites
24
, Cited by
49
]
Supreme Court of India
The Commissioner Of Police & Ors vs Acharya Jagdishwarananda Avadhuta & ... on 11 March, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 2984, 2004 (12) SCC 770, 2004 AIR SCW 1887, 2004 (3) SLT 306, (2004) 17 ALLINDCAS 871 (SC), 2004 (17) ALLINDCAS 871, 2004 (2) LRI 39, 2004 (3) SCALE 146, 2004 (3) ACE 87, (2004) 3 JT 224 (SC), (2004) 2 KHCACJ 336 (SC), (2004) 2 CTC 690 (SC), (2004) 3 MAD LJ 28, (2004) 2 SUPREME 427, (2004) 3 SCALE 146, (2004) 3 MAD LW 247, (2004) 3 MAD LW 319, (2004) 28 OCR 226, (2004) 16 INDLD 410, (2004) 3 CTC 199 (MAD)
Author:
Ar. Lakshmanan
Bench:
Ar. Lakshmanan
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  6230 of 1990

PETITIONER:
The Commissioner of Police & Ors.            		               

RESPONDENT:
Acharya Jagdishwarananda Avadhuta & Anr.   			   

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 11/03/2004

BENCH:
Dr. AR. Lakshmanan 

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

Dr. AR. Lakshmanan, J.
This appeal stems from the judgment and order dated 08.11.1990 passed by the 
Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in F.M.A.T. No. 1451 of 1990 dismissing the 
appeal filed by the Commissioner of Police with a directive to the effect that "The Police 
Authorities should permit the Ananda Margis to perform the Tandava dance in public 
processions on the occasion of their principal religious functions listed in prayer (b) of 
the writ petition on their undertaking to maintain peace and discipline on such 
occasions."  The Division Bench affirmed the judgment and order dated 07.05.1990 
passed by the learned Single Judge of the said Court allowing the writ petition of the 
respondents herein with a declaration that "Tandava dance as prescribed for the 
followers of Ananda Margis is an essential and integral part of the religion of the said 
religious denomination and that they have a right to perform such a dance in public on 
the occasions prescribed in this behalf subject to the restrictions under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution of India and the Police Authorities have no jurisdiction to impose 
ban on such a dance."
This case has a long and chequered carrier.  The facts are stated as under:-
Ananda Murtiji introduced Tandava dance requiring it to be performed daily by 
an Ananda Margi as one of his religious rites.
What is Tandava Dance:
According to the Ananda Margis, Lord Shiva was the originator of Tandava 
dance and introduced it about six thousand five hundred years back for physical, mental 
and spiritual upliftment of every human being.  Tandava dance is to be performed with a 
skull, knife and Trishul.  It is also customary to hold a lathi and a damroo and sword.  
Dancer may also use live snake in place of skull in day time and fire mashal's or 
damroo during night time.  Tandava dance lasts for a few minutes where two or three 
persons dance by lifting one leg to the level of chest and then bringing it down and 
lifting the other.  Ananda Murtiji by incorporating Tandava dance in the system of beliefs 
of Ananda Marga wanted to bring it to its original glory.  Tandava dance symbolises 'life' 
and `death'.  The skull represents death and the knife represents life.  The Ananda 
Margis are followers of Shaivite order within Hindu religion and Ananda Murtiji directed 
performance of Tandava dance as one of the prescriptions of religious rite to be 
followed by an Ananda Margi in private life and public places.
The respondents took out a procession with human skulls, daggers, trident etc. 
on 10.08.1979.  According to the police, the procession was to take out violating 
prohibitory ban in regard to carrying of those articles in processions in public streets.  In 
that circumstances, the Police Authorities declared the assembly unlawful and the 
police force was compelled to intervene.  The Commissioner of Police, Calcutta made 
repetitive orders under
Section 144
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 since 
August, 1979, directing that no member of a procession or assembly of five or more 
persons should carry any fire arms, explosive, swords, spears, knives, trident, lathis or 
any article which may be used as weapon of offence or any article likely to cause 
annoyance to the public.  This order of the Police Commissioner was challenged by the 
General Secretary of the Ananda Marga in a Writ Petition No. 903 of 1980 before the 
High Court of Calcutta.  The Calcutta High Court, by order dated 23.09.1980, rejected 
the said writ petition for the reasons recorded therein.  Again the Commissioner of 
Police, Calcutta made a fresh order under
Section 144
of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 on 29.03.1982 wherein the same restraints as mentioned in the earlier 
order were imposed and an application for permission to take out a procession on the 
prohibited streets accompanied with Tandava dance was rejected by him.  The said 
order refusing permission by the Police Commissioner was challenged by filing a writ 
petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India in this Court being registered as Writ 
Petition Nos. 6890 and 7204 of 1982.
This Court passed an order in the said writ petition rejecting the same on the 
finding that performance of Tandava dance in procession in the public streets or in 
gatherings in public places was not an essential religious rite of the followers of the 
Ananda Marga.  This Court also held as under:
"The claim of Ananda Marga as a separate religion was not 
acceptable in view of the clear assertion that it was not an institutionalised 
religion but a religious denomination.  Ananda Margis belong to the Shaivite 
order and as such they belong to the Hindu religion.  Accordingly, they were 
not entitled to get the protection of
Article 25
of the Constitution of India.
The Courts have the power to determine whether a particular rite or 
observance is regarded as essential by the tenets of a particular religion.
Ananda Margi as a religious order is of recent origin and Tandava 
dance as a part of religious rite of that order is still more recent.  It is 
doubtful as to whether in such circumstances Tandava dance can be taken 
as an essential religious rite of Ananda Margis.  Even conceding it is so it is 
difficult to accept Mr. Tarkunde's argument that taking out religious 
processions with Tandava dance is an essential religious rite of Ananda 
Margis.
Even conceding that Tandava dance has been prescribed as a 
religious rite for every follower of Ananda Margis it does not follow as a 
necessary corollary that Tandava dance to be performed in the public is a 
matter of religious rite.  In fact, there is no justification in any of the writings 
of Shri Ananda Murti that Tandava dance must be performed in 
public,,........We are, therefore, not in a position to accept the contention of 
Mr. Tarkunde that performance of Tandava dance in a procession or at 
public place is an essential religious rite to be performed by every Ananda 
Margi."
The petitioners have no fundamental right within the meaning of
Article 25
or 26 to perform Tandava dance in public streets and public 
places."
According to the appellants, no permission was granted to the respondents' 
organisation for taking out a similar procession.  The respondents performed Tandava 
dance with human skulls, knives etc. violating the conditions of permission.  On 
07.05.1987, the respondents made an application to the Commissioner of Police, 
Calcutta seeking for permission for taking out procession.  By order dated 25.05.1987, 
the permission was refused by the Commissioner of Police, Calcutta.  Under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India, Writ Petition (Civil) Nos. 1317-18 of 1987 was filed by the 
respondents in this Court challenging the said order of the Police Authorities refusing 
permission which was disposed of by this Court with the following observation:
"We are of the view that these cases should appropriately be examined by 
the High Court keeping in view that has been said by this Court in the 
judgment in Acharya Jagdishwaranand Avadhuta etc. Vs. 
Commissioner of Police, Calcutta & Anr. reported in [1984] 1 SCR 447.  
Petitioners are at liberty to go before the High Court."
Pursuant to the aforesaid liberty granted by this Court, a writ application was 
moved by the respondents praying for quashing the orders dated 20.05.1987 and 
27.05.1987 of appellant No.1 - Commissioner of Police and also for a directive upon 
the appellants commanding them to allow the respondents to perform Tandava dance 
in public procession of Ananda Marga on the occasion of its principal religious function 
and festival such as
(i)	Ananda Purnima;
(ii)	Shravani Purnima;
(iii)	Bijaya Dashami;
(iv)	 Dipavali;
(v)	New Year Day;
(vi)	Falguni Purnima (Vasanttotsava) and
(vii)	Dharma Maha Chakra and Dharma Maha Sammelans.
The respondents based their right to perform Tandava dance in procession and 
in public gathering on the basis of the prescription of their Guru Shri Ananda Murtiji in 
the recent fourth Edition of Carya Carya Part I published in the year 1986.  The writ 
application was heard by a learned Single Judge who passed an order allowing the writ  
application upon holding, inter alia, that Tandava dance as prescribed for followers of 
Ananda Marga was an essential and integral part of the religion of the said religious 
denomination and that they have right to perform such a dance on the occasion 
prescribed in this behalf subject to the restrictions imposed under
Articles 25
and
26
of 
the Constitution of India and the Court was powerless to examine as to whether such 
prescription of their Guru formed essential and integral part of the religious rite to be 
observed by the Ananda Margis.  Against the said judgment and order, the appellants 
filed an appeal before the Division Bench and obtained stay of operation of the said 
order of the learned Single Judge.  The stay application and the appeal were heard by 
the Division Bench of the High Court of Calcutta on several dates.  The impugned 
judgment and order of the Division Bench of the High Court of Calcutta was passed on 
08.11.1990 dismissing the stay application and the appeal and affirming the order of 
the learned Single Judge of the High Court of Calcutta.  Aggrieved by the impugned 
judgment, the appellants have approached this Court by way of Special Leave Petition 
No. 16233 of 1990.  On 21.12.1990, this Court granted leave in this matter and directed 
to continue the status quo until further orders.  A direction was also issued to expedite 
the appeal and to post the appeal as early as possible.  On 13.11.1992, this Court, after 
hearing the parties for sometime and having considered the decision of the three 
learned Judges of this Court in Acharya Jagdishwaranand Avadhuta etc.'s case 
(supra), was of the view that this is a matter which requires consideration by a 
Constitution Bench of this Court.  The matter was placed before the Constitution Bench.  
The Constitution Bench, by an order dated 04.12.2001, observed that there is no 
justification for the hearing of this civil appeal by a Constitution Bench and it must be 
placed before a Bench of two learned Judges for final disposal.  When the matter came 
up before the Division Bench of this Court on 17.01.2002, the Bench expressed their 
opinion as follows:
"After hearing the counsel for the parties at length, we are of the 
opinion that seemingly there is a contradiction in the order passed by the 
Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court (impugned judgment); the three-
Judge Bench judgment in Acharya Jagdishwaranand Avadhuta & Ors. 
(supra)  and the order passed by a two-Judge Bench in Bijoe Emmannuel 
& Ors. (supra).  In the latter case, the two-Judge Bench has explained in 
judgment of this Court in Acharya Jagdishwaranand Avadhuta & Ors. 
(supra) and held that Ananda Margi could claim the benefit of
Article 25(1)
having open the question regarding applicability of
Article 25
to the Ananda 
Margis.  The High Court based its decision on the latter judgment and gave 
the impugned judgment holding that the order passed by the appellants was 
violative of
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution of India.
We feel that the observation made by the two-Judge Bench in Bijoe 
Emmannuel & Ors. (supra) that
Article 25
did not apply to Ananda Margis 
had crept in the latter judgment  by some slip does not appear to be correct.  
In our view, this Court in its judgment in Acharya Jagdishwaranand 
Avadhuta etc. (supra) had reached a definite conclusion that the claim of 
the respondents that the action of the appellant was violative of fundamental 
rights of the respondents within the meaning of
Articles 25
and
26
of the 
Constitution of India had to be rejected.  It is apparent from the observation 
made by the Court in para 15 of its order reproduced in the earlier part of 
this order.
Another aspect which is required to be considered is whether the 
High Court was right in holding that prescribing of Tandava Dance with 
damroo, skull and trishul as a necessary religious rite by the Ananda Margis 
by their Guru after the rendering of the judgment by this Court would 
translate into a practice and the religious rites of the Ananda Margis or not. 
As the earlier judgment had been rendered by a three-Judge Bench, it 
would be appropriate that this aspect is also examined by a three-Judge 
Bench.
In order to avoid contradiction and inconsistency in the orders 
passed by this Court, we are of the view that this matter requires to be 
considered by a Bench of three learned Judges.  Accordingly, we request 
the learned Chief Justice to place this matter before a Bench of three 
learned Judges."
As noticed earlier, the dispute started in the year 1979 between the Police 
Authorities - the appellants herein and the respondents' organisation and the matter 
was pending before one forum or the other for all these years and has now been 
placed before this Bench for final hearing and for resolution of the long standing 
dispute between the parties.
We heard the arguments of Mr. Tapas Ray, learned senior counsel for the 
appellants and Mr. T.R. Andhyarujina, learned senior counsel for the respondents.
Learned senior counsel appearing for the respective parties drew our attention to 
the pleadings, documents, exhibits marked,  the judgments rendered by the High Court 
and of this Court on earlier occasions.  Both sides have also cited number of judgments 
in support of their respective contentions.
Mr. Tapas Ray, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants, submitted 
that -
a)	Tandava dance is not a religious rite or practice essential to the tenets of 
religious faith of Ananda Margis and that taking out religious processions 
with Tandava dance is not an essential religious rite;
b)	Ananda Margis have no fundamental right within the meaning of
Articles 
25
and
26
of the Constitution of India to perform Tandava dance in public 
streets or public places on their mere assertions that their Guru recently 
prescribed Tandava dance as part of their religious rite;
c)	The findings of the Calcutta High Court to the effect that Tandava dance 
is a part of religious order of that particular community and that the Police 
Authorities should allow the Ananda Margis to perform the Tandava 
dance in public procession on the occasion of their principal religious 
functions mentioned in the writ petitions are hit by the principle of res 
judicata in view of the negative decision of this Court on identical issues 
in Acharya Jagdishwaranand Avadhuta etc.'s case (supra);
d)	The subsequent order dated 01.12.1987 of this Court in Writ Petition 
(Civil) No. 1317-18 of 1987 to the effect that the case made out in the writ 
petition filed in this Court should be appropriately examined by the High 
Court keeping in view what had been said by this Court in Acharya 
Jagdishwaranand Avadhuta etc.'s case (supra) has not enabled the 
High Court to reopen the issues already conclusively decided by this 
Court in the above case;
e)	In view of the fact that Ananda Margis is not an institutionalised religion 
by itself and that they are a religious denomination within the Hindu 
religion which is the religion they hold, the Ananda Margis have no 
fundamental right within the meaning of
Article 25
or
Article 26
to perform 
Tandava dance in pubic streets and public places as per the mandate of 
their preceptor Ananda Murtiji in absence of any prescription to that effect 
in the "Shaivite" order within the Hindu religion;
f)	Whether the 'Guru' of Ananda Margis, Ananda Murtiji enjoys complete 
autonomy under
Article 26(b)
of the Constitution of India in the matter of 
deciding as to what rites and ceremonies are essential for his followers 
and whether Court is powerless to determine if such particular rite or 
observance is an essential tenet of the religion the followers of Ananda 
Margi hold.
g)	The respondents also cannot be permitted to carry trident, daggers or 
knife and/or live snakes in public procession or otherwise in view of the 
fact that the same is bound to disturb public peace and tranquillity and 
also such permission cannot be given as because there would be 
possibility of breach of public order and it might affect public health and 
morality.  Further carrying of human skulls and indulging in dance by 
lifting the leg to the chest level with weapons like tridents, daggers and/or 
knives and/or live snakes in crowded public roads of Calcutta and its 
suburbs or anywhere are repulsive to public taste and morality and the 
unusual dancing pose would also cause fear in the mind of people 
specially children thereby provoking public annoyance.
Mr. T.R. Andhyarujina, learned senior counsel, made elaborate submissions in 
support of the respondents'  case and cited many decisions.
He submitted that the issue raised in the present appeal had been raised by way 
of an application under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India before this Court and this 
Court having directed the High Court to dispose of the matter keeping in view the earlier 
judgments of this Court, the matter is at large.
The action of the appellants in refusing the Ananda Margis the right to perform 
the Tandava dance was violative of
Articles 15
, 19
, 25
and
26
of the Constitution of 
India.
In the present case, what constitutes an essential part of a religion is primarily to 
be ascertained with reference to the doctrine of that religion itself and the Court cannot 
say that a belief or practice is not part of religion.  In support of this contention, he relied 
on the following judgments:-
1.
The Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras  vs. Sri 
Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt
[1954] SCR 1005 at 
1028]
2.
Sardar Syedna Taher Saifuddin Saheb vs. The tState of Bombay
[1962] (Supp.2) SCR 496 at 531-532]
3.	Seshammal and Others, etc. etc. vs. State of Tamil Nadu [1972] (2) 
SCC 11]
4.	Ratilal Pannachand Gandhi vs.The State of Bombay & Ors. [1954] 
SCR 1055]
5.
N. Adithayan vs. Travancore Devaswom Board & Ors.
[2002] (8) SCC 
106]
6.
The Durga Committee, Ajmer & Anr. vs. Syed Hussain Ali & Ors
.
[1962] (1) SCR 383 at 412
In the present case, Anand Murtiji had prescribed a procession on six days with 
Tandava dance in the Carya Carya in the fourth edition 1986.  This precept is binding 
on the Ananda Margis which has not been disputed by the Commissioner of Police that 
these precepts are mandatory for the Ananda Margis.  [As could be seen from Volume-
II page 84 para 8 of the paper book].
It is significant that this Court in its order of 01.12.1987 did not dismiss the fresh 
writ petition filed after its decision in Acharya Jagdishwaranand Avadhuta etc.'s case 
(supra).  When the precepts were recorded in the Carya Carya and made part of the 
new petition, this Court ordered that this should be investigated by a fresh writ petition 
in the High Court which was done by the Division Bench of the High Court now and held 
that the precept was established as part of Ananda Margis religious belief.
It is pertinent to mention that carrying a small knife not exceeding 3" or 4" in size 
and a skull as symbolic items for the purpose of performing religious rites is not 
prohibited by any law.  Besides, it must be emphasised that a knife with a blade shorter 
than 10.16 cm in length is not an "arm" under
Section 2(c)
of the Arms Act.  Learned 
senior counsel cited [AIR 1990 Calcutta 336 at 352] and Acharya Jagdishwaranand 
Avadhuta etc.'s case (supra) which also notes that these are only 'symbolic' items.
There can be no question of any 'public order' being violated by the procession 
of Ananda Margis involving in the Tandava dance.  The concept of 'public order' which 
is a permissible restriction under
Article 25(1)
needs to be distinguished from the 
connotation 'law and order'.  As stated by this Court in
Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia vs. 
State of Bihar & Ors.
[1966] (1) SCR 709 at 745] that every breach of peace does 
not lead to public disorder.
Learned senior counsel for the respondents relied on the decision of the 
Constitution Bench in
Himat Lal K. vs. Commissioner of Police, Ahmedabad & Anr.
[1973] (2) SCR 266] for the proposition that the right to carry out religious processions 
in public streets.
It has been stated by the Commissioner of Police that if Ananda Margis do not 
carry a knife, trident or skull but only perform the Tandava dance in public, there would 
be no objection.  This is to ignore the fact that feature of the Tandava dance is the 
carrying of a knife, trident and skull since time immemorial.  This has also been noted 
by the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in Commissioner of Police vs. 
Acharya Jagdishwaranad [AIR 1991 Calcutta 263 at 270[.
Concluding his argument, learned senior counsel submitted that the respondents 
are willing to abide by any reasonable regulation in the interest of public order imposed 
by the Commissioner of Police in the conduct of their procession provided that the 
essential practice of Tandava dance as aforesaid is permitted.
The first question which needs to be decided goes to the very root of the High 
Court's jurisdiction in deciding the issue after the permission was given to the 
respondents to approach the High Court.  It is clear from the language used by this 
Court in disposing of the petition under
Article 32
of the Constitution of India  that this 
Court itself was persuaded with the earlier judgment did not finally conclude the matter.  
That is why, this Court directed the respondents herein to go before the High Court and 
directed the High Court to reconsider the matter.  As rightly pointed out by learned 
senior counsel for the respondents, it is significant to note that this Court in its order 
dated 01.12.1987 did not dismiss the fresh writ petition filed after its decision in 
Acharya Jagdishwaranand Avadhuta etc.'s case (supra) when the precepts were 
recorded in the Carya Carya and made part of the new petition under
Article 32
of the 
Constitution of India, this Court ordered that this should be investigated by the High 
Court in a fresh writ petition filed by the respondents, which was done by the High Court 
and which on reconsideration of the entire gamut of litigation and the records and of the 
arguments of the counsel appearing on either side held that the precept was 
established as part of Ananda Margis religious belief.  Therefore, the submission made 
by learned senior counsel for the appellants that the earlier judgment of this Court is 
final and there was no scope for the same issue to be reagitated or redetermined by the 
High Court has no force.  Since the matter is at large, we are of the opinion the High 
Court is right in considering the entire matter afresh and determining the same.  The 
High Court was competent to consider the question whether the Ananda Margis can 
claim the benefit of
Article 25(1)
of the Constitution of India.  Since, in our view, the said 
question is still open for reconsideration.  This apart, this Court in arriving at its finding 
that the Tandava dance was not an essential part of Ananda Margis religion had taken 
into consideration the fact that there was no document to show that the Tandava dance 
was to be performed in public.  As rightly pointed out by the High Court, there has been 
a factual change in the situation since the earlier judgment.  The High Court, therefore, 
is right in holding that it has the jurisdiction to entertain the present writ proceedings.
This Court, in its earlier judgment, took note of the fact that the practice was a 
recent one.  No finding, however, was arrived at by this Court that by reason of the 
recentness of the practice, the same could not form part of religion or be a matter of 
religion.  This Court, finally rested its finding on the fact that the Ananda Margis had not 
been able to show from any of their religious literature that the Tandava dance was to 
be performed in public.  In fact, this Court has also recorded that the counsel for the 
Ananda Margis had been asked by the Court to produce any literature in this regard but 
this could not be done.
As far as the recentness of the practice is concerned, it has been submitted by 
Mr. Andhyarujina that the Tandava dance has been closely associated with Hinduism 
from time immemorial and in support of this argument he relied upon several authorities 
and that the Hindus in general have always believed in dance as a form of worship vide 
"Nataraja in Art, Thought and Literature" by C. Sivaramamurti.  He would further submit 
that Ananda Murtiji was considered by the Ananda Margis as their religious preceptor or 
guru and any direction given by him was a mandate which could not be disobeyed.  
Therefore, the rites and rituals which would be prescribed by Ananda Murtiji would form 
an integral part of their religion as Ananda Murtiji was alive till recently, necessarily such 
directives could continue to be given until his death.
I am of the opinion that there is merit and substance in the contention of learned 
senior counsel.  Although the specific introduction of Tandava dance in public 
procession may have been recent, this does not detract from the fact that the Tandava 
dance is part of the religion of the Ananda Margis.  In any religion, practices may be 
introduced according to the decisions of the spiritual Head.  If these practices are 
accepted by the followers of such spiritual Head as a method of achieving their spiritual 
upliftment, the fact that such practice was recently introduced cannot make it 
anytheless a matter of religion.
Countering the argument, learned senior counsel for the appellants,  submitted 
that the concept of Tandava dance was not a part of religion but a secular activity and 
relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of
Durga Committee, Ajmer & Anr. 
vs. Syed Hussain Ali & Ors.
reported in (supra).  The particular passage relied on by 
learned counsel for the appellant is as follows:
"In order that the practices in question should be treated as a part of religion 
they must be regarded by the said religion as its essential and integral part; 
otherwise even surely secular practices which are not an essential or an 
integral part of religion are apt to be clothed with a religions form and may 
make a claim for being treated as religions practices within the meaning of
Art. 26.
Similarly even practices though religions may have sprung from 
merely superstitious beliefs and may in that sense be extraneous and 
unessential accretions to religion itself.  Unless such practices are found to 
constitute an essential and integral part of a religion their claim for the 
protection under
Art.26
may have to be carefully scrutinised, in other words, 
the protection must be confined to such religious practices as are an 
essential and integral part of it and no other."
This observation of this Court, in our view, runs counter to the observation of 
Mukherjee, J. in
The Commissioner, Hindu Religious Endowment, Madras vs. Sri 
Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt
(supra).  In this context, it is useful 
to reproduce a passage from the above judgment which explains the definition of 
religion in paragraphs 14 and 19 of the judgment which are -
"We now come to
Art. 25
which, as its language indicates, secures to every 
person, subject to public order, health and morality, a freedom not only to 
entertain such religious belief, as may be approved of by his judgment and 
conscience, but also to exhibit his belief in such outward acts as he thinks 
proper and to propagate or disseminate his ideas for the edification of 
others....
....If the tenets of any religious sect of the Hindus prescribe that 
offerings of food should be given to the idol at particular hours of the day, 
that periodical ceremonies should be performed in a certain way at certain 
periods of the year or that there should be daily recital of sacred texts or 
oblations to the sacred fire all these would be regarded as parts of 
religion..."
In a subsequent decision, namely, His Holiness Srimad Perarulala Ethiraja 
Ramanuja Jeeyar Swami etc. vs. The State of Tamil Nadu [AIR 1972 SC 1586], this 
Court has held that -
"Worshippers lay great store by the rituals and whatever other people, not of 
the faith may think about these rituals and ceremonies, they are a part of the 
Hindu Religious faith and cannot be dismissed as either irrational or 
superstitious."
Mr. Tapas Ray again submitted that the directives regarding the performance of 
Tandava dance was contained in Carya Carya under the heading "Social functions and 
festivals" and, therefore, the performance of Tandava dance was a secular activity.  We 
are unable to accept this contention.  We have already referred to the festivals at large.  
The Tandava dance has to be performed which are religious in nature.  It is stated in 
Chapter 15 of the Carya Carya that our social-cum-spiritual functions will be considered 
part of our spiritual life.  Admittedly, the original Tandava dance of Siva forms part of the 
Hindu religion which is said to represent the threefold processes of creation, 
preservation and destruction.  The rhythm, postures, ornaments and the weapons used 
in the dance are said to be symbols of religious significance vide chapter entitled "The 
significance of Sivas dance from "Nataraja in "Art, Thought and Literature"  by S. 
Sivarama murthi.  It is to be noticed that since 1986 Ananda Murtiji has specifically 
directed the performance of the Tandava dance in public procession on special 
occasions.  This directive is contained in the revised version of the Carya Carya.  It was 
placed before us at the time of hearing.  In fact, this writing was not produced before 
this Court during the hearing of the earlier writ proceedings and that this Court had no 
occasion to consider the same.  In our view, the performance of Tandava dance in 
public procession forms part of the Ananda Margis  religion and is also a matter of 
religion within the meaning of those articles and that the Ananda Margis cannot be 
deprived of their right to practice their religion in the manner prescribed by their 
religious preceptor, except on the grounds of public order, morality and health.  It is not 
the case of the appellants that the permission for the performance of Tandava dance in 
public procession has been forbidden on the ground of health.  Granting to have the 
permission has been refused on the ground of public order and morality.  However, in 
the orders by which the permission had been refused, the Police Authorities have 
refused permission in terms of the order of this Court.  This Court had never directed 
the said authorities not to accede to the performance of the Tandava dance in public 
procession.  It was, therefore,  wrong for the State Authorities to refuse permission 
purportedly in terms of this Court's orders.  A close scrutiny of the order refusing 
permission do not contain any reference to public order or morality.
However, the 
appellants, at the time of hearing of this appeal,  tried to improve their case by affidavits 
which cannot at all be permitted.  The reason justifying refusal of permission should 
have appeared in the order refusing permission itself.  The only reason given was this 
Court's order.  These reasons cannot now be modified or supplemented by way of an 
affidavit in the proceedings as held by this Court in
Mohinder Singh Gill vs. The Chief 
Election Commissioner
[AIR 1978 SC 851.
Ananda Marga had already been declared as a religious denomination by this 
Court vide judgment dated 20.10.1983 as reported in Acharya Jagdishwaranand 
Avadhuta etc.'s case (supra) at para 9 wherein it has been observed as under:
"....Ananda Marga appears to satisfy all the three conditions, viz., it is a 
collection of individuals who have a system of beliefs which they regard as 
conducive to their spiritual well being; they have a common organisation 
and the collection of these individuals has a distinctive name, Ananda 
Marga, therefore, can be appropriately treated as a religious denomination 
within the Hindu religion..."
This declaration was made by this Court after perusal of all rival contentions by 
both the parties.  In that case also, the present appellants had made various averments 
about the alleged misbehaviour of Ananda Margis and this Court placed no reliance on 
the said allegations.  The contention that the word 'religion' under
Article 25(1)
of the 
Constitution of India does not include sect of religion of Ananda Marga being declared 
as religious denomination does not qualify for the same protection as religion in our 
view is not tenable.  The learned Judges of the Calcutta High Court in their judgment 
impugned in this appeal has categorically dealt with the question following the decision 
exactly on the same point in the case of
Shirur Mutt
(supra) and the National Anthem 
case reported in [AIR 1987 SC 748] and Sri Venkataramana Devaru & Ors. Vs. State 
of Mysore & Ors., [AIR 1958 SC 255] held that a religious denomination or 
organisation enjoys complete autonomy in the matter of deciding as to what rights and 
ceremonies are essential according to the tenets of the religion they hold and outside 
authority has no jurisdiction to interfere with their decision in such matters.
It was argued on behalf of the respondents that the Ananda Marga which has 
been declared as a religion by this Court has been discriminated and singled out by the 
West Bengal Government for its ideological differences as its philosophy is based on 
spirituality.  Several instances were pointed out by the respondents.  Particulars were 
also furnished by the respondents in their writ petition in this regard.  According to the 
respondents, processions of various hues are taken out regularly in Calcutta and the 
celebration of Muslim festival of Muharram is taken out with various deadly weapons as 
well as Sikh celebrations with sword fighting display in public, the procession of workers 
of Bharat Sevasram Sangha (a Social and not even a religious organisation) are 
allowed to move on horseback and carrying swords through the streets.  Besides these, 
the example of Bolana and Gajana festivals in Burdwan, Birbhum, Murshidabad, Nadia 
in West Bengal, wherein a public dance with severe heads from corpses is displayed 
and the procession of monks in Allahabad are examples of religious tolerance in our 
country which has a wide variety of traditions and beliefs.  The display of Tandava 
dance which takes only a few minutes by a very limited number of persons to display 
the same compared to other religious festivals.  The plea of congested streets is an 
eye-wash in that the appellants allows other groups of other hue to move in procession 
in Calcutta and deny the Ananda Margis due to prejudice towards Ananda Marga and 
its philosophy.  This contention was denied by learned counsel for the appellants stating 
that if the respondents are allowed to perform the dance on public roads while in 
procession which is offensive order morality are bound to create external situation 
endangering public life and safety which goes or bound to go out of control of the 
administration.  Such a procession with burning torches, human skulls etc. if allowed 
will only be at the cost of widespread public panic, disruption of traffic, both vehicular 
and pedestrian and smooth movement of passers by and will give rise to the chances of 
rioting and other criminal offences.  In our view, this contention of the appellants has no 
merits.  If one religious denomination is allowed to carry its religious practice but 
another religious denomination is restrained from carrying on religious practice and 
almost similar religious practices, the same makes out a clear case of discrimination in 
violation of the principles of
Article 14
of the Constitution.  It was submitted by learned 
senior counsel for the respondents that in the procession of the followers of Ananda 
Margis, each one of them will not carry the skull and trident or knives of the aforesaid 
size, but only 5 to 6 members in a procession of at least 1,000 members would carry 
the skull and the trident and/or knives to perform the Tandava Dance which will be of a 
very limited duration, may be of 1 or 2 minutes.  Such performance is likely to be 
repeated at the interval of say one mile and the said performance is not a continuous 
one.  Such performance cannot by any stretch of imagination cause public annoyance 
or disturbance of the public law and order situation and therefore, there is no reason for 
the respondents to deny permission to the members of Ananda Margis to perform such 
Tandava Dance in public inasmuch as the said dance is one of the most fundamental 
aspects of the religious practice which the Ananda Margis are bound to perform as per 
the directions of their Living Guru.
According to Mr. Andhyarujina, a wrong impression is created about the religious 
procession by the Ananda Margis as if it consisted of a huge number of violent persons 
brandishing knives or tridents and displaying human skull or tridents terrifying the public 
and disturbing periodically public order in streets and that the facts are to the contrary.  
In regard to this submission, he invited our attention to the conditions under which the 
procession with Tandava dance is held by Ananda Margis as under:-
"1.  6 times a year on days of festivals and social functions
2. approximately 1000 members in procession
3. 5 or 6 members carry skulls and trident and/or knives to perform Tandava 
dance, which is of 1 or 2 minutes duration.  This will be repeated at intervals of 
one mile and is not of continuous duration;
4. Knife/trident is only of 3" to 4"
5. The skull is held in the left hand and knife/trident (sometimes a torch) is held 
in the right
6. Each of the items, tandava dance, trident/knife and skull has a deep spiritual 
significance.
7. The organizers of the procession have given undertaking to the Commissioner 
of Police to maintain peace and discipline when conducting procession and the 
procession will be taken only on a specified route or roads"
According to him, Tandava Dance in procession is the mandate of Ananda 
Margis.  He invited our attention to para 14 of the judgment of this Court in Acharya 
Jagdishwaranand Avadhuta etc.'s case (supra) in which this Court held that there is 
no justification in any writings of Shri Ananda Margis that Tandava dance must be 
performed in public.  On this finding, this Court held that Tandava dance was not 
proved to be an essential religious rite to be performed by every Ananda Margi in 
procession.
The tenets of the Ananda Margi are both oral and written as in the case of many 
religions.  The fact that there were no writings shown to the Court that Tandava dance 
is to be performed in public, did not negative the existence of such precepts by the 
Anand Murthiji.  As in the case of many religious any of the Anand Murthiji's precepts 
are a matter of oral prescriptions.  However, in the 1986 edition of Carya Carya specific 
mention was made by Anand Murthiji of the requirement of Tandava dance in 
procession on special functions and festivals.
These written mandatory directions of Anand Murtiji were specifically pleaded by 
the Petitioner at page 9-10 para 9 and 10 of the Writ Petition.  Their existence or 
genuineness were not denied in the reply.  On the contrary, it was admitted that "the 
directive may be mandatory and binding on the followers of Ananda Margis but it does 
not bind the respondents.
The Court rightly observed that the fact that the practice is recently prescribed by 
Ananda Murtiji is not a reason for saying does not part of the religious practices and 
beliefs of the denomination.
I shall now consider whether Ananda Margis have the fundamental right under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution of India.
The Anand Margi are a religious denomination and as such are entitled to the 
protection under
Articles 25
and
26(b)
of the Constitution for their beliefs and practices 
including their practice of Tandava dance in a procession or public place.  This is 
because, as held by this Court in several cases.
"Religious practices or performance of acts in pursuance of religious beliefs are 
as much a part of religious as faith or belief in religious doctrine.  No outside authority 
has any right to say that they are not essential part of religion and it is not open to the 
secular authority of the State to restrict or prohibit them in any manner they like....."
Ratilal Pannachand Gandhi vs. State of Bombay
,(supra)  citing with approval Daver, 
J. in Jamshedji Soonabai, AIR 33 Bom.
122, Commnr. HRE, Madras vs. 
Lakshmandra 1954 SCR 1006 at 1021-1022, 1025,
Sardar Syedna vs. State of 
Bombay
1962 suppl (2) SCR 496 at 531-532.
In Venkatarama Devaru's case 
(supra),  this Court has held that the right under
Article 26(b)
of a denomination to 
manage its own affairs in matters of religion includes even practices which are regarded 
as part of religion.
The exercise of the freedom to act and practice in pursuance of religious beliefs 
is as much important as the freedom of believing in a religion.  In fact to persons 
believing in religious faith, there are some forms of practicing the religion by outward 
actions which are as much part of religion is the faith itself.  The freedom to act and 
practice can be subject to regulations.  In our Constitution subject to public order health 
and morality and to other provisions in Part III of the Constitution.  However, in every 
case the power of regulation must be so exercised with the consciousness that the 
subject of regulation is a fundamental right of religion, and as not to unduly infringe the 
protection given by the Constitution.  Further in the exercise of the power to regulate, 
the authorities cannot sit in judgment over the professed views of the adherents of the 
religion and to determine whether the practice is warranted by the religion or not.  That 
is not their function ( See Jesse Cantwell vs. State of Connecticut (1939 84 L.Ed. 
1213-1218, United States vs. Ballard, 1943 88 L.Ed. 1148, 1153, 1154).
I shall now consider the right of the Ananda Margis to religious procession.
In
Parthasaradi Ayyangar & Ors.  vs. Chinakrishna Ayyangar,  ILR
5 Madras 304 
Turner C.J. said,
"In India,   person of whatever sect are entitled to conduct religious procession 
through public streets so long as they do not interfere with the ordinary use of such 
streets by the public and subject to such directions as the Magistrates may lawfully give 
to prevent obstruction of thorough fare or breaches of public peace."
"The power to suspend is extraordinary and the Magistrate should resort to it 
only when he is satisfied that other powers are insufficient.  This authority of the 
Magistrate should be exercised in defence of rights rather than in their suspension."
These observations were quoted with approval by this Court in
Ghulam Abbas 
vs. State of U.P.
1982 (1) SCR 1077 at 1130-1133.  It was observed that the 
authorities should not in face of such religion rights prohibit religious procession on the 
"facile ground of public peace and tranquillity" but adopt a positive approach to protect 
fundamental rights under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution.
Moreover "public order" has a larger connotation than "law and order".  
Contravention of law to effect public order  must affect the community or the public at 
large.  A mere disturbance of law and order leading to disorder is not one which affects 
"public order".
(See
R.M. Lohia vs. State of Bihar
,(supra)).
Similar processions by other communities even with use of swords e.g. Sikhs, 
Muslims and Bharat Sevashram Sanghs have been permitted by the Commissioner of 
Police.
The Police Commissioner answers the charge of discrimination by stating that 
"activities of Anand Margis cannot come within the scope of religious functions or 
practices as compared to well established practices  festival of Muslims and Sikhs".  It 
is not for the Police Commissioner to give his disapproval to practice of a particular sect 
which are in his opinion not well established.  To allow any authority to judge the truth 
or falsity of a religious belief or practice is to destroy the guarantee of religious freedom 
in the Constitution(see US vs. Ballard, 88 L.Ed.1148).
At the time of hearing, a promise was made that the Ananda Margis are willing to 
abide with any regulatory condition imposed by the Police Authorities in their procession 
so long as their religious beliefs and practices of Tandava Dance in a procession are 
not abrogated.
Whilst our Constitution is neutral in religion, it at the same time, is benign and 
sympathetic of all religious creeds however unacceptable they may be in the eyes of 
the non-believers.
Articles 25
and
26
embody a tolerance to all religions.  This Court 
has rightly said 
"Our tradition teaches tolerance; Our philosophy preaches tolerance; Our 
Constitution practices tolerance; Let us not dilute it:
It is in that spirit of tolerance that creeds like the Petitioner with their 
practices must be accepted in our society".
This Court has explained in a number of decisions that what constitutes an 
essential part of a religion is primarily to be ascertained with reference to the doctrine of 
that religion itself and the Court cannot say that a belief or practice is not part of 
religion.  This proposition was authoritatively laid down by the Constitution Bench of this 
Court (Seven Judges) in
Shirur Mutt
's case (supra) as extracted in paras (supra).  
This is the most essential part of the fundamental right of freedom of religion.
This 
Court in subsequent cases have followed the proposition in
Shirur Mutt
's case 
(supra), Sardar Syedna Tahe Saifuddin Saheb vs. State of Bombay (Five Judges) 
1962 (Suppl) SCR 496 at 531-532 & in
Seshanmmal vs. State of Tamil Nadu
, 1972 
(2) SCC 11 (five Judges) at page 21.
In the case of
Ratilal Pannachand Gandhi vs. State of Bombay
(supra), this 
Court emphasized that "No outside authority has any right to say that these are not 
essential parts of religion and it is not open to a secular authority of the State to restrict 
and prohibit them in any manner they like under the guise of administering the trust 
estate."
This Court quoted with approval
Jamshedji  vs. Soonabai
(supra)  where 
the Bombay High Court held, "if this is the belief of the community......a secular judge is 
bound to accept that belief - it is not for him to sit in judgment on that belief, he has no 
right to interfere with the conscience of a donor who makes a gift in favour of what he 
believes to be the advancement of his religion and the welfare of his community or 
mankind."
As late as 2002, this Court has reiterated this in
N. Adithayan vs. Tranvancore 
Devaswom Board
[(2002) 8 SCC 106 at 123].  This Court observed that "as to what 
really constitutes an essential part of religion or religious practice has to be decided by 
the Courts with reference to the doctrine of a particular religion or practices regarded as 
parts of religion."
The obiter of Gajendragadkar, J. in
Durga Committee, Ajmer vs. Syed 
Hussain Ali
(supra) to the effect that  the Court may have  carefully scrutinized the 
practices to find out whether they constitute an essential or integral part of religion is not 
in line with the above decisions including that of seven Judges Bench in the case of
Shirur Mutt
(supra).
Seervai in Constitutional Law of India (4th Edition), Volume-II  at page 1268 has 
criticized this as obiter as inconsistent with earlier decisions of this Court cited above.   
Subject to consideration of public order, health and morality, it is not open for 
anybody to question the tenets and practices of religion, however, irrational they may 
appear to an outsider.
It is brought to our notice that the following observation in Acharya 
Jagdishwaranand Avadhuta etc.'s case (supra) is not correct in law :-
"Mr. Tarkunde has claimed protection of
Article 25
of the Constitution but in 
view of our finding that Anandamarga is not a separate religion, application 
of
Article 25
is not attracted".
As rightly stated by this Court in Bijoe Emmanuel's case (1986 (6) 
SCC 615 at 631.  This sentence appears to have crept into the judgment by 
some slip.
Article 25(1)
states that all persons are entitled to freedom of 
religion.  Hence every member of a religious denomination is entitled to the 
fundamental right of freedom of religion under
Article 25.
It necessarily 
follows that every sect or denomination is entitled to freedom of religion 
under
Article 25.
It is undisputed that under
Article 26(b)
a denomination is 
entitled to manage its own affairs in matters of religion.
The above observation in Jagdishwaranand's case is also contrary 
to the interpretation of
Article 25(1)
given by this Court in the Constitution 
Bench of 7 Judges in
Shirur Mutt
case where the Court observes that 
"institutions as such cannot practice or propagate religion; it can be done 
only by individual persons and whether these persons propagate their 
personal views or the tenets for which the institution stands is really 
immaterial for the purpose of
Article 25".
In this context, I can also usefully refer to the decision of this Court in
Ratilal 
Panachand  Gandhi & Ors. Vs. State of Bombay & Ors.
(supra).
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the observation of the learned Judges in the 
referring order dated 17.01.2002 are not correct.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the important questions of law posed 
for our consideration.
Article 25(1)
guarantees to every person freedom of conscience and the right 
freely to profess, practice and propagate any religion.  It may be noted that this right is 
not confined to citizens alone, but covers all persons residing in India.  But the right to 
freedom of religion guaranteed by this Article is subject to restrictions which may be 
imposed by the state on the grounds of:
1.	Public order, morality and health;
2.	Other provisions of Part III of the constitution;
3.	Regulating nonreligious activity associated with religious
practice;
4.	Social welfare and reform &
5.	Throwing open Hindu religious institutions of public
character to all classes of Hindus.
The full concept and scope of religious freedom is that there are no restraints 
upon the free exercise of religion according to the dictates of one's conscience or upon 
the right freely to profess, practice and propagate religion save those imposed under 
the police power of the State and the other provisions of Part II of the Constitution.  This 
means the right to worship God according to the dictates of one's conscience.  Man's 
relation to his God is made no concern for the State.  Freedom of conscience and 
religious belief cannot, however, be, set up to avoid those duties which every citizen 
owes to the nation; e.g. to receive military training, to take an oath expressing 
willingness to perform military service and so on.
Though the freedom of conscience and religious belief are absolute, the right to 
act in exercise of a man's freedom of conscience and freedom of religion cannot 
override public interest and morals of the society and in that view it is competent for the 
state to suppress such religious activity which are prejudicial to public interest.  That 
apart, any activity in furtherance of religious belief must be subordinate to the criminal 
laws of the country.  It must be remembered crime will not become less odious because 
sanctioned by what a particular sect may designate as religious.  Thus polygamy or 
bigamy may be prohibited or made a ground of disqualification for the exercise of 
political rights, notwithstanding the fact that is in accordance with the creed of a 
religious body.
The liberty of the individual to do as he pleases, even in innocent matters, must 
yield to the common good.  In other words, the police power of the State is founded on 
the theory that when there is conflict between the rights of individual and the interest of 
the society, the interest of the society must prevail.  In an organized society there 
cannot be any individual right which is injurious to the community as a whole.  At the 
same time, the police power is not absolute and must not be arbitrary or oppressive.  In 
other words, the police power must be exercised for preservation of the community from 
injury.  What our Constitution attempts to do is to strike a balance between individual 
liberty and social control.  There are two limbs to religions freedom contained in Article
25.  While one limb guarantees the right the other limb incorporates restrictions on the 
exercise of the right so that they may not conflict with public welfare or morality.
Jahova Witnesses and Ananda Margis

The principle of secularism enshrined in the Constitution touched its high 
watermark in the Jehovah's witnesses case, wherein this Court held that children of the 
Jehovah's witnesses faith need not stand up to sing the National Anthem at school 
assemblies.  According to the Court there is no provision of law which obliges anyone to 
sing the National Anthem, nor is it disrespectful to the National Anthem if a person who 
stands up respectfully when the National anthem is sung does not join the singing.  It is 
true that the constitution enjoins a duty on every citizen to respect the National Flag and 
National Anthem.  However, according to the Court,  proper respect is shown to the 
National Anthem by standing up when the National Anthem is sung and it will not be 
right to say that disrespect is shown by not joining in the singing.  Therefore, the 
expulsion of the children from the school for the reason they did not join the singing of 
National Anthem, though they do stand up respectfully, when the Anthem is sung would 
be violative of
Article 19(1)
and
Article 25(1)
, especially when it was sought to be done 
in pursuance of two circulars issued by the Director of Public Instruction having no 
statutory force.  In the case of P.M.A. Metropolitan & Ors. etc.etc. vs. Moran Mar 
Marthoma & Anr. etc. etc., AIR 1995 SC 2001 (ex-communication case),  a sharply 
divided Court upheld the right of the leaders of faith to ex-communicate 'fallen' believers 
for religious reasons-no doubt leaving it to the Courts to determine whether an ex-
communicatory reason was religious or not.  The principle of ex-communication is that 
the collective right will prevail over individual right.  However, in 1995, this Court 
recognized the power of ex-communication as a measure of discipline.
In the case of
Mohd. Hanif  Quareshi & Ors. vs. The State of Bihar
, [1959 SCR 629,Cow Slaughter 
case]  this Court had struck a balance between the fundamental rights of butchers to 
occupation and slaughtering of cows an activity claimed to be part of the Islamic faith.  
While prohibiting indiscriminate slaughter of cows the Court did two things.
1.	muslim sentiments were respected and butchers retained a large part of 
their trade.
2.	by rejecting their claim that cow slaughter was an "essential practice of 
Islam" relying on its own interpretation of Koran, the Hindus were partially 
appeased.
Here, the Court has assumed the role of the theologian after making a roving 
enquiry.  While the decision is criticized on the ground that, once this door is opened, 
there is no limit to which the Court cannot go, the answer is that the power of judicial 
review as a basic structure is vested with the Court and if some one has to be trusted, 
let it be the Courts even in matters of faith.  This Court, as stated earlier, considered 
this question whether performance of Tandava dance is a religious rite or practice 
essential to the tenets of the religious faith of the Ananda Margis.  The Court while 
upholding Ananda Marga satisfies all the three conditions envisaged by
Article 26
of the 
Constitution of India and as such a religious denomination negatived their claims to 
perform Tandava Dance in public (1. It is a collection of individuals who have a system 
of beliefs which they regards as conducive to their spiritual well-being; 2. they have a 
common organization, and 3 the collection of these individuals has distinctive name).  
The specific case of the petitioners is that Shri Ananda Murti introduced Tandava as a 
part of religious rites of Anand Margis in 1966.  What is Tandava Dance?  It lasts for a 
few minutes, where two or three persons dance by lifting one leg to the level of the 
chest, bringing it down and lifting the other.  When the Ananda Margis greet their 
spiritual preceptor, they perform a brief welcome dance of Tandava using skull and 
knife for 2/3 mts.  According to them,  Tandava is a custom among it sect members and 
it is a customary performance and its origin is over thousands of years old.  Repelling 
the contention the Court held even conceding that Tandava dance has been prescribed 
as a religious rite for the followers of Ananda Marga, it does not follow as a necessary 
corollary that Tandava Dance to be performed in the public is a matter of religious rite.  
The Court went on to observe that there is nothing that Tandava dance must be 
performed in public.  In the result, this Court rejected the claim of Ananda Margis to 
perform Tandava Dance in public streets.
It would be pertinent to mention that the Sikh Community carry "Kirpans" as a 
symbol of their religious practice and the Gurkhas the "Kukris" or "Dagger".  So also, the 
Hindus are permitted to carry the idol of "Ganesa" in procession before immersion in the 
sea during Vinayaka Chaturti Celebrations.  Persons professing Islamic Faith are 
allowed to take out procession during "Moharrum" Festival and persons participating in 
such processions beat their chest with hands and chains and inflict injuries on them and 
the same has been permitted as a religious practice of that community.  
	Each deity presides over a certain function, has a certain consort, uses a 
particular vehicle, giving them a concrete aspect that appeals to less spiritually 
sophisticated lay people.  All these insignia have a deep philosophical symbolism.  
What might interest us presently is that all these vehicles are mostly drawn from the 
world of animals, birds, and even reptiles.  For example, Brahma has a swan, Vishnu 
has a garuda, a type of eagle, Siva rides a bull, Ganesa a mouse, Subrahmanya a 
peacock, and so on.  The idea is only to emphasize the kinship with animals.  Trees 
have the divinity Vanadevata.  War is presided over by the Goddess Chamundi riding a 
lion.  Sound has a divinity, the Nadabrahmam.  The Goddess Saraswathi presides over 
music and arts.  Lakshmi sitting on a lotus deals with wealth.  Parvathi, the consort of 
Siva, rules the entire Nature.  All these divinities serve to consecrate every aspect of 
daily life.  The whole pantheon serves to emphasize the one ultimate Reality.
Reading and reciting old scriptures, for instance, Ramayana or Quran or Bible or 
Gurur Granth Sahib is as much a part of religion as offering food to deity by a Hindu or 
bathing the idol or dressing him and going to a temple, mosque, church or gurudwara...
The authorities concerned can step in and take preventive measures in the 
interest of maintenance of Law and Order if such religious processions disturb Law and 
Order.  It has to be held that the right to carry Trishul, Conch or Skull is an integral and 
essential part of religious practice and the same is protected under
Article 25
of the 
Constitution of India.  However, the same is subject to the right of the State to interfere 
with the said practice of carrying Trishul, Conch or Skull if such procession creates Law 
and Order problems requiring intervention of concerned authorities who are entrusted 
with the duty of maintaining Law and Order.
What is Religion
	Religion is a social system in the name of God laying down the Code of Conduct 
for the people in Society.  Religion is a way of life in India and it is an unending 
discovery into unknown world.  People living in Society have to follow some sort of 
religion.  It is a social Institution and Society accepts religion in a form which it can 
easily practice.  George Barnard Shaw stated, "There is nothing that people do not 
believe if only it be presented to them as Science and nothing they will not disbelieve if 
it is presented to them as Religion."  Essentially, Religion is based on "Faith".  Some 
critics say that Religion interfered with Science and Faith.  They say that religion led to 
the growth of blind faith, magic, sorcery, human sacrifices etc.  No doubt, history of 
religion shows some indications in this direction but both Science and Religion believe 
in faith.  Faith in Religion influences the temperament and attitude of the thinker.  
Ancient civilization viz., the Indus Valley Civilization shows faith of people in Siva and 
Sakthi.  The period of Indus Valley Civilization was fundamental religion and was as old 
as at least  Ehyptian and Mesapetomiah Cultute.  People worship Siva and the Trishul 
(Trident), the emblem of Siva which was engraved on several seals.  People also 
worshipped stones, trees, animals and Fire.  Besides, worship of stones, trees, animals 
etc. by the primitive religious tribes shows that animism viz., worship of trees, stones, 
animals was practiced on the strong belief that they were abodes of spirits, good or evil.  
Modern Hinduism is to some extent includes Indus Valley Civilization Culture and 
religious faith.  Lord Siva is worshipped in the form of Linga.  Many symbols have been 
used in Hindu Literature.  Different kinds of symbols and images have different sanctity.  
Brading of chest, arms and other parts of body represent to the weapons of symbols of 
Siva.  Modern Hinduism has adopted and assimilated various religious beliefs of 
primitive tribes and people.  The process of worship has undergone various changes 
from time to time.
The expression of `RELIGION ' has not been defined in the Constitution and it is 
incapable of specific and precise definition.
Article 25
of the Constitution of India 
guarantees to every person, freedom of conscience and right freely to profess, practice 
and propagate religion.  No doubt, this right is subject to public order related to health 
and morality and other provisions relating to Fundamental Right.  Religion includes 
worship, faith and extends to even rituals.  Belief in religion is belief of practice a 
particular faith, to preach and to profess it.  Mode of worship is integral part of religion.  
Forms and observances of religion may extend to matters of Food and Dress.  An act 
done in furtherance to religion is protected.  A person believing in a particular religion 
has to express his belief in such acts which he thinks proper and to propagate his 
religion.  It is settled law that protection under
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution of 
India extend guarantee for rituals and rituals and observances, ceremonies and modes 
of worship which form part and parcel of religion.  Practice becomes part of religion only 
if such practice is found to be essential and integral part.  It is only those practices 
which are  integral part of religion that are protected.  What would constitute an 
essential part of  religion or religious practice is to be determined with reference to the 
Doctrine of a particular religion which includes practices which are regarded by the 
Community as part and parcel of that religion.  Test has to be applied by Courts 
whether a particular religious practice is regarded by the community practicing that 
particular practice is integral part of the religion or not.  It is also necessary to decide 
whether the particular practice is religious in character or not and whether the same can 
be regarded as an integral or essential part of religion which has to be decided based 
on evidence.
It is not uncommon to find that those delve deep into scriptures to ascertain the 
character and status of a particular practice.  It has been authoritatively laid down that 
Cow Sacrifice is not an obligatory over-act for a Muslim to exhibit his religious belief.  
No Fundamental Right can be claimed to insist on slaughter of a healthy cow on a 
Bakrid Day.  Performance of "Sharadha" and offering of "Pinda" to ancestors are held to 
be an integral part of Hindu Religion and religious practice.  Carrying "Trishul" or 
"Trident" and "skull" by a few in a procession to be taken out by a particular community 
following a particular religion is by itself an integral part of religion.  When persons 
following a particular religion carry Trishul, Conch or Skull in a procession, they mrely 
practice which is part of their religion which they wanted to propagate by carrying 
symbols of their religions such as Trishul, Conch etc.  If the conscience of a particular 
community has treated a particular practice as an integral or essential part of religion, 
the same is protected by
Articles 25
and
26
of the Constitution of India.
	Therefore, Anand Margis have right to take a procession in public places after 
obtaining necessary permission from the concerned authorities and they are also 
entitled to carry Trishul or Trident, Conch or Skull so long as such procession is 
peaceful and does not offend the religious sentiments of other people who equally enjoy 
fundamental right to exercise their religious freedom.  An Anand Margi is entitled to 
transmit or spread religion by taking out procession in public places and also carry 
Trishul, Conch or Skull.  However, any religious right is subject to public order.  The 
State has got ample powers to regulate the secular activities associated with religious 
practices.  Religious activities are protected under
Article 25
of the Constitution of India.  
No doubt, such religious freedom is subject to health and subject to laws made for 
social welfare.  Every person has got right to follow, practice and propagate his religion.              
The Commissioner has got power to regulate assemblies, meetings and 
processions in public places, etc.  It specifically provides that he is entitled to prescribe 
the routes by which and the times at which such processions may pass, in order to 
keep the public places and prevent obstructions on the occasion of such assemblies, 
meetings and processions and in the neighbourhood of places of worship during the 
time of public worship.
Hence, to preserve public peace and to avoid damages to public properties and 
keeping this in mind the Anand Margis are permitted to go on procession and perform 
Tandva dance with skull, Trishul, knife, damroo, sword subject to the following terms 
and conditions:-
1.	The Commissioner of police may prescribe the route;
2.	REGULATION:
(i)	The participants to the procession shall not carry wooden bars, 
weapons, metal rods, weapons capable of inducing violence.
(ii)	Loud speakers shall not be used.
(iii)	Traffic regulations should be observed.
(iv)	Traffic should not be obstructed.
(v)	Normal activities of common man should not be disturbed.
(vi)	Objectionable slogans and illegal slogans or provocative slogans 
affecting others' sentiments shall not be expressed or voiced.
(vii)	Processionists shall proceed in five persons row and shall keep 
one side of the road by keeping other side for transport.
(viii)	Crackers are prohibited
(ix)	They should not spray colour powders
The instructions of police officers and other regulations as above should be 
followed."
For the foregoing reasons, I am of the opinion that the appeal filed by the 
appellats has no merits and is, therefore, dismissed.
In my opinion, it is a fit case for awarding of exemplary costs to the respondents.  
Since the respondents were prevented from practising their religion and perform the 
religious Tandava dance, they were compelled to come before this Court.  In this 
appeal, since the appellant is a Government, by taking a lenient view, I order no costs.