[Cites
6
, Cited by
97
]
Supreme Court of India
Koppula Venkat Rao vs State Of Andhra Pradesh on 10 March, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 1874, 2004 (3) SCC 602, 2004 AIR SCW 1604, 2004 (3) SCALE 96, 2004 CALCRILR 449, 2004 SCC(CRI) 840, 2004 (3) ACE 64, (2004) 3 JT 328 (SC), 2004 (2) SLT 787, 2004 (3) JT 328, (2004) 3 KHCACJ 114 (SC), (2004) 16 ALLINDCAS 46 (SC), (2004) 2 RECCRIR 189, (2004) 2 CURCRIR 70, (2004) 49 ALLCRIC 1, (2004) 2 CRIMES 306, (2004) 2 CURLJ(CCR) 189, (2004) 2 CHANDCRIC 187, (2004) 2 RECCRIR 796, (2004) 2 EASTCRIC 93, (2004) 2 MADLW(CRI) 704, (2004) 2 SUPREME 358, (2004) 2 ALLCRIR 1053, (2004) 3 SCALE 96, (2004) 2 UC 827, (2004) 2 BOMCR(CRI) 214, (2004) 3 ALLCRILR 690, 2004 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 108, (2004) 18 INDLD 268, (2004) 1 KER LJ 820
Author:
Arijit Pasayat
Bench:
Doraiswamy Raju
,
Arij1T Pasayat
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  84 of 1998

PETITIONER:
KOPPULA VENKAT RAO

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 10/03/2004

BENCH:
DORAISWAMY RAJU & ARIJ1T PASAYAT

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

2004 (2) SCR 944


The Judgment of the Court was delivered by

ARIJIT PASAYAT, J. Taking lift on a bicycle after a late night movie show
and travelling in darkness can result in some harrowing-traumas for a
teenaged girl as the victim in the present case experienced.
Accused-appellant Koppula Venkat Rao calls in question legality of his
conviction as recorded by the Trial Court and upheld by Learned Single
Judge of the Andhra Pradesh High Court under
Section 376
of the Indian
Penal Code 1860 (in short "the
IPC
")- He was sentenced to undergo 10 years
RI by the Trial Court which was reduced to 5 years by the High Court.
Accusation which led to the trial of the accused are essentially as
follows":
On 10. 6. 1991 at about 6.00 p.m. the victim along with her friend and two
others started by walk from their village to go to a nearby place for
witnessing a movie. They reached cross-roads of the village where the
accused along with his friends who were going to Borrampalem on their
bicycles met them and gave lift to the victim girl and her friends and all
of them witnessed the picture at a movie hall. At the time of return
accused nourished an idea of quenching his lust by committing sexual
intercourse with the victim, invited her to board his bicycle and the
victim girl agreed to accompany him and sat on his bicycle and the accused
road the bicycle at high speed and reached near a cattle shed, stopped the
bicycle dragged the victim by using criminal force into the cattle shed
took out her sari, and got on top of her before actual intercourse
ejaculated. The accused left the victim on hearing some sound and went away
along with his bicycle. Thereafter, the victim girl came on to the road.
The parents of the victim girl took her to the village. The father of the
victim girl approached the village elders on the same night who promised to
summon the accused on the next day. But the accused did not turn up till
the evening. On 12.6.1991, when the victim girl along with her parents were
on the way to Police Station the S.I. of police met them and asked them to
go to the Government Hospital, and there he recorded the statement of the
victim girl and on the basis of statement a Crime was registered in crime
No. 39/91 and investigation was started. After investigation, charge sheet
was filed. The accused pleaded innocence and faced trial. Prosecution
examined 12 witnesses. PW-1 is the victim while PW-2 and PW-3 are her
mother and father respectfully. PW-5 is the doctor who examined the victim
and PW-12 is the doctor who examined the accused.
Placing reliance on the evidence of PW-1, the Trial court convicted the
accused as aforesaid holding that the victim was subjected to rape by the
accused. Conclusions were upheld by the High Court. Both the Courts held
that since ejaculation was there, it amounted to rape and whether actual
intercourse was there is immaterial, ejaculation being the ultimate act of
sexual intercourse.
In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that
the prosecution version has many loose ends and the Courts below have not
analysed the evidence in their proper perspective. Additionally, the
evidence of PW-1 and the doctors evidence clearly rules out the commission
of rape as alleged. Even if the prosecution version is accepted in its
totality, no case of rape is made out and at the most a case of attempt to
rape is made out. Actual intercourse and not ejaculation is the sine qua
non of the offence.
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent-State submitted that the
well-reasoned orders of the Trial Court and the High Court unerringly point
out that accused had committed rape on the victim, as established beyond a
shadow of doubt. The version of the Prosecutrix alone can form the
foundation of conviction.
The plea relating to applicability of
Section 376
read with
Section 511
.
IPC
needs careful consideration. In every crime, there is first, intention
to commit, secondly preparation to commit it, thirdly, attempt to commit
it. If the third stage, that is, attempt is successful, then the crime is
complete. If the attempt fails the crime is not complete, but law punishes
the person attempting the Act,
Section 511
is a general provision dealing
with attempts to commit offences not made punishable by other specific
sections. It makes punishable all attempts to commit offences punishable
with imprisonment and not only those punishable with death. An attempt is
made punishable, because every attempt, although it falls short of success,
must create alarm, which by itself is an injury, and the moral guilt of the
offender is the same as if he had succeeded. Moral guilt must be united to
injury in order to justify punishment. As the injury is not as great as if
the act had been committed, only half the punishment is awarded.
A culprit first intends to commit the offence, then makes preparation for
committing it and thereafter attempts to commit the offence. If the attempt
succeeds, he has committed the offence, if it fails due to reasons beyond
his control, he is said to have attempted to commit the offence. Attempt to
commit an offence can be said to begin when the preparations are complete
and the culprit commences to do something with the intention of committing
the offence and which is a step towards the commission of the offence. The
moment he commences to do an act with the necessary intention, he commences
his attempt to commit the offence. The word "attempt" is not itself
defined, and must, therefore, be taken in its ordinary meaning. This is
exactly what the provisions of
Section 511
require. An attempt to commit a
crime is to be distinguished from an intention to commit it, and from
preparation made for its commission. Mere intention to commit an offence,
not followed by any act, cannot constitute an offence. The will is not to
be taken for the deed unless there be some external act which shows that
progress has been made in the direction of it, or towards maturing and
effecting it. Intention is the direction of conduct towards the object
chosen upon considering the motives which suggest the choice. Preparation
consists in devising or arranging the means or measures necessary for the
commission of the offence. It differs widely from attempt which is the
direct movement towards the commission after preparations are made.
Preparation to commit an offence is punishable only when the preparation is
to commit offences under
Section 122
(waging war against the Government of
India) and
Section 399
(preparation to commit dacoity). The dividing line
between a mere preparation and an attempt is sometimes thin and has to be
decided on the facts of each case. There is a greater degree of
determination in attempt as compared with preparation.
An attempt to commit an offence is an act, or a series of acts, which leads
inevitably to the commission of the offence, unless something, which the
doer of the act neither foresaw nor intended, happens to prevent this. An
attempt may be described to be an act done in part execution of a criminal
design, amounting to more than more preparation, but falling short of
actual consummation, and, possessing, except for failure to consummate, all
the elements of the substantive crime. In other words, an attempt consists
in it the intent to commit a crime, falling short of, its actual commission
or consummation/completion. It may consequently be defined as that which if
not prevented would have resulted in the full consummation of the act
attempted. The illustrations given in
Section 511
clearly show the
legislative intention to make a difference between the cases of a mere
preparation and an attempt. In order to find an accused guilty of an
attempt with intent to commit a rape. Court has to be satisfied that the
accused, when he laid hold of the prosecutrix, not only desired to gratify
his passions upon her person, but that he intended to do so at all events,
and notwithstanding any resistance on her part. Indecent assaults are often
magnified into attempts at rape. In order to come to a conclusion that the
conduct of the accused was indicative of a determination to gratify his
passion at all events, and in spite of all resistance, materials must
exist. Surrounding circumstances many times throw beacon light on that
aspect.
The sine qua non of the offence of rape is penetration, and not
ejaculation. Ejaculation without penetration constitutes an attempt to
commit rape and not actual rape. Definition of "rape" as contained in
Section 375
IPC refers to "sexual intercourse" and the Explanation appended
to the Section provides that penetration is sufficient to constitute the
sexual intercourse necessary to the offence of rape. Intercourse means
sexual connection.
In the instant case that connection has not been established. Courts below
were not correct in their view.
When the evidence of the prosecutrix is considered in the proper
perspective, it is clear that the commission of actual rape has not been
established. However, the evidence is sufficient to prove that attempt to
commit rape was made. That being the position, conviction is altered from
Section 376
IPC to
Section 376
/
511
IPC. Custodial sentence of 3 and '/2
years would meet the ends of justice. The accused who is on bail shall
surrender to custody to serve remainder of his sentence.
The appeal is allowed to the extent indicated.