[Cites
14
, Cited by
136
]
Supreme Court of India
Kulwant Singh & Ors vs State Of Punjab on 23 January, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 2875, 2004 AIR SCW 778, 2004 SCC(CRI) 1441, 2004 (2) SCALE 32, 2004 (9) SCC 257, 2004 (2) SLT 117, (2004) 1 RAJ LW 128, (2004) 18 INDLD 584, (2004) 27 OCR 767, (2004) 2 RECCRIR 858, (2004) 1 CURCRIR 283, (2004) 2 SUPREME 93, (2004) 3 ALLCRIR 2577, (2004) 48 ALLCRIC 815, (2004) 1 CHANDCRIC 203, (2004) 2 ALLCRILR 248, (2004) 2 CRIMES 88, (2004) 49 ALLCRIC 747, (2004) 2 SCALE 32, 2004 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 556, (2004) 15 ALLINDCAS 861 (SC), (2004) 1 JT 583 (SC)
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
Doraiswamy Raju
,
S.B. Sinha
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  947 of 1997

PETITIONER:
Kulwant Singh & Ors.					

RESPONDENT:
State of Punjab						

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 23/01/2004

BENCH:
Doraiswamy Raju & S.B. Sinha.

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

S.B. SINHA, J :
The appellants who are three in number with their 
father, Virsa Singh (Accused No.1) and brother Tara Singh 
(Accused No.3) [since deceased] were charged for commission 
of an offence under
Sections 148
/
302
/
323
/
149
of the Indian 
Penal Code.
The incident took place at about 10.30 a.m. on 
13.6.1987.  Admittedly, the family of the deceased and the 
appellants belong to the same village. They have 
agricultural lands.  The parties had disputes both as regard 
boundaries of their agricultural land as also as regard 
irrigation of their respective field.  On the day of the 
incident, Kartar Kaur (deceased) brought food for her sons 
Avtar Singh and Balkar Singh (PW 5 and PW 6) who were 
working in their agricultural field.  When they  finished 
taking their meals, Virsa Singh (Accused No.1) armed with 
'Takwa', Kulwant Singh (Appellant No.1) and Tara Singh 
(Accused No.3) armed with 'Kirpan' each, Sahiba Singh 
(Appellant No.2) armed with 'Barchha' and Darbara Singh 
(Appelant No.3) armed with 'Kappa' came near the informant 
and the deceased from the side of their tubewell.  Virsa 
Singh, allegedly, exhorted the complainant and the deceased 
to be ready as they had come to teach them a lesson for 
scrapping the boundaries of the fields; whereupon the first 
informant Partap Singh, since deceased, and Balkar Singh 
along with their mother got up.  It is contended that Sahiba 
Singh gave one Barchha blow to Partap Singh in his abdomen 
and another blow just below his right shoulder in the chest, 
whereas  Virsa Singh assaulted Partap Singh with Takwa on 
the back of his right hand.  Kartar Kaur, mother of the 
informant, who had tucked her salwar as she waded through 
the water, came forward and she was given a blow with Kirpan 
by Kulwant Singh on the back of her left leg, whereupon she 
fell down.  Even thereafter Tara Singh is said to have given 
Kirpan blow on her left thigh and Virsa Singh gave two Takwa 
blows on her both wrists.
Avtar Singh and Balkar Singh who examined themselves as 
PW 5 and PW 6 respectively came forward to rescue their 
mother and brother whereupon Sahiba Singh is said to have 
given Barchha blow in the abdomen of Avtar Singh (PW 5) and 
another blow on his left thigh.  Accused No.1 allegedly gave 
blunt side Takwa blow on Balkar Singh (PW 6) on the back of 
his right hand.
It stand admitted that in the aforementioned incident, 
Darbara Singh and Virsa Singh also suffered injuries which 
are said to have been inflicted on them by the complainant 
and his brother purported to be in their self-defence.
The accused persons thereafter ran away with their 
respective weapons whereafter Avtar Singh (PW 5) went to the 
village and informed his cousin Hardip Singh about the 
occurrence. A tractor was brought from the village in which 
Partap Singh and Kartar Kaur were brought to the hospital at 
Ferozepur.  The lady breathed her last on the way whereas 
Partap Singh was admitted to the Civil Hospital, Ferozepur.
The motive for commission of the said offence on the 
part of the accused persons is said to be a dispute which 
took place a day prior to the day of the occurrence between 
the complainant party and Virsa Singh allegedly on the 
ground that the complainant party scrapped the boundaries of 
the fields.  However, it is said that the matter had been 
settled at the instance of one Maura Singh, a resident of 
the same village.
The doctor attending on Partap Singh informed the 
Police whereupon the S.H.O. of the Police Station came to 
the Hospital.  The statement of Partap Singh, who was 
seriously injured could not be taken by the police and only 
at about 4.30 p.m., the first information report was lodged 
by Avtar Singh.
It is not disputed that Partap Singh was medico-legally 
examined at 12.30 p.m. on 13.6.1987 by Dr. A.S. Mann (PW 2) 
and the following injuries were found on his person :
"1. 	Oblique incised wound 10 cms. X = 
cm. and depth varied from muscle 
deep to bone deep on back of right 
hand starting from base of index 
finger and going upwards and 
medially with bleeding.
2. 	Incised wound 3 cms. X 1 cm. (at 
centre) oblique on front and right 
side of abdomen 5 cms. medial at 
the level of right anterior 
superior iliac spine with bleeding.  
Omentum and a small leap of 
intestine was coming out of the 
wound.  Abdomen was tender and 
tense.
3. 	Incised wound 1.5 cms. X = cm. 
oblique in direction on front and 
upper part of right chest just 
below the outer half of right 
clavicle."
Injury No.1 was kept under observation 
for X-ray examination and injury No.3 
was kept under observation for surgical 
report and injury No.2 was declared 
dangerous to life.  In this regard Dr. 
Mann gave his report Ex.PH and also 
prepared pictorial diagram Ex.PH/1 
showing the seats of injuries.  PW 2 Dr. 
A.S. Mann sent ruqa Ex.PJ to the Station 
House Officer, Police Station Sarad, 
Ferosepur, regarding the death of Kartar 
Kaur and arrival of Avtar Singh 
(Injured)"
The statement of Partap Singh on a certificate issued 
by the doctor that he was fit to make a statement was 
recorded on 18.6.1987.  Partap Singh, however, succumbed to 
his injuries 26.6.1987.
Dr. J.S. Dalal (PW 3) who conducted the post-mortem on 
the dead body of Partap Singh found the following injuries 
on his person :
"1.	Under the bandages of both ankles 
vene section wounds were present 
medially over both ankles.
2.	On removing bandage of right hand 
there was an oblique healed wound 
except in its middle one third.  It 
was 10 cms. long on the back of 
right hand starting from base of 
index finger and going upwards and 
medically.  The unhealed wound was 
pale and on opening it frank pus 
came out.  There were corresponding 
cuts in the third and fourth 
metacarpal bones.
3.	Horizontal healed wound 1.5 cms. 
long just below outer half of right 
clavicle.
4.	An oblique wound with clean cut 
margins 8 cms. X 3.5 cms. muscle 
deep on the right side of abdomen 
starting 5 cms. medically and above 
the right anterior superiod iliac 
spine and going downwards and 
medially.  The floor of this wound 
contained plough and on dissection 
of surrounding tissues frank pus 
oozed out.
5.	A stitched wound 20 cms. long on 
right side of abdomen just lateral 
tomid line.  On removing stitches 
there was corresponding out in the 
perticotniu with stitches.  The 
mesentery had been repaired at many 
places and small gut at two places.  
The abdominal cavity contained 
about 300 grams of chocolate 
colored foul smelling fluid."
Autopsy examination of Kartar Kaur was held about 6.45 
p.m. on the same day by Dr. Tirath Goel (PW 1), which 
disclosed the following injuries on her dead body :
i.   Incised wound 5 cms. X 2 cms. on 
the front and lower part of left 
thigh.
ii.	Incised wound 10 cms. X 3 cms. on 
the back of left leg.  Underlying 
vessels and muscles were cut and 
bones were fractured.
iii.  Incised wound 5 cms. X 2 cms. on 
the back of right writ joint.  
Under lying bones were cut through 
and through.
iv.	Incised wound 4 cms. X 1 cm. on the 
back of left leg just below injury 
No.2.
v.	Incised wound 3 cms. X 1 cm. on the 
back of left writ joint."
Accused Darbara Singh was also medico-legally examined 
by PW 2, Dr. A.S. Mann, at about 1.30 p.m. on the same day  
and the following injuries were found on his person :
"1. 	Incised wound 11 cms. X 2 cms.   
oblique in palm of right hand on 
lower part 2 cms. deep with 
bleeding.
2.  Incised wound 2 cms. X = cm. on 
palmer aspect of right index finger 
on the promimal phallanx with 
bleeding. Injury was 1 cm. Deep.
3. 	Reddish abrasion 1/3 cm. X < cm. on 
back and upper and of right hand 
little finger.
4. 	Reddish abrasion with over lying 
lacerated wound 1.5 cm. X 1/4 cm. 
Oblique on back of right and ring 
finger on proximal phallanx.  
Injury was 1/3 cm. deep with 
bleeding.
5. 	Lacerated wound = cm. X <  cm. X 
1/3 cm. on back of right hand 
middle finger on proximal phallanx 
with bleeding.
6. 	Incised wound 2.5 cm. X = cm. on 
palmer aspect of left hand index 
finger on the distal phallanx with 
bleeding, 1 cm. deep.
7. 	Incised wound 3 cms. X = cm. on 
outer side of root of left thumb 
with bleeding 1.5 cms. deep.
8. 	Incised wound 20 cms. X 7 cms. 
slightly oblique and almost 
vertical on back of right abdomen 
crossing the mid line.  Depoth 
could be easily traced upto 10 cms.
9. 	Incised wound 3 cm. X 2 cms. X 2.5 
cms. oblique on postere medial side 
of left thigh in middle one third 
with bleeding."
Accused No.1, Virsa Singh, was also medico-legally 
examined by the same doctor at about 2.20 p.m. on that day 
and following injuries were found on his person.
"1. 	Incised wound 5 cm. X = cm. and 
bone deep on right side of skull, 
oblique in direction 6.5 cms. 
vertically behind the middle of 
right eye brow with bleeding.
2. 	Lacerated wound 1 cm. x 1/3 cm. and 
bone deep in mid line and centre of 
forehead.
3.	Incised wound 8 cms. X = cm. 
starting from the tip of nose and 
going transversally over the right 
cheek varying in depth from = cm to 
1 cm.  Right ala of nose was cut 
through and through with bleeding.
4. 	Incised wound 3.5 cms. X 1.5 cms. 
transverse in mid line and front of 
neck 5 cms. below the thyreid 
cartiledge with bleeding.  The 
depth could be easily traced upto 2 
cms.
5.	Lacerated wound = cm. x 1/3 cm. x 
1/3 cm. on palmer surface of left 
hand in the we space of thumb and 
index finger with bleeding."
The statement of PW 6 was recorded by the police at 
8.10 p.m. on 14.6.1987.
Despite the fact that two of the accused persons were 
in the hospital itself, they were not arrested immediately 
as they were undergoing treatment.  Accused Nos. 2, 3 and 5 
were arrested on 20.6.1987; whereas Accused Nos. 1 and 4 
were arrested On 29/30.6.1987.
PW 5 and PW 6 who are also said to have suffered minor 
injuries in the said incident were examined by Dr. Tirath 
Goel and Dr. A.S. Mann respectively on 13.6.1987 at 5.30 
p.m. and on   14.6.1987.
The injuries on the person of Avtar Singh as found were 
as under :
"1. Lacerated wound 1 cm. x 1 cm.  
superficial on the front and lower 
part of left thigh.  Fresh bleeding 
was present on touching.
2.	Abrasion 1 cm. x 1 cm. on the right 
side of abdomen 5 cms. above the 
umlicus."
The following injuries were found on the person of 
Balkar Singh :
"a blush contusion 3 cms. X 3 cms. on 
back of left hand index finger over 
the meta carpe phallangeal joint with 
overlying partially scabbed brownish 
abrasion 1.5 cms. X < cm."
Upon completion of the investigation, the accused 
persons were charge-sheeted.  The learned Sessions Judge, 
Ferozepur disbelieving the prosecution case acquitted the 
accused persons by a judgment and order dated 26.8.1988.  
The State of Punjab aggrieved thereby and dissatisfied 
therewith preferred an appeal thereagainst before the Punjab 
and Haryana High Court which was marked as Criminal Appeal 
No.402-DB of 1989.
By reason of the impugned judgment, the High Court 
disagreeing with the view of the learned Sessions Judge came 
to the conclusion that the accused persons were guilty of 
commission of the offences under
Section 302
and
302
/
149
IPC 
and sentenced them to undergo the rigorous imprisonment for 
life and passed the following sentences :
"Name of the accused	     Offence committed			      Sentence
Kulwant Singh
U/s 302
IPC
for 
committing murder 
of Kartar Kaur
He  shall  undergo  life  
imprisonment and   pay  a  
fine  of  Rs. 10,000/-
and in default thereof 
shall further undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for 
a term of one year.
Virsa Singh
Tara Singh
Darbara Singh 
and
Sahiba Singh
 

U/s 302/149
IPC
They shall undergo life 
imprisonment and pay a 
fine of Rs.10,000/- each 
and in default thereof 
shall further undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for 
a period of one year 
each.
Virsa Singh
Kulwant Singh
Tara Singh
Darbara Singh
U/s 302/149
IPC
for committing the 
murder of Partap 
Singh
They shall undergo 
imprisonment and pay a 
fine of Rs.10,000/- each 
and in default  thereof  
shall   further   undergo
rigorous imprisonment for 
a period of one year 
each.
Sahiba Singh
U/s 323
IPC
for 
causing injuries 
to Avtar Singh 
He shall undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for six 
months and pay a fine of 
Rs.1000/- and in default 
thereof, shall further 
undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for one 
month.
Virsa Singh
Kulwant Singh
Tara Singh 
and Darbara 
Singh
U/s 323/149
IPC
They shall undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for 
six months and pay a fine 
of Rs.1000/- each and in 
default thereof shall 
further undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for one 
month each.
Virsa Singh
U/s 323
IPC
for 
causing injuries  
to Balkar Singh
He shall undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for six 
months and pay a fine of 
Rs.1000/- and in default 
therefor, undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for 
one month.
Kulwant Singh
Tara Singh
Darbara Singh 
and
Sahiba Singh

U/s 323/149
IPC
They shall undergo 
rigorous imprisonment for 
six months and pay a fine 
of Rs.1000/- each and in 
default thereof, shall 
further undergo rigorous 
imprisonment for one 
month each."
All the substantive sentences awarded to the respective 
accused persons were directed to run concurrently.  It was 
further directed that the fine, if recovered, shall be paid 
by way of compensation to the heirs of the respective 
deceased in equal shares.
Mr. UU Lalit, learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
the appellants would submit that the High Court committed a 
manifest error in passing the impugned judgment insofar as 
it failed to take into consideration that in the facts and 
circumstances of this case, the appellants, their brother 
and father should have been held to have exercised their 
right of private defence having regard to the nature of 
injuries suffered by Accused Nos. 1 and 4.
Mr. Lalit would submit that the nature of injuries on 
the person of the said accused are pointers to the fact that 
the complainants were the aggressors.  The learned counsel 
would contend that the alleged immediate cause leading to 
the occurrence was that Harnam Singh's field used to be 
irrigated through the water drawn from the tubewell of the 
complainant and when Darbara Singh was cleaning the water 
channel, Partap  Singh  came whereupon the verbal 
altercation ensued; whereafter they came being armed with 
weapons and attacked Darbara Singh.  According to the 
learned counsel, Harnam Singh was armed with 'Khund', a hard 
and blunt weapon whereas Partap Singh came with a sharp-
edged weapon and while he was attacked Darbara Singh tried 
to ward away the attack with his both hands, as a result 
whereof he suffered as many as five injuries on his two 
palms.
The learned counsel would point out that Darbara Singh 
was evidently working in the field as he had been found by 
the doctor to be bare chested. It was contended that only 
upon noticing Darbara Singh being assaulted with 'Khund', a 
blunt weapon, Virsa Singh came to his rescue and he had also 
been attacked and only in the said scenario Virsa  Singh 
exercised his right of private defence.  Kartar Kaur, 
however, who had come in the meanwhile at the place of 
occurrence unfortunately suffered injuries resulting in her 
death.
Mr. Lalit would urge that had the complainant been not 
aggressors, there was no reason as to why PW 5 and PW 6 
would suffer only minor injuries.  Sufferance of such 
injuries by the said witnesses, Mr. Lalit would contend, is 
doubtful, as in the opinion of the doctor they could be 
self-inflicted.  Mr. Lalit would further argue that there is 
nothing on records to show that except Darbara Singh and 
Virsa Singh, any of the other three accused persons was 
present at the place of occurrence and participated therein.  
According to Mr. Lalit, only in the aforementioned fact 
situation, the trial court found the presence of PW 5 and PW 
6 at the place of occurrence to be doubtful and furthermore 
held that having regard to the injuries on the persons of 
Darbara Singh and Virsa Singh, they were entitled to 
exercise their right of private defence.  In that view of 
the matter, the learned counsel would argue, that the High 
Court should not have interfered with the judgment of 
acquittal passed by the leaned Sessions Judge having regard 
to the fact that the said defence had been raised from the 
very beginning of the trial.
Mr. Lalit would further submit that the statements of 
Partap Singh in the facts and circumstances of the case, 
should not have been treated to be a dying declaration.
So-called dying declaration of Partap Singh in effect 
and substance, Mr. Lalit would submit, was a statement under
Section 161
of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the same 
was not reliable in view of the fact that Partap Singh died 
five days thereafter.
The learned counsel would urge that the High Court 
failed to consider the nature of the injuries suffered by 
the accused persons which having regard to the materials 
brought on records would clearly prove that the accused 
persons exercised their right of private defence.  Mr. Lalit 
would further submit that the prosecution failed to prove 
that the injuries caused to the accused persons by PW 5 and 
PW 6 were by way of exercise of their right of private 
defence as merely a bald statement had been made in the  
first information report to the said effect and furthermore 
PW 5 and PW 6 also did not elaborate thereabout in their 
depositions before the Sessions Court.
Mr. Lalit would argue that as the judgment of acquittal 
passed by the learned Sessions Judge in the aforementioned 
situation was reasonable, the High Court should not have 
interfered therewith.
Mr. OK Khullar and Mr. Arun Kumar Sinha, learned 
counsel appearing on behalf of the State and the 
complainant, on the other hand, would submit that from the 
site plan prepared by the investigating officer, it would 
appear that the occurrence took place in the field of the 
first informant.  The learned counsel would contend that as 
the date and place of occurrence as also the nature of 
offence stand admitted, it was for the accused persons to 
prove that the informant party were the aggressors and they 
exercised their right of private defence.  The learned 
counsel would contend that even if the contention of the 
appellants is accepted, no explanation has been offered as 
to why Kartar Kaur was done to death.   It was pointed out 
that from the materials on records, it would appear that she 
was subjected to assault despite falling down on the field.
The principal questions which arise for consideration 
in this appeal, in view of the rival submissions made by the 
learned counsel for the parties are:
(i)	whether the accused persons were entitled to 
exercise their right of private defence;
(ii)	in any event whether they exceeded the same in 
doing so;
(iii)	Whether the statement of Partap Singh recorded on 
18.6.1987 should be construed to be a dying 
declaration?
Before adverting to the rival contentions, as noticed 
hereinbefore, it may be noticed that Accused Nos.1 and 3 
have since died.
It is not in dispute that the deceased Kartar Kaur and 
the injured Partap Singh were brought to the hospital by PW 
5, Avtar Singh. According to the prosecution, Balkar Singh 
had gone to his maternal uncle's place to inform him about 
the incident and as such he was examined by the police on 
the next day of occurrence.  The materials on records 
further show that the investigating officer having been 
informed about the incident by Dr. Mann wanted to record the 
evidence of Partap Singh as he was an injured witness but as 
he was not declared fit to make a statement, the statement 
of PW 5 was recorded and the same was treated as the first 
information report.
We may at the threshold examine the question as to 
whether the statement of Partap Singh could be treated to be 
a dying declaration.
Section 32
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 nowhere 
states that the dying declaration must be recorded in the 
presence of a Magistrate or in other words no statement 
which has not been recorded before the Magistrate cannot be 
treated to be a dying declaration. The fact that the 
investigating officer from the beginning intended to take 
the statement of Partap Singh is not in dispute. The 
endorsement made by the doctor in Ex.PQ/1 and Ex.PR/1 would 
clearly show that he had not been found fit to make such 
statement. Only on the fifth day i.e. 18.6.1987, the 
statement of Partap Singh could be recorded.
Section 32
of the Indian Evidence Act also does not 
state that a dying declaration should be made only in 
expectation of death and in that view of the matter the fact 
that Partap Singh died on 26.6.1987 after a period of one 
week is of no consequence.  Explanation-I appended to
Section 32
specifies that when the statement is made by a 
person as to the cause of his death, or any of the 
circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death 
where cause of death of that person's death comes into 
question would be a relevant factor.
PW-9, the investigating officer Hukam Singh has proved 
the statement of Partap Singh.  He deposed that he was fully 
conscious when he made the statements which were read over 
to him.  In that view of the matter the said statements are 
admissible under
Section 32
of the Indian Evidence Act.
The statement of PW-1 in no unmistakable terms shows 
that the condition of Partap Singh was very serious.
In
Ramawati Devi vs. State of Bihar
[AIR 1983 SC 164] , 
this Court observed :
"...A statement, written or oral, made 
by a person who is dead as to the cause 
of his death or as to any of the 
circumstances of the transaction which 
resulted in his death, in case in which 
the cause of that person's death comes 
into question, becomes admissible under
section 32
of the Evidence Act. Such 
statement made by the deceased is 
commonly termed as dying declaration. 
There is no requirement of law that such 
a statement must necessarily be made to 
a Magistrate. What evidentiary value or 
weight has to be attached to such 
statement must necessarily depend on the 
facts and circumstances of each 
particular case. In a proper case, it 
may be permissible to convict a person 
only on the basis of a dying declaration 
in the light of the facts and 
circumstances of the case. In the 
instant case, the dying declaration has 
been properly proved..."
In
Tehal Singh and Others vs. State of Punjab
[AIR 
1979 SC 1347], this Court negatived the contention that a 
dying declaration should be made only in expectation of 
death, stating :
"... We do not also see any force in 
the suggestion of Dr. Chitale that the 
statement of Harmel Singh was not made 
in expectation of death and was, 
therefore, not entitled to weight. Apart 
from the fact that
Section 32
of the 
Evidence Act does not require that a 
statement should be made in expectation 
of death, it is clear from the evidence 
that the condition of Harmel Singh was 
serious at that time. In the requisition 
made by the Medical Officer to the 
Police it has been clearly mentioned 
that the condition of Harmel Singh was 
serious. The very circumstance that Dr. 
Pasricha advised that Harmel Singh 
should be removed to Bhatinda Hospital 
for better treatment clearly indicates 
that the condition of Harmel Singh was 
serious..."
In that view of the matter, the statement of Partap 
Singh, in our opinion, would be admissible under
Section 32
of the Indian Evidence Act.
The prosecution case as emerging from the first 
information report would clearly show the respective parts 
played by the accused persons. The allegations made in the 
first information report and the statements made before the 
court by PW 5, Avtar Singh and PW 6, Balkar Singh, who were 
the eye-witnesses as also the dying declaration of Partap 
Singh clearly indicate the manner in which the offence had 
been committed and injuries had been inflicted upon the 
deceased.
The autopsy report of Kartar Kaur further demonstrates 
that injury no.2 inflicted on her, an incised wound of 10 
cms. X 3 cms. on the back of left let as a result whereof  
underlying vessels and muscles were cut and bones were 
fractured, was in the opinion of the doctor, sufficient to 
cause death in the ordinary course of nature.
The injury report of Partap Singh also would clearly 
show that injury no.2 suffered by him which was an incised 
wound 3 cms. x 1 cm. (at center) oblique on front and right 
side of abdomen 5 cms medial, was in the opinion of the 
doctor was dangerous to his life, which came to be true.
The injuries caused on the deceased Kartar Kaur and 
Partap Singh were found to have been caused within six 
hours.  The boundary dispute between the parties as also a 
dispute with regard to irrigation of the accused field from 
the water taken from the tubewell of the complainant are 
admitted.
The statement of Partap Singh is also material.  He was 
seriously injured and was examined by Dr. Tirath Goel (PW-
1). He, continuously for days was not found fit to make any 
statement and endorsement to the said effect was made by the 
said doctor to the investigating officer in Ex.PQ/1 and 
Ex.PR/1.  Only on the fifth day, he was found fit to make a 
statement as would appear from the endorsement marked as Ex.
P.5/1 made by the Dr. Goel whereupon only a statement was 
recorded by the investigating officer.  The statement of 
Partap Singh marked as Ex.P00 was recorded on 18.6.1987 by  
ASI Hukam Singh.
The appellants did not dispute the aforementioned 
facts; neither the statements of PW-1 and PW-9 in this 
behalf were put to test in cross-examination.
It is not essential that a dying declaration should be 
made only before a Magistrate.
We would deal with the question of admissibility of the 
statement made by Partap Singh, a little later but suffice 
it to point out at this juncture that the statements of 
Partap Singh stand corroborated by the evidence of Avtar 
Singh (PW-5) and Balkar Singh (PW-6).  Even if the evidence 
of Balkar Singh is held not to be reliable, as has been 
submitted by Mr. Lalit, we find no reason to disbelieve the 
statements of Avtar Singh (PW-5).  He categorically stated 
that when they were working in the field, their mother had 
come with food and when they just finished taking the same, 
the accused persons came and Virsa Singh gave a 'lalkara' 
whereupon accused persons inflicted blows on Partap Singh, 
Kartar Kaur and PW-5 and PW-6.   The sufferance of minor 
injuries by PW-5 and PW-6 at the hands of the accused 
persons appears to be more probable as by the time they 
realized their position and went to the actual place of 
occurrence upon collecting their weapons and assaulting 
Darbara Singh and Virsa Singh therewith, the accused persons 
might have realized that they had already inflicted fatal 
blows on Kartar Kaur and Partap Singh and in the meanwhile 
they had also suffered injuries at the hands of the 
informant party.  Partap Singh suffered two Barchha blows at 
the hands of Sahiba Singh, one in the abdomen and another in 
the chest whereas Virsa Singh appears to have inflicted a 
Takwa blow.  These injuries are corroborated by medical 
evidence.
Similarly, the statements made in the first information 
report as also before the court by PW-5 as regard nature of 
injuries suffered by Kartar Kaur also stands corroborated by 
medical evidence.  The presence of PW-5 and PW-6 at the 
place of occurrence cannot be disbelieved only on the ground 
that the injuries found on their persons were found to be 
simple in nature.  They might have suffered simple injuries 
because they might have collected their arms so as to make 
counter attacks after seeing unarmed Kartar Kaur and Partap 
Singh having been seriously injured.
Chapter IV of the
Indian Penal Code
provides for the 
general exceptions.
Sections 96
to
106
which occur in the 
said chapter deals with the right of private defence.
Section 96
says that nothing is an offence which is done in 
exercise of the right of private defence.  This right, 
however, is available to a person who is suddenly confronted 
with immediate necessity of averting an impending danger 
which is not his own creation.  The necessity must be 
present, real or apparent.  It is preventive and not 
retributive.  [See
Laxman Sahu vs. State of Orissa
, AIR 1988 
SC 83].
The question, whenever a right of private defence is 
claimed, must be judged from the nature of occurrence, the 
circumstances in which it had occurred and whether the 
person claiming such right has acted legitimately.  
Attending circumstances would also be relevant for judging 
the same.
It is well-settled that the burden to prove the same is 
on the person who raises such plea.  For the purpose of 
proving the same, the accused may rely upon the materials on 
records brought by the prosecution in addition to examining 
the witnesses and adducing positive evidences, if any.  A 
person has a right of private defence of  body under
Section 
97
and in the event it is found that he was entitled to 
exercise the same, he necessarily must be held to have a 
right to cause death in terms of
Section 100
of  the Indian 
Penal Code, if there was a reasonable apprehension that 
death or grievous  hurt would be caused.
For arriving at a finding as to the whether the accused 
persons had legitimately exercised their right of private 
defence, it is necessary to pass the question as to who had 
started the assault.
The place of occurrence is the agricultural field of 
the informant.  It will, therefore, be safe to presume that 
the accused persons trespassed into the property of the 
informant. The fact that at least two of the accused persons 
were armed with sharp-edged weapons like Kirpan or Kappa is 
not disputed.  If they had trespassed into the agricultural 
field of the informant with deadly weapons, it is difficult 
to presume in absence of any material on record that the 
initiation of the assault was from the side of the 
informant.  It stands admitted that the Accused Darbara 
Singh was cleaning the water channel which passes through 
the field of the informant.  There is also no reason to 
disbelieve the statements of PW-5 and PW-6 as also the dying 
declaration of Partap Singh that their mother had brought 
food for them and they had taken the food and incident took 
place immediately thereafter.  As noticed hereinbefore, the 
injuries inflicted on deceased Kartar Kaur is not disputed.  
She was not and could not have been armed with any weapon. 
She did not take any part.  She ever did not incite her sons 
to assault the accused persons.  If the informant party was 
the aggressor, there was no reason as to why she would run 
towards the place where the fight was taking place, 
resulting in causing of injuries on the person of Partap 
Singh.  She apparently tried to intervene seeing her sons 
being assaulted with sharp cutting weapons.  She had been 
inflicted with as many as five sharp-cutting injuries, three 
on the leg and two on the wrist.  There does not appear to 
be any reason as to why an aged lady was done to death.  The 
impact of the blows on her person would be evident from the 
autopsy report.  Apart from the cumulative effect of five 
injuries inflicted on her person, as noticed hereinbefore, 
injury no.2 was sufficient to cause death in ordinary course 
of nature.  It defies common sense, if the prosecution story 
is accepted that PW-5 and PW-6 were not present at the place 
of occurrence, that the deceased Partap Singh alone would 
single handedly attack the accused persons who were five in 
number and variously armed.
Virsa Singh himself and his four sons are said to have 
taken part in the occurrence.  There were five male members 
on the side of the accused whereas three were there on the 
side of the informant. The nature of the weapons used in the 
commission of offence also suggests that they are not 
ordinarily required to be carried on their persons, even on 
religious ground.
It may be true that Darbara Singh suffered five 
injuries out of nine injuries on both palms but only because 
he might have tried to ward off the assault of the blows  
which were inflicted on him by themselves cannot be 
conclusive that he was attacked first.  Another factor which 
deserves attention of this Court is that the occurrence 
which had taken place at about 10.30 a.m. on 13.6.1987 
whereafter, PW-5 went back to the village to inform his 
cousin, brought a tractor and took the injured Kartar Kaur 
and Partap Singh to hospital.  The distance between the 
place of occurrence and the hospital is said to be about 9 
k.m.   On the way Kartar Kaur died and Partap Singh was 
examined at 12.30 p.m.  It is not in dispute that they were 
brought to the hospital by PW-5 and in that view of the 
matter his presence at the place of occurrence appears more 
probable.   On the other hand, the injured Darbara Singh and 
Virsa Singh were brought to the hospital by Kulwant Singh at 
least one hour thereafter.  Presence of Kulwant Singh also, 
thus, appears to be probable.  Despite suffering such 
injuries why they were not rushed to hospital has not been 
explained.  Furthermore, Dr. A.S. Mann (PW-2) immediately 
informed the officer incharge about the incident.  The 
police came to the hospital, the first information report 
was lodged at 4.30 p.m.  If the informant and his brothers 
were the aggressors, it was expected, that the injured 
Darbara Singh and Virsa Singh or the Appellant no.1, Kulwant 
Singh, would have made such statements before the police 
officer giving details as to the mode and manner in which 
the incident had happened and as to how Virsa Singh and 
Darbara Singh suffered such grievous injuries, particularly 
when PW 2 in his evidence categorically stated that Virsa 
Singh was fully conscious and could talk clearly.
The records also reveal that weapons of attacks were 
recovered at the instance of both Kulwant Singh and Sahiba 
Singh.  The spear and kirpan which were recovered were found 
to be blood-stained.  We, therefore, are of the opinion that 
there does not exist any legal infirmity in the findings of 
the High Court.
For the reasons aforementioned, we are of the opinion 
that the accused persons have not been able to discharge 
their onus of proof that they had killed the deceased in 
exercise of their right of private defence.
The appeal being devoid of any merit is dismissed.