[Cites
10
, Cited by
86
]
Supreme Court of India
Parvinder Singh vs Renu Gautam & Ors on 22 April, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 2299, 2004 (4) SCC 794, 2004 AIR SCW 2647, 2004 SCFBRC 359, 2004 (4) ANDH LD 1, 2004 (4) SCALE 867, 2004 (2) HRR 115, 2004 (5) ACE 182, 2004 (4) SLT 109, (2004) 19 ALLINDCAS 377 (SC), 2004 HRR 2 115, 2004 (2) ALL CJ 1214, 2004 (6) SRJ 45, (2004) 23 ALLINDCAS 790 (CAL), (2005) 1 ICC 618, (2004) 3 ICC 732, (2004) 4 SCALE 867, (2004) 2 WLC(SC)CVL 109, (2004) 2 CIVILCOURTC 513, (2004) 2 LANDLR 27, (2004) 4 MAD LW 53, (2004) 1 RENCJ 135, (2004) 1 RENTLR 596, (2004) 3 SUPREME 707, (2005) 1 CAL HN 1, (2005) 1 CALLT 285, (2004) 19 INDLD 324
Author:
R.C. Lahoti
Bench:
R.C. Lahoti
,
Brijesh Kumar
,
Arun Kumar
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1680-1681 of 1999

PETITIONER:
Parvinder Singh

RESPONDENT:
Renu Gautam & Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 22/04/2004

BENCH:
R.C. LAHOTI, BRIJESH KUMAR & ARUN KUMAR.

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

R.C. Lahoti, J.
The suit premises consist of a shop bearing No.96/1, Lower 
Bazar, Shimla, governed by the
H.P. Urban Rent Control Act, 
1987
.  The appellant is the landlord-cum-owner of the shop.  It 
was let out to late Vijay Gautam under an oral lease.  On 
31.12.1988, a partnership deed was signed between late Vijay 
Gautam and Harbhajan Singh, the respondent No.3 herein.  On 
26.6.1991, Vijay Gautam died.  The partnership stood dissolved 
consequent thereupon. On 29.6.1991, another deed of 
partnership was signed between respondent No.1, the widow of 
late Vijay Gautam acting for herself and as guardian of 
respondent No.2, the minor son of Vijay Gautam, on the one 
hand and Harbhajan Singh, respondent No.3 on the other hand.  
On 7.7.1992, appellant initiated proceeding for eviction of the 
respondents from the shop alleging that the tenant Vijay Gautam 
had sublet the premises to Harbhajan Singh which subletting has 
been continued by the heirs  Respondent No.1 & 2, after the 
death of Vijay Gautam.  A ground of default in payment of rent 
was also taken.  The suit for eviction was dismissed by the 
Controller and the dismissal was upheld by the appellate 
authority as also by the High Court in civil revision.  Feeling 
aggrieved, the landlord has filed this appeal by special leave.
A perusal of the three judgments ___ impugned herein ___ 
shows that the ground for eviction for default in payment of rent 
has been negatived by all the three Courts.  So far as the ground 
of subletting is concerned, the plea has not been gone into on 
merits by any of the Courts because of the law laid down by a 
two-Judges Bench of this Court in
A.S. Sulochana Vs. C. 
Dharmalingam
, (1987) 1 SCC 180.
In
A.S. Sulochana
's 
case, the tenant was sought to be evicted on the ground of 
subletting within the meaning of
Section 10(2)(ii)(a)
of Tamil 
Nadu Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1960.  The facts 
found therein were that the original landlord and tenant between 
whom the lease was created had both died.  No evidence, direct 
or circumstantial, was available wherefrom it could be inferred if 
the lease prohibited the tenant from creating a sub-tenancy or 
whether the sub-tenancy was created by the tenant without the 
written consent of the landlord.  Under the Tamil Nadu Act, the 
landlord could not succeed in evicting the tenant without 
establishing that
Section 10(2)(ii)(a)
was violated.  Thus, the 
Court found that an inference as to creation of an unlawful sub-
tenancy within the meaning of Section 10(2)(ii)(a) of the Tamil 
Nadu Act could not be drawn.  However, the Court went on to 
observe:-
"When the statute says the tenant who is 
sought to be evicted must be guilty of the 
contravention, the court cannot say, 'guilt of 
his predecessor in interest' will suffice.  The 
flouting of the law, the sin under the
Rent Act
must be the sin of the tenant sought to be 
evicted, and not that of his father or 
predecessor in interest.  Respondent inherited 
the tenancy, not the sin, if any, of his father.  
The law in its wisdom seeks to punish the 
guilty who commits the sin, and not his son 
who is innocent of the rent law offence.  It 
being a penal provision in the sense that it 
visits the violator with the punishment of 
eviction, it must be strictly construed."
A.S. Sulochana
's case came up for the consideration of a 
three-Judges Bench of this Court in
Imdad Ali  Vs. Keshav 
Chand & Ors.
, (2003) 4 SCC 635, though in the context of 
dealing with a ground for eviction under a local rent control law 
of Madhya Pradesh.
A.S. Sulochana
's case was distinguished 
and also adversely commented upon.
The Court felt that in
A.S. 
Sulochana
's case the Division bench was influenced by the 
opening clause of the relevant provision in Tamil Nadu Act which 
begins with "a landlord who seeks to evict his tenant" so as to 
hold that the facts constituting the ground for eviction should be 
referable to the present tenant and not to his predecessor who 
had already died.
The
Court further held
in
Imdad Ali
's case:-
"It matters not whether such default is made 
by the original tenant or by his successor 
inasmuch as the successor-in-interest of the 
original tenant continues to be a tenant within 
the meaning of the provisions thereof.  By 
reason of death of the original tenant, a new 
tenancy is not created. A successor-in-interest 
of a tenant holds his tenancy right subject to 
rights and obligations of his predecessor.  He 
does not and cannot claim a higher right than 
his predecessor. It is now well settled that a 
person by reason of inheritance or assignment 
does not derive any better title than his 
predecessor, and, thus, the right which the 
original tenant did not possess cannot be 
passed on to his successor."
In
Imdad Ali
's case, the three-Judges Bench opined that 
the law
laid down in
A.S. Sulochana
's case was not applicable 
for interpreting a provision in
M.P. Accommodation Control Act
1961.
The Bench also said ___ "We do not subscribe to the 
general observations made in
A.S. Sulochana
's case and to the 
said extent it cannot be held to have laid down a good law and is 
overruled accordingly".
The relevant provision of the H.P. Act reads as under:-
"14.(1)	xxx		xxx		xxx

       	(2) A landlord who seeks to evict his 
tenant shall apply to the Controller for a 
direction in that behalf.  If the controller, after 
giving the tenant a reasonable opportunity of 
showing cause against the applicant, is 
satisfied__

		xxx		xxx		xxx
(ii) that the tenant has after the 
commencement of this Act without the written 
consent of the landlord__
(a) transferred his rights under the lease 
or sublet the entire building or rented land or 
any portion thereof, or

		xxx		xxx		xxx

the Controller may make an order directing the 
tenant to put the landlord in possession of the 
building or rented land and if the Controller is 
not so satisfied he shall make an order 
rejecting the application:
xxx		xxx		xxx"
Tenancy is a heritable right unless a legal bar operating 
against heritability is shown to exist.  Thus, the one who inherits 
tenancy rights also inherits the obligations incurred by the 
deceased tenant alongwith the rights which he had.  It is difficult 
to accept a proposition that on death of the tenant his heirs 
inherit only rights and not obligations.  If that be so, then the 
heirs would not be liable to pay any arrears of rent which were 
not paid by the deceased-tenant.
The judgments of the Controller, the appellate authority 
and the High Court which proceed on
A.S. Sulochana
's case 
cannot now be sustained and deserve to be set aside.
The rent control legislations which  extend many a 
protection to the tenant, also provide for grounds of eviction. 
One such ground, most common in  all the legislations, is 
subletting or parting with possession of the tenancy premises by 
the tenant.  Rent control laws usually protect the tenant so long 
as he may himself use the premises but not his transferee 
inducted into possession of the premises, in breach of the 
contract or the law, which act is often done with the object of 
illegitimate profiteering or rack renting.  To defeat the provisions 
of law, a device is at times adopted by unscrupulous tenants and 
sub-tenants of bringing into existence a deed of partnership 
which gives the relationship of tenant and sub-tenant an 
outward appearance of partnership while in effect what has 
come into existence is a sub-tenancy or parting with possession 
camouflaged under the cloak of partnership.  Merely because a 
tenant has entered into a partnership he cannot necessarily be 
held to have sublet the premises or parted with possession 
thereof in favour of his partners.  If the tenant is actively 
associated with the partnership business and retains the use and 
control over the tenancy premises with him, may be along with 
the partners, the tenant may not be said to have parted with 
possession.  However, if the user and control of the tenancy 
premises has been parted with and deed of partnership has been 
drawn up as an indirect method of collecting the consideration 
for creation of sub-tenancy or for providing a cloak or cover to 
conceal the transaction not permitted by law, the Court is not 
estopped from tearing the veil of partnership and finding out the 
real nature of transaction entered into between the tenant and 
the alleged sub-tenant.
A person having secured a lease of premises for the 
purpose of his business may be in need of capital or finance or 
someone to assist him in his business and to achieve such like 
purpose he may enter into partnership with strangers.  Quite 
often partnership is entered into between the members of any 
family as a part of tax planning.  There is no stranger brought on 
the premises. So long as the premises remain in occupation of 
the tenant or in his control, a mere entering into partnership 
may not provide a ground for eviction by running into conflict 
with prohibition against subletting or parting with possession.  
This is a general statement of law which ought to be read in the 
light of the lease agreement and the law governing the tenancy.  
There are cases wherein the tenant sublets the premises or parts 
with possession  in defiance of the terms of lease or the rent 
control legislation and in order to save himself from the peril of 
eviction brings into existence, a deed of partnership between 
him and his sub-lessee to act as a cloak on the reality of the 
transaction. The existence of deed of partnership between the 
tenant and the alleged sub-tenant would not preclude the 
landlord from bringing on record material and circumstances, by 
adducing evidence or by means of cross examination, making 
out a case of sub-letting or parting with possession or interest in 
tenancy premises by tenant in favour of a third person.
The rule 
as to exclusion of oral by documentary evidence governs the 
parties to the deed in writing.  A stranger to the document is not 
bound by the terms of the document and is, therefore, not 
excluded from demonstrating the untrue or collusive nature of 
the document or the fraudulent or illegal purpose for which it 
was brought into being.  An enquiry into reality of transaction is 
not excluded merely by availability of writing reciting the 
transaction.
Tyagaraja Vs. Vedathanni
, AIR 1936 PC 70 is an 
authority for the proposition that oral evidence in departure from 
the terms of a written deed is admissible to show that what is 
mentioned in the deed was not the real transaction between the 
parties but it was something different.  A lease of immovable 
property is transfer of a right to enjoy such property.  Parting 
with possession or control over the tenancy premises by tenant 
in favour of a third person would amount to the tenant having 
'transferred his rights under the lease' within the meaning of
Section 14(2)(ii)(a)
of the Act.
Shri Gourab Banerjee, the learned senior counsel for the 
appellant, submitted that all the relevant evidence and material 
are available on record and both the parties have adduced the 
necessary evidence.  All that is needed to be done is its 
appreciation and to draw inferences. In such circumstances and 
keeping in view the period of time for which the proceedings 
have already remained pending, we deem it proper to remand 
the matter to the appellate authority for hearing and decision 
afresh.
Accordingly, the appeals are allowed.  The judgments of 
the High Court and the Appellate Authority are set aside.  The 
case is remanded to the Appellate Authority to hear and decide 
the appeal afresh after hearing the parties and to record a 
finding on the availability of ground for eviction under
Section 
14(2)
of H.P. Urban Rent Control Act, 1987 and then decide the 
appeal finally.  The costs shall abide the result.