[Cites
18
, Cited by
174
]
Supreme Court of India
State Of Jharkhand And Anr vs Govind Singh on 3 December, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2005 SUPREME COURT 294, 2004 AIR SCW 6799, 2005 AIR - JHAR. H. C. R. 369, (2005) 1 JCR 1 (SC), (2005) 1 KER LT 34, 2005 CRILR(SC&MP) 106, (2005) 1 SUPREME 477, 2004 (7) SLT 393, (2004) 10 JT 349 (SC), 2005 (1) SRJ 549, 2004 (10) SCALE 174, 2004 (8) ACE 693, 2004 (3) BLJR 2340, 2004 (10) JT 349, 2005 (10) SCC 437, 2005 SCC(CRI) 1570, 2005 (1) CALCRILR 422, (2005) 25 ALLINDCAS 100 (SC), (2005) 1 BLJ 752, (2005) 1 ALLCRILR 362, (2005) 2 EASTCRIC 204, (2005) 30 OCR 498, (2005) 1 PAT LJR 207, (2005) 1 RAJ CRI C 238, (2005) 1 RECCRIR 189, (2005) 1 ALLCRIR 12, (2004) 10 SCALE 174, (2005) 1 JLJR 128, (2005) 51 ALLCRIC 296, (2005) 1 CRIMES 49, (2005) 1 SCJ 187, (2005) 1 CURCRIR 6, (2004) 8 SUPREME 678, 2005 CHANDLR(CIV&CRI) 296, 2005 (1) ALD(CRL) 398, 2005 (1) ANDHLT(CRI) 170 SC, (2005) 1 ANDHLT(CRI) 170
Author:
Arijit Pasayat
Bench:
Arijit Pasayat
,
S.H. Kapadia
CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  1405 of 2004

PETITIONER:
State of Jharkhand and Anr.

RESPONDENT:
Govind Singh

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 03/12/2004

BENCH:
ARIJIT PASAYAT & S.H. KAPADIA

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

(Arising out of SLP (Crl.)No. 343 of 2004)


ARIJIT PASAYAT, J

	Leave granted.
The State of Jharkhand has filed this appeal against the judgment 
of learned Single Judge of the Jharkhand High Court at Ranchi holding 
that even though there was no specific provision in
Section 52 (3)
of 
the Indian Forest Act, 1927 (in short the "Act") as amended by Bihar 
Act 9 of 1990 (hereafter referred to as the 'Bihar Act'), a vehicle 
seized for alleged involvement in commission of forest offence can be 
released on payment of fine in lieu of confiscation.
Background facts as projected by the appellants are as follows:
On 10.4.1997 at Barkagaon Protected Forest Area, a truck bearing 
No. BR 13-9041 was found loaded with 11.8 tonnes of coal. Confiscation 
Proceeding No.3/1997 arising out of Pelawal case No.28/97 was 
instituted and show cause notice was issued. The respondent filed reply 
to the notice.  After considering the same the Divisional Forest 
Officer, Hazaribagh directed confiscation of the truck.
An appeal was preferred before the Deputy Commissioner, 
Hazaribagh, numbered as Case No.40/1997. By order dated 17.7.1999 the 
appeal was dismissed. The matter was carried in revision by the 
respondent before the Revisional Authority cum Secretary, Department of 
Forest and Environment and by order dated 3.12.2002 the revisional 
authority dismissed the revision. A petition under
Article 226
of the 
Constitution of India, 1950 (in short the 'Constitution') was filed 
before the High Court. It was the primary stand therein that there was 
no prohibition in directing release of the vehicle on payment of fine 
in lieu of confiscation. The High Court held that there was some 
dispute regarding weight of coal which was being carried. It was noted 
that the value of the coal was not established and considering the 
value of coal which was being transported it would be inequitable to 
direct confiscation and, therefore, it was held that to meet the ends 
of justice the power to impose fine in lieu of confiscation can be read 
into under
Section 52 (3)
of the Act. Accordingly, a fine of 
Rs.50,000/- was imposed and the seizing authority was directed to 
release the vehicle on payment thereof.
In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the appellant-State 
submitted that the view taken by the learned Single Judge is contrary 
to a Division Bench's decision of Patna High Court, Ranchi Bench in the 
case of Dilip Kumar Pandey v. The State of Bihar and Ors. Criminal Writ 
Jurisdiction Case No.12 of 1997(R) where considering an identical issue 
it was held that there was no scope for directing release of the 
vehicle on payment of fine in lieu of confiscation.
There is no appearance on behalf of the respondent in spite of 
notice.
In order to appreciate the stand taken by learned counsel for the 
appellants, it would be necessary to take note of
Section 52
of the Act 
and the State amendment by the Bihar Act.
"
Section 52-
Seizure of property liable to 
confiscation: (1) When there is reason to believe 
that a forest offence has been committed in respect 
of any forest produce, such produce, together with 
all tools, boats, carts or cattle used in committing 
any such offence, may be seized by any Forest Officer 
or Police Officer.
(2)	Every officer seizing any property under this 
section shall place on such property a mark 
indicating that the same has been so seized, and 
shall, as soon as may be, make a report of such 
seizure to the Magistrate having jurisdiction to try 
the offence on account of which the seizure has been 
made:
Provided that, when the forest produce 
with respect to which such offence is believed 
to have been committed is the property of 
Government, and the offender is unknown, it 
shall be sufficient if the officer makes, as 
soon as may be, a report of the circumstances 
to his official superior."
"
Section 52
as amended by Bihar Act Seizure and its 
procedure for the  property liable for confiscation: 
(1) When there is reason to believe that a forest 
offence has been committed in respect of any forest 
produce, such produce, together with all tools, arms, 
boats, vehicles, ropes, chains or any other article 
used in committing any such offence, may be seized by 
any Forest Officer or Police Officer.
(2)	Every officer seizing any property under this 
section shall place on such property a mark 
indicating that the same has been so seized, and 
shall, as soon as may be, either produce the property 
seized before an officer not below the rank of the 
Divisional Forest Officer authorized by the State 
Government in this behalf by notification 
(hereinafter referred to as the authorized officer) 
or where it is, having regard to quantity of bulk or 
other genuine difficulty, not practicable to produce 
the property seized before the authorized officer, or 
where it is intended to launch criminal proceedings 
against the offender immediately, make a report of 
such seizure to the Magistrate having jurisdiction to 
try the offence on account of which the seizure has 
been made:
Provided that, when the forest produce 
with respect to which such offence is believed 
to have been committed is the property of 
Government, and the offender is unknown, it 
shall be sufficient if the officer makes, as 
soon as may be, a report of the circumstances 
to his immediate superior.
(3) Subject to sub-section (5), where the authorized 
officer upon production before him of property seized 
or upon receipt of report about seizure, as the case 
may be, is satisfied that a forest offence has been 
committed in respect thereof, he may by order in 
writing and for reasons to be recorded, confiscate 
forest produce so seized together with all tools, 
arms, boats, vehicles, ropes, chains or any other 
article used in committing such offence. The 
Magistrate having jurisdiction to try the offence 
concerned may, on the basis of the report of the 
authorized confiscating officer, cancel the 
registration of a vehicle used in committing the 
offence, the licence of the vehicle-driver and the 
licence of the arms. A copy of the order on 
confiscation shall be forwarded without undue delay 
to the Conservators of Forests of the forest-circle  
in which the forest produce, as the case may be, has 
been seized.
(4)	No order confiscating any property shall be 
made under sub-section (3) unless the authorized 
officer-
(a)	sends an intimation about initiation of 
proceedings for confiscation of property to the 
magistrate having jurisdiction to try the offence on 
account of which the seizure has been made;
(b)	issue a notice in writing to the person 
from whom the property is seized, and to any other 
person who may appear to the authorized officer to 
have some interest in such property;
(c)	affords an opportunity to the persons 
referred to in clause (b) of making a representation 
within such reasonable time as may be specified in 
the notice against the proposed confiscation; and
(d)	gives to the officer effecting the 
seizure and the persons or person to whom notice has 
been issued under clause (b), a hearing on date to be 
fixed for such purposes.
(5)	No order of confiscation under sub-section (3) 
of any tools, arms, boats, vehicles, ropes, chains or 
any other article (other than the forest produce 
seized) shall be made if any person referred to in 
clause (b) of sub-section (4) proves to the 
satisfaction of authorized officer that any such 
tools, arms, boats, vehicles, ropes, chains or other 
article were used without his knowledge or connivance 
or as the case may be, without the knowledge or 
connivance of his servant or agent and that all 
reasonable and necessary precautions had been taken 
against use of the objects aforesaid for commission 
of forest offence"
Learned Single Judge by the impugned judgment held that though 
the power to levy fine in lieu of confiscation is not there, same has 
to be read into the statute to fully effectuate the legislative intent.  
It was a case of casus omissus.
The conclusion is clearly erroneous.  It is against the settled 
principles relating to statutory interpretation.
When the words of a Statute are clear, plain or unambiguous, i.e. 
they are reasonably susceptible to only one meaning, the courts are 
bound to give effect to that meaning irrespective of consequences.  The 
intention of the Legislature is primarily to be gathered from the 
language used, which means that attention should be paid to what has 
been said as also to what has not been said. [See
J.P. Bansal v. State 
of Rajasthan
(2003 (5) SCC 134]

As a consequence, as construction which requires for its support 
addition or substitution of words or which results in rejection of 
words as meaningless has to be avoided.
As was noted by the Privy 
Council in Crawford v. Spooner (1846) 6 Moore PC1:"We cannot aid the 
Legislature's defective phrasing of an Act, we cannot add or mend and, 
by construction make up deficiencies which are left there".
The view 
was reiterated by this Court in
State of Madhya Pradesh v. G.S. Dall 
and Flour Mills
(AIR 1991 SC 772), and State of Gujarat v. Dilipbhai 
Nathjibhai Patel (JT 1998(2) SC 253).
Speaking briefly the Court cannot 
reframe the legislation, as noted in
J.P. Bansal
's case (supra), for 
the very good reason that it has no power to legislate.
It is said that a statute is an edict of the legislature. The 
elementary principle of interpreting or construing a statute is to 
gather the mens or sententia legis of the legislature.
Interpretation postulates the search for the true meaning of the 
words used in the statute as a medium of expression to communicate a 
particular thought. The task is not easy as the "language" is often 
misunderstood even in ordinary conversation or correspondence. The 
tragedy is that although in the matter of correspondence or 
conversation the person who has spoken the words or used the language 
can be approached for clarification, the legislature cannot be 
approached as the legislature, after enacting a law or Act, becomes 
functus officio so far as that particular Act is concerned and it 
cannot itself interpret it. No doubt, the legislature retains the power 
to amend or repeal the law so made and can also declare its meaning, 
but that can be done only by making another law or statute after 
undertaking the whole process of law-making.
Statute being an edict of the legislature, it is necessary that 
it is expressed in clear and unambiguous language. In spite of Courts 
saying so, the draftsmen have paid little attention and they still 
boast of the old British jingle "I am the parliamentary draftsman. I 
compose the country's laws. And of half of the litigation, I am 
undoubtedly the cause", which was referred to by this Court in Palace 
Admn.
Board v. Rama Varma Bharathan Thampuran
(AIR 1980 SC 1187 at. 
P.1195).
In Kirby v. Leather (1965 (2) All ER 441) the draftsmen were 
severely criticized in regard to Section 22(2)(b) of the (UK) 
Limitation Act, 1939, as it was said that the section was so obscure 
that the draftsmen must have been of unsound mind.
Where, however, the words were clear, there is no obscurity, 
there is no ambiguity and the intention of the legislature is clearly 
conveyed, there is no scope for the court to innovate or take upon 
itself the task of amending or altering the statutory provisions. In 
that situation the Judges should not proclaim that they are playing the 
role of a law-maker merely for an exhibition of judicial valour. They 
have to remember that there is a line, though thin, which separates 
adjudication from legislation. That line should not be crossed or 
erased. This can be vouchsafed by "an alert recognition of the 
necessity not to cross it and instinctive, as well as trained 
reluctance to do so". (See: Frankfurter, Some Reflections on the 
Reading of Statutes in "Essays on Jurisprudence", Columbia Law Review, 
P.51.)
 
	It is true that this Court in interpreting the Constitution 
enjoys a freedom which is not available in interpreting a statute and, 
therefore, it will be useful at this stage to reproduce what Lord 
Diplock said in Duport Steels Ltd. v. Sirs (1980 (1) ALL ER 529, at p.
542):
"It endangers continued public confidence in 
the political impartiality of the judiciary, which 
is essential to the continuance of the rule of law, 
if Judges, under the guise of interpretation, 
provide their own preferred amendments to statutes 
which experience of their operation has shown to 
have had consequences that members of the court 
before whom the matter comes consider to be 
injurious to public interest."
Where, therefore, the "language" is clear, the intention of 
the legislature is to be gathered from the language used. What is to 
be borne in mind is as to what has been said in the statute as also 
what has not been said. A construction which requires, for its 
support, addition or substitution of words or which results in 
rejection of words, has to be avoided, unless it is covered by the 
rule of exception, including that of necessity, which is not the 
case here. (See:
Gwalior Rayons Silk Mfg. (Wvg.) Co. Ltd. v. 
Custodian of Vested Forests
(AIR 1990 SC 1747 at p. 1752);
Shyam 
Kishori Devi v. Patna Municipal Corpn.
(AIR 1966 SC 1678 at p. 
1682);
A.R. Antulay v. Ramdas Sriniwas Nayak
(1984 (2) SCC 500, at 
pp. 518, 519)]. Indeed, the Court cannot reframe the legislation as 
it has no power to legislate.
[See
State of Kerala v. Mathai 
Verghese
(1986 (4) SCC 746, at p. 749);
Union of India v. Deoki 
Nandan Aggarwal
(AIR 1992 SC 96 at p.101)

The question is not what may be supposed and has been intended 
but what has been said. "Statutes should be construed not as theorems 
of Euclid". Judge Learned Hand said, "but words must be construed with 
some imagination of the purposes which lie behind them".
(See Lenigh 
Valley Coal Co. v. Yensavage 218 FR 547).
The view was re-iterated in
Union of India and Ors. v. Filip Tiago De Gama of Vedem Vasco De Gama
(AIR 1990 SC 981).
In Dr. R. Venkatchalam and Ors. etc. v. Dy. Transport 
Commissioner and Ors. etc. (AIR 1977 SC 842), it was observed that 
Courts must avoid the danger of a priori determination of the meaning 
of a provision based on their own pre-conceived notions of ideological 
structure or scheme into which the provision to be interpreted is 
somewhat fitted. They are not entitled to usurp legislative function 
under the disguise of interpretation.
While interpreting a provision the Court only interprets the law 
and cannot legislate it. If a provision of law is misused and subjected 
to the abuse of process of law, it is for the legislature to amend, 
modify or repeal it, if deemed necessary. (See
Commissioner of Sales 
Tax, M.P. v. Popular Trading Company, Ujjain
(AIR 2000 SC 1578). The 
legislative casus omissus cannot be supplied by judicial interpretative 
process.
Two principles of construction  one relating to casus omissus 
and the other in regard to reading the statute as a whole  appear to 
be well settled. Under the first principle a casus omissus cannot be 
supplied by the Court except in the case of clear necessity and when 
reason for it is found in the four corners of the statute itself but at 
the same time a casus omissus should not be readily inferred and for 
that purpose all the parts of a statute or section must be construed 
together and every clause of a section should be construed with 
reference to the context and other clauses thereof so that the 
construction to be put on a particular provision makes a consistent 
enactment of the whole statute. This would be more so if literal 
construction of a particular clause leads to manifestly absurd or 
anomalous results which could not have been intended by the 
Legislature. "An intention to produce an unreasonable result", said 
Danackwerts, L.J. in Artemiou v. Procopiou (1966 1 QB 878), "is not to 
be imputed to a statute if there is some other construction available". 
Where to apply words literally would "defeat the obvious intention of 
the legislature and produce a wholly unreasonable result" we must "do 
some violence to the words" and so achieve that obvious intention and 
produce a rational construction. (Per Lord Reid in Luke v. IRC (1966 AC
557) where at p. 577 he also observed: "this is not a new problem, 
though our standard of drafting is such that it rarely emerges".
It is then true that, "when the words of a law extend not to an 
inconvenience rarely happening, but due to those which often happen, it 
is good reason not to strain the words further than they reach, by 
saying it is casus omissus, and that the law intended quae frequentius 
accidunt." "But," on the other hand, "it is no reason, when the words 
of a law do enough extend to an inconvenience seldom happening, that 
they should not extend to it as well as if it happened more frequently, 
because it happens but seldom" (See Fenton v. Hampton 11 Moore, P.C.
345).  A casus omissus ought not to be created by interpretation, save 
in some case of strong necessity. Where, however, a casus omissus does 
really occur, either through the inadvertence of the legislature, or on 
the principle quod semel aut bis existit proetereunt legislators, the 
rule is that the particular case, thus left unprovided for, must be 
disposed of according to the law as it existed before such statute - 
Casus omissus et oblivioni datus dispositioni communis juris 
relinquitur; "a casus omissus," observed Buller, J. in Jones v. Smart 
(1 T.R. 52), "can in no case be supplied by a court of law, for that 
would be to make laws."
Keeping in view the aforesaid legal principles the inevitable 
conclusion is that the High Court was not justified in reading into
Section 52 (3)
of the Act the power to direct release by imposing fine 
in lieu of confiscation.
The matter can be looked at from another angle.
Section 68
of the 
Act reads as follows:
"
Section 68-
Power to compound offences: (1) The 
State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, empower a Forest Officer-
(a)	to accept from any person against 
whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has 
committed any forest offence, other than an 
offence specified in
Section 62
or
Section 63
, 
a sum of money by way of compensation for the 
offence which such person is suspected to have 
committed, and

	(b	when any property has been seized 
as liable to confiscation, to release the same 
on payment of the value thereof as estimated by 
such officer.
(2)	On the payment of such sum of money, or such 
value, or both, as the case may be, to such officer, 
the suspected person, if in custody, shall be 
discharged, the property, if any seized shall be 
released, and no further proceedings shall be taken 
against such person or property.
(3)	A Forest-officer shall not be empowered under 
this section unless he is a Forest-officer of a rank 
not inferior to that of a Ranger and is in receipt of 
a monthly salary amounting to at least one hundred 
rupees, and the sum of money accepted as compensation 
under clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall in no case 
exceed the sum of fifty rupees."
The said section was also amended by the State amendment. The 
amended provision reads as follows:
"
Section 68-
Power to compound offences: (1) The 
State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, empower a Forest Officer-
(a)	to accept from any person against 
whom a reasonable suspicion exists that he has 
committed any forest offence, other than an 
offence specified in clauses (c) and (d) to 
Section 26, clauses (c) and (d) to Section 33 
or Section 62 or Section 63, sum of money by 
way of compensation for the offence which such 
person is suspected to have committed, and
(b)	when any property has been seized 
as liable to confiscation, to release the same 
on payment of the value thereof as estimated by 
such officer.
(2)	On the payment of such sum of money, or such 
value, or both, as the case may be, to such officer, 
the suspected person, if in custody, shall be 
discharged, the property, if any seized shall be 
released, and no further proceedings shall be taken 
against such person or property.
(3)	A Forest-officer shall not be empowered under 
this section unless he is a Forest-officer of a rank 
not inferior to that of an Assistant Conservator of 
Forest."
The power to act in terms of
Section 68
of the Act is limited to 
offences other than those specified in clauses (c) and (d) to
Section 
26
, clauses ) and (d) to
Section 33
or
Section 62
or
Section 63
. Sub-
section (1)(b) of
Section 68
is also relevant. It provides that where 
any property has been seized as liable for confiscation, an officer 
empowered by the State Government has power to release the same on 
payment of the value thereof as estimated by such officer.  The officer 
has to be empowered in the official gazette by the State Government. To 
act in terms of the position the value of the property seized or as 
liable for confiscation has to be estimated. Therefore, on a combined 
reading of
Section 52
and
Section 68
of the Act as amended by the Bihar 
Act, the vehicle as liable for confiscation may be released on payment 
of the value of the vehicle and not otherwise. This is certainly a 
discretionary power, exercise of which would depend upon the gravity of 
the offence. The officer is empowered to release the vehicle on the 
payment of the value thereof as compensation. This discretion has to be 
judicially exercised.
Section 68
of the Act deals with power to 
compound offences. It goes without saying that when the discretionary 
power is conferred, the same has to be exercised in a judicial manner 
after recording of reasons by the concerned officer as to why the 
compounding was necessary to be done. In the instant case, learned  
Single Judge did not refer to the power available under
Section 68
of 
the Act and on the contrary, introduced the concept of reading into
Section 52
of the Act, a power to levy fine in lieu of confiscation 
which is impermissible. In the impugned judgment nowhere the value of 
the truck which was liable for confiscation was indicated. It appears 
that the first appellate Court and the revisional authority did not 
consider it to be a fit case where the vehicle was to be released and 
were of the considered view that confiscation was warranted. They took 
specific note of the fact that fake and fabricated documents were 
produced to justify possession of the seized articles. In any event the 
respondent had not made any prayer for compounding in terms of
Section 
68
of the Act.
Confiscation in terms of sub-section (3) of
Section 52
of the Act 
is the immediate statutory action which provides that when forest 
offence as defined in
Section 2(3)
of the Act is believed to have been 
committed in respect of the seized vehicle, the authorized officer may 
confiscate the forest produce and the vehicle involved in the 
transportation of the forest produce.  Foundation for action in terms 
of
Section 52(3)
of the Act is the belief entertained by the concerned 
officer that forest offence has been committed. It is not the value of 
the forest produce which is relevant, but the value of the article 
liable for confiscation. In the instant case it is the truck carrying 
the forest produce.
Judgment of the High Court is clearly indefensible, deserves to 
be set aside which we direct.  The appeal is allowed.