[Cites
31
, Cited by
57
]
Supreme Court of India
Modern School vs Union Of India & Ors on 27 April, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 2236, 2004 (5) SCC 583, 2004 AIR SCW 2698, 2004 (2) LRI 481, 2004 (5) ACE 219, 2004 (5) SCALE 170, 2004 (3) SLT 364, (2004) 3 ALLMR 894 (SC), (2004) 3 JCR 113 (SC), (2004) 19 ALLINDCAS 708 (SC), (2004) 3 RAJ LW 341, (2004) 3 SERVLR 693, (2004) 4 ANDHLD 50, (2004) 4 SUPREME 16, (2004) 5 SCALE 170, (2004) 3 ESC 367, (2004) 2 SCT 830, (2004) 17 INDLD 163, (2004) 111 DLT 317, 2006 (62) ALR SOC 20 (SC)
Author:
S.B. Sinha
Bench:
S.B. Sinha
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2699 of 2001

PETITIONER:
Modern School

RESPONDENT:
Union of India & Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 27/04/2004

BENCH:
S.B. Sinha.

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

with C.A. Nos. 2700, 2701, 2702, 
2703, 2704, 2705-2706, 2707, 2708, 
2709 and 2710 of 2001 

S.B. SINHA, J :
INTRODUCTION:
How far and to what extent unaided private institutions 
can be subjected to regulations is the core question involved 
in these appeals which arise out of a common judgment and 
order dated 30.10.1998 passed by the High Court of Delhi in 
C.W.P. No. 3723, 4021, 4119, 5330 of 1997.
THE LAW OPERATING IN THE FIELD:
The Delhi School Education Act, 1973
(for short 'the 
Act') was enacted inter alia to provide for better 
organisation and development of school education.  By reason 
of the provisions of the Act, school education, whether 
imparted in a government institution, a minority institution, 
an aided or unaided private institutions is sought to be 
regulated.  The power of Administrator to regulate education 
in all the schools in Delhi, however, is to be made in 
accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Section 4
of the 
Act provides for recognition of the institution.  A scheme of 
management for managing the affairs of the school is required 
to be framed in terms of
Section 5
thereof conforming to the 
provisions of the rules made thereunder.
However, in relation to the recognised private school 
which does not receive any aid, the scheme of management may 
apply with such variations and modifications in the rules as 
may be prescribed.  It has not been brought to our notice as 
to whether any separate rules have been framed as regard 
scheme of management of recognised unaided private schools.  
The second proviso appended to
Section 5
, however, states that 
the scheme relating to the previous approval of the 
appropriate authority shall not apply to a scheme of 
management for unaided minority school.
Section 6
of the Act 
provides for grant of aid to recognised schools.  The matter 
relating to payment to salary to the employees of the school 
is controlled by
Section 10
of the Act stating that the scales 
of pay and allowances, medical facilities, pension, gratuity, 
provident fund and other prescribed benefits of the employees 
of a recognised private school shall not be less than the 
amount payable to employees of the corresponding status in 
school run by the State.
Chapter V of the Act
applies to unaided minority schools.
Section 15
relates to contract of service in terms whereof a 
written contract is required to be entered into by and between 
the managing committee and every employee of a school.
Section 17
regulates fees to be charged by aided schools.  No 
such provision has been made in relation to the recognised 
unaided schools.  Sub-Section (3) of
Section 17
merely 
requires the manager of every recognised school whether aided 
or unaided to file with the Director a full statement of the 
fees to be levied by such school during the ensuing academic 
session, and, furthermore, except with the prior approval of 
the Director, no school shall charge during that academic 
session any fee in excess thereof.
The Act
, therefore, does 
not provide for any regulation as regards charging of any fee 
or any other amount by the unaided recognised schools.
Section 18
the Act provides for a School Fund.  Sub-
sections (1) and (2) of
Section 18
relate to aided schools 
whereas Sub-section (3) thereof provides for Recognized 
Unaided School Fund.; and  such fund may be credited with 
income accrued  to the School  by way of fees,  any charges or 
payments which may be realized by the School for other 
specific purposes or any other contribution, endowment, gift 
and the like.  Clause (a) of Sub-
section  4
of
Section 18
specifies that that the income derived by unaided schools by 
way of fees shall be utilized only for such educational 
purposes as may be prescribed whereas in terms of Sub-Clause
(b) thereof, charges and contributions received by the school 
are required to be utilised for the specific purpose wherefor 
they were received.  Any endowment or gift to a Society/trust 
for establishment of a new school or establishing any branch 
thereof, therefore, is not prohibited.
Section 22
provides for establishment of Delhi Schools 
Education Advisory Board.
Section 24
provides for inspection 
of schools which is in the following terms:
"24. Inspection of schools  (1) Every 
recognised school shall be inspected at 
least once in each financial year in 
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Director may also arrange 
special inspection of any school on such 
aspects of its working as may, from time 
to time, be considered necessary by him.
(3) The Director may give directions to 
the manager to rectify any defect or 
deficiency found at the time of 
inspection or otherwise in the working 
of the school.
(4) If the manager fails to comply with 
any direction given under sub-section 
(3) the Director may, after considering 
the explanation or report, if any, given 
or made by the manager, take such action 
as he may think fit, including
(a)	stoppage of aid,
(b)	withdrawal of recognition, or
(c)	except in the case of a minority 
school, taking over of the 
school under
section 20
."
The Administrator in exercise of its power conferred upon 
it under
Section 28
of the Act framed rules known as the Delhi 
School Education Rules, 1973 (The Rules).  Rule 44 mandates 
that every society or trust desiring to establish a new school 
(not being a minority school) shall give an intimation 
therefor in writing communicating their intention to establish 
the school.  Rule 50 provides for the conditions for 
recognition.  Rule 51 enumerates the facilities to be provided 
by a school seeking recognition.  Rule 59 provides for the 
scheme of management of recognised schools.  Chapter VI of the 
Rules provide for grant-in-aid and conditions therefor.  
Chapter VIII provides for recruitment and terms and conditions 
of service of the employees of private schools other than 
unaided minority ones.  Chapter XIII of the Rules specifies 
the mode and manner in which fees and other charges in aided 
schools should be expended.  Rule 151 provides for development 
fees.
The expression 'Fees' has been defined in Rule 157.  
Chapter XIV provides for establishment of a school fund.  
Rules 172 to 177 provide for the manner in which the fees 
realised by the aided and unaided institutions are to be 
utilised.
Rules 176 and 177 of the Rules read thus :
"176.  Collections for specific purposes 
to be spent for that purpose 

Income derived from collections for 
specific purposes shall be spent only for 
such purpose.
177.	Fees realized  by unaided recognized 
schools how to be utilized -
(1)	Income derived by an unaided 
recognized school by way of fees 
shall be utilised in the first 
instance, for meeting the pay, 
allowances and other benefits 
admissible to the employees of the 
school.
Provided that savings, if any, from 
the fees collected by such school may 
be utilised by its managing committee 
for meeting capital or contingent 
expenditure of the school, or for one 
or more of the following purposes, 
namely :-
a)	award of scholarships to 
students;
b)	establishment of any other 
recognised school, or
c)	assisting any other school or 
educational institution, not 
being a college, under the 
management of the same society 
or trust by which the first 
mentioned school is run.
(2)	the savings referred to in sub-rule 
(1) shall be arrived at after 
providing for the following, namely 
:-
(a)	pension, gratuity and other 
specified retirement and other 
benefits admissible to the 
employees of the school;
(b)	the needed expansion of the 
school or any expenditure of a 
development nature;
(c)	the expansion of the school 
building or for the expansion or 
construction of any building or 
establishment of hostel or 
expansion of hostel 
accommodation;
(d)	co-curricular activities of the 
students;
(e)	reasonable reserve fund not 
being less than ten per cent, of 
such savings;
(3)	Funds collected for specific 
purposes, like sports, co-curricular 
activities, subscriptions for 
excursions or subscriptions for 
magazines, and annual charges, by 
whatever name called, shall be spent 
solely for the exclusive benefit of 
the students of the concerned school 
and shall not be included in the 
savings referred to in sub-rule (2).
(4)	The collections referred to in sub-
rule (3) shall be administered in the 
same manner as the monies standing to 
the credit of the Pupils Fund as 
administered."
Rule 180 mandates that the unaided schools shall submit 
returns.
ANALYSIS:
The said Act and the rules framed thereunder provide for 
a complete code not only as regard regulation of education but 
also organisation and development thereof.
Establishment of a private educational institutional has 
been held to be a fundamental right by this Court in
T.M.A. 
Pai Foundation and Others Vs. State of Karnataka and Others
[(2002) 8 SCC 481].  The fundamental right to establish 
educational institution as contained in
Article 19(1)(g)
of 
the Constitution of India would, however, be subject only to 
the reasonable restrictions which may be imposed by any law in 
terms of Clause (6) thereof.
The Act
is a law regulating 
education.
The Act
seeks to regulate education  necessary 
corollary whereof would be that education imparted in an 
individual institution may also be subjected to regulation.  
But any control or regulation over education or educational 
institution must be imposed only by a legislative act and not 
by any executive instruction.
[See
Union of India Vs. Naveen 
Jindal and Anr.
, (2004) 2 SCC 510]

 	This Court analysing the provisions of
Articles 19
, 26
and
30
of Constitution of India in
T.M.A. Pai Foundation
(supra) inter alia stated:
a)	The majority community as well as linguistic and 
religious minorities would have a right under
Articles 19(1)(g)
and
26
to establish educational 
institutions. In addition,
Article 30(1)
, in no 
uncertain terms, gives the right to the religious 
and linguistic minorities to establish and 
administer educational institutions of their choice.
b)	The Scheme framed by this Court  in
Unni Krishnan, 
J.P. Vs. State of A.P.
[ (1993) 1 SCC 645]  is 
unconstitutional as thereby restrictions imposed   
make it difficult, if not impossible, for the 
educational institutions to run efficiently.  The 
restrictions thus imposed cannot be said to be 
reasonable ones.
c)	The private unaided educational institutions 
imparting education cannot be deprived of their 
choice in matters, inter alia, of selection of 
students and fixation of fees and it is not open to 
the court to insist that statutory authorities 
should impose any condition for the purpose of grant 
of affiliation or recognition which would completely 
destroy the institutional autonomy  and the very 
objective of establishment of the institution.
d)	Education, particularly, higher education must be 
perceived in the light of the idea of an academic 
degree as a "private good" that benefits the 
individual rather than a "public good" for society 
which is now widely accepted.  The logic of today's 
economics and an ideology of privatization have 
contributed to the resurgence of private higher 
education and the establishing of private 
institutions where none or very few existed before.
e)	The right to establish and administer broadly 
comprises of the following rights :-
(a) to admit students;
(b) to set up a reasonable fee structure;
(c) to constitute a governing body;
(d) to appoint staff (teaching and non-teaching); 
and
(e) to take action if there is dereliction of duty 
on the part of any employees.
f)	While the private educational institutions in the 
matter of setting up a reasonable fee structure may 
not resort to profiteering but they may take into 
consideration the need to generate funds to be 
utilized for the betterment and growth of the 
educational institution, the betterment of education 
in that institution and to provide facilities 
necessary for the benefit of the students.  The 
regulatory measures must, in general, be to ensure 
the maintenance of proper academic standards, 
atmosphere and infrastructure and the prevention of 
mal-administration by those in charge of management.
The fixing of a rigid fee structure would be an 
unacceptable restriction. The essence of a private 
educational institution is the autonomy that the 
institution must have in its management and 
administration.
g)	There, necessarily, has to be a difference in the 
administration of private unaided institutions and 
the government aided institutions.  In the latter 
case, the Government will have greater say inter 
alia in fixing of fees but in the case of private 
unaided institutions, maximum autonomy in the day-
to-day administration  has to be with the private 
unaided institutions. Bureaucratic or governmental 
interference in the administration of such an 
institution will undermine its independence.
h)	While running an educational institution is not a 
business, in order to examine the degree of 
independence that can be given to a recognized 
educational institution, like any private entity 
that does not seek aid or assistance from the 
Government, and that exists by virtue of the funds 
generated by it, including loans or borrowings, it 
would be important to note that the essential 
ingredients of the management of the private 
institution include the recruiting students and 
staff, and the quantum of fee that is to be charged.
i)	An unaided institution can charge fee from the 
students.  One cannot lose sight of the fact that we 
live in a competitive world today, where 
professional education is in demand.  A large number 
of professional and other institutions  have been 
started by private parties who do not seek any 
governmental aid. In a sense, a prospective student 
has various options open to him/her where normally 
economic forces have a role to play. The decision on 
the fee to be charged must necessarily be left to 
the private educational institution that does not 
seek or is not dependent upon any funds from the 
Government.   The object of setting up an 
educational institution is by definition 
"charitable", the making of profit  should not be 
the object. . There can, however, be a reasonable 
revenue surplus, which may be generated by the 
educational institution for the purpose of 
development of education and expansion of the 
institution.
The Judgment of this Court in
T.M.A. Pai Foundation
(supra) came to be interpreted by a Constitution Bench of this 
Court in
Islamic Academy of Education & Anr. Vs State of 
Karnataka & Ors.
[(2003) 6 SCC 697]  wherein  inter alia the 
following question was raised for consideration:
"Whether the educational institutions 
are entitled  to fix their own fee 
structure;"
Answering the said question, this Court held:
"7. So far as the first question is 
concerned, in our view the majority 
judgment is very clear.  There can be no 
fixing of a rigid fee structure by the 
Government.  Each institute must have 
the freedom to fix its own fee structure 
taking into consideration the need to 
generate funds to run the institution 
and to provide facilities necessary for 
the benefits of the students.  They must 
also be able to generate surplus which 
must be used for the betterment and 
growth of that educational institution.  
In paragraph 56 of the judgment it has 
been categorically laid down that the 
decision on the fees to be charged must 
necessarily be left to the private 
educational institutions that do not 
seek and which are not dependent upon 
any funds from the Government.  Each 
institute will be entitled to have its 
own fee structure.  The fee structure 
for each institute must be fixed keeping 
in mind the infrastructure and 
facilities available, the investments 
made, salaries paid to the teachers and 
staff, future plans for expansion and/ 
or betterment of the institution etc.  
Of course there can be no profiteering 
and capitation fees cannot be charged.  
It thus needs to be emphasized that as 
per the majority judgment imparting of 
education is essentially charitable in 
nature.  Thus the surplus/ profit that 
can be generated must be only for the 
benefit/ use of that educational 
institution.  Profits/ surplus cannot be 
diverted for any other use or purpose 
and cannot be used for personal gain or 
for any other business or 
enterprise..."
The Court, having regard to the fact that the validity of 
the statutes/ regulations governing the fixation of fees had 
not been considered, directed constitution of a committee 
headed by a retired High Court Judge for the said purpose.  
One of us while concurring with the said directions stated:
"147. On a bare reading of the relevant 
paragraphs of the judgment some of which 
are referred to hereinbefore, it is 
beyond any doubt that in the matter of 
determination of the fee structure the 
unaided institutions exercise a greater 
autonomy.  They, like any other citizens 
carrying on an occupation, must be held 
to be entitled to a reasonable surplus 
for development of education and 
expansion of the institution.  
Reasonable surplus doctrine can be given 
effect to only if the institutions make 
profits out of their investments. As 
stated in paragraph 56, economic forces 
have a role to play.  They, thus, 
indisputably have to plan their 
investment and expenditure in such a 
manner that they may generate some 
amount of profit.  What is forbidden is
(a) capitation fee and (b) profiteering.
154.The fee structure, thus, in relation 
to each and every college must be 
determined separately keeping in view 
several factors including, facilities 
available, infrastructure made 
available, the age of the institution, 
investment made, future plan for 
expansion and betterment of the 
educational standard etc.  The case of 
each institution in this behalf is 
required to be considered by an 
appropriate Committee.  For the said 
purpose, even the books of accounts 
maintained by the institution may have 
to be looked into.  Whatever is 
determined by the Committee by way of a 
fee structure having regard to relevant 
factors some of which are enumerated 
hereinbefore, the management of the 
institution would not be entitled to 
charge anything more."
The principles for fixing fee structure of particular 
institutions have, thus, been illustrated in
T.M.A. Pai 
Foundation
(supra) and
Islamic Academy of Education
(supra) 
but it must be borne in mind that those principles were
laid 
down in
absence of any statute operating in the field.  Where, 
however, a statute operates in the field, regulation of 
education would be governed thereby.  In this case, as the 
regulation of education is governed by a
Legislative Act
, the 
court cannot impose any other or further restrictions by 
travelling beyond the scope, object and purport thereof.
The High Court by reason of the impugned judgment 
travelled beyond the legislative scheme as regards 
administration of a private institution as also fixation of 
fee while issuing the impugned directions in the light of the 
decision of this Court in
Unni Krishnan
(supra).  It is not in 
dispute that pursuant to or in furtherance of the directions 
issued by the High Court a Committee known as Duggal Committee 
was constituted.  The said Committee has submitted its report.  
Pursuant to the recommendations made by the Committee, a 
circular dated 15th December, 1999 has been issued purported 
to be in terms of Sub-Section (3) and (4) of
Section 24
of the 
Act.  The same apparently is beyond the scope and purport of 
the Act and the Rules as the directions thereunder can be 
issued only for the purpose of rectifying the defect and 
deficiencies found at the time of inspection or otherwise in 
the working of the school and not pursuant to the 
recommendations made by a committee constituted in terms of 
the judgment of the High Court.  'Defects and deficiencies' 
within the meaning of the said provisions would mean defects 
and deficiencies while applying the provisions of the Act and 
the rules framed thereunder only and not the recommendations 
of a committee de'hors 'the Act' and 'the rules'.  The said 
directions, therefore, do not have the force of law within the 
meaning of Clause (6) of
Article 19
of the Constitution of 
India.  State indisputably can issue directions which would 
only meet the criteria of a 'law' within the meaning of
Article 13
of the Constitution  of India.
(See
Naveen Jindal
(supra)

 	This Court in
T.M.A. Pai Foundation
(supra), thus, not 
only upheld the right to establish and administer educational 
institutions as being guaranteed by
Articles 19(1)(g)
and
26
subject to the provisions of
Articles 19(6)
and
26(a)
and, 
particularly, minorities under
Article 30
, it emphasised the 
requirement of grant of greater autonomy to the private 
unaided institutions.
The Court while holding that the scheme 
framed in
Unni Krishnan
(supra) as unconstitutional made an 
observation that thereby 'education' in respect of important 
features thereof is sought to be nationalised, viz., right of 
a private unaided institution to give admission and to fix 
fee.  By reason of such a scheme, as private institutions 
became indistinguishable from the government institutions 
which would amount to curtailing of all essential features of 
the right of administration of a private unaided educational 
institution, the same was liable to be struck down being 
unfair and unreasonable.  The Court in no uncertain terms held 
that the fixing of a rigid fee structure, dictating the 
formation and composition of a governing body, compulsory 
nomination of teachers and staff for appointment or nominating 
students for admissions would be unacceptable restrictions.  
It is true that a declaration was made to the effect by the 
Court that since the object of setting up of educational 
institution is by definition "charitable" as fee cannot be 
charged which would not be required for the purpose of 
fulfilling that object.  The Object of an educational 
institution although may not be to make profiteering but 
generation of a reasonable revenue surplus for the purpose of 
development of education and expansion of the institution is 
permissible.  In the case of unaided private schools, this 
Court held that the maximum autonomy must be with the 
management as regards administration, disciplinary powers, 
admission of students and the fees to be charged.  This Court 
noticed that the examination results at all levels of unaided 
private schools despite stringent regulations of the 
governmental authorities were far superior to the results of 
the government-maintained schools.  The Court held that 
curtailment of income of such private schools is impermissible 
as it disables those schools from affording the best 
facilities because of lack of funds.  It was suggested that if 
the lowering of standards from excellence to a level of 
mediocrity is to be avoided, the solution lies in the States 
not using their scanty resources to prop up institutions that 
are able to otherwise maintain themselves out of the fees 
charged, but in improving the facilities and infrastructure of 
state-run schools and in subsidizing the fees payable by the 
students there.
We are bound by the decisions of the larger Benches of 
this Court.
This Court, having regard to
T.M.A. Pai Foundation
(supra) 
cannot thus issue any direction or make a scheme which would 
not be constitutional being violative of clause (6) of
Article 
19
of the Constitution.
Indisputably, the standard of education, the curricular 
and co-curricular activities available to the students and 
various other factors are matters which are relevant for 
determining of the fee structure.  The courts of law having no 
expertise in the manner and/ or having regard to its own 
limitations keeping in view the principles of judicial review 
always refrain from laying down precise formulae in such 
matters.  Furthermore, while undertaking such exercise the 
respective cases of each institution, their plans and 
programmes for the future expansion and several other factors 
are required to be taken into consideration.  The Constitution 
Bench in
Islamic Academy of Education
(supra) which as noticed 
hereinbefore subject to making of an appropriate legislation 
directed setting up of two committees, one of which would be 
for determining fee structure.
This Court both in
T.M.A. Pai 
Foundation
(supra) and
Islamic Academy of Education
(supra) 
had upheld the rights of the minorities and unaided private 
institutions to generate a reasonable surplus for future 
development of education.
Dawn Oliver in Constitutional Reform in the UK under the 
heading 'The Courts and Theories of Democracy, Citizenship, 
and Good Governance' at page 105 states:
"However, this concept of democracy as 
rights-based with limited governmental 
power, and in particular of the role of 
the courts in a democracy, carries high 
risks for the judges - and for the public.  
Courts may interfere inadvisedly in public 
administration.  The case of Bromley 
London Borough Council v. Greater London 
Council ([1983] 1 AC 768, HL) is a classic 
example.  The House of Lords quashed the 
GLC cheap fares policy as being based on a 
misreading of the statutory provisions, 
but were accused of themselves 
misunderstanding transport policy in so 
doing.  The courts are not experts in 
policy and public administration - hence 
Jowell's point that the courts should not 
step beyond their institutional capacity 
(Jowell,2000).  Acceptance of this 
approach is reflected in the judgments of 
Laws LJ in International Transport Roth 
GmbH Vs. Secretary of State for the Home 
Department ([2002] EWCA Civ 158, [2002] 3 
WLR 344) and of Lord Nimmo Smith in Adams 
v. Lord Advocate (Court of Session, Times, 
8 August 2002) in which a distinction was 
drawn between areas where the subject 
matter lies within the expertise of the 
courts (for instance, criminal justice, 
including sentencing and detention of 
individuals) and those which were more 
appropriate for decision by democratically 
elected and accountable bodies.  If the 
courts step outside the area of their 
institutional competence, government may 
react by getting Parliament to legislate 
to oust the jurisdiction of the courts 
altogether.  Such a step would undermine 
the rule of law.  Government and public 
opinion may come to question the 
legitimacy of the judges exercising 
judicial review against Ministers and thus 
undermine the authority of the courts and 
the rule of law."
The aforementioned paragraph has been noticed by this 
Court in
Chairman and M.D., BPL Ltd. Vs. S.P. Gururaja & Ors
[(2003) 8 SCC 567].
The States have a duty to impart education and 
particularly primary education having regard to the fact that 
the same is a fundamental right within the meaning of
Article 
21
of the Constitution of India, but as the Government had 
neither resources nor the ability to provide for the same, it 
appears, the Legislature permitted the Societies/Trusts to 
establish the educational institutions from the savings made 
by them from the Unaided Institutions.
It is not the case of the respondents that Rule 177 is 
unconstitutional.  The vires or otherwise of the said rule may 
be considered in an appropriate proceedings but without going 
into the said question in great details, it may not be 
appropriate for us to read down the provisions thereof and 
issue any direction in derogation thereto.  I do not find any 
conflict in Rules 176 and 177 of the Rules.    
 	In view of the fact that the plain language has been 
employed in Rule 177 of the Rules, a strict construction 
thereof may not be justified.  The proviso appended to Rule 
177 is not exhaustive.  There is no reason as to why the 
expression "capital or contingent expenditure" of the school 
should be given a narrow meaning, particularly having regard 
to the fact that Clause (b) thereof permits the Managing 
Committee to establish any other recognised school out of the 
saving from the fees collected by such school and clause (c) 
thereof permits rendition of assistance to any other school or 
educational institution under the Management of the same 
society or trust by which the first mentioned school is run.
The provisions of the Act and the rules framed thereunder 
in my opinion are absolutely clear and unambiguous.  This 
Court has to interpret the provisions of the Act and the Rules 
framed thereunder in the light of the fundamental rights of 
the appellants.  Any direction, therefore, which would further 
curtail their fundamental rights would be wholly unwarranted.  
Furthermore, the impugned judgment of the Delhi High 
Court was rendered having regard to the decision of this Court 
in
Unni Krishnan
(supra).
Unni Krishnan
(supra) no longer 
holds the field.  Its dicta that imparting of education is not 
a fundamental right stands overruled.  The scheme framed by it 
has also been held to be unconstitutional.
All orders and 
directions issued by the High Court pursuant to or in 
furtherance of the directions in
Unni Krishnan
(supra) or any 
decision following the same must, therefore, be kept out of 
consideration.
Thus, the question posed in these matters needs to be 
answered differently as imparting of education is now a 
fundamental right.  Such a right, therefore, requires a fresh 
look and not through the glasses of
Unni Krishnan
(supra).
An 11-Judge Bench as also a Constitution Bench of this 
Court in
T.M.A. Pai Foundation
(supra) and
Islamic Academy of 
Education
(supra), as noticed hereinbefore, have merely 
forbidden profiteering.
'Profiteering' has been defined in Black's Law 
Dictionary, Fifth edition as:
"Taking advantage of unusual or 
exceptional circumstances to make 
excessive profits"
Although decisions are galore the purpose would be better 
served by referring to G.P. Singh Principles of Statutory 
Interpretation, Ninth Edition, 2004, pages 120-122 which is in 
the following terms:
"4. Regard to Consequences:
If the language used is capable of 
bearing more than one construction, in 
selecting the true meaning regard must 
be had to the consequences resulting 
from adopting the alternative 
constructions.  A construction that 
results in hardship, serious 
inconvenience, injustice, absurdity or 
anomaly or which leads to inconsistency 
or uncertainty and friction in the 
system which the statute purports to 
regulate has to be rejected and 
preference should be given to that 
construction which avoids such results.  
This rule has no application when the 
words are susceptible to only one 
meaning and no alternative construction 
is reasonably open.
(a)	Hardship, inconvenience, 
injustice, absurdity and anomaly to 
be avoided

In selecting out of different 
interpretations "the court will adopt 
that which is just, reasonable and 
sensible rather than that which is none 
of those things" as it may be presumed 
"that the Legislature should have used 
the word in that interpretation which 
least offends our sense of justice".
If the grammatical construction leads to 
some absurdity or some repugnance or 
inconsistency with the rest of the 
instrument, it may be departed from so 
as to avoid that absurdity, and 
inconsistency.  Similarly, a 
construction giving rise to anomalies 
should be avoided.  As approved by 
Venkatarama Aiyar, J., "Where the 
language of a statute, in its ordinary 
meaning and grammatical construction, 
leads to a manifest contradiction of the 
apparent purpose of the enactment, or to 
some inconvenience or absurdity, 
hardship or injustice, presumably not 
intended, a construction may be put upon 
it which modifies the meaning of the 
words, and even the structure of the 
sentence."
It would not, therefore, be proper to impose any further 
restrictions in this behalf and interpret
T.M.A. Pai 
Foundation
(supra) in a different way so as to take away some 
of the rights of the appellants which are recognised therein.
We have noticed hereinbefore that
T.M.A. Pai Foundation
(supra) gave a new look to the concept of 'education', viz., 
opening up of economy and concept of globalisation.  We, 
therefore, cannot look at the question differently.  It must 
further be borne in mind that by reason of judicial direction 
this Court cannot override a statute or statutory rules 
governing the field and, thus, no direction can be issued by 
this Court contrary thereto or inconsistent therewith.  
Furthermore, the expression 'development of education' is 
a broad term.  There does not exist any reason as to why the 
said right would be limited, regulated or curtailed in absence 
of any provisions contained in the Act or the rules framed 
thereunder.  When the law permits utilisation of surplus fund 
of an institution for setting up another institution, the 
Court should not come in their way from doing so.
This Court, when such legislations are operating in the 
field should be loathe to impose any further restrictions.  
This Court normally does not pass an order even in exercise of 
its jurisdiction under
Article 142
of the Constitution of 
India which would be contrary to the law.
(See
Government of 
West Bengal Vs. Tarun K. Roy and Ors.
2003 (9) SCALE 671, 
paragraphs 32 to 34 and
Jamshed Hormusji Wadia Vs. Board of 
Trustees, Port of Mumbai and Another
, (2004) 3 SCC 214)
The need of the day, therefore, is strict implementation 
and enforcement of the statute.  The administration, in the 
event, comes to the conclusion that the rules are required to 
be amended, they are free to do so; but only because there are 
a few cases of mismanagement, the same by itself should not be 
considered to be an indicia that all institutions are being 
run in an unprofessional or unethical manner.
Once, the legislature has laid down an educational 
scheme, the jurisdiction of the court is merely to interpret 
the same.  It cannot and should not issue any other or further 
direction.  It would not supplant a statutory provision by 
issuing any direction except in some exceptional cases.
The statutory scheme of the Act must be considered also 
from the point of view that a Society running several 
institutions may have to impart education in different areas; 
slum, semi urban or urban.  It may not, therefore, be improper 
for an institution to generate some surplus fund from an 
institution which is situated within a metropolitan area for 
the purpose of starting a school in a slum or a semi urban 
area.
It may also not be necessary to issue direction as to how 
and in what manner the institutions should maintain their 
accounts. In absence of any statutory provision governing the 
field, it is for the administration  of the educational 
institution to determine the same having regard to the 
prevailing law like
Income Tax Act, 1961
.
I am, furthermore of the opinion, that as it is 
permissible in law, the excess income from an institution may 
be spent by the Society/Trust to establish another school 
keeping in view the fact that more and more educational 
institutions are required to be established particularly in 
rural or semi urban area.
So far as allotment of land by the Delhi Development 
Authority is concerned, suffice it to point out that the same 
has no bearing with the enforcement of the provisions of the 
Act and the rules framed thereunder but indisputably the 
institutions are bound by the terms and conditions of 
allotment.  In the event such terms and conditions of 
allotment have been violated by the allottees, the appropriate 
statutory authorities would be at liberty to take appropriate 
step as is permissible in law.
For the reasons aforementioned, I respectfully dissent 
with the opinion of Brother Kapadia,J.  I would allow the 
appeals.  No costs.