[Cites
73
, Cited by
35
]
Supreme Court of India
U.P. Co-Operative Cane Unions ... vs West U.P. Sugar Mills Association & Ors. ... on 5 May, 2004
Equivalent citations: AIR 2004 SUPREME COURT 3697, 2004 (5) SCC 430, 2004 AIR SCW 3789, 2004 ALL. L. J. 2483, 2005 (5) SLT 206, (2004) 6 SCALE 187, (2004) 3 CTC 590 (SC), (2004) 5 SUPREME 388, 2004 (2) LRI 662, (2004) 20 ALLINDCAS 55 (SC), 2004 (3) CTC 590, 2004 (5) ACE 587, (2004) 2 EFR 288, (2004) 18 INDLD 709, (2004) 5 SCALE 457, (2004) 5 SUPREME 246
Author:
G.P. Mathur
Bench:
Chief Justice
,
K.G. Balakrishnan
,
G.P. Mathur
CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  460 of 1997

PETITIONER:
U.P. Co-operative Cane Unions	Federations

RESPONDENT:
West U.P. Sugar Mills Association & Ors. etc. 

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 05/05/2004

BENCH:
CJI, K.G. Balakrishnan & G.P. Mathur.

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT


(With CA Nos.461/1997, 4685/1997, 1727/1999, 4602/1999, 6065/2001, 
CA No.________/2004 @ SLP(C) No. 16851/2001, SLP(C) Nos.1363/2002, 
948/2003, CA Nos.8117-8122/2001, T.C. (c) No.21-22/2003 IA No.3 in CA 
460 of 1997 


G.P. MATHUR,J.
1.	The controversy raised in these appeals by special leave and Transfer 
Petitions basically relates to the competence of the State Government to fix 
the State Advised Price for purchase of sugarcane by an occupier of a sugar 
factory over and above the minimum price fixed by the Central Government.  
The validity of the procedure adopted for ensuring the payment of the 
aforesaid  price  to a sugarcane grower is also under challenge.
2.	The power of the State Government to fix higher sugarcane price was 
recognised in
Maharashtra Rajya Sahkari Sakkar Karkhana Sangh Ltd. v. 
State of Maharashtra & Ors.
1995 (Supp) 3 SCC 475  and  in
State of M.P. 
v. Jaora Sugar Mills Ltd. & Ors.
(1997) 9 SCC 207 it was held that the State 
Government  has an obligation to ensure payment of proper price to  the 
sugarcane growers by occupiers of the factory.
However some observations  
made in
State of Tamilnadu & Ors. v. Kothari Sugar & Chemicals Ltd. & 
Ors.
(1996) 7 SCC 751 apparently indicate that State Government has no 
power to fix the price.  In view of this seeming conflict, the cases were 
initially referred  for decision by a larger Bench of three Judges and then to a 
Bench of five Judges.
3.	We will first deal with Civil Appeal Nos.460 of 1997, 461 of 1997,   
1727 of 1999 and 4602 of 1999 which arise  from State of  U.P. and are 
directed against  the judgment and orders of  two benches of  Allahabad 
High Court wherein conflicting views have been taken. The Central 
Government by the order dated 11.3.1996 fixed the statutory premium price 
of sugarcane payable by the sugar factories for 1996-97 sugar season at 
Rs.45.90 per quintal linked to a basic recovery of 8.5 per cent sugar subject 
to a premium of Rs. 0.57 for every 0.1 percentage  point increase in the 
recovery above that level.  According to Sugar Mills Association the average 
minimum statutory price for the whole of U.P. came to about Rs.50.33 per 
quintal and the additional price under Clause 5-A of Sugarcane (Control) 
Order 1966 came  to about Rs.7 per quintal and thus they were liable to pay 
Rs.57.33 per quintal.  The State Government by the order dated 15.11.1996 
fixed the State Advised Price at Rs.72 per quintal for ordinary quality and 
Rs.75 per quintal for fast ripening quality of sugarcane to be delivered at the 
gate of the factory.  In case the sugarcane was delivered at the purchase 
centre the sugar mills were entitled to deduct about Rs.3 per quintal towards 
transportation cost.  Writ Petition No.36889 of 1996 was filed by West U.P. 
Sugar Mills Association, Central U.P. Sugar Mills Association, East U.P. 
Sugar Mills Association and 32 sugar mills for quashing the order dated 
15.11.1996 of U.P. Government whereby State Advised Cane Price was  
fixed and for restraining the respondent authorities (State of U.P. and Cane 
Commissioner U.P.) from taking any coercive  steps to enforce the payment 
of the said State Advised Price.  A declaration was also sought that the writ  
petitioners are liable to pay only the minimum price fixed by the Central 
Government under Clause 3 of Sugarcane (Control) Order 1966 plus the 
additional cane price determined under Clause 5-A of the said Order.  A 
Division Bench of the High Court allowed the writ petition  by the judgment 
and order dated 11.12.1996.  The order of the State Government dated 
15.11.1996 was quashed and the respondent authorities  were restrained 
from enforcing the State Advised Price.  It was, however, directed that  
where  an agreement in Form B or Form C of the Appendix to the U.P. 
Sugarcane Supply and Purchase Order, 1954  had been reached between 
occupiers of the factory and the cane growers or cane growers' cooperative 
society then the occupiers of the factory will have to pay the price in 
accordance  with such agreement.
4.	The Cane Commissioner U.P. issued a recovery certificate on 
13.2.1997 for recovery of State Advised Sugarcane price from Agota Sugar 
and Chemicals Ltd. and on the basis of the aforesaid recovery certificate  
Tehsildar Bulandshahr sent a citation dated 21.2.1997 for recovery of the 
amount.  Agota Sugar and Chemicals Ltd. then filed Writ Petition No. 775 
(M/B) of 1997 before the Lucknow Bench of Allahabad High Court for 
quashing of the aforesaid recovery certificate and the citation. It was also  
prayed that a writ of mandamus be issued  commanding the Cane 
Commissioner and authorities of the State Government not to adopt any  
coercive method to recover any amount from it on the basis of the recovery 
certificate dated 13.2.1997 and the citation dated 21.2.1997. Writ Petition 
No. 2086 (M/B) 1997 was filed by Shri V.M. Singh, a  sugarcane grower, 
claiming  to represent the interest of all the sugarcane growers in the State, 
praying that the authorities be directed to enforce the payment of State 
Advised Price for the sugarcane purchased by the sugar mills. 	The writ 
petitions were disposed of by a common judgment and order dated 1.2.1999.  
Writ Petition No. 775 (M/B) of 1997  filed by Agota Sugar and Chemicals 
Limited was dismissed but Writ Petition 2086 (M/B) of 1997 was allowed 
and a writ of mandamus was issued commanding the Cane Commissioner 
and State of U.P. to enforce the payment of State Advised Price for the 
sugarcane purchased by the sugar mills in the State.  The State Government 
was further directed to initiate recovery proceedings against the defaulting 
sugar mills for non-payment of the dues and in case sugar mills failed to pay 
the State Advised Price and the interest to the cane growers within six 
weeks, the Government was directed to recover the amount in accordance 
with law and thereafter pay the same to the cane growers or cane growers' 
co-operative societies.
5.	Civil Appeal No. 460 of 1997 has been preferred by U.P. Co-
operative Cane Unions Federation and Civil Appeal No.461 of 1997 has 
been filed by State of U.P. and another against the judgment and order dated 
11.12.1996 of Allahabad High Court by which Writ Petition No. 36889 of 
1996 was allowed.  Civil Appeal No.1727 of 1999 and Civil Appeal 
No.4602 of 1999 have been preferred against common judgment and order 
dated 1.2.1999 of  Lucknow Bench of Allahabad High Court, whereby Writ 
Petition No.775 (M/B) of 1997 preferred by Agota Sugar and Chemicals was 
dismissed and Writ Petition No.2086 (M/B) of 1997 preferred by V.M. 
Singh was allowed.  Civil Appeal No.460 of 1997 is being treated as the 
leading case.
6.	 Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, learned senior counsel for the appellant U.P. 
Co-operative Cane Unions Federation has submitted that the Central 
Government fixes only the minimum price under Clause  3(1) of Sugarcane 
(Control) Order, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as 1966 Order) and such 
fixation of minimum price does not exhaust the field of determination of 
price of sugarcane.  In the matter of fixation of price the concept of 
minimum price, fair price and maximum price are well known and, 
therefore, even after fixation of minimum price by the Central Government 
it is always open for the State Government to fix a higher price for the 
sugarcane.  Learned counsel has submitted that the State Government can 
not only fix a higher price but can also advise  sugarcane growers and sugar 
factories to agree at a higher price.   The State Government can fix the 
higher price in exercise of its regulatory power under
UP Sugarcane 
(Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Act, 1953
(hereinafter referred to as 
1953 Act).  The Sugarcane grower or the sugarcane growers' co-operative 
society and the occupiers of sugar factories have to compulsorily enter into 
an agreement in accordance with UP Sugarcane (Supply and Purchase) 
Order, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as 1954 Order)  and the State 
Government can issue  directions for recording  of State Advised Price in the 
agreements which have to be executed for supply of sugarcane.  Shri 
Dwivedi  has also urged that parchas are issued to the sugarcane growers 
and in exercise of the power conferred by  1953 Act, the  State Government 
can direct that the State Advised Price  be recorded in the parchas which are 
issued to sugarcane growers. Learned counsel has also submitted  that the 
Central Government does not take into consideration the various bye-
products like molasses, bagasse and press mud which are produced during 
the course of production of sugar and the sugar mills make considerable 
amount of money from the sale of aforesaid bye-products especially since 
molasses has been decontrolled after 1991.  The State Government, having 
regard to the local conditions and also the amount earned by the sugar 
factories from the aforesaid bye-products, fixes the price of the sugarcane 
which is more realistic.  Learned counsel has further submitted that there is 
no repugnancy between the minimum price fixed by the Central Government 
and the State Advised Price fixed by the State Government and the view to 
the  contrary  taken by the High Court is clearly erroneous in law.
7.	Shri P. Chidambaram, learned senior counsel appearing for  the State 
of U.P. has submitted that there are many facets of price like minimum 
price, minimum support price, fair price and maximum price.
Section 3
of  
Essential Commodities Act, (hereinafter referred to as
EC Act
) empowers 
the Central Government to make orders for maintaining or increasing 
supplies of any essential commodity or for securing their equitable 
distribution and availability at fair prices or for regulating or prohibiting the 
production, supply and distribution thereof and trade and commerce therein.  
The Central Government has made Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 
(hereinafter referred to '1966 Order')  in exercise of the said power and 
Clause 3 of the Order provides for fixation of minimum price of sugarcane 
payable by the producer of sugar to the grower of sugarcane.  The price is 
fixed having regard to,  inter alia, (a) the cost of production of sugarcane; (b) 
the return to the grower from alternative crops and the general trend of 
prices of agricultural commodities; and  (c) availability of sugar to the 
consumer  at a fair price.  Learned counsel has submitted that the main 
purpose of the 1966 Order,  was to ensure that sugarcane supplies are 
maintained  and sugar is available at  fair price and, therefore,  the order 
must be construed in the context of the policy of the Central Government to 
appropriate a part of the production of sugar mills as "levy sugar" and sell 
levy sugar at controlled price through the public distribution system (ration 
shops).  The statutory minimum price as fixed by the Central Government is 
basically linked to fixation of the price of levy sugar and is not linked with 
the actual price of the sugarcane. Hence deliberately the Central Government 
kept the minimum price of sugarcane at a low level.  The additional price 
payable under clause 5-A of the 1966 Order is factory specific and has co-
relation only with the profits of the sugar factory and, therefore it is only a 
matter of chance for a sugarcane grower to get some additional amount. If at 
all the factory makes profit, the amount paid to a sugarcane grower will be 
pitiably low or illusory.  Learned counsel has also submitted that sugarcane 
occupies land for a longer period than any other crop and it needs larger 
investment in the inputs.  The farmers can raise only one crop of sugarcane 
in a year.  Price is the main incentive in any economy and the best incentive 
to the sugarcane grower is remunerative price for his produce.  The 
minimum price fixed by the Central Government under Clause 3 of  1966 
Order is not a remunerative price, as the definition shows that it is only a 
minimum price.  It does not take into account higher costs and higher risks 
involved in raising sugarcane.  If there is a higher investment and higher 
risk, the sugarcane grower is entitled to higher return but the said fact is not 
taken into consideration while fixing the minimum price by the Central 
Government.  Learned counsel has submitted that power to fix remunerative 
price must reside in some authority and therefore such a power must vest 
with the State Government as the field for the same remains open and 
unoccupied.  Shri Chidambaram has further submitted that 1953 Act has 
been enacted to regulate the distribution, sale and purchase of cane.
Section 
16
of this Act empowers the State Government  to  regulate the distribution, 
sale or purchase of cane in any reserved or assigned area.  The power 
conferred  under the Act on the State Government is of wide amplitude  and 
takes within its fold  the power to determine a remunerative price to the cane 
grower.
The Act
not only confers power but also casts a duty upon the State 
Government to ensure that the sugarcane grower gets a remunerative price 
and he is incentivised to grow sugarcane because the economy of the State to 
a significant extent  is dependent upon growing sugarcane and supplying the 
same to the sugar factories.  Learned counsel has also urged that the State 
Government in exercise of its power under the 1953 Act can bring about an 
agreement between the sugarcane grower or sugarcane growers' co-
operative  society and occupiers of a factory satisfying certain terms and 
conditions and the price of the sugarcane  will be one of the terms thereof.  
Under the agreements the sugarcane grower is reserved or assigned to a 
specified sugar mill and is bound to supply not less than 85 per cent of the 
agreed quantity of sugarcane.   He is bound to cut the sugarcane on receipt 
of a cutting order and in case of non-supply he is liable to pay penalty.  If 
these terms imposed by the  Government are valid, then by the same logic 
the term regarding price is also valid and binding  and sugar mills cannot 
approbate and reprobate the  agreement.  Learned counsel has made an 
alternative submission that even if it is assumed that 1953 Act does not 
confer such a power then
Article 162
read with Entry 33 List III of Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution confers power upon the State Government to 
fix price by an executive order.
In support of this submission reliance has 
been placed upon certain decisions of this Court  rendered in
Rai Saheb, 
Ram Jawaya Kapoor v. State of Punjab
(
1955) 2 SCR 225  Bishambhar 
Dayal Chandra Mohan & Ors. v. State of U.P.
(
1982) 1 SCC 39 and State of 
Andhra Pradesh v. Lavu Narendranath
(1971) 1 SCC 607.  Lastly  learned 
counsel has submitted that certain items like molasses, begasse and press 
mud which are bye-products of sugar industries and which contribute to the 
earning of the sugar mills have not been taken into consideration by the 
Central Government and, therefore,  the price fixed by the State Government 
which takes into consideration all the relevant factors and the local 
conditions represents the true price which should be upheld.
8.	   Shri Shanti Bhushan, learned senior counsel appearing for the 
respondents (sugar factories), has submitted that the main question  to be 
examined is whether the State Government has any statutory power to fix 
the State Advised Price for sugarcane and to compel the sugar factories to 
pay the said price.  Learned counsel has submitted that in exercise of power 
conferred by
Section 3
of E.C. Act the Central Government has made the 
1966 Order,  and the Central Government fixes the price of the sugarcane 
under Clause 3 (1) of the said Order.  There is no specific  provision under 
the 1966 Order, which may empower the State Government to fix the price 
of sugarcane over and above what has been fixed by the Central 
Government.  Similarly there is no specific provision in  1953 Act and the 
Rules made thereunder   which may empower the State Government to fix 
the price of the sugarcane.  Learned counsel has further submitted that there 
is  clear repugnancy between the price fixed by the Central Government and 
the price fixed by the State Government and, therefore,  it is the price which 
has been fixed by the Central Government which has to prevail. It has also 
been contended that under
Section 3
(3-
C) of E.C. Act
, the Central 
Government has to determine the price of levy sugar which a sugar factory is 
compelled to sell to the Central Government or the State Government under 
an order made with reference to Section 3(2)(f) E..C. Act and while 
determining price of such levy sugar  it is only the minimum price of 
sugarcane fixed by the Central Government which can be taken into 
consideration.   The fixation of higher price of sugarcane by the State 
Government  would completely dislocate the mechanism  provided under the
E.C. Act
for determination of the price of the levy sugar.  Learned counsel 
has further submitted that the respondents (Sugar Mills Association) had 
sent several letters requesting the State Government not to announce any 
State Advised Price and within three days of the announcement of the State 
Advised Price  the writ petition was filed.  It has thus been urged that in fact 
there was no agreement between the sugarcane growers or the sugarcane 
growers' co-operative society and the occupiers of the sugar factories for 
payment of State Advised Price.  It has also been contended that even if the 
price fixed by the State Governments is mentioned in the agreements or in 
the parchas, the respondents (sugar factories) cannot be compelled to pay 
the said price as they had never given their consent for recording the State 
Advised Price in the agreements or in the parchas.  In order to constitute a 
valid agreement, it is submitted, the consent of the parties must be 
voluntarily and must not have been obtained under any duress or compulsion 
and since the sugar mills had never voluntarily agreed to pay the State 
Advised Price, the agreements wherein such a price is recorded is not 
binding upon them.
9.	Shri Sudhir Chandra, learned senior counsel, appearing for the appellant 
Agota Sugar and Chemicals Ltd. in CA No. 4602 of 1999 has adopted the 
argument of Shri Shanti Bhushan. In addition he has submitted that there 
cannot be any oral agreement regarding the price of the sugarcane between a 
sugarcane grower or a sugarcane growers' co-operative society and the 
occupier of the sugar factory  as Forms B and C given in Appendix to U.P. 
Sugarcane Supply and Purchase Order, 1954 clearly contemplate an 
agreement in writing.  He has further submitted that in the agreements which 
had been executed between the sugar factory and the sugarcane growers co-
operative society the State Advised Price had not been recorded and the 
High Court had misread the same.
10.  	Before adverting to the contentions raised at the Bar it is necessary to  
keep in mind that sugarcane is the main raw material for manufacture of 
sugar as it is the sugarcane juice which is ultimately converted into crystals 
which becomes a marketable commodity.  Sugarcane, unlike coal or ore of  
minerals is not available under the surface of the earth which may be 
extracted and  stored and may be used as and when required.  It is a product 
of agriculture which has to be grown in fields like any other agricultural crop 
and requires inputs and hard labour for its production and it dries within a 
short time of its harvesting and becomes virtually useless.  The sugar 
factories do not have an  unlimited capacity to crush sugarcane but have a 
fixed capacity and, therefore, they require fresh sugarcane in a limited 
quantity everyday during the entire crushing season. Sugar factories in the 
State of U.P. generally commence crushing in the month of November and 
continue upto the end of April or sometimes middle of May i.e. for about six 
months. In order to ensure  proper and continuous supply of sugarcane  to 
sugar factory throughout the crushing season, the harvesting of crop has to 
be done in limited quantity (according to crushing capacity and requirement 
of the sugar factory) everyday  and not in one stretch.  In view of this 
peculiar requirement of sugar factory the position of  sugarcane growers 
becomes entirely different from those who grow other crops like wheat or 
paddy which can be harvested in one go and can be sold later on at the 
convenience of the farmer at the opportune time.     In order to achieve the 
proper balance viz. to ensure a continuous supply of  adequate quantity of 
sugarcane to the sugar factory and proper remuneration to the cane grower 
for the cane supplied by him, various enactments have been made which we  
will presently refer to.
11.	  The Central Legislature initially enacted Sugarcane Act, 1934 and 
the Statement of Objects and Reasons, amongst others, said that the initiative 
in the matter of fixing prices for cane must be left to Provincial 
Governments so as to suit local conditions.
Section 3
of this Act empowered 
the Provincial Government, by notification in the official gazette, to declare 
any area as controlled area, to fix a minimum price or minimum prices for 
the purchase in any controlled area of sugarcane intended for use in any 
factory and to prohibit in any controlled area the purchase of sugarcane 
intended for use in any factory otherwise than from the grower of the 
sugarcane or from a person licensed to act as a purchasing agent.  The 
purchase of sugarcane intended for use in factory in any controlled area at a 
price less than the minimum price notified  was made an offence under
Section 5
.
Section 7
of the Act conferred wide powers on the Provincial 
Government to make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the objects 
of the Act.  The U.P. Legislature thereafter enacted the U.P. Sugar Factories 
Control Act, 1938 (U.P. Act No.1 of 1938) which repealed the Sugarcane 
Act, 1934 in its application in the province of U.P.
Section 2 (a)
of E.C. Act  
defines essential commodities and in view of
Section 2(b)
of the said Act 
"food crops" includes crops of sugarcane.  The Central Government 
exercising powers under
Section 3
of the E.C. Act made the Sugarcane 
Control Order, 1955.  Clause 3(a) of this Order laid down that the Central 
Government may, after consultation with such authorities, bodies or 
associations as it may deem fit, by notification in the Official Gazette, fix in 
respect of an area the price or the minimum price to be paid by producers of 
sugar for sugarcane purchased by him.  This order was repealed by the 
Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966 (for short '1966 Order')  and  Clause 2(g) 
and (i) and sub-clauses (1),(2),(3) of Clause 3 thereof are being  reproduced 
below:
2(g)    "price" means the price or the minimum price fixed by                                         
the Central Government, from time to time, for sugarcane 
delivered
(i)     to a sugar factory at the gate of the factory or at a 
sugarcane purchasing center; or
(ii)	to a khansari unit;
(i)  	"producer of sugar" means a person carrying on the                   
business of manufacturing sugar by vacuum pan process
3.	Minimum price of sugarcane payable by producer of 
sugar (1) The Central Government may, after consultation 
with the authorities, bodies or associations as it may deem fit, 
by notification in the official Gazette, from time to time, fix the 
minimum price of sugarcane to be paid by producers of sugar or 
their agents for the sugarcane purchased by them, having regard 
to -
(a)	the cost of production of sugarcane;
(b)	the return to the grower from alternative crops and 
the general trend of prices of agricultural 
commodities;
(c)	the availability of sugar to the consumers at a fair 
price;
(d)	the price at which sugar produced from sugarcane 
is sold by producers of sugar; and
(e)	the recovery of sugar from sugarcane:
Provided that the Central Government or, with the 
approval of the Central Government, the State Government, 
may, in such circumstances and subject to such conditions as 
specified in Clause 3-A, allow a suitable rebate in the price so 
fixed.
Explanation  (1)	Different prices may be fixed for different 
areas or different qualities or varieties of sugarcane.
(2)	No person shall sell or agree to sell sugarcane to a 
producer of sugar or his agent, and no such producer or agent 
shall purchase or agree to purchase sugarcane, at a price lower 
than that fixed under sub-clause (1).
(3)	Where a producer of sugar purchases any sugarcane from 
a grower of sugarcane or from a sugarcane grower's co-
operative society, the producer shall, unless there is an 
agreement in writing to the contrary between the parties, pay 
within fourteen days from the date of delivery of  sugarcane to 
the seller or tender to him the price of the cane sold at the rate 
agreed to between the producer and the sugarcane grower or 
sugarcane growers' co-operative society or that fixed under 
sub-clause (1),as the case may be, either at the gate of  factory 
or at the cane collection center or transfer or deposit the 
necessary amount in the Bank account of the seller or the co-
operative society, as the case may be.
12.	The 1966 Order has been amended several times by the Central 
Government.  Sub-clause 3 of Clause 3 was substituted on 18.5.1968,  
Clause 3-A relating to rebate that can be deducted from the price paid for the 
sugarcane was inserted on 24.9.1976 and Clause 5-A was inserted on 
25.9.1974.  The definition of 'price' given in Clause 2(g) shows that it can 
either be the price or the minimum price fixed by the Central Government.  
Clause 3(3) deals with payment of the price of the cane sold at the rate 
agreed to between the producer and the sugarcane grower or sugarcane 
growers' co-operative society or that fixed under sub-clause (1) as the case 
may be.   Clause 3-A which deals with rebate that can be deducted from the 
price paid for sugarcane also refers to  either the minimum price of 
sugarcane fixed under Clause 3 or the price agreed to between the producer 
and the sugarcane grower or the sugarcane growers' co-operative society. So 
far as the power of the Central Government is concerned,  under Clause 3(1) 
it can  fix only the "minimum price" of sugarcane to be paid by producers of 
sugar for the sugarcane purchased by them.  This is the lowest permissible 
rate.  The effect of Clause 3(2) is that a producer of sugar can under no 
circumstances purchase sugarcane at a price lower than the minimum price 
fixed under Clause 3(1) and there is a similar prohibition on the cane grower 
and he cannot sell or agree to sell sugarcane to a producer of a sugar below 
the said price.  But the 1966 Order, in view of definition of  "price" given in 
Clause 2(g) and also the language used in Clauses 3 and 3-A, clearly 
contemplates that there can be a price other than the "minimum price" of 
sugarcane fixed under Clause 3(1), namely, the "price agreed to between the 
producer and the sugarcane grower or the sugarcane growers' co-operative 
society".  Clause 5-A lays down that where a producer of sugar purchases 
sugarcane from a grower of sugarcane during each sugar year, he shall in 
addition to the minimum sugarcane price fixed under Clause 3 pay to the 
sugarcane grower an additional price, if found due in accordance with the 
provisions of the Second Schedule   This additional price is to be calculated 
in accordance with the formula given in Second Schedule and is dependent 
upon the value of the sugar produced and the profits made and in effect it is 
a sharing of profits.  Sub-clause (5) of Clause 5-A lays down that no 
additional price determined under sub-clause (2)  shall become payable by a 
producer of sugar who pays a price higher than the "minimum sugarcane 
price" fixed under Clause 3 to the sugarcane grower, if the same is not less 
than the total of the price fixed under Clause 3(1) and additional price 
determined under Clause 5-A (2). This provision again contemplates 
payment of price higher than the minimum price fixed under Clause 3 (1).  A 
whole reading of the 1966 Order would, therefore, show that the Central 
Government shall fix the minimum price of sugarcane but there can be a 
price higher than the minimum price which may be in the nature of agreed 
price between the producer of sugar and the sugarcane grower or the 
sugarcane growers' co-operative society.  So the field for a price higher than 
the minimum price is clearly left open in the 1966 Order made by the 
Central Government.
13.     The U.P. legislature enacted the
U.P.  Sugarcane (Regulation of 
Supply and Purchase) Act, 1953
(for short 'the 1953 Act') which was 
published in Gazette on 9.10.1953.
Sections 2(a)
,
2(n)
,
15
and
16
of this  
Act read as under:-
Section 2(a)
"assigned area" means an area assigned to a 
factory under
Section 15
;
Section 2(n)
"Reserved area" shall mean the area reserved for a 
factory under an Order for reservation of Sugarcane areas made 
under Rule 125-B of the Defence of India Rules, 1962, and 
when no such order is in force, the area specified in an order 
made under
Section 15
.
"15.	Declaration of reserved area and assigned area  (1) 
Without prejudice to any order made under Clause (d) of sub-
section (2) of
Section 16
, the Cane Commissioner may, after 
consulting the Factory and Cane-growers Co-operative Society 
in the manner to be prescribed
(a)	reserve any area (hereinafter called the reserved area), 
and
(b)	assign any area (hereinafter called an assigned area),

for the purposes of the supply of cane to a factory in accordance 
with the provisions of
Section 16
during one or more crushing 
seasons as may be specified and may likewise at any time 
cancel such order or alter the boundaries of an area so reserved 
or assigned.
(2)	Where any area has been declared as reserved area for a 
factory, the occupier of such factory shall, if so directed by the 
Cane Commissioner, purchase all the cane grown in that area, 
which is offered for sale to the factory.
(3)	Where any area has been declared as assigned area for a 
factory, the occupier of such factory shall purchase such 
quantity of cane grown in that area and offered for sale to the 
factory, as may be determined by the Cane Commissioner.
(4)   An appeal shall lie to the State Government against the 
order of the Cane Commissioner passed under sub-section (1).
16.	Regulation of purchase and supply of cane in the 
reserved and assigned areas  (1) The State Government may, 
for maintaining supplies, by order, regulate -
(a)	the distribution, sale or purchase of any cane in any 
reserved or assigned area;  and
(b)	purchase of cane in any area other than a reserved or 
assigned area.
(2)  Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers 
such order may provide for -
(a)	the quantity of cane to be supplied by each Cane-grower 
or Cane-growers' Cooperative Society in such area to the 
factory for which the area has so been reserved or 
assigned;
(b)	the manner in which cane grown in the reserved area or 
the assigned area, shall be purchased by the factory for 
which the area has been so reserved or assigned and the 
circumstance in which the cane grown by a cane-grower 
shall not be purchased except through a Cane-growers' 
Co-operative Society;
(c)	the form and the terms and conditions of the agreement 
to be executed by the occupier or manager of the factory 
for which an area is reserved or assigned for the purchase 
of cane offered for sale ;
(d)	the circumstances under which permission may be 
granted
(i)	for the purchase of cane grown in reserved or 
assigned area by a Gur, Rab or Khandsari 
Manufacturing Units or any person or factory other 
than the factory for which area has been reserved 
or assigned; and
(ii)	for the sale of cane grown in a reserved or assigned 
area to a Gur, Rab or Khandsari Manufacturing 
Unit or any person or factory other than the factory 
for which the area is reserved or assigned ;
(e)	such incidental and consequential matters as may appear 
to be necessary or desirable for this purposes."
14.	In exercise of the power conferred by Section 28 of the 1953 Act, the 
State Government has made U.P. (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) 
Rules, 1954 (for short 'the Rules').   Rule 21 lays down that the occupier of 
a factory shall by August 31, each year, apply to the Cane Commissioner in 
Form I, Appendix III, for the reservation or assignment of an area for supply 
of cane to the factory during the ensuing crushing season. There is a specific 
column viz. Item No.6 in Form I Appendix III wherein  details  of purchases, 
if any, made at more than the minimum cane price during the last crushing 
season have to be given.  Here the occupier has to fill in the quantity of 
sugarcane which was purchased at a price more than the minimum price and 
also the amount of increase  over and above the minimum price. Thus 
payment of higher price and quantum of sugarcane so purchased is a factor 
which is taken into consideration while reserving or assigning an area in 
favour of a sugar factory.  Rule 38-A enjoins that at every purchasing centre 
at least one  weighment clerk shall be appointed and deputed by the occupier 
of a factory who is required to weigh the sugarcane and calculate the cane 
price correctly.  Similarly under sub-rule (4) of this Rule the cane growers 
co-operative society is required to appoint one society clerk at every 
purchasing centre who has to carefully watch  and check the wieghment of 
cane and also examine the parcha in which weight and price of cane are  
recorded.  Rule  94(b) requires occupier of a factory to put up at each 
purchasing centre a notice in Devnagri script, showing the minimum price of 
cane fixed by Government and also the rates at which cane is being 
purchased at the centre.  Rule 96 (1)(i) (j) lays down that no occupier of a 
factory shall purchase cane without preparing or causing to be prepared at 
the purchasing centre a parcha in quadruplicate showing correctly the rate at 
which the sugarcane is purchased and the price that has to be paid for the 
sugarcane at that rate.  Rule 100 requires an occupier of a factory to maintain 
in respect of each sugarcane grower (except in respect of cane purchased 
through a cane growers' co-operative society) a detailed  account containing 
several items including the net weight of cane purchased and the rate per 
quintal paid for sugarcane.
15.      In exercise of power conferred by
Section 16
of the Act, the State 
Government has made UP Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) 
Order, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as  1954 Order).  Clause 3-A of this 
Order provides for purchase of cane in reserved area and Clause 4 provides 
for purchase of cane in an assigned area.  Clause 3(2) lays down that a cane 
grower or a cane growers' co-operative society may within 14 days of the 
issue of an order reserving an area for a factory, offer to supply cane grown 
in the reserved area to the occupier of the factory in Form A of the 
Appendix.  Clause 3(3) and Clause 4 (1) lay down that the occupier of the 
factory for which an area has been reserved or assigned shall within fourteen 
days of the receipt of the order enter into an agreement in Form B or Form C 
of the Appendix, with the cane grower or the cane growers' co-operative 
society, as the case may be, in respect of the cane offered.  Clause 5 (1) lays 
down that cane grown in the reserved or assigned area shall not, except with 
the permission of the Cane Commissioner, be purchased by any person 
without the previous issue of requisition slips and identification cards to the 
growers by the occupier of the factory.  Sub-clauses (2) and (3) of Clause 5 
mandate that the  requisition slips and identification cards to the members of 
cane growers' co-operative society shall not be issued except by such society 
and records of the same have to be maintained by the occupier of the factory 
and also by the cane growers' co-operative society.  Clause 5(4) lays down 
that purchase of cane shall be spread over the entire crushing season in an 
equitable manner and Clause 5(7) lays down that no person shall transfer or 
abet the transfer of requisition slips for the cane of a grower to another 
person.
16.    The  proforma of the agreement regarding sale and purchase of cane 
which is to be executed between a cane grower and the occupier of a factory  
is given in Form B and that  between cane growers' co-operative society and 
the occupier of a factory is given in Form C and they mention the terms 
thereof. Para 1 of Form B contains the agreement of the sugarcane grower  
to sell his sugarcane crop (giving details of area and approximate yield) to 
the occupier of the factory at the minimum price notified by the Government 
and on such dates as may be specified in requisition slips issued by the said 
occupier.  Para 2 provides that the cane shall be taken by the factory in 
installments equitably spread over the whole working period of factory.  
Para 3 provides that in the event of  willful failure to supply at least 85 per 
cent of the agreed quantity of sugarcane, the cane grower shall be liable to 
pay the factory compensation at the rate not exceeding thirty-three naya 
paise per quintal on such deficit.  Para 4 provides that in case the cane 
grower willfully fails to supply sugarcane to the factory on three consecutive 
occasions according to the requisition made by the factory, he shall cease to 
have a claim to sell cane to the factory.  Para 6 is important and it provides  
that in the event of a break down at the factory or of other circumstances due 
to natural causes, calamities, accident beyond human control arising to show 
that the factory will not be able to purchase the cane  it has agreed to 
purchase, the cane grower, after giving a week's notice to the occupier  of 
the factory and with the previous permission of the Cane Commissioner 
shall have the option of making other arrangements for the disposal of the 
cane and in such case no compensation shall be payable by either party to 
the other.
17.     Form C is the proforma of the agreement which has to be executed  
between the  cane growers' co-operative society and the occupier of a 
factory regarding sale and purchase of sugarcane. Para 1 of this proforma 
contains the agreement of  the society  to sell sugarcane (giving details of the 
area and the quality) to the factory at the minimum price notified by the 
Government and the supply has to be made in such quantities and on such 
dates as may be specified in the requisition slips issued by the occupier. It 
also contains a proviso that the price payable by the factory to the society 
shall not in any case be lower than that paid generally by the factory to other 
growers of the villages in which co-operative society operates.  The 
remaining paragraphs of the agreement are almost similar to that of 
proforma in Form B regarding supply of cane being taken by the factory in 
installments equitable spread over the whole working period of the factory, 
compensation to be paid by society to the factory in the event of deficit and 
the right of the society to make other arrangements for the disposal of the 
cane with the previous permission of the Cane Commissioner in the event of 
break down or happening of other circumstances where under factory is 
unable to purchase the sugarcane.
18.    A sugar factory normally runs in shifts for the whole day during the 
crushing season and it needs a continuous supply of freshly harvested 
sugarcane according to its daily crushing capacity which should be spread 
over the entire crushing season of about six months.
The  U.P. Sugarcane 
(Regulation of  Supply and Purchase) Act, 1953
,  U.P. Sugarcane 
(Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Rules, 1954 and the U.P. Sugarcane 
Supply and Purchase Order, 1954, have been made to achieve that object.  
Any shortfall in supply of sugarcane to sugar factory will seriously affect its 
production resulting in huge losses. Therefore, the first and foremost 
requirement for the profitable running of the sugar factory is that it should 
get adequate quantity of sugarcane everyday throughout  the crushing season 
and for ensuring this, a system of reserving or assigning an area in favour of 
sugar factory has been evolved under
Section 15
of the Act.  The reservation 
of an area ensures the supply of the entire sugarcane grown therein  to the 
factory in whose favour it has been reserved.  Similarly the assignment of an 
area ensures the supply of  such quantity of sugarcane  to the factory in 
whose  favour it has been assigned as may be determined by the Cane 
Commissioner.  Another advantage to the sugar factory is that sugarcane 
from its reserved or assigned area cannot be sold to any other factory in the 
vicinity even if it offers a higher price to a grower.  This arrangement does 
not allow the market forces to operate and thereby completely avoids 
competition amongst the sugar factories which could lead to escalation in 
prices.  It is common knowledge that every sugar factory is keen to have the 
maximum area reserved  or assigned for it so that it may get adequate raw 
material.  Sugarcane requires a particular type of soil and climatic condition 
and cannot be grown everywhere.  The sugar factories are established in the 
sugar producing belt in close proximity with each other  and very often there 
are competing claims for reservation or assignment of an area in their 
favour.  It is for this  reason that an appeal is provided under
Section 15(4)
of the Act against an order made under
Section 15(1)
of the Act by the Cane 
Commissioner   reserving or assigning an area in favour of sugar factory.  
Once an area is reserved in favour of a factory the cane grower in the said 
area  or the cane growers' co-operative society operating therein gets tied to 
that factory and has to compulsorily  enter into an  agreement in prescribed 
proforma (Form B or Form C) given in the Appendix to 1954 Order.     In 
view of Clause 5 of the said Order cane grown in the reserved or assigned 
area cannot be purchased by anyone without the previous issue of requisition 
slips and identification cards to the growers by the occupier of the factory 
and in the case of members of the cane growers co-operative society by such 
society.  Since the requisition slips are non-transferable and  they are issued 
by the sugar factory according to its requirement of sugarcane, it thereby 
completely controls the purchase of sugarcane from a reserved or assigned 
area.  The terms of the agreement in Form B and Form C are also quite 
stringent as in the event of failure to  supply  at least eighty-five per cent of 
the agreed quantity of sugarcane the cane grower or the cane growers' co-
operative society has to pay  compensation.  Even in the event of a break 
down in the factory or its inability to purchase due to calamities or 
circumstances beyond human control, the cane grower or the cane growers' 
co-operative society is not at liberty to make any other arrangement for 
disposal of cane except after giving a week's notice to the factory and 
obtaining prior permission of the Cane Commissioner.  Here too no 
compensation is payable by the factory to the cane grower or the cane 
growers'  co-operative society for the loss which may be suffered on this 
account.
19.	The provisions
referred to above
have been made for the benefit  of 
the sugar factory so that it is assured of and gets a continuous supply of 
freshly harvested sugarcane in quantity according to its crushing capacity 
and for the whole duration of the crushing season.  No doubt the cane 
grower also gets some advantage in the sense that purchase of his yield is 
assured but at the same time many limitations and restrictions are imposed 
upon him.  In view of the aforesaid statutory provisions, the position of a 
cane grower becomes entirely different from that of  a farmer producing any 
other kind of  agricultural crop where there are absolutely no restrictions 
upon him.  He is at absolute liberty to harvest his crop at his convenience  
without being dictated by a third party, to sell it to  anyone whomsoever he 
likes and whenever he wants.   It is in this  scenario, which is not the 
creation of the cane grower but of   the statutory provisions operating in the 
field, that we have to examine the question whether the State has any 
authority or power to fix the price of the sugarcane supplied to a producer of 
sugar (sugar factory).
20.   The preamble of
U.P. Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase) 
Act, 1953
is  an Act to regulate the supply and purchase of sugarcane  for 
use in sugar factories, gur, rab or khandsari sugar manufacturing units.  The 
various provisions of the Act show in unmistakable terms that it regulates 
the supply and purchase of sugarcane required for use in sugar factories.  
'Regulate' means to control or to adjust by rule or to subject to governing 
principles. It is a word of broad impact having wide meaning 
comprehending all facets not only specifically enumerated in the Act, but 
also embraces  within its fold the powers incidental to the regulation 
envisaged in good faith  and its meaning has to be ascertained in the context 
in which it has been used and the purpose of the statute.
21.	In State of Tamilnadu v. M/s. Hindu Stone & Ors. 1981 (2) SCC 205 
it was held that regulation must receive so wide an amplitude so as to impute 
prohibition within its fold.  It will be useful to reproduce the relevant part of 
para 10 of the Report wherein this principle was succinctly stated by 
Chinappa Reddy, J. in following words:-
" We do not think that 'regulation' has that rigidity of 
meaning as never to take in 'prohibition'.   Much depends on 
the context in which the expression is used in the statute and the 
object sought to be achieved by the contemplated regulation.   It 
was observed by Mathew, J. in
G.K. Krishnan v. State of Tamil 
Nadu
, 1975 (1) SCC 375 : "The word 'regulation' has no fixed 
connotation.   Its meaning differs according to the nature of the 
thing to which it is applied".   In modern statutes concerned as 
they are with economic and social activities, 'regulation' must, 
of necessity, receive so wide an interpretation that in certain 
situations, it must exclude competition to the public sector from 
the private sector.  More so in a welfare State.
It was pointed 
out by the Privy Council in Commonwealth of Australia v. 
Bank of New South Wales, (1949) 2 All ER 755 (PC)  and we 
agree with what was sated therein  that the problem whether 
an enactment was regulatory or something more or whether a 
restriction was direct or only remote or only incidental 
involved, not so much legal as political, social or economic 
consideration and that it could not be laid down that in no 
circumstances could the exclusion of competition so as to create 
a monopoly, either in a State or Commonwealth agency, be 
justified.  Each case, it was said, must be judged on its own 
facts and in its own setting of time and circumstances and it 
might be that in regard to some economic activities and at some 
stage of social development, prohibition with a view to State 
monopoly was the only practical and reasonable manner of 
regulation.   The statute with which we are concerned, the
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act
, is 
aimed, as we have already said more than once, at the 
conservation and the prudent and discriminating exploitation of 
minerals.  Surely, in the case of a scarce mineral, to permit 
exploitation by the State or its agency and to prohibit 
exploitation by private agencies is the most effective method of 
conservation and prudent exploitation.  If you want to conserve 
for the future, you must prohibit in the present.  We have no 
doubt that the prohibiting of leases in certain cases is part of the 
regulation contemplated by
Section 15
of the Act."
Again in
K. Ramanathan v. State of Tamilnadu & Anr.
1985 (2) SCC 
116 it was held that the word 'regulation' cannot have any rigid or inflexible 
meaning so as to exclude prohibition. It is a word of broad import, having a 
broad meaning and is very comprehensive in scope.  It was further held that 
the power to regulate carries with it full power over the thing subject to 
regulation and in absence of restrictive words, the power must be regarded 
as plenary over the entire subject.  It implies the power to rule, direct and 
control, and involves the adoption of a rule or guiding principle to be 
followed or the making of a rule with respect to the subject to be regulated.   
It has different shades of meaning and must take its colour from the context 
in which it is used having regard to the purpose and object of the legislation.
22.	In VSR & Oil Mills Vs. State of A.P. AIR 1964 SC 1781 agreements 
for a period of ten years had been executed for supply of electricity and the 
same did not contain any provision authorising the Government to increase 
the rates during their operation.  However the State Government issued 
orders enhancing the agreed rates exercising power under Section 3(1) of 
Madras Essential Articles Control & Requisitioning (Temporary Powers) 
Act, 1949 which reads as under:
"The State Government so far as it appears to 
them to be necessary or expedient for maintaining, 
increasing or securing supplies of essential articles or for 
arranging for their equitable distribution and availability 
at fair prices may, by notified order, provide for 
regulating or prohibiting  the supply, distribution and 
transport of essential articles and trade and commerce 
therein."
The enhancement in rates was challenged on the ground that any 
increase in agreed tariff was out of the purview of
Section 3(1)
.  Chief 
Justice Gajendragadkar, speaking for the Constitution Bench, held as under:
"The word regulate is wide enough to confer power on 
the State to regulate either by increasing the rate or 
decreasing the rate, the test being what is it that is 
necessary or expedient to be done to maintain, increase, 
or secure supply of the essential articles in question and 
to arrange for its equitable distribution and its availability 
at fair prices.  The concept of fair prices to which
Section 
3 (1)
expressly refers does not mean that the price once 
fixed must either remain stationary, or must be reduced 
in order to attract the power to regulate.  The power to 
regulate can be exercised for ensuring the payment of a 
fair price, and the fixation of a fair price would inevitably 
depend upon a consideration of all relevant and economic 
factors which contribute to the determination of such a 
fair price.  If the fair price indicated on a dispassionate 
consideration of all relevant factors turns out to be higher 
than the price fixed and prevailing, then the power to 
regulate the price must necessarily include the power to 
increase so as to make it fair.  Hence the challenge to the 
validity of orders increasing the agreed tariff rate on the 
ground that they are outside the purview of
Section 3(1)
cannot be sustained."
In
Jiyajeerao Cotton Mills Ltd. & Anr. v. Madhya Pradesh Electricity 
Board & Anr.
1989 (Suppl) 2 SCC 52 the validity of the orders providing for 
higher charges/tariff for electricity consumed beyond legally fixed limit was 
upheld in view of
Section 22(b)
of the Electricity Act which permits the 
State Government to issue an appropriate order  for regulating  the supply, 
distribution and consumption of electricity.  It was held that the Court while 
interpreting the expression "regulate"  must necessarily keep in view the 
object to be achieved and the mischief sought to be remedied.  The necessity 
for issuing the orders arose out of the scarcity of electricity available to the 
Board for supplying to its customers and, therefore, in this background the 
demand for higher charges/tariff was held to be a part of a regulatory 
measure.
In
Quarry Owners' Association v. State of Bihar
2000(8) SCC 
655 the question which required consideration was whether the State 
Government had the power to fix the rate of royalties in
Mines and Minerals 
(Regulation and Development) Act, 1957
.  The Court after taking note of the 
fact that the words "regulation of mines and mineral development" are 
incorporated both in the Preamble and the Statement of Objects and Reasons 
of the Act held that the word "regulation" may have different meaning in 
different context but considering it in relation to the economic and social  
activities including the development and excavation of mine, the fixation of 
the rate of royalties would also be included within its meaning.
In
Deepak 
Theatre, Dhuri v. State of Punjab & Ors.
(1992) Supp. 1 SCC 684 while 
interpreting the
Cinemas Regulations Act, 1952
and having regard to the 
preamble  thereto  an Act to make provision for regulating exhibition of 
cinematographs -  it was held that classification of seats and fixation of rates 
of admission according to paying capacity of a cinegoer is also an integral 
power of regulation and, therefore,  fixation of rates of admission became a 
legitimate ancillary or incidental power in furtherance of the regulation 
under the Act.
23.	The  1953 Act,  the  Rules and 1954 Order substantially deal with sale 
and  purchase  of sugarcane.
Section 16 (1)
provides that the State 
Government may, for maintaining supplies, by order, regulate sale or 
purchase of cane in any reserved or assigned area or purchase of cane in area 
other than a reserved or assigned area.
Section 16(2)(b)
of the Act lays 
down that the order may provide for the manner in which cane grown in a 
reserved or assigned area shall be purchased by the factory and the 
circumstances in which cane grown by canegrowers shall not be purchased 
except through a canegrowers' cooperative society.   Section 17 enjoins 
speedy payment of the price of cane purchased by occupier of a factory, 
payment of interest where default occurs for a  period exceeding 15 days 
from the date of delivery and recovery of amount by the Collector as arrears 
of land revenue on a certificate issued by the Cane Commissioner.  Rule 38-
A requires  weighment clerk to calculate the cane price correctly after 
weighment of cane and the clerk appointed by the society to examine that 
the weight and price are correctly recorded in the parchas.  Rule 96 
mandates  that cane shall not be purchased at the purchasing centre without 
preparing a parcha in quadruplicate mentioning amongst others the rate at 
which the cane is purchased and the price that has to be paid for the same   
and Rule 100 casts a duty upon the occupier of the factory to maintain 
separately for each canegrower a complete account of several items 
including the rate per quintal paid for cane.
24.	Sugarcane supplied to sugar factory are "goods" within the meaning 
of
Section 2(7)
of Sale of Goods Act.   Sub-section (1) of
Section 4
of Sale 
of Goods Act provides that a contract of sale of goods is a contract whereby 
the seller transfers or agrees to transfer the property in goods to the buyer for 
a price.   Sub-section (3) of the same Section provides that where under a 
contract of sale the property in the goods is transferred from the seller to the 
buyer, the contract is called a sale, but where the transfer of property in the 
goods is to take place at a future time or subject to some conditions 
thereafter to be specified, the contract is called an agreement to sell.
Section 5
provides that a contract of sale is made by an offer to buy or sell 
goods for a price and the acceptance of such offer.   These provisions show 
that price is an essential element of sale of goods.
25.
In
Popatlal Shah v. State of Madras
1953 SCR 677 it was held by a 
Constitution Bench that the expression "sale of goods" is a composite 
expression consisting of various ingredients or elements.  There are the 
elements of a bargain or contract of sale, the payment or promise of payment 
of price, the delivery of goods and the actual passing of title and each one of 
them is essential to a transaction of sale though the sale is not completed or 
concluded unless the purchaser becomes the owner of property.
In
State of 
Madras v. Gannon Dunkerley
1958 SCR 379 (at page 397) it was observed 
that according to the law both of England and of India, in order to constitute 
a sale it is necessary that there should be an agreement between the parties 
for the purpose of transferring title to the goods which, of course, 
presupposes capacity to contract, that it must be supported by money 
consideration and that as a result of the transaction property must actually 
pass in the goods.   Unless all these elements are present, there can be no 
sale. The law is, therefore, well settled that in a matter relating to sale of 
movable property or goods, price is an essential element of the transaction.
26  The Preamble of the 1953 Act says "
An Act
to regulate the supply and 
purchase of sugarcane required for use in sugar factories ..."  The  
provisions of the Act
referred to above
also show that the legislature has 
made very elaborate provisions regarding  supply of sugarcane by 
canegrowers, its purchase by the sugar factories and payment of price 
thereof.   In fact, very detailed and exhaustive provisions have been made in 
the Rules and the 1954 Order to ensure that at the time of delivery of 
sugarcane by the canegrowers, its weight and price is correctly recorded and 
the price is paid to them  within 14 days, failing which sugar factory is liable 
to pay interest.   In such circumstances, the irresistible conclusion which can 
be drawn is that the regulatory power possessed by the State Government 
shall also include the power to fix the price of the sugarcane.  If it is held 
that the State  under its power of regulation cannot fix the price, then the 
statutory provision contained in the 1953 Act, the Rules and 1954 Order will 
become completely one sided, operating entirely for the benefit of sugar 
factories giving them many advantages with no corresponding obligations 
and leaving the canegrorwer in a lurch with host of restrictions upon him.   
This can never be the intention of the Legislature.   It will not be fair to read 
the Act and the Rules in such a restrictive manner, whereby the provisions 
made for the benefit of the canegrowers become wholly illusory.
27.	It has been urged by learned counsel for respondents that the 
expression "at the minimum price notified by Government" used in the 
proforma of the agreement which is to be executed between a canegrower 
and the occupier of the factory as  given in Form B and that which is to be 
executed between a canegrowers' cooperative society and the occupier of 
the factory as  given in Form C in the appendix to 1954 Order  indicates that 
it is only the minimum price fixed by the Central Government which can be 
the  consideration or price for the sale of sugarcane to the sugar factory.    
Strong reliance in support of this submission has  been placed upon certain 
observations made by this Court in
Ch. Tika Ramji & Ors. v. State of Uttar 
Pradesh & Ors.
, 1956 SCR 393.  The proforma of agreement viz. Forms B 
and C are contained in the appendix to U.P. Sugarcane Supply and Purchase 
Order, 1954.   This Order has been made by U.P. Government in exercise of 
the power conferred by
Section 16
of the 1953 Act, which provides that the 
State Government may for maintaining supplies by Order regulate the 
distribution, sale or purchase of cane in any reserved or assigned area, etc.    
The Order having been made by the State Government in exercise of  a  
power conferred by an Act made by U.P. legislature, the only logical 
inference which can be  drawn is that the word "Government" refers to State 
Government.   There is no indication in the proforma of the agreement or in 
the 1954 Order that the word "Government" would refer to Central 
Government.   If the State Government is prescribing a proforma of an 
agreement which is  to be executed by a canegrower  or a canegrowers' 
cooperative society and the occupier of the factory regarding sale and 
purchase of sugarcane wherein the word "Government" is used, it can only 
mean the State Government and not the Central Government unless there is 
clear indication to the contrary.
28.	The observations made in
Tika Ramji
(supra), strong reliance on 
which is placed by learned counsel for the respondents, have to be 
understood in the context in which they were made.   It may be noted that 
the writ petitions in the said case were filed in this Court in the year 1954 
and the judgment was delivered on 24.4.1956.   At the relevant time, it was 
the Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1955 which was in operation.   Clause 3 of 
this Order empowered the Central Government to fix the price or the 
minimum price to be paid by a producer of sugar for sugarcane purchased by 
him.   The 1955 Order has been repealed by Sugarcane (Control) Order, 
1966 and Clause 3 of this Order provides that the Central Government may 
fix the minimum price  of sugarcane to be paid by producers of sugar.   
There is a difference between "the price" which is a fixed amount and "the 
minimum price" which only indicates the lowest permissible rate.   The 1966 
Order which itself was made by the Central Government more than a decade 
after the judgment was rendered in Tika Ramji was amended in 1978 and 
Clauses 3(3) and 3-A thereof contemplate an "agreed price" which in view 
of the mandate of Clause 3(2) is bound to be higher than the "minimum 
price" fixed under Clause 3(1).  Naturally it is this "agreed price" which is to 
be mentioned in the agreements for sale and purchase of sugarcane in Forms 
B and C otherwise the very purpose of entering into agreements would be 
defeated.
The State Government had not fixed any price for the sugarcane 
under its regulatory power by the time
Tika Ramji
(supra) was decided by 
this Court in April, 1956 and only the Central Government had taken a step 
for fixing the price.   It was in these circumstances that it was observed that 
the "price fixed by the Government" would mean "the Central Government".   
The observations relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents 
were made while considering the question whether there was any 
repugnancy between the provisions of the Sugarcane Control Order 1955 
and the 1953 Act, the Rules and 1954 Order and they should be understood 
in that context.   The relevant portion of the judgment on page 434 is being 
reproduced below :
"The price of cane fixed by Government here only meant the 
price fixed by the appropriate Government which would be the 
Central Government, under clause 3 of the Sugarcane Control 
Order, 1955, because in fact the U.P. State Government never 
fixed the price of sugarcane to be purchased by the factories.   
Even the provisions in behalf of the agreements contained in 
clauses 3 and 4 of the U.P. Sugarcane Regulation of Supply and 
Purchase Order, 1954, provided that the price was to be the 
minimum price to be notified by the Government subject to 
such deductions, if any, as may be notified by the Government 
from time to time meaning thereby the Central Government, the 
State Government not having made any provision in that behalf 
at any time whatever.   The provisions thus made by the 
Sugarcane Control Order, 1955, did not find their place either 
in the impugned Act or the Rules made thereunder or the U.P. 
Sugarcane Regulation of Supply and Purchase Order, 1954; and 
the provision contained in Section 17 of the impugned Act in 
regard to the payment of sugarcane price and recovery thereof 
as if it was an arrear of land revenue did not find its place in the 
Sugarcane Control Order, 1955."
Having regard to the factual situation then existing that U.P. 
Government had not fixed the price of the sugarcane, it was held that the 
price of the cane fixed by the Government could only mean "Central 
Government".   It has not been laid down as a principle of law that the words 
"minimum price notified by Government" must necessarily mean the 
minimum price fixed by the Central Government or that under no 
circumstances it can mean the price fixed by the State Government.
29.      Learned counsel for the respondent has also submitted that in order to 
constitute a valid agreement, the consent of the parties thereto should be a 
voluntary consent and not a consent obtained under any kind of compulsion 
or duress.   It has been submitted that after the State Government makes an 
announcement of a State Advised Price, the occupiers of the sugar factories 
are compelled to enter into agreements with the canegrowers and 
canegrowers' cooperative societies in Forms B and C, wherein the State 
Advised Price is mentioned.   The same price is also mentioned in the 
parchas issued to the canegrowers.   It has been urged that the sugar 
factories cannot be compelled to pay such State Advised Price even though 
it may have been  mentioned in the Forms or in the parchas.   It is not 
possible to accept the contention raised.
As discussed earlier, the State 
Government in exercise of its regulatory power can fix the price of the 
sugarcane.   The mere fact that this price is not to the liking of the sugar 
factory does not mean that it cannot form the basis for supply of sugarcane 
by the canegrowers or canegrowers' cooperative society to the sugar factory.   
It is well settled that even a compulsory sale does not lose the character of a 
sale.   This question has been examined in considerable detail by a 
Constitution Bench in
Indian Steel & Wire Products Ltd. v. State of Madras
, 
1968 (1) SCR 479.  The appellant in this case  supplied certain steel products 
to various persons at the instance of the Steel Controller, who exercised 
powers under the Iron and Steel (Control of Production & Distribution) 
Order, 1941, which was issued under the
Defence of India Act, 1939
.   The 
appellant challenged the assessment of sales tax made on its turnover under 
Madras General Sales Tax Act.   The contention of the appellant was  that it 
was the Controller who determined the persons to whom the goods were to 
be supplied, the price at which they were to be supplied, the manner in 
which they were to be transported and the mode in which payment of price 
was to be made.   In short it was said that every facet of the transaction was 
prescribed by the Controller and, therefore, they could not be considered as  
sales.  Sub-clause (1) of Clause 11-B of the Control Order provided that the 
Controller may, by notification in the Gazette, fix the maximum price at 
which any iron or steel may be sold and Sub-clause (3) of the same clause 
provided that no producer or stockholder shall sell or offer for sale (and no 
person shall acquire) any iron or steel at a price exceeding the maximum 
price fixed under Sub-clause (1) or (2).  After review of number of 
authorities, the Court held as under :
"For the reasons already stated, we are unable to accept the 
contention that the transactions with which we are concerned in 
these cases are not sales.   Out of the four elements mentioned 
earlier, three were admittedly established, namely, the parties 
were competent to contract, the property in the goods was 
transferred from the seller to the buyer, and price in money was 
paid.   The only controversy was whether there was mutual 
assent.   Our finding is that there was mutual assent in several 
respects.   Hence, we agree with the High Court that the 
transactions before us are sales."
30.
In
Andhra Sugar Mills Ltd. v. State of Andhra Pradesh
, 1968 (1) SCR 
705, the question of compulsion by law to enter into an agreement was 
considered by a Constitution Bench.  Under the Andhra Pradesh (Regulation 
of Supply and Purchase) Act, 1961, the occupier of a sugar factory had to 
buy sugarcane from canegrowers in conformity with the directions from the 
Cane Commissioner.   Under Section 21 of the aforesaid Act, the State 
Government had power by  notification to tax purchasers of sugarcane for 
use, consumption or sale in a sugar factory and the tax was leviable subject 
to a maximum rate per metric ton.
The petitioner sugar factories filed writ 
petitions under
Article 32
of the Constitution challenging the validity of 
Section 21 mainly on the ground that as the petitioners were compelled by 
law to buy cane from canegrowers, their purchases were not made under 
agreements and were not taxable under Entry 54 List II having regard to
Gannon Dunkerley
's case.   The contention was repelled after a thorough 
analysis of the legal position and the following observations on page 711 of 
the Report show that the challenge raised by the respondents here has no 
substance :
"Under
Section 4(1)
of the Indian Sale of Goods Act, 
1930, a contract of sale of goods is a contract whereby the seller 
transfers or agrees to transfer the property in goods to the buyer 
for a price.   By
Section 3
of this Act, the provisions of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872
apply to contracts of sale of goods 
save in so far as they are inconsistent with the express 
provisions of the later Act.
Section 2
of the Indian Contract 
Act provides that when one person signifies to another his 
willingness to do or to abstain from doing anything with a view 
to obtaining the assent of the other to such act or abstinence, he 
is said to make a proposal.   When the person to whom the 
proposal is made signifies his assent thereto, the proposal is 
said to be accepted.   A proposal when accepted becomes a 
promise.  Every promise and every set of promises forming the 
consideration for each other is an agreement.  There is mutual 
assent to the proposal when the proposal is accepted and in the 
result an agreement is formed.   Under
Section 10
, all 
agreements are contracts if they are made by the free consent of 
parties competent to contract for a lawful consideration and 
with a lawful object and are not by the Act expressly declared 
to be void.
Section 13
defines consent.   Two or more persons 
are said to consent when they agree upon the same thing in the 
same sense.
Section 14
defines free consent.   Consent is said 
to be free when it is not caused by coercion, undue influence, 
fraud, misrepresentation or mistake as defined in Sections 15 to
22.   Now, under Act No.45 of 1961 and the Rules framed 
under it, the cane grower in the factory zone is free to make or 
not to make an offer of sale of cane to the occupier of the 
factory.   But if he makes an offer, the occupier of the factory is 
bound to accept it.   The resulting agreement is recorded in 
writing and is signed by the parties.   The consent of the 
occupier of the factory to the agreement is not caused by 
coercion, undue influence, fraud, misrepresentation or mistake.   
His consent is free as defined in
Section 14
of the Indian 
Contract Act though he is obliged by law to enter into the 
agreement.   The compulsion of law is not coercion as defined 
in
Section 15
of the Act.   In spite of the compulsion the 
agreement is neither void nor voidable.   In the eye of the law, 
the agreement is freely made.  The parties are competent to 
contract.   The agreement is made for a lawful consideration 
and with a lawful object and is not void under any provisions of 
law.   The agreements are enforceable by law and are contracts 
of sale of sugarcane as defined in Section 4 of the Indian Sale 
of Goods Act.   The purchases of sugarcane under the 
agreement can be taxed by the State legislature under Entry 54 
List II."
Again at page 712, the Court made the following observation :
" It is now realised that in the public interest, 
persons exercising certain callings or having monopoly or near 
monopoly powers should sometimes be charged with the duty 
to serve the public and, if necessary, to enter into contracts.   
Thus,
Section 66
of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 compels the 
railway administration to supply the public with tickets for 
travelling on the railway upon payment of the usual fare.
Section 22
of the Indian Electricity Act, 1910 compels a 
licensee to supply electrical energy to every person in the area 
of supply on the usual terms and conditions.   Cheshire and 
Fifoot in their Law of Contract, 6th Edn. p. 23 observe that for 
reasons of social security the State may compel persons to 
make contracts.   One of the objects of Act No.45 of 1961 is to 
regulate the purchase of sugarcane by the factory owners from 
the canegrowers.   The canegrowers scattered in the villages 
had no real bargaining power.   The factory owners or their 
combines enjoyed a near monopoly of buying and could dictate 
their own terms.  In this unequal contest between the 
canegrowers and the factory owners, the law stepped in and 
compelled the factory to enter into contracts of purchase of cane 
offered by the canegrowers on prescribed terms and 
conditions."
31.	A similar question was examined by a Bench of Seven Judges in
Salar 
Jung Sugar Mills Ltd. v. State of Mysore & Ors.
, 1971 (1) SCC 23.   The 
contention was that there was no mutual assent by and between the sugar 
mills and the growers of the sugarcane and, therefore, there was no purchase 
or sale of sugarcane and consequently no tax under Mysore Sales Tax Act 
could be levied.  It was held that Statutory Orders regulating the supply and 
distribution of goods by and between the parties under Control Orders in a 
State do not absolutely impinge on the freedom to enter into contract.   
Legislative measures or statutory provisions fixing the price, delivery, 
supply, restricting areas for transactions are all within the realm of planning 
economic needs, ensuring production and distribution of essential 
commodities and basic necessities of community.   The individual freedom 
is to be reconciled with adequate performance by the Government of its 
functions in a highly organized society.   In para 44 of the Reports it was 
held as under :
"The parties choose the term of delivery.   They have 
choice of obtaining a supply exceeding 95% of the yield.   They 
can stipulate for a price higher than the minimum.   They can 
have terms for payment in advance as well as in cash.   A 
grower may not cultivate and may not have any yield.   A 
factory may be closed or wound up, and may not buy any 
sugarcane.   A factory can reject goods on inspection.   A 
combination of all these features indicate that the parties 
entered into agreements with mutual assent and with volition 
for transfer of goods in consideration of price.   The 
transactions amount to sales within the meaning of the Mysore 
Sales Tax Act."
32.
In
Sukhnandan Saran Dinesh Kumar v. Union of India & Ors.
, 1982 
(2) SCC 150, after considering the provisions of 1966 Order and 1953 Act 
made by U.P. Legislature the Court clearly ruled that in order to protect the 
sugarcane growers who are not in a position to negotiate, the Government 
can prescribe terms in a contract which they have to enter into with the 
occupiers of sugar factories.   After elaborate discussion of the relevant 
provisions, the Court expressed its view in following words in para 22 of the 
Reports:
"The proposition is now beyond the pale of controversy 
that the State can impose a restriction in the interest of general 
public on the right of a party to contract where in the opinion of 
the Government the contracting parties are unable to negotiate 
on the footing of equality.  Constitutional validity of statutes 
prescribing minimum wages has been founded on this 
proposition.  The principle can be effectively extended to the 
powerful sugar industry and the cane growers because the cane 
growers admittedly are at a comparative disadvantage to the 
producers of sugar and khandsari sugar who were described in 
the course of arguments as sugar barons.  It does not require an 
elaborate discussion to reach an affirmative conclusion that 
sugarcane growers who are farmers cannot negotiate on the 
footing of the equality with the producers of sugar and 
khandsari sugar.  The State action for the protection of the 
weaker sections is not only justified but absolutely necessary 
unless the restriction imposed is excessive"
33.       As discussed earlier, the reservation or assignment of area is made 
for the benefit of a sugar factory.   The agreements executed by the 
canegrowers or canegrowers' cooperative society in favour of occupier of a 
factory are also for the benefit of the sugar factory as by such agreements it 
gets an assurance of a continuous supply of freshly harvested sugarcane on 
the days indicated in the requisition slips issued by it so that there may not 
be any problem in getting optimum quantity of raw material throughout the 
crushing season.   In absence of the agreements the sugar factory will also be 
a loser as it may face great problem in getting the supply of sugarcane 
according to its requirement.   The occupiers of the factory are themselves 
keen for execution of the agreements but their only objection is to the 
mention of State Advised Price.   The agreement is one composite 
transaction and it is not open to them to contend that the terms thereof which 
are to their advantage should be enforced but the term relating to price 
notified by the State Government should not be enforced as their consent in 
that regard was not a voluntary act.	In our opinion, having regard to the 
advantages derived by the sugar factories, they are fully bound by the 
agreement wherein the State Advised Price may be mentioned and it is not 
open to them to assail the clause relating to price of the sugarcane on the 
ground that their consent was not voluntary or was obtained under some 
kind of duress.
34. 	Learned senior counsel for the respondents has strenuously urged that 
the Central Government having made the 1966 Order which contains a 
specific provision for fixation of price of sugarcane, under Clause 3(1) 
thereof, the regulatory power under the 1953 Act cannot embrace within its 
fold the same power of fixation of price as this will be clearly repugnant to a 
law made by the Parliament and would be void in view of
Article 254(1)
of 
the Constitution.
In
Ch. Tika Ramji
(supra) it has been held that the
E.C. 
Act
under which the Central Government made the 1966 Order and the 1953 
Act made by U.P. Legislature have been enacted with reference to Entry 33 
of List III of the Seventh Schedule.   The constitutional validity of the 1953 
Act was upheld by the Constitution Bench in
the said decision
.
On page 
437 of the Reports the Court quoted with approval the following passage 
from the judgment of Sulaiman J. in Shyamakant Lal Vs. Rambhajan Singh 
1939 FCR 188 (at 212) for the principle of construction in regard to 
repugnancy :
"When the question is whether a Provincial legislation is 
repugnant to an existing Indian law, the onus of showing its 
repugnancy and the extent to which it is repugnant should be on 
the party attacking its validity.  There ought to be a 
presumption in favour of its validity, and every effort should be 
made to reconcile them and construe both so as to avoid their 
being repugnant to each other; and care should be taken to see 
whether the two do not really operate in different fields without 
encroachment.   Further, repugnancy must exist in fact, and not 
depend merely on a possibility."
And then went to hold :
"In the instant case, there is no question of any inconsistency in 
the actual terms of the Acts enacted by Parliament and the 
impugned Act.  The only questions that arise are whether 
Parliament and the State Legislature sought to exercise their 
powers over the same subject-matter or whether the laws 
enacted by Parliament were intended to be a complete 
exhaustive code or, in other words, expressly or impliedly 
evinced an intention to cover the whole field."
35.
In
M. Karunanidhi v. Union of India
, AIR 1979 SC 898, the principles 
to be applied for determining repugnancy between a law made by Parliament 
and law made by State legislature were considered by a Constitution Bench.  
In pursuance of an FIR lodged against Shri M. Karunanidhi the CBI after 
investigation had submitted chargesheet against him under
Section 161
,
468
and
471
IPC and
Section 5(2)
read with
Section 5(1)(d)
of the Prevention of 
Corruption Act.   The Madras Legislature had passed an Act known as Tamil 
Nadu Public Men (Criminal Misconduct) Act, 1973 which had received the 
assent of the President.   It was contended that by virtue of
Article 254(2)
of 
the Constitution, the provisions of Indian Penal Code, Prevention of 
Corruption Act and Criminal Law Amendment Act stood repealed.   After 
review of all the earlier authorities Court laid down the following tests :
"1.	That in order to decide the question of repugnancy it 
must be shown that the two enactments contain inconsistent and 
irreconcilable provisions, so that they cannot stand together or 
operate in the same field.
2.	That there can be no repeal by implication unless the 
inconsistency appears on the face of the two statutes.
3.	That where the two statutes occupy a particular field, but 
there is room or possibility of both the statutes operating in the 
same field without coming into collision with each other, no 
repugnancy results.
4.	That where there is no inconsistency but a statute 
occupying the same field seeks to create distinct and separate 
offences, no question of repugnancy arises and both the statutes 
continue to operate in the same field."
The same question was examined in considerable detail in M/s
Hoechst Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. State of Bihar
, AIR 1983 SC 1019 and it 
was held that one of the occasion where inconsistency or repugnancy arose 
was when on the same subject matter one would be repugnant to the other 
and, therefore, in order to raise a question of repugnancy, two conditions 
must be fulfilled.   The State law and the Union law must operate on the 
same field and one must be repugnant or inconsistent with the other and 
these are cumulative conditions.
In
National Engineering Industries Ltd. v. 
Sri Kishan Bhageria & Ors.
, AIR 1988 SC 329, Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. 
opined that the best test of repugnancy is that if one prevails, the other 
cannot prevail.
36.
In
S. Satyapal Reddy & Ors. v. Govt. of A.P. & Ors.
, 1994 (4) SCC 
391, the question was examined in the context of prescription of a higher 
qualification by the State Government.  The service rule made by the Central 
Government prescribed a diploma in Mechanical Engineering as the 
minimum qualification for appointment on the post of Assistant Motor 
Vehicles Inspector while the rule made by the State Government required a 
degree in Mechanical Engineering or certain other alternative qualifications.   
The challenge made by the diploma holders was negatived and it was held 
that prescribing a higher qualification did not give rise to any inconsistency 
or repugnancy as both the rules could operate harmoniously and effect could 
be given to both of them.
Similarly, in
Dr. Preeti Srivastava v. State of 
M.P. & Ors
, 1999 (7) SCC 120, it was held that laying down higher 
eligibility qualification  by the State Government for admission to Post 
Graduate Medical Courses did not lead to any kind of repugnancy.
37.	Under Sub-section (1) of Clause 3 of the 1966 Order, the Central 
Government can only fix a minimum price of sugarcane.   This clause 
should be read along with Sub-clause (2) which creates an embargo or 
prohibition that no person shall sell or agree to sell sugarcane to a producer 
of sugar and no such producer shall purchase or agree to purchase sugarcane 
at a price lower than that fixed under Sub-clause (1).   The inconsistency or 
repugnancy will arise if the State Government fixed a price which is lower 
than that fixed by the Central Government.  But, if the price fixed by the 
State Government is higher than that fixed by the Central Government, there 
will be no occasion for any inconsistency or repugnancy as it is possible for 
both the orders to operate simultaneously and to comply with both of them.  
A higher price fixed by the State Government would automatically comply 
with the provisions of Sub-clause (2) of Clause 3 of 1966 Order.   Therefore, 
any price fixed by the State Government which is higher than that fixed by 
the Central Government cannot lead to any kind of repugnancy.
38.	The decisions of this Court touching the controversy in hand may now 
be examined.
In
Maharashtra Rajya Sahkari Sakkar Karkhana Sangh Ltd. 
& Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
1995 Supp. (3) SCC 475 (paras 11, 
12, 21), R.M. Sahai, J. speaking for a Three Judge Bench held that the entire 
process of price fixation can be divided into three stages.   The first is the 
fixation of what is known as the minimum ex-factory price by the Central 
Government under 1966 Order for all the  sugar factories in the country 
linking it with basic recovery of 8.5 per cent with a proportionate increase 
for every 0.1 per cent extra recovery.   The second is the State Advised Price 
and every State has its own method to determine it.   The power is assumed 
under the Acts of the State Legislature or Orders issued by the Government 
and in State of U.P. it is done by Orders issued under the
U.P. Sugarcane  
(Regulation of  Supply and Purchase) Act, 1953
.   The third is the price paid 
at the end of the season.   The Bhargava Commission had recommended the 
payment of additional price at the end of the season on 50-50 profit sharing 
basis between growers and factories to be worked out in accordance with 
Second Schedule to the 1966 Order.   In paragraph 21, it was observed as 
under :
"The price is fixed, may be, by the Board of Directors or 
by the State Government under bye-laws but the prices are for 
the reserved area.   The Central Government did not fix any 
maximum price obviously because the conditions in the 
agricultural sector differed from State to State.   Therefore, it 
having fixed a minimum price expects the State to offer 
remunerative price to its cultivators.  In a controlled economy 
the price fixation machinery is to be determined by the State 
Government or under the 1966 Order in the manner provided 
therein.   Since in Maharashtra 95% of the sugar factories are in 
the cooperative sector the price is fixed by the Government as it 
has substantial financial stake.  But so long the price fixation 
does not suffer from any infirmity or it is held to be prejudicial 
to the cane-growers so as to benefit the State or the financial 
institution it cannot be held to be bad"
The next is
State of M.P. v. Jaora Sugar Mills Ltd. & Ors.
, 1997 (9) 
SCC 207, which has been decided by a Bench of two judges.   The dispute 
arose on account of fixation of price under the M.P. Sugar (Regulation of 
Supply and Purchase) Act, 1958.   The contention on behalf of the sugar 
factories was that Clauses 3 and 5-A of the 1966 Order determine the 
liability to pay the price and additional price and the Central Government 
having determined the price of the sugarcane under the aforesaid Order, 
there is no power with the State Government de hors the Order to fix any 
agreed price.   The concept of  agreed  price  came into force on 19.9.1976 
by virtue of Clause 3-A of the said Order and until then there was no power 
to fix an agreed price.   It was also urged that the State Government has, 
therefore, no power under the Act to fix any price as the field was occupied 
by the 1966 Order.   The contention was, however, not accepted and after 
noticing the provisions of Clauses 3(2) and 3(3), it was held as under in para 
8 of the Reports :
"8.	This would clearly indicate that despite the fixation of 
minimum price under clause 3(1), by agreement between the 
sugarcane grower and the purchaser of the sugarcane, they 
would be at liberty to agree to sell or purchase the sugarcane at 
a higher price than that fixed by the Central Government under 
clause 3(1).   Only for postponement of payment beyond 14 
days, there should be an agreement in writing between the 
parties obviously with the concurrence of the Central 
Government or authorised authority in that behalf.   Thus, there 
is no statutory prohibition in that behalf to pay higher price.   
That would be further clear by clause 3(2) which speaks of the 
contract between the parties for payment of higher price of 
sugarcane fixed under sub-clause (1) of clause 3 pursuant to the 
agreement or pursuant to the minimum price fixed by the 
Central Government under clause 3(1) of the Order."
It was observed in paras 9 and 10 that there was no prohibition for  the 
canegrowers and occupiers of the sugar factories in entering into oral 
agreement through the service of the Cane Commissioner, a statutory 
authority, who could  effect such an agreement. The agreement would not be 
tainted with compulsion but in novation of the minimum price fixed under 
the 1966 Order.    After noticing the provisions of the M.P. Act, which are 
some what similar to U.P. Act, it was held as under in para 13 of the 
Reports:
"13.	It would thus be clear that the Cane 
Commissioner having power to compel the cane-growers 
to supply cane to the factory or khandsari unit, he has 
incidental power and is duty bound to ensure payment of 
the price of the sugarcane supplied by the sugarcane 
grower.   The price fixed or agreed is a statutory price 
and bears the stamp of statutory first charge on the sugar 
and assets of the factory over any other contracted 
liabilities to recover the price of the sugarcane supplied 
to the factory or khandsari unit."
SKG Sugar Ltd. v. State of Bihar 1997 (9) SCC 362 is a decision by 
the Bench of three judges and deals with the effect of 1966
Control Order 
and the Bihar Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply and Purchase)  Act, 1981
.   
It was clearly ruled  that the provisions of 1966 Order do not show that there 
is any prohibition on the factory or the association of factories entering into 
an agreement to pay higher price than the minimum price prescribed under 
the Order and the object of the Order is to ensure that the canegrowers 
should not be compelled to sell their sugarcane at a price lower than the 
minimum price fixed by the Central Government under Clause 3.  In this 
case an agreement had been arrived at between Sugar Factories Owners 
Association and sugarcane growers, wherein a higher price was agreed to be 
paid but this was sought to be resiled by the appellant on the ground that it 
was a Company, which was an independent entity in the eye of law and was, 
therefore, not bound by any such agreement.
After noticing the provisions 
of the Act and the earlier decision rendered in
State of M.P. v. Jaora Sugar 
Mills Ltd.
(supra) it was held as under in para 6 of the reports :
"It is not in dispute that under
Section 31
of the Supply 
Act, the State Government has power to fix the reserved area, in 
other words, zone was carved out for the appellant for the 
supply of sugarcane to the factory.   All the farmers who are 
cultivating sugarcane within that zone are bound by the State 
action to supply sugarcane to the factories within that reserved 
area.   Consequently, the factory also is bound by the actions of 
the State Government.   Obviously, pursuant to the obligation 
had by the State under the
Supply Act
, the meeting was 
convened by the State Government where at the Factory 
Owners' Association and farmers participated and agreed to fix 
the price at Rs.20.50 per quintal of sugarcane.   As a 
consequence, both the cane growers as well as the owners of the 
factory are bound by the decision.   This having been agreed 
upon, the price fixed by the State Government in excess of the 
minimum price fixed by the Central Government under clause 3 
of the Order would be the price fixed for supply of sugarcane 
and the Government would be entitled to enforce the 
liability.."
It was also observed in the same paragraph that the State Government 
acted in their statutory capacity to fix the higher price of the sugarcane.
39.     These cases clearly lay down that under the 1966 Order the Central 
Government only fixes the minimum price and it is always open to the State 
Government to fix a higher price.  Under the enactments made by the State 
Legislatures areas are  reserved for the sugar factories and the canegrowers 
therein are compelled to supply sugarcane to  them and therefore the State 
Government has incidental power to fix the price of sugarcane which will 
also be statutory price.   They further lay down that the Cane Commissioner 
can direct the canegrowers and the sugar factories to enter into agreements 
for purchase of sugarcane at a price fixed by the State Government and such 
agreements cannot be branded as having been obtained by force or 
compulsion.
40.	Learned senior counsel for the respondents has placed strong reliance 
on certain observations made in
State of Tamil Nadu v. Kothari Sugars and 
Chemicals Ltd.
, 1996 (7) SCC 751, which is a decision by a Bench of two 
judges.   In our opinion, this decision can be of no assistance to the 
respondents as the point for consideration here was entirely different, which 
will be evident from paras 1 and 3 of the judgment which read as under :
"Para 1.	The question for decision is :Whether for the 
purchase of sugarcane from the canegrowers, a purchaser is 
liable to pay purchase tax under the State Sales Tax Act on the 
amount paid by the purchaser to the canegrower over and above 
the price fixed under clauses 3 and 5-A of the Sugarcane 
(Control) Order, 1966 ?
Para 3.	The occasion for payment by the purchaser of the 
amount in excess of the aggregate of the minimum cane price 
and the additional cane price so fixed, arises on account of an 
order of the State Government dated 15.11.1980 purporting to 
fix a higher revised minimum cane price and directing the sugar 
factories in Tamil Nadu to pay that price to the canegrowers.   
Pursuant to the direction, each sugar factory was directed to 
make that payment and in compliance thereof this sugar factory 
paid the excess amount as an 'advance' described as under :
" being advance payment towards cane supply 
during 1980-81 season, against probable additional 
cane price under Section 5-A of the Sugarcane 
(Control) Order, 1966."
41.	It is important to note that in Tamil Nadu there is no statutory 
provision for regulating the supply and purchase of sugarcane for use in 
sugar factories or khandsari sugar manufacturing units. Therefore, the order 
of the State Government dated 15.11.1980 fixing higher revised minimum 
cane price had not been issued in exercise of any statutory power.  In para 6 
of the Reports, the Court observed that unless there be an agreement 
between the grower and the purchaser for purchase of the sugarcane at 
higher price, the obligation of the purchaser is to pay the grower only the 
aggregate of the amounts fixed under clauses 3 and 5-A.   It was further 
observed that  without any contractual or statutory basis fixing the sale price 
of sugarcane at an amount higher than the minimum cane price fixed under 
Clause 3 and the additional cane price fixed under Clause 5-A, any sum paid 
by the purchaser to the grower as advance prior to fixation of the additional 
cane price under Clause 5-A cannot form part of the price of sugarcane.  It 
was pointed out in  para 7  that the State advice to the purchasers to pay 
certain amount in addition to the minimum price fixed under Clause 3 in 
anticipation of fixation of the additional cane price under Clause 5-A, does 
not have any statutory basis. The amount of advance was paid in anticipation 
of fixation of additional cane price under Clause 5-A, which means that in 
case the fixation under Clause 5-A was at a higher amount than the amount 
paid as advance, then the purchaser would have to pay the deficit amount.   
Similarly, when the amount of advance was in excess, the purchaser would 
be entitled to refund of the excess amount, irrespective of the fact that 
whether the refund was actually made or not. Any amount paid by way of 
advance towards a probable additional price to be worked out in accordance 
with the formula given in the 1966 Order could not be treated as price of 
sugarcane for the purpose of levy of sales tax.  In fact in para 9 of the reports 
it was observed that for treating the entire amount paid by the purchaser as 
the price of the sugarcane supplied, it must be found proved as a fact that the 
higher price including the excess amount was paid as the price of sugarcane 
under an agreement between the grower and the purchaser irrespective of a 
lower amount being fixed as an aggregate of the price fixed under Clauses 3 
and 5-A of the 1966 Order.   It was further held that unless a clear finding to 
that effect is recorded, the amount paid by the purchaser in excess of the 
aggregate of the minimum price fixed under Clause 3 and the additional 
price fixed under Clause 5-A, as part of the amount paid in advance prior to 
the fixation of the additional price under Clause 5-A, cannot be treated 
automatically as a part of the total price of the sugarcane.
42.	The question in issue here did not come up for consideration before 
the Bench and some general observations made in the course of the 
reasoning given in a matter dealing with liability to pay tax on some amount 
which was paid by sugar factory as "advance" towards the probable 
additional cane price under Clause 5-A cannot be  construed as an 
expression of opinion on the merits of the matter.   It is well settled that a 
decision is an authority for what it actually decides and not what logically 
flows from it. Every observation of Court are not to be interpreted or used 
like provisions of Statute as if they were part of an Act. It is, therefore, not 
possible to hold that the Court laid down any principle of law that it is not 
open to the State to fix higher price or that there could be no agreement 
between the canegrowers and the occupier of the factory for payment of 
higher price.
43	One of the main reasons given by the High Court for allowing the writ 
petition and quashing the order of fixation of State Advised Price is that 
power to fix sugarcane price had been given to the State Government under 
the Sugarcane Act, 1934 and hence it would be redundancy to say that the 
same power to fix cane price also flows from
Section 16
of the 1953 Act. 
The High Court has  also held that when the 1953 Act was enacted there was 
already a law, viz., the Sugarcane Act, 1934, which enabled the State 
Government to fix the minimum cane price and hence, it could not have 
been the intention of the U.P. Legislature while enacting 1953 Act that
Section 16
thereof would include the power to fix the minimum cane price 
as such a power was already there with the State Government under Section 
3(2) of the Sugarcane Act, 1934.   The High Court, therefore, concluded that
Section 16
of the 1953 Act only gave power to the State Government to 
regulate the supply and purchase of sugarcane in the narrower sense and not 
in the wider sense so as to include the power to fix the minimum price.   
This reasoning of the High Court proceeds on the footing that the Sugarcane 
Act, 1934 was in existence and was in operation when the 1953 Act was 
enacted by U.P. Legislature.   It appears that the correct legal position was 
not brought to the notice of the learned judges.   The Sugarcane Act, 1934 
was repealed by U.P. Sugar Factories Control Act, 1938
(UP Act
No.1 of 
1938).
Section 26
of U.P. Sugarcane (Regulation of Supply & Purchase) 
Act, 1953 repealed the U.P. Sugar Factories Control Act, 1938.   With the 
enforcement of the
Government of India Act, 1935
, there was  distribution 
of legislative powers between the Dominion Legislature and the Provincial 
Legislature and the entire subject matter of Sugarcane Act, 1934 fell within 
the Provincial Legislative list.    It was in these circumstances that the U.P. 
Legislature enacted the U.P. Sugar Factories Control Act, 1938 which 
repealed the Sugarcane Act, 1934 in its application in the State of U.P.   This 
position has been noticed in
Ch. Tika Ramji & Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh 
& Ors.
, 1956 SCR 393 at page 400, 401 and 417.   Therefore, the aforesaid 
reasoning given by the High Court has no legal basis.
44.	The second reasoning given by the High Court is that even if the State 
Government had the power to fix the minimum cane price under
Section 16
of the 1953 Act, this power came to an end in view of
Article 254(1)
of the 
Constitution on the enactment of the
E.C. Act
and the promulgation of the 
Sugarcane Control Order, 1955 (later replaced by the 1966 Order), which 
now gives exclusive power to the Central Government to fix the minimum 
price.   As discussed earlier we are not in agreement with the aforesaid 
reasoning as the question of repugnancy does not arise. The High Court has 
also held that the Central Government, while fixing the price of the sugar 
under
Section 3(3C)
of the E.C. Act, takes into consideration the minimum 
price of sugarcane fixed under 1966 Order and if the sugar mills are 
compelled to pay  a higher price than that fixed by the Central Government, 
it will disturb the price of the levy sugar and such an eventuality could not 
have been contemplated by the legislature. Over a period of time, the quota 
of levy sugar has gone down from 40 per cent to 10 per cent of the total 
production of sugar and the sugar mills are now  free to sell 90 per cent of 
their production in open market.   Under
Section 3(3C)
of the E.C. Act, the 
Central Government has to determine the price of the levy sugar having 
regard to several factors enumerated in the sub-section and the minimum 
price fixed under 1966 Order is only one of the factors.   The manufacturing 
cost of sugar and securing of reasonable return on the capital employed in 
the business of manufacturing sugar are also relevant factors under Clauses
(b) and (d) of
Section 3(3C)
E.C. Act and, therefore, the fixation of higher 
price for sugarcane by the State Government by itself cannot have any major 
or substantial impact on the fixation of the price of the levy sugar by the 
Central Government.
45.	Shri Shanti Bhushan, learned senior counsel, has strenuously urged 
that the fixation of higher price by the State Government will seriously 
affect the economy of the  sugar factories inasmuch as the price of the 
sugarcane is a very major factor and contributes to the extent of 70 per cent  
of the price of sugar.  Learned counsel has submitted that any increase in the 
price of sugarcane by the State Government is bound to result in a serious 
financial crisis for the sugar factories which are already passing through  a  
bad phase and are suffering huge losses.   He has also placed before the 
Court some facts and data to show that the sugar mills being run by U.P. 
State Sugar Corporation and those under the cooperative sector, which pay 
the State Advised Price for sugarcane, are running on huge losses.   Reports 
have also been placed to show that the State Government has given heavy 
amounts by way of subsidy to these sugar factories in order to sustain the 
loss.   The contention is that the payment of State Advised Price by the sugar 
factories will result in a virtual closure of the sugar industry.   Shri Rakesh 
Dwivedi, learned senior counsel for appellant, has seriously disputed the 
aforesaid submission and  has urged that the respondent sugar factories have 
not produced their balance sheets to show that they are in fact running on 
losses.  He has submitted that virtually all the factories being run by the U.P. 
State Sugar Corporation were established in Nineteen Thirties, have very old 
machinery and technology and are over-staffed and the main reason for the 
losses suffered by them is their poor performance on account of the frequent 
breakdowns, the machinery being old and employment of excessive 
manpower and not the price of sugarcane.    The U.P. State Sugar 
Corporation, it is urged,  could not invest money in order to improve the 
technology or install new machinery due to financial crunch.  Shri Dwivedi 
has also placed before the Court data relating to some of the factories being 
run under cooperative sector which have made profits.
46.	Learned counsel for both the sides have also placed reliance on the 
Report of the Sugar Industry Inquiry Commission, 1974,  also known as 
'Bhargava Commission', which was given on 27.2.1974.  Shri Chidambaram 
has referred to  paragraphs 1.20, 1.23 and 1.24 of the Report, wherein it is 
said that there is need not only to intensify cane development work to 
increase the sugarcane yield, but also to bring more area under sugarcane.    
Sugarcane occupies land for a longer period than any other crop, its period 
of growth extending from 10 months to 18 months and during this period, 
two or more other crops can be grown, which give the farmer a quicker 
return for his investment.   Sugarcane also needs larger investment in the 
inputs.   It, therefore, recommended that the statutory minimum cane price 
be so fixed that the return from the sugarcane has an edge over the return 
from other alternative crops, in which technological breakthrough had 
already been achieved, and should be varied from year to year in future in 
proportion to the changes in return from other competitive crops and that it 
wholly covered the cost of cultivation in all major cane growing regions.   
Shri Chidamabaram has also urged that para 2.22 of Chapter II of the Report 
shows that the Central Government, while fixing the minimum price of 
sugarcane, does not take into consideration extra realization from molasses.  
Molasses, which is a bye product of sugar industry, is the  main raw material 
for production of rectified spirit, potable and industrial alcohol and ethnol.  
Learned counsel has submitted that on account of decontrol of molasses and 
its heavy demand, the sugar mills earn considerable amount of money from 
the sale of this bye product.   Besides molasses, bagasse and press mud are 
also produced in the manufacture of sugar which are again not taken into 
consideration .   Bagasse is used in co-generation and also for manufacture 
of paper and press mud is used in manufacture of  manure.    According to 
learned counsel, since  these three items from which sugar factories earn 
considerable  amount of money are not taken into consideration by the 
Central Government, the minimum price fixed under the 1966 Order is not 
realistic.  The State Government is aware of the local conditions like cost of 
the inputs and labour etc. and as it also  takes into consideration the 
aforesaid factors (molasses, bagasse and press mud) the price of the 
sugarcane fixed by it reflects the correct price.
47.	Shri Shanti Bhushan has also placed before the Court a copy of the 
order passed by the Central Government under Clause 3 of the 1966 Order 
on 9.1.2003 fixing the minimum price of sugarcane for the sugar year 2002-
2003, which shows that prices have been fixed for different factories 
keeping in view the minimum price of sugarcane at Rs.69.50 per quintal 
linked to a basic recovery of 8.5 per cent sugar subject to a premium of 
Rs.0.82 for every 0.1 per cent point increase in the recovery above that level.  
The chart shows that in the State of  U.P. generally the price fixed for 
sugarcane for most of the sugar mills being run by the U.P. State Sugar 
Corporation or in cooperative sector  (Sahkari) is much lower than the price 
fixed for the sugar mills being run by private sector. The price of sugarcane  
fixed for some of the sugar mills, which will illustrate the situation, is given 
below :
S.No.     Name of Sugar Factory		Minimum Sugarcane Price
							(Rupees per quintal)

1.	U.P. State Sugar Corporation Ltd.			71.96
	Panninagar, Distt. Bulandshahr.  

2.	U.P. State Sugar Corporation Ltd.			73.60
	Rohana Kalan, Distt. Muzaffarnagar. 

3.	Daurala Sugar Works, 					89.18
	Daurala, Distt. Meerut.

4.	The Upper India Sugar Mills				84.26
	Khatauli, Distt. Muzaffarnagar.

5.	The Upper Doab Sugar Mills Ltd.			86.72
	Shamli, Distt. Muzaffarnagar.

6.	Siel Ltd.							87.54
	Titawi, Distt. Muzaffarnagar.

7.	Bisalpur Kisan Sahakari Chini Mills Ltd.		71.14
	Bisalpur, Distt. Pilibhit.

8.	L.H. Sugar Factories Ltd.					78.52
	Pilibhit, Distt. Pilibhit.

9.	Ghaghara Sugar Ltd.					86.72
	Ajbapur, Distt. Lakhimpur Kheri.
48.	 Bulandshahr, Meerut and Muzaffarnagar are adjoining districts in 
Western U.P.  but the prices of sugarcane range from Rs.71.96 to Rs.89.18.   
The Sugar mills at  serial nos. 2 and 6 are situate within the same district of 
Muzaffarnagar, but the difference in prices is almost Rs.14.00.   Similarly, 
sugar mills at serial nos.7 and 8 are situate within the same district of Pilibhit 
and serial no.9 is in adjoining district of Lakhimpur   but the differenc in 
prices is quite substantial.   It is not likely that there would be  any 
substantial difference in the quality of cane grown within the same district or 
in the same area.  The prices fixed by the Central Government clearly 
indicate that a sugarcane grower who falls within the reserved area of a 
sugar mill run by U.P. State Sugar Corporation or by cooperative sector gets 
much less while as one who falls within the reserved area of sugar mill run 
by private sector gets much higher. This is possibly due to the reason that the 
sugar mills of U.P. State Sugar Corporation are very old having obsolete 
technology due to which recovery is poor.  There is no justifiable reason 
why a sugarcane grower should suffer only on account of the fact that he 
happens to fall within the reserved area of a mill run by the U.P. State Sugar  
Corporation or in the cooperative sector.   The State Government fixes 
uniform prices and not factory wise. Such a fixation of price is, therefore, 
more just and equitable from the point of view of a sugarcane grower.
49.	It is, however, difficult to form any definite opinion on the factual 
aspect of the matter only on the basis of the statistical data placed before us 
by the learned counsel for the parties as a correct or true assessment of the 
situation cannot be had from the same.   Moreover, we are more concerned 
with the legal aspect of the matter.
50.	In view of the discussions made above, Civil Appeals No.460 of 1997 
and 461 of 1997 are allowed and the judgment and order dated 11.12.1996 
of the High Court is set aside.   Civil Appeals No.1727 of 1999 and 4602 of 
1999 are dismissed and the judgment and order dated 1.2.1999 of the High 
Court is affirmed.
Civil Appeal No. 4685 of 1997:
The State of Bihar Vs. Bihar Sugar 
Mills Association


	State of Bihar
has preferred this appeal by special leave against the 
judgment and order dated 4..2.1997 of the Patna High Court by which the 
writ petition preferred by Bihar Sugar Mills Association was allowed and the 
order dated 29.11.1996 passed by the Sugarcane Commissioner, Bihar, 
fixing the price of sugarcane for crushing season 1996-97 was quashed.
For 
doing so, the High Court basically relied upon the provisions of Sugarcane 
(Control) Order, 1966 issued by the Central Government and also the 
judgment and order dated 11.12.1996 of Allahabad High Court in CMWP 
no. 36889 of 1996 (
West U.P. Sugar Mills Association v. State of U.P.
). The 
High Court did not examine the provisions of
Bihar Sugarcane  (Regulation 
of Supply and Purchase) Act, 1981
in order to ascertain whether under the 
said Act the State Government has any power to fix the price of sugarcane.  
We have set aside the judgment of the Allahabad High Court dated 
11.12.1996.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the matter requires fresh 
consideration in the light of our decision in CA No. 460 of 1997 (U.P. Co-
operative
Cane Unions Federation v. West U.P. Sugar Mills Association
).  
The appeal is accordingly allowed and the judgment and order dated 
4.2.1997 of the  High Court is set aside and the writ petition is remitted back 
to the High Court for fresh consideration in accordance with law.
Civil Appeal No.6065 of 2001 : State of Punjab & Ors. v. Saraya 
Industries Ltd. & Ors. and  SLP (C) No. 1363 of 2002 :  State of 
Haryana & Ors. v. The Saraswati Industrial Syndicate Ltd. & Anr.
State of Punjab and State of Haryana have preferred these appeal and 
special leave petition against the common judgment and order dated 
23.12.1998 of Punjab & Haryana High Court by which a bunch of writ 
petitions preferred by the respondent Sugar Mills were allowed and the 
direction given by the State Government to the writ petitioners to pay the 
State Advised Price for the sugarcane purchased by them during the year 
1996-97 was declared illegal and it was held that the writ petitioners cannot 
be compelled to pay any price over and above the statutory minimum price 
fixed by the Central Government for the sugarcane purchased by them.   For 
doing so, the High Court basically relied upon the provisions of Sugarcane 
(Control) Order, 1966 issued by the Central Government and also the 
judgment and order dated 11.12.1996 of Allahabad High Court in CMWP 
no. 36889 of 1996 (
West U.P. Sugar Mills Association v. State of U.P.
). The 
High Court did not examine the provisions of
Punjab Sugarcane  (Regulation 
of Supply and Purchase) Act, 1953
in order to ascertain whether under the 
said Act the State Government has any power to fix the price of sugarcane.  
We have also set aside the judgment of the Allahabad High Court dated 
11.12.1996.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the matter requires fresh 
consideration in the light of our decision in CA No. 460 of 1997 (U.P. Co-
operative
Cane Unions Federation v. West U.P. Sugar Mills Association
).  
The appeal and the special leave petition are accordingly allowed and the 
judgment and order of High Court is set aside and the writ petitions are 
remitted back to the High Court for fresh consideration in accordance with 
law.
CA Nos. 8117-22 of 2001 and SLP(C) No. 16851 of 2001 :
Government 
of Andhra Pradesh & Anr. v. KCP Sugar & Industries Corpn. Ltd. & 
Ors
.
Leave granted in SLP(C) No.16851 of 2001.  These appeals by special 
leave have been preferred by Government of Andhra Pradesh against the 
judgment and order dated 8.5.2001 of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh   by 
which the writ petition preferred by respondent KCP  Sugar Mills was 
allowed and order passed by the State Government on 4.12.1998 fixing the 
price of sugarcane was set aside. For doing so, the High Court basically 
relied upon the provisions of Sugarcane (Control) Order, 1966. The High 
Court did not examine the provisions of the
Andhra Pradesh Sugarcane  
(Regulation of Supply and Purchase) Act, 1961
in order to ascertain whether 
under the said Act the State Government has any power to fix the price of 
sugarcane. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the matter requires fresh 
consideration in the light of our decision in CA No. 460 of 1997 (U.P. Co-
operative
Cane Unions Federation v. West U.P. Sugar Mills Association
). 
The appeals are accordingly allowed and the judgment and order dated 
8.5.2001 of the  High Court is set aside and the writ petition is remitted back 
to the High Court for fresh consideration in accordance with law.
Transfer Case Nos. 21 and 22 of 2003 : The South Indian Sugar Mills 
Association, Tamil Nadu V. Government of Tamil Nadu & Ors.
The South Indian Sugar Mills Association, Tamil Nadu filed writ 
petition praying that a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ,  
order or direction may be issued forbearing the Government of Tamil Nadu 
and the Commissioner of Sugar and Cane Commissioner, Chennai, from 
fixing and announcing or notifying any price for sugarcane except the 
additional price under Clause 5A of the Sugar (Control) Order, 1966, to be 
paid by the sugar mills in Tamil Nadu to the sugarcane growers for the sugar 
season 1999-2000.  The writ petitions were transferred to this Court and 
were heard along with CA No. 460 of 1997.
The State of Tamil Nadu has not made any statutory enactment for 
regulation of supply and purchase of sugarcane. In the counter-affidavit   
filed on behalf of the respondents it is admitted that the State Government is 
not fixing State Advised Price for sugarcane in exercise of any statutory 
power.  In fact in para 9 of the counter-affidavit it is stated that the State 
Government will not make any unilateral announcement of State Advised 
Price as apprehended by the petitioner.  It is further stated that the 
Government will follow the past practice of consultation with the sugar mill 
owners and cane growers and only after ascertaining  their respective views 
and making them to come to an agreement on fixation of price, the State 
Advised Price, as an agreed price, will be recommended by the State 
Government.  In view of the fact that there is no statutory enactment 
regarding regulation of supply and purchase of sugarcane, it is obvious that 
the State Government has no power to fix the price of the sugarcane.  
However, it is always open for the sugar mills to enter into agreements with 
the sugarcane growers to purchase sugarcane at a price higher than the 
statutory minimum price fixed by the Central Government.  The Transfer 
Petitions are accordingly disposed of  in the aforesaid terms.
SLP (C) No. 948 of 2003 :M/s.
Naraingarh Sugar Mills Ltd. v. State of 
Haryana & Ors
.
This Special Leave Petition has been preferred against the judgment 
and order dated 20.12.2002 of a Division Bench of the Punjab & Haryana 
High Court by which  interim orders passed in favour of petitioner were 
vacated.  The main ground which weighed with the High Court for vacating 
the stay order was that the writ petitioner had not even paid the statutory 
minimum price of sugarcane to the farmers and a sum of Rs.5 crores was 
due from it. In the facts and circumstances of the case, we do not find any 
ground to interfere with the order passed by the High Court.  The Special 
Leave Petition is accordingly dismissed.
IA No.3 of 2002 in CA No. 460 of 1997 : New Horizon Sugar Mills Ltd. 
Ariyur, Kandamangalam P.O., Pondicherry

	This application has been moved in CA No.460 of 1997 (U.P. Co-
operative
Cane Union Federation v. West U.P. Sugar Mills Association & 
Ors.
). Since the main relief claimed in the application is against Government 
of Pondicherry which is not party to the civil appeal, it is not possible to 
grant the prayers made in the application.  The application is accordingly 
dismissed.