[Cites
56
, Cited by
11
]
Supreme Court of India
Franklin Templeton Trustee Services ... vs Amruta Garg And Ors. Etc. Etc. on 14 July, 2021
Equivalent citations: AIR 2021 SUPREME COURT 3494, AIRONLINE 2021 SC 334
Author:
Sanjiv Khanna
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
S. Abdul Nazeer
REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 498-501 OF 2021

                 FRANKLIN TEMPLETON TRUSTEE SERVICES
                 PRIVATE LIMITED AND ANOTHER                          .....   APPELLANT(S)

                                         VERSUS

                 AMRUTA GARG AND OTHERS ETC.                          ..... RESPONDENT(S)

                                                   WITH

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 502 OF 2021

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 503 OF 2021

                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 504-507 OF 2021

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 508 OF 2021

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 509 OF 2021

                           SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1486 OF 2021

                                                    AND

                          SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. ______ OF 2021)
                                  (ARISING OUT OF DIARY NO. 1563 OF 2021)



                                                ORDER
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2021.07.14
By the order dated 12th February 2021, interpreting Regulation
15:18:34 IST
Reason:
18(15)(c) of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Mutual
Page 1 of 77
Funds) Regulations, 1996 (hereafter referred to as ‘Regulations’)

     and accepting the poll results, we have directed winding up of six

     mutual fund schemes:
(i)     Franklin India Low Duration Fund (Number of Segregated

             portfolios – 2),
(ii)    Franklin India Ultra Short Bond Fund (Number of Segregated

             portfolios – 1),
(iii)   Franklin   India   Short   Term   Income   Plan   (Number     of

             Segregated portfolios – 3),
(iv)    Franklin India Credit Risk Fund (Number of Segregated

             portfolios – 3),
(v)     Franklin India Dynamic Accrual Fund (Number of Segregated

             portfolios – 3), and
(vi)    Franklin India Income Opportunities Fund (Number of

             Segregated portfolios – 2).
2.   We would now proceed to interpret Regulations 39 to 42 and their

     interrelation with Regulation 18(15)(c). We shall also examine and

     decide the challenge to the constitutional validity of Regulations 39

     to 42. As elucidated in the course of hearings and reflected in the

     order dated 12th February 2021, it would be inopportune to decide

     and dispose of these appeals, as facts remain disputed and are sub-

     judice along with other substantive issues in the adjudication
Page 2 of 77
proceedings under the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,

     1992
(hereafter referred to as the ‘
SEBI Act
’). The forensic report of

     the auditors, possibly the foundation of the show cause notice(s), is

     a subject matter of consideration before the statutory authorities that

     are bestowed with wide powers. It is not anyone’s case that the

     statutory adjudication proceedings should be eschewed or nullified.

     At the same time, we are not inclined to dispose of these appeals as

     this would not be in the interest of the unitholders, who are hopeful,

     yet concerned and apprehensive. Final and conclusive adjudication,

     on contested factual and related issues, post the statutory

     adjudication would be in the interest of the parties. No prejudice

     should be caused. Directions to await the orders in the adjudication

     proceeding have been incorporated in the order dated 12th February

     2021. We hope and trust that the proceedings under the
SEBI Act
would conclude expeditiously.
General overview of the Regulations
3.   We shall begin with an overview of the Regulations as they would

     aid us in deciding the two issues; though, to avoid prolixity, we are

     not reproducing the Regulations. We would subsequently selectively

     quote the Regulations requiring interpretation.
4.   The Regulations envisage a three-tier structure for mutual funds in

     the form of the sponsor, the board of trustees or the trustee
Page 3 of 77
company, and the asset management company (the AMC). The

     sponsor, as defined by
Regulation 2(x)
, means a person who, acting

     alone or in combination with another body corporate, establishes a

     mutual fund. For this purpose, the sponsor is required to make an

     application to the Securities and Exchange Board of India

     (hereinafter referred to as the ‘SEBI’) in the prescribed form for

     registration of the mutual fund. Chapter II of the Regulations spells

     out the eligibility criteria and requirements for registration of a

     mutual fund.
5.   The term ‘trustees’ has been defined in
Regulation 2(y)
to mean the

     board of trustees or the trustee company who hold the property of

     the mutual fund in trust for the benefit of the unitholders. The

     expression ‘unit’ has been defined in
Regulation 2(z)
to mean the

     interest of the unitholders in the scheme, which consists of each unit

     representing one undivided share in the assets of the scheme, and

     the term ‘unitholder’ has been defined in
Regulation 2(z)(i)
to mean

     a person holding a unit in the scheme of a mutual fund.
6.   The AMC is a company, approved by SEBI under
Regulation 21(2)
,

     which undertakes business activities in the nature of management

     and advisory services provided to the pooled assets. The services
Page 4 of 77
may be specified by SEBI from time to time. The AMC is forbidden

     by the Regulations from acting as a trustee of any mutual fund.
7.   Chapter III relates to the constitution and management of mutual

     funds and operation of trustees etc.
Regulation 14
stipulates that a

     mutual fund shall be constituted in the form of a trust and the

     instrument of the trust shall be in the form of a deed, registered

     under the provisions of the
Indian Registration Act, 1908
, executed

     by the sponsor in favour of the trustees.
Regulation 15(1)
requires

     that the trust deed shall incorporate such clauses as are mentioned

     in the Third Schedule of the Regulations, and such other clauses as

     are necessary for safeguarding the interests of the unitholders.
Regulation 15(2)
mandates that no trust deed shall contain a clause

     which has the effect of – (a) limiting or extinguishing the obligations

     and liabilities of the trust in relation to any mutual fund or the

     unitholders; or (b) indemnifying the trustees or the AMC for loss or

     damage caused to the unitholders by acts of negligence or acts of

     commission or omission on part of the trustees or the AMC.
Regulation 16
itemises the criteria for disqualification from

     appointment as a trustee. In effect, it stipulates the eligibility

     requirements for appointment of the trustees. In particular, it states

     that two-thirds of the trustees shall be independent persons, not

     associated with the sponsors in any manner. Further, a person
Page 5 of 77
appointed as a trustee of a mutual fund is not eligible to be

     appointed as a trustee of another mutual fund. An AMC and its

     directors (including independent director), officers or employees are

     ineligible to be appointed as a trustee of any mutual fund.
Regulation 17
requires prior approval of SEBI before a person is

     appointed as a trustee. In the case of existing trustees of any mutual

     fund, they may form a trustee company to act as a trustee, albeit

     with prior approval of SEBI. The trustees are bound by the Code of

     Conduct specified in the Fifth Schedule, as well as general and

     specific due diligence mandates.
8.
Regulation 18
is critical as it elaborately enlists the rights and

     obligations of the trustees, in as many as 29 sub-regulations. The

     trustees and the AMC, as per
Regulation 18(1)
, can enter into an

     investment management agreement with the prior approval of SEBI.

     Such an agreement must contain clauses mentioned in the Fourth

     Schedule and other clauses as are necessary for the purpose of

     making    investments.    The      sub-regulations   enumerate     the

     requirements to be satisfied before a scheme is launched by the

     AMC. They obligate that the trustee shall ensure that the AMC has

     been diligent in empanelling the brokers, and in monitoring

     securities transactions with the brokers and in avoiding undue

     concentration of business with any broker. The trustees have to also
Page 6 of 77
ensure and check that the AMC has not given any undue or unfair

       advantage to any associates or dealt with any of its associates in

       any manner detrimental to the interest of the unitholders and that

       the transactions entered into by the AMC are in accordance with the

       regulations and the scheme. The trustees are entitled to call for

       details of transactions in securities by the key personnel of the AMC

       in their own name or on behalf of the AMC and report the same to

       SEBI, as and when required. The sub-regulations require the

       trustees to carry out quarterly reviews of all transactions between

       the mutual funds, the AMC and its associates. The trustees are to

       also review the net worth of the AMC on a quarterly basis. In case of

       any shortfall in net worth, the trustees were to ensure that the AMC

       makes up for the shortfall in terms of
Regulation 21(1)(f)
.1 The

       trustees are to furnish to SEBI, on a half-yearly basis, a report on

       the activities of the mutual fund with certificates that there have

       been no instances of self-dealing or front running by any of the

       trustees, directors or key personnel of the AMC, and that the AMC

       has been managing the schemes independently of any other

       activities, and in case any activities of the nature referred to in
Regulation 24(b)
have been undertaken by the AMC, that it has



1The position post the SEBI (Mutual Funds) (Amendment) Regulations, 2021 with effect from 5th
Marcch 2021 has not been examined.
Page 7 of 77
taken adequate steps to ensure that the interests of the unitholders

          are protected.2
9.        Chapter IV of the Regulations relates to the constitution and

          management of the AMC and the custodian. The AMC is appointed

          by the sponsor, or by the trustee, if so authorised by the trust deed.

          However, the appointment needs approval by SEBI under
Regulation 21(2)
. As per
Regulation 20(2)
, the appointment of the

          AMC can be terminated by majority of the trustees or by 75% of the

          unitholders of the scheme.
Regulation 20(3)
states that any change

          in the appointment of the AMC is subject to the approval of SEBI

          and the unitholders.
Regulation 21
enumerates the eligibility criteria

          for appointment as an AMC. The directors of the AMC should be

          persons having adequate professional experience in finance and

          financial services related fields and should not be found guilty of

          moral turpitude or convicted of any economic offence or violation of

          any securities laws. The key personnel of the AMC should not have

          been found to be guilty of the above, nor should they have worked

          for any AMC/mutual fund/intermediary during the period when its

          registration was suspended or cancelled by SEBI. The board of

          directors of the AMC must have at least 50% of directors who are

          not associates, or associated in any manner with the sponsor or any

2   Legal effect of
Regulation 24
has not been examined.
Page 8 of 77
of its subsidiaries or the trustee. The net worth of the AMC should

          not be less than Rs.50 crores.
Regulation 24
specifies the

          restrictions on the business activities of the AMC.
Regulation 25
specifies the obligations and the responsibilities of the AMC, which

          include taking reasonable steps and exercising due diligence to

          ensure that the investment of funds pertaining to any scheme is not

          contrary to the provisions of the regulations and the trust deed. The

          AMC is responsible for the acts of commission or omission by its

          employees, or persons whose services have been procured by the

          AMC. Sub-regulation (6) states that the AMC and its directors,

          notwithstanding any contract or agreement, shall not be absolved of

          the liability to the mutual fund for their acts of omission and

          commission, while holding such position or office.
10.       There are a number of stipulations and restrictions to ensure

          objectivity, fidelity and transparency in business transactions by the

          AMC and compliance with the Regulations. A system of regulation

          involving checks, responsibility and power of free decision is

          envisaged. The Chief Executive Officer, by whatever name called, is

          mandated by sub-regulation (6A)3 to
Regulation 25
to ensure that

          the mutual fund complies with all the provisions of the Regulations,

          guidelines and circulars issued in relation thereto from time to time

3   SEBI (Mutual Funds) (Second Amendment) Regulations, 2020, w.e.f. 29.10.2020
Page 9 of 77
and that the investments made by the fund managers are in the

            interest of the unitholders. This officer is responsible for the overall

            risk management function of the mutual fund. Sub-regulation (6B)4

            to
Regulation 25
states that the fund managers, whatever be the

            designation, shall ensure that the funds are invested to achieve the

            objectives of the scheme and in the interest of the unitholders.
11.         Chapter V deals with schemes of mutual funds and
Regulation 28(1)
thereunder states that no scheme shall be launched by the AMC

            unless it is approved by the trustees and a copy of the offer

            document has been filed with SEBI. Regulations 32 and 33 pertain

            to the listing and repurchase respectively of units in close-ended

            schemes, while
Regulation 35
deals with the allotment of units and

            refunds of moneys. In terms of Regulation 38, guaranteed return is

            not to be provided in a scheme, unless such returns are fully

            guaranteed by the sponsor or the AMC, and a statement to that

            effect is made in the offer document, indicating the name of the

            person who will guarantee the return and the manner in which the

            guarantee is to be met. Regulation 38A permits launching of a

            capital protection-oriented scheme subject to: (a) the units of the

            scheme being rated by a registered credit rating agency from the

            viewpoint of the ability of its portfolio structure to attain the

4   Ibid.
Page 10 of 77
protection of the capital invested therein; (b) the scheme being

        close-ended; and (c) compliance with other requirements as may be

        specified by SEBI. Regulation 48 requires that every mutual fund

        shall compute the Net Asset Value of each scheme as specified and

        the same shall be calculated on daily basis and disclosed in the

        manner as stated by SEBI.
12.     Regulation 49 is titled ‘pricing of units’ and states that the price at

        which the units may be subscribed / sold / repurchased by the

        mutual fund shall be made available to the investors in the manner

        specified by SEBI. The methodology for calculating the sale and

        repurchase price of the units is to be provided by the mutual fund in

        the manner specified by SEBI. Sub-regulation (3) states that in

        determining the price of the units, the mutual fund shall ensure that

        the repurchase price is not lower than 93% of the Net Asset Value

        and the sale price is not higher than 107% of the Net Asset Value.

        As per the second proviso to sub-regulation (3), difference between

        the repurchase price and the sale price of the unit shall not exceed

        7% calculated on the sale price.5
13.     Regulations 54 and 55 relate to the annual report and the auditor’s

        report respectively. Regulation 56 requires providing a copy of the
5 Post amendment w.e.f. 5.3.2021 Regulation 49(3) states that the repurchase price of units of an open-
ended scheme shall not be lower than 95 % of the NAV. There is no stipulation in the Regulations
regarding the sale price.
Page 11 of 77
annual report and the summary thereof to the unitholders.
Regulation 58 mandates periodic and continual disclosures by the

      AMC, the trustee, the sponsors, and the custodians, requiring them

      to make such disclosures and submit such documents as may be

      provided by SEBI and comply with sub-regulations (2) and (3).

      Regulation 59 deals with half-yearly disclosures. Regulation 60

      imposes a general obligation to disclose information and, being of

      some importance, is reproduced below:
“Disclosures to the investors
60. The trustee shall be bound to make such
              disclosures as are essential in order to keep them
              informed about any information which may have an
              adverse bearing on their investments.”


           The trustees are mandated and bound to make such

      disclosures to the unitholders as are essential to keep them

      informed about any information that may have adverse bearing on

      their investments.
14.   Chapter VIII relates to and empowers SEBI to authorise and

      conduct inspection and audit. SEBI, under Regulation 61(1), may

      appoint one or more persons as the inspecting officers to undertake

      inspection of the books of accounts, records, documents, and

      infrastructure, systems, and procedures or to investigate the affairs

      of the mutual fund, the trustees, and the AMC for the purposes
Page 12 of 77
stipulated therein. Regulation 62 requires that SEBI shall issue not

less than ten days’ notice to the mutual fund, trustees, or AMC, as

the case may be, before ordering an inspection or investigation.
However, under sub-regulation (2), notwithstanding sub-regulation

(1), SEBI can direct such inspection or investigation without any

notice when it is satisfied that in the interest of the investors no such

notice should be given. Regulation 63 prescribes the duties and

obligations of the mutual fund/ trustees/ AMC whose affairs are

being inspected or investigated. The investigating officer can, during

the course of the investigation, examine or record the statements of

any director, officer, or employee of the mutual fund/ trustee/ AMC

and every such mutual fund/ trustee/ AMC is duty-bound to give to

the investigating officer all assistance in connection with the

inspection or investigation. The inspecting officer is to submit, as

soon as possible, a report to SEBI on completion of the

investigation. Regulation 65 states that SEBI or the Chairman shall

after consideration of inspection or investigation report take such

action as SEBI or the Chairman may deem fit and appropriate under

Chapter V of the Securities and Exchange Board (Intermediaries)

Regulations, 2008.
Page 13 of 77
Regulations 39 to 42 and 18(15) of the Securities and Exchange
Board of India (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996.
15.   Regulations 39 to 42 read as under:
“Winding Up
39. (1) A close-ended scheme shall be wound up on
             the expiry of duration fixed in the scheme on the
             redemption of the units unless it is rolled over for a
             further period under sub-regulation (4) of regulation 33.
(2) A scheme of a mutual fund may be wound up, after
             repaying the amount due to the unit holders, —

                “(a) on the happening of any event which, in the
                opinion of the trustees, requires the scheme to
                be wound up; or
(b) if seventy-five per cent of the unit holders of a
                scheme pass a resolution that the scheme be
                wound up; or
(c) if the Board so directs in the interest of the
                unitholders.
(3) Where a scheme is to be wound up under sub-
regulation (2), the trustees shall give notice disclosing
             the circumstances leading to the winding up of the
             scheme:
“(a) to the Board; and
(b) in two daily newspapers having circulation all
                over India, a vernacular newspaper circulating at
                the place where the mutual fund is formed.
Effect of winding up
40. On and from the date of the publication of notice
             under clause (b) of sub-regulation (3) of regulation 39,
             the trustee or the asset management company as the
             case may be, shall—
Page 14 of 77
“(a) cease to carry on any business activities in
   respect of the scheme so wound up;
(b) cease to create or cancel units in the scheme;
(c) cease to issue or redeem units in the scheme.
Procedure and manner of winding up
41. (1) The trustee shall call a meeting of the
unitholders to approve by simple majority of the
unitholders present and voting at the meeting resolution
for authorising the trustees or any other person to take
steps for winding up of the scheme:
Provided that a meeting of the unitholders shall not be
necessary if the scheme is wound up at the end of
maturity period of the scheme.
(2)(a) The trustee or the person authorised under sub-
regulation (1) shall dispose of the assets of the scheme
concerned in the best interest of the unitholders of that
scheme.
(b) The proceeds of sale realised under clause (a),
shall be first utilised towards discharge of such
liabilities as are due and payable under the scheme
and after making appropriate provision for meeting the
expenses connected with such winding up, the balance
shall be paid to the unitholders in proportion to their
respective interest in the assets of the scheme as on
the date when the decision for winding up was taken.

(3) On the completion of the winding up, the trustee
shall forward to the Board and the unitholders a report
on the winding up containing particulars such as
circumstances leading to the winding up, the steps
taken for disposal of assets of the fund before winding
up, expenses of the fund for winding up, net assets
available for distribution to the unit holders and a
certificate from the auditors of the fund.
Page 15 of 77
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
             regulation, the provisions of these regulations in
             respect of disclosures of half-yearly reports and annual
             reports shall continue to be applicable until winding up
             is completed or the scheme ceases to exist.
Winding up of the scheme
42. After the receipt of the report under sub-regulation
             (3) of regulation 41, if the Board is satisfied that all
             measures for winding up of the scheme have been
             complied with, the scheme shall cease to exist.”
16.
Regulation 18(15)(c)
reads as under:
“Rights and obligations of the trustees.
18.
xx                xx                 xx

             (15) The trustees shall obtain the consent of the
             unitholders –
(a) whenever required to do so by the Board in the
             interest of the unitholders; or
(b) whenever required to do so on the requisition made
             by three-fourths of the unitholders of any scheme; or
(c) when the majority of the trustees decide to wind up
             or prematurely redeem the units.”


Interpretation of Regulations 39 to 42, their interplay and
harmonious construction with
Regulation 18(15) (c)
of the Securities
and Exchange Board of India (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996.
17.   Regulation 39, as the heading states, relates to ‘winding up’ of a

      scheme of a mutual fund. Sub-regulation (1) to Regulation 39
Page 16 of 77
applies to close-ended schemes and is accordingly not relevant as

       the six schemes in question are open-ended schemes.6
18.    Sub-regulation (2) to Regulation 39 uses the expression ‘a scheme

       of a mutual fund,’ and accordingly applies to both open-ended and

       close-ended schemes.7 It is an undisputed position that sub-

       regulation (2) to Regulation 39 applies to the six schemes. In terms

       of sub-regulation (2) to Regulation 39, a scheme of a mutual fund

       can be wound up: (a) on the happening of any event, which, in the

       opinion of the trustees, requires the scheme to be wound up; (b) if

       75% of its unitholders8 pass a resolution for winding up of the

       scheme; or (c) SEBI directs winding up of the scheme in the interest

       of the unitholders. Under each clause the initiator is different, and

       the condition to be satisfied is stipulated. Clause (a) empowers the

       trustees, while clauses (b) and (c) empower the unitholders and

       SEBI respectively.
19.    When a scheme “is to be wound up” under sub-regulation (2), the

       trustees are required by sub-regulation (3) of Regulation 39 to issue

       a public notice in two daily newspapers having all India circulation


6
Regulation 2(f)
– “close-ended scheme” means any scheme of a mutual fund in which the period of
maturity of the scheme is specified.
7
Regulation 2(s)
– “open-ended scheme” means a scheme of a mutual fund which offers units for sale

without specifying any duration for redemption.
8 2(z)(i) of SEBI (Mutual Fund) Regulation 1996, “unit holder” means a person holding unit in a scheme

of mutual fund.
Page 17 of 77
and in a vernacular paper having circulation where the mutual fund

      is located. The public notice should state the circumstances leading

      to winding up of the scheme. The trustees are also required to write

      to SEBI and disclose the circumstances leading to winding up of the

      scheme.
20.   On and from the date of publication, the cease and freeze mandate

      of Regulation 40 triggers. Regulation 40, which is in the nature of

      statutory injunction, states that on and from the date of publication of

      notice under Regulation 39(3), the trustees and the AMC shall

      cease to (a) carry on any business in respect of the scheme to be

      wound up; (b) create or cancel units of the scheme; and (c) issue or

      redeem units of the scheme.
21.   Regulation 41, as per the heading, relates to the procedure and

      manner of winding up. The trustees, in terms of sub-regulation (1) to

      Regulation 41, are required to call a meeting of the unitholders for

      authorising either the trustees or any other person to take steps for

      winding up of the scheme. Voting at the meeting is by simple

      majority of the unitholders present and voting. In this meeting the

      unitholders do not examine, affirm or reject the decision to wind up

      the scheme. The voting is restricted to selection of the person –
Page 18 of 77
either the trustee or a third person – who would take ‘steps for

      winding up of the scheme’.
22.   Regulation 41(2)(a), requires that the person or the trustee

      authorised under Regulation 41(1) must dispose of the assets of the

      scheme in the best interest of the unitholders. Clause (b) to sub-

      regulation (2) to Regulation 41, states that the sale proceeds shall

      be first utilised towards discharge of liabilities due and payable

      under the scheme. Secondly, appropriate provision is to be made for

      meeting the expenses connected with the winding up. The balance

      amount shall be paid to the unitholders in proportion to their

      respective interests in the scheme as on the date when the decision

      for winding up was taken. The clause differentiates between the

      creditors whose liability is due and payable, and the unitholders.

      Payment of the amount due and payable to the creditors is

      prioritised and takes precedent. Thereafter, appropriate provision is

      required to be made for expenses connected with the winding up.

      The balance amount is payable to the unitholders.
23.   In terms of Regulation 42(2), the unitholders are to be paid in

      proportion to their respective interest in the assets of the scheme.

      The interest of the unitholders in the assets of the scheme as

      mentioned in Regulation 42(2) is computed on the basis of the date
Page 19 of 77
when the decision for winding up of the scheme was taken. As per

      Regulation 41(3), on completion of winding up, the trustees have to

      forward to SEBI and to the unitholders a report on the winding up

      containing particulars such as circumstances leading to the winding

      up, the steps taken for disposal of the assets for winding up,

      expenses for winding up, net assets available for distribution to the

      unitholders and a certificate from the auditors. Sub-regulation (4), a

      non-obstante provision, states that the requirement in respect of

      disclosures in the form of half-yearly report and annual report shall

      continue until winding up is completed or the scheme ceases to

      exist. Regulation 42 states that after receipt of the report under

      Regulation 41(3), if SEBI is satisfied that all measures relating to

      winding up have been complied with, the scheme would cease to

      exist.
24.   Regulation 42A stipulates that the units of the mutual funds scheme

      shall be delisted from the recognised stock exchange in accordance

      with the guidelines as may be specified by SEBI.
25.
Regulation 18(15)(c)
, which relates to rights and obligations of the

      trustees, in simple words requires the trustees to take consent of the

      unitholders, when they, by majority, decide to wind up or

      prematurely redeem the units. Words “winding up” in Regulation
Page 20 of 77
18(15)(c), ex-facie refers to the winding up of the open-ended

      scheme and the expression “prematurely redeem the units” refers to

      premature redemption of units under the close-ended scheme.


Decision of the High Court and contentions of SEBI, the trustees and
the AMC.
26.   The judgment under challenge, interpreting
Regulation 18(15)(c)
and Regulation 39(2)(a) holds that the decision of the trustees to

      wind up a scheme under clause (a) to Regulation 39(2) must muster

      the consent of the majority of the unitholders as per
Regulation

      18(15)(c)
.
27.   Contesting this finding and interpretation, the argument of SEBI, the

      trustees and the AMC is that Regulations 39 to 42 are a complete

      code dealing with winding up of a scheme of mutual funds. Initiators

      and conditions to be satisfied under clauses (a), (b), and (c) to

      Regulation 39(2) are different. It is argued that prior consent of the

      unitholders is not envisaged when the trustees, on the happening of

      any event in terms of clause (a), form an opinion that a scheme is

      required to be wound up, or when SEBI under clause (c) directs

      winding up of a scheme in the interest of the unitholders. Only when

      the unitholders want to windup a scheme, in terms of clause (b), a

      resolution by 75% of the unitholders is mandated. The need to

      obtain the consent of the unitholders vide
Regulation 18(15)(c)
Page 21 of 77
refers to the procedure and the manner for winding up as mandated

by Regulation 41(1). To put it differently, the unitholders do not

come into the picture when the trustees and SEBI, under clauses (a)

and (c) respectively of Regulation 39(2), decide to wind up a

scheme. Their decision is final and binding on the unitholders. It is

submitted:
“a)
Regulation 18(15)(c)
requires Trustees to obtain
          consent of Unit holders “when the majority of the
          Trustees decide to wind up”. It is thus very clear that
          consent is required when Trustees decide to wind up
          the scheme(s) and when read together with Regulation
          41, makes it amply clear that the consent is for the
          purpose of Regulation 41 i.e. to authorize the Trustee
          or any other person to dispose of the asset of
          scheme(s), in the interest of the unit holders.
(b) The consent envisaged under
Regulation 18(15)(c)
is a general “rights and obligations” of the Trustees and
          that the said consent shall be read as approval required
          under Regulation 41(1).
(c) It is submitted that in the event consent under
Regulation 18(15)(c)
is interpreted to mean that prior
          consent of unitholders is required before a scheme is
          wound up pursuant to a decision taken by the Trustees,
          the provisions of Regulation 39(2)(b) to be rendered
          otiose as under the said Regulation, a scheme may be
          wound up at the instance of Unit holders (upon 75% of
          the Unit holders of a scheme passing a Resolution for
          winding up).
(d) Regulation 40 comes into effect “on and from the
          date of publication of notice” by Trustees under
          Regulation 39(3)(b) and not from the date of “consent
          of Unit holders”, which makes it abundantly clear that
          consent of Unit holders is not contemplated qua
          decision of Trustees to wind up a scheme(s).
(e) Further, Regulation 40 (a) provides that on and from
          the date of publication of notice under 39(3)(b), the
          Trustees or Asset Management Company, as the case
Page 22 of 77
may be, shall cease to carry on any business activities
          in respect of the scheme so wound up. Therefore, when
          a decision by Trustee to wind up scheme is taken, in
          terms of 39(2)(a), the notice is issued and Regulation
          40 comes into operation and the requirement of
          obtaining consent of Unit holders at this stage cannot
          arise.
(f) It is submitted that Regulation 41(1) casts an
          obligation on the Trustees to call a meeting of the unit
          holders to approve a resolution authorising the
          Trustees or any other person to take steps for winding
          up of the scheme.
Regulation 18(15)(c)
of the MF
          Regulations cannot be erroneously interpreted so as to
          conclude that before implementing Regulation 41, prior
          approval of the unit holders has to be taken.”

     The submission accentuates, what is submitted would be the

impractical and calamitous effect of reading
Regulation 18(15)(c)
into Regulations 39 to 42.     Prior-consent from the unitholders if

necessary even when the trustees ‘decide to wind up’ a scheme

under Regulation 39(2)(a), would inevitably delay the publication of

public notices as envisaged by Regulation 39(3). Therefore the

cease and freeze legal effect of Regulation 40 would get postponed

resulting in chaos and confusion, as business activities such as

buying and redemption of units etc., would continue despite the

trustees having taken the decision to wind up the scheme. In panic,

most unitholders would rush for redemptions, which achingly would

be the reason for winding up. The result would be fire-sale of sound

assets in a hasty and disorganised manner at discounted valuations

in adverse market conditions. The trustees who stand in a fiduciary
Page 23 of 77
capacity as domain experts, as mandated by clause (a) to

      Regulation 39(2), act for and in the interest of the unitholders. The

      unitholders, a large and disparate body of lay persons without

      domain expertise, have been erroneously conferred the right to veto

      and overrule the decision of the domain experts. Given the grave

      consequences for the sponsor, trustees and AMC, a decision to

      wind up a scheme is taken after in-depth analysis with great care

      and caution. Thus, the findings of the High Court to the contrary

      should be reversed.
Interpretation of the term ‘consent’ in
Regulation 18(15)(c)
vide order
dated 12th February, 2021
28.   In our order dated 12th February 2021, we have interpreted
Regulation 18(15)(c)
and the word ‘consent’ therein in the following

      manner:
“8. However, we begin by rejecting the argument raised by
             some of the objecting unitholders that consent would be
             binding only on those who have consented to winding up
             of the mutual fund schemes and cannot be imposed on
             others. The word ‘consent’, in the context of the clause,
             clearly refers to ‘consent of the majority of the unitholders’,
             and not consent given by individual unitholders who alone
             would be bound by their consent, that is, it excludes
             unitholders who are not agreeable. To accept the second
             or contra view, as pleaded by some of the objecting
             unitholders, would be to negate the very object and
             purpose of clause (c) to sub-regulation (15) of Regulation
18. In fact, the submission, if accepted, will make the
             Mutual Fund schemes and the winding up provisions in
             the Mutual Fund Regulations unworkable as there would
Page 24 of 77
be two different classes of unitholders – one bound by the
consent, and others who are not bound by consent.
Consequently, the scheme would not wind up. The intent
behind the provision is to bind even those who do not
consent.
9. Black’s Law Dictionary (10th Edition) defines the word
‘consent’ as “a voluntary yielding to what another
proposes or desires; agreement, approval, or permission
regarding some act or purpose, esp. given voluntarily by a
competent person; legally effective assent.” The dictionary
also defines ‘general consent’ to mean “adoption without
objection, regardless of whether every voter affirmatively
approves.” Shackleton on the Law and Practice of
Meetings, 14th Edn., while defining majority, and the
binding effect of majority, has opined:
“Definition

   7-30. Majority is a term signifying the greater
   number.      In    legislative   and    deliberative
   assemblies, it is usual to decide questions by a
   majority of those present and voting. This is
   sometimes expressed as a “simple” majority,
   which means that a motion is carried by the mere
   fact that more votes are cast for than against, as
   distinct from a “special” majority where the size of
   the majority is critical.
The principle has long been established that the
   will of a corporation or body can only be
   expressed by the whole or a majority of its
   members, and the act of a majority is regarded
   as the act of the whole.
A majority vote binds the minority

   7-31. Unless there is some provision to the
   contrary in the instrument by which a corporation
   is formed, the resolution of the majority, upon any
   question, is binding on the majority and the
   corporation, but the rules must be followed.”
Page 25 of 77
The word/expression ‘consent’ in sub-regulation
    (15) to
Regulation 18
refers to affirmative
    consent to winding up by ‘the majority of the
    unitholders’. Conversely, consent is denied when
    ‘majority of the unitholders’ do not approve the
    proposal to wind up the scheme.
10. However, the question which still remains to be
answered is whether ‘consent’ would mean majority of the
unitholders who exercise their right in the poll, or majority
of all the unitholders of the scheme. Connected with the
question is the concern of quorum, which means the
minimum number of members of the entire body of
members required to be present to legally transact
business.
11. Shackleton in the above quotation has referred to
distinction between simple and special majority. More
appropriate for our discussion is William Paul White’s
thesis ‘History and Philosophy of the Quorum as a Device
of Parliamentary Procedure’ published in 1967, in which
he elucidates:
“Much of the controversy that has been
    historically associated with the quorum can be
    traced to the problem of simply determining just
    what is meant by a quorum. “From the very
    earliest times it has been recognised as a
    general rule that a majority of a group is
    necessary to act for the entire group.” In the case
    of a public body, the power or authority which
    establishes the body may also determine what
    constitutes a quorum. Sturgis states that
    common parliamentary law fixes the quorum as a
    “majority of the members”. The constitution of the
    United States sets the quorum requirement in the
    House of Representatives at a majority of the
    membership. But to state that a quorum is a
    majority of the membership opens the way to
    potential conflict; which is precisely what has
    happened on numerous occasions.”
Page 26 of 77
After examining the various definitions of the
   term quorum, the author observes that the
   definitions by themselves give no key as to how
   to determine what is minimum number or what
   constitutes majority. The expression ‘majority’
   can mean - (i) majority of total membership list;
(ii) exclude or include delinquent members; (iii)
   members present and voting; or (iv) those
   present, voting and not voting. Different
   meanings, he observed, have added to the
   confusion around the concept of the quorum.
Albeit referring to the position in 1967, the author
   observed:
“As we have emerged into the modern era, it is
   not surprising that by now the method, which has
   been legally agreed upon by the courts, to
   determine minimum and majority, is well
   established.”
12. Clause (c) to sub-regulation (15) of
Regulation 18
per
se does not prescribe any quorum or specify the criterion
for computing majority or ratio of unitholders required for
valid consent for winding up. Clause (b) of Regulation
39(2), on the other hand, specifies that seventy-five per
cent of the unitholders of a scheme can pass a resolution
that the scheme be wound up. Similarly, Regulation 41(1)
requires the trustees to call a meeting to approve, by
simple majority of the unitholders present and voting, a
resolution for authorising the trustees or any other person
to take steps for winding up of the scheme.
Section 48
of
the Companies Act, 2013 states that where share capital
of a company is divided into different classes of shares,
the rights attached to the shares of any class may be
varied with the consent in writing of the shareholders of
not less than three-fourths of the issued shares of that
class. Sub-section (3) to
Section 55
of the Companies Act,
2013 in case of failure to redeem or pay dividend refers to
consent of holders of three-fourths in value of the
preference shares.
Section 103
of the Companies Act,
2013 prescribes minimum quorum for shareholder
meetings.
Page 27 of 77
13.
In
Shri Ishwar Chandra v. Shri Satyanarain Sinha
and Others
, this Court on the question of quorum has
held:
“If for one reason or the other one of them could
   not attend, that does not make the meeting of
   others illegal. In such circumstances, where there
   is no rule or regulation or any other provision for
   fixing the quorum, the presence of the majority of
   the members would constitute it a valid meeting
   and matters considered there at cannot be held
   to be invalid.”

This decision had also relied on the exposition on the
subject of quorum in the Halsbury’s Laws of England,
Third Edition (Vol. IX, page 48, para 95), which reads:
“95. Presence of quorum necessary. The acts of
   a corporation, other than a trading corporation,
   are those of the major part of the corporators,
   corporately assembled. In other words, in the
   absence of special custom or of special provision
   of the constitution, the major part must be
   present at the meeting, and of that major part
   there must be a majority in favour of the act or
   resolution contemplated. Where, therefore, a
   corporation consists of thirteen members, there
   ought to be at least seven present to form a valid
   meeting, and the act of the majority of these
   seven or greater number will bind the
   corporation. In considering whether the requisite
   number is present, only those members must be
   included who are competent to take part in the
   particular business before the meeting. The
   power of doing a corporate act may, however, be
   specially delegated to a particular number of
   members, in which case, in the absence of any
   other provision, the method of procedure
   applicable to the body at large will be applied to
   the select body.
Page 28 of 77
If a corporate act is to be done by a definite body
    along, or by definite body coupled with an
    indefinite body, a majority of the definite body
    must be present.
Where a corporation is composed of several
    select bodies, the general rule is that a majority
    of each select body must be present at a
    corporate meeting; but this rule will not be
    applied in the absence of express direction in the
    constitution, if its application would lead to an
    absurdity or an impossibility. ...” (emphasis
    supplied)
14. The concept of ‘absurdity’ in the context of
interpretation of statutes is construed to include any result
which is unworkable, impracticable, illogical, futile or
pointless, artificial, or productive of a disproportionate
counter mischief. Logic referred to herein is not formal or
syllogistic logic, but acceptance that enacted law would
not set a standard which is palpably unjust, unfair,
unreasonable or does not make any sense. When an
interpretation is beset with practical difficulties, the courts
have not shied from turning sides to accept an
interpretation that offers a pragmatic solution that will
serve the needs of society. Therefore, when there is
choice between two interpretations, we would avoid a
‘construction’ which would reduce the legislation to futility,
and should rather accept the ‘construction’ based on the
view that draftsmen would legislate only for the purpose of
bringing about an effective result. We must strive as far as
possible to give meaningful life to enactment or rule and
avoid cadaveric consequences.
15. We would neither hesitate in stating the obvious, that
modern regulatory enactments bear heavily on
commercial matters and, therefore, must be precisely and
clearly legislated as to avoid inconvenience, friction and
confusion, which may, in addition, have adverse economic
consequences. The legislator in the present case must,
therefore, reflect and take remedial steps to bring about
clarity and certainty in the Mutual Fund Regulations.
Page 29 of 77
16. Reading prescription of a quorum as majority of the
unitholders or ‘consent’ as implying ‘consent by the
majority of all unitholders’ in
Regulation 18(15)(c)
of the
Mutual Fund Regulations will not only lead to an absurdity
but also an impossibility given the fact that mutual funds
have thousands or lakhs of unitholders. Many unitholders
due to lack of expertise, commercial understanding,
relatively small holding etc. may not like to participate.
Consent of majority of all unitholders of the scheme with
further prescription that ‘fifty percent of all unitholders’
shall constitute a quorum is clearly a practical impossibility
and therefore would be a futile and foreclosed exercise.
17. Conscious of the problem of quorum and majority in
indefinite electorate, 1st Edition of Halsbury’s Laws of
England on the question of quorum and meetings, had
referred to the following principles:
“791. Where a corporation consists of a definite
    number of corporate electors, a majority of that
    number must be present in order to constitute a
    valid election. But where a corporation consists
    of an indefinite number of corporate electors, a
    majority only of those existing at the time of the
    election need be present.
When an election is to be made by a definite
    body only, or the electoral assembly is to consist
    of a definite and an indefinite body, the majority
    of the definite body must, as a general rule, be
    present in order to render the election legal. It is
    not necessary that a majority of the indefinite
    body should be present so long as there is
    majority of the definite body. If a constituent part
    of a corporation refuses to be present at an
    election, it cannot be held, and an election by the
    remaining parts will be void. But electors present
    at an election and abstaining from voting are
    deemed to acquiesce in the election made by
    those who vote.”
Page 30 of 77
The aforesaid exposition, for the purpose of
   majority and quorum, draws distinction between
   an electorate consisting of definite number and
   an electorate composed of indefinite number.
   Justice Seshagiri Ayyar of the Madras High Court
   in his concurring judgment in Syed Hasan Raza
   Sahib Shamsul Ulama and two
others v. Mir
   Hasan Ali Sahib
and two others had drawn
   distinction between definite and indefinite
   numbers in the following manner:
“…In the first class of cases, the number of the
   select body is fixed. In the second class of cases,
   the number is subject to variation every year or at
   stated periods. For example, the number of
   electors of a Temple Committee or the number
   for a Municipality is liable to fluctuation.
   Residence for a particular period, or the attaining
   of age of minors can bring in new electors.
   Whereas in the case of a Select Committee, the
   number is fixed…”

   In the case of unitholders, the number is
   fluctuating and ever changing and, therefore,
   indefinite. Numbers of unitholders can increase,
   decrease and change with purchase or
   redemption. Therefore, in the context of clause
(c) of
Regulation 18(15)
, we would not, in the
   absence of any express stipulation, prescribe a
   minimum quorum and read the requirement of
   ‘consent by the majority of the unitholders’ as
   consent by majority of all the unitholders. On the
   other hand, it would mean majority of unitholders
   who exercise their right and vote in support or to
   reject the proposal to wind up the mutual fund
   scheme. The unitholders who did not exercise
   their choice/option cannot be counted as either
   negative or positive votes as either denying or
   giving consent to the proposal for winding up.
18. Investment in share market, though beneficial and
attractive, requires expertise in portfolio construction,
stock selection and market timing. In view of attendant
risks, diversification of portfolio is preferred but this
Page 31 of 77
consequentially requires a larger investment. Mutual funds
managed by professional fund managers with advantages
of pooling of funds and operational efficiency are the
preferred mode of investment for ordinary and common
persons. It would be wrong to expect that many amongst
these unitholders would have definitive opinion required
and necessary voting in a poll on winding up of a mutual
fund scheme. Such unitholders, for varied reasons, like
lack of understanding and expertise, small holding etc.,
would prefer to abstain, leaving it to others to decide. Such
abstention or refusal to express opinion cannot be
construed as either accepting or rejecting the proposals.
Keeping in view the object and purpose of the Regulation
with the language used therein, we would not accept a
‘construction’ which would lead to commercial chaos and
deadlock. Therefore, silence on the part of absentee
unitholders can neither be taken as an acceptance nor
rejection of the proposal.
Regulation 18(15)(c)
, upon
application in ground reality, must not be interpreted in a
manner to frustrate the very law and objective/purpose for
which it was enacted. We would rather accept a
reasonable and pragmatic ‘construction’ which furthers the
legislative purpose and objective. The underlying thrust
behind
Regulation 18(15)(c)
is to inform the unitholders of
the reason and cause for the winding up of the scheme
and to give them an opportunity to accept and give their
consent or reject the proposal. It is not to frustrate and
make winding up an impossibility. Way back in 1943,
Sutherland in Statutes and Statutory Construction, Volume
2, Third Edition at page no. 523, in Note 5109, had stated:
“Where a statue has received a contemporaneous
    and practical interpretation and the statute as
    interpreted is re-enacted, the practical interpretation
    is accorded greater weight than it ordinarily
    receives, and is regarded presumptively the correct
    interpretation of the law. The rule is based upon the
    theory that the legislature is acquainted with the
    contemporaneous interpretation of a statue,
    especially, when made by an administrative body or
    executive officers charged with the duty of
    administering or enforcing the law, and therefore
Page 32 of 77
impliedly adopts     the    interpretation   upon   re-
enactment.”

             With some modifications, the principle can be applied in
             the present case. Practical interpretation should be
             accorded greater weight than it ordinarily receives, and
             can be regarded as presumptively correct interpretation as
             the draftsmen legislate to bring about a functional and
             working result.
19. We would not read into
Regulation 18(15)(c)
a need to
             have affirmative consent of majority of all or entire pool of
             unitholders. The words ‘all’ or ‘entire’ are not incorporated
             and found in the said Regulation. Thus, consent of the
             unitholders for the purpose of clause (c) to sub-regulation
             (15) of
Regulation 18
would mean simple majority of the
             unitholders present and voting.”

            The above interpretation resolves several grey areas and

      would underpin the construction of Regulations 39 to 42 and their

      interplay with
Regulation 18(15)(c)
.
29.   The quotation highlights that interpretation is sometimes a three-
stage process. At first, the words being interpreted should be

      understood according to their grammatical meaning in their literal

      and popular sense. In the second stage, we consider whether in the

      given context the plain meaning is obscure as the text gives rise to

      choice of more than one interpretation, or the propositional

      interpretation fails to achieve the manifest purpose of the legislation,

      reduces it to futility, is practically unworkable or even illogical. In

      such cases at the third stage, the court applying interpretative tools
Page 33 of 77
selects or blue-pencils an interpretation advancing the legislative

      intent without rewriting the provision. The legislative intent is

      gathered not by restricting it to the language of the provision, rather

      in the light of the object and purpose of the provision and the

      legislation. The courts do lean towards a pragmatic and purposive

      interpretation as there is an assumption that the draftsmen legislate

      to bring about a functional and working result.
Harmonious interpretation of
Regulation 18(15)(c)
with Regulations
39 to 42
30.   Regulation 39(2) under clause (a) vests the power of winding up of a

      scheme with the trustees, and with the unitholders under clause (b)

      and with the SEBI under clause (c), but under
Regulation 18(15)(c)
,

      the trustees are required to seek consent of the unit holders, when

      they by majority decide to wind up a scheme.
Regulation 18(15)(c)
mirrored by use of the word ‘shall’ is couched as a command.

      Further, the expression ‘when the majority of the trustees decide to

      wind up’ in
Regulation 18(15)(c)
manifestly refers to clause (a) to

      Regulation 39(2) as this is the only Regulation which entitles the

      trustees to wind up the scheme.
Regulation 18(15)(c)
, when it refers

      to trustees’ decision to wind up, it implies the trustees’ opinion to

      wind up the scheme. Rather than making the decision of the

      trustees otiose, as suggested by SEBI, the trustees and the AMC,
Page 34 of 77
Regulation 18(15)(c)
itself would become otiose in case their

      interpretation is accepted. Principle of harmonious construction

      should be applied which, in the context of the Regulations in

      question, would mean that the opinion of the trustees would stand,

      but the consent of the unitholders is a pre-requisite for winding up.
31.   We do not think that this interpretation in any way dilutes or renders

      clause (b) to Regulation 39(2) meaningless or redundant. This

      clause applies where the winding up process is initiated at the

      instance of the unitholders, i.e. upon 75% of unitholders of the

      scheme passing a resolution for winding up. Clause (b) does not in

      any manner reflect that clause (c) to
Regulation 18(15)
should not

      be read as it ordains in simple words.
32.   Regulation 41, as explained above, refers to and relates to the

      procedure and manner of winding up which cannot be equated with

      the requirement of consent as postulated by
Regulation 18(15)(c)
.

      Argument to the contrary, equating
Regulation 18(15) (c)
with

      Regulation 41(1) overlooks the difference in language, and the

      object and purpose behind the two regulations. Regulation 41(1)

      applies even in cases where 75% unitholders have passed the

      resolution for winding up of the scheme under Regulation 39(2)(b) or

      where SEBI directs the scheme to be wound up in the interest of the
Page 35 of 77
unitholders under Regulation 39(2)(c). On the other hand
Regulation

      18(15)(c)
applies only when majority of the trustees form an opinion

      and decide to wind up or prematurely redeem the units in entirety, a

      situation covered by Regulation 39(2)(a). To ignore the mandate of
Regulation 18(15)(c)
would nullify the legislative intent by resorting

      to a rather disordered and knotted argument that Regulations

      18(15)(c) and 41(1) are identical and serve the same purpose.

      Clause (c) to
Regulation 18(15)
does not duplicate sub-regulation

      (1) to Regulation 41.
33.   Similarly, omission of clause (d) to
Regulation 18(15)
and insertion

      of 18(15A) with effect from 22nd May 2000 by SEBI (Mutual Funds)

      (Second Amendment) Regulations, 2000 is inconsequential. Prior to

      its omission, clause (d) to
Regulation 18(15)
read:
“(d) when any change in the fundamental attributes of
              any scheme or the trust or fees and expenses payable
              or any other change which would modify the scheme or
              affect the interest of the unitholders is proposed to be
              carried out unless the consent of not less than three-
              fourths of the unit holders is obtained: Provided that no
              such change shall be carried out unless three fourths
              of the unit holders have given their consent and the
              unit holders who do not give their consent are allowed
              to redeem their holdings in the scheme.
Provided further that in case of an open ended scheme,
              the consent of the unitholders shall not be necessary if:
(i) the change in fundamental attribute is carried out
              after one year from the date of allotment of units.
Page 36 of 77
(ii) the unitholders are informed about the proposed
                    change in fundamental attribute by sending individual
                    communication and an advertisement is given in
                    English daily newspaper having nationwide circulation
                    and in a newspaper published in the language of the
                    region where the head office of the mutual fund is
                    situated.
(iii) the unitholders are given an option to exit at the
                    prevailing Net Asset Value without any exit load.
Explanation: For the purposes               of this clause
                    "fundamental attributes" means              the investment
                    objective and terms of a scheme."
By the same amendment9, sub-regulation (15A) has been

          inserted and reads:
“(15A) The trustees shall ensure that no change in the
                    fundamental attributes of any scheme or the trust or
                    fees and expenses payable or any other change which
                    would modify the scheme and affects the interest of
                    unitholders, shall be carried out, unless –
(i) a written communication about the proposed
                       change Is sent to each unitholder and an
                       advertisement is given in one English daily
                       newspaper having nationwide circulation as well
                       as in a newspaper published in the language of
                       region where the Head Office of the mutual fund
                       is situated; and
(ii) the unitholders are given an option to exit at
                       the prevailing Net Asset Value without any exit
                       load.”

                 The distinction between
Regulation 18(15A)
and
Regulation

          18(15)(c)
is evident. The words ‘winding up or premature
9   SEBI (Mutual Funds) (Second Amendment) Regulations, 2000.
Page 37 of 77
redemption of units’ in
Regulation 18(15)(c)
refers to a situation

      covered by Regulation 39(2)(a), that is, when the scheme is being

      wound up pursuant to a decision of the trustees. On the other hand,
Regulation 18(15A)
does not apply when the scheme is being

      wound up, rather it applies when there is a proposal to change the

      fundamental attributes of the scheme, fee or expense or any other

      change that would modify the scheme and affect the interests of the

      unitholders. The effect should be not to wind up the scheme thereby

      bringing it to an end, but to continue with the scheme as modified.

      Therefore, for
Regulation 18(15A)
to apply, the scheme should not

      cease to exist.
34.   In cases under clause (a) to Regulation 39(2) the unitholders have

      no right or option to exit or not exit the scheme and are paid in terms

      of Regulation 41.
Regulation 18(15A)
gives the option to the

      unitholders to exit at the prevailing ‘Net Asset Value’ without any exit

      load or continue with the altered/modified scheme. Under the

      omitted clause (d) to
Regulation 18(15)
, consent of three-fourths of

      the unitholders for fundamental changes to the scheme was

      sometimes necessary. This is not necessary under
Regulation

      18(15A)
. Omission of clause (d) to sub-regulation 18(15) and

      insertion of sub-regulation (15A) to
Regulation 18
, as observed

      above is inconsequential and not relevant to the present dispute. If
Page 38 of 77
anything, the draftsmen having retained clause (c) to 18(15), re-
enforces its link with clause (a) to Regulation 39(2). Accordingly, the

      need to obtain consent of the unitholders is mandated under clause
(c) to sub-regulation 15 to
Regulation 18
when the trustees under

      clause (a) to Regulation 39(2) decide to wind up a scheme.
35.   The argument that the unitholders are lay persons and not well-
versed with the market conditions is to be rejected in light of the

      order dated 12th February 2021. Relevant portion of this order, at the

      risk of repetition, is being reproduced below:
“18. Investment in share market, though beneficial and
              attractive, requires expertise in portfolio construction,
              stock selection and market timing. In view of attendant
              risks, diversification of portfolio is preferred but this
              consequentially requires a larger investment. Mutual
              funds managed by professional fund managers with
              advantages of pooling of funds and operational
              efficiency are the preferred mode of investment for
              ordinary and common persons. It would be wrong to
              expect that many amongst these unitholders would
              have definitive opinion required and necessary voting
              in a poll on winding up of a mutual fund scheme. Such
              unitholders, for varied reasons, like lack of
              understanding and expertise, small holding etc., would
              prefer to abstain, leaving it to others to decide. Such
              abstention or refusal to express opinion cannot be
              construed as either accepting or rejecting the
              proposals. Keeping in view the object and purpose of
              the Regulation with the language used therein, we
              would not accept a ‘construction’ which would lead to
              commercial chaos and deadlock. Therefore, silence on
              the part of absentee unitholders can neither be taken
              as an acceptance nor rejection of the proposal.
Page 39 of 77
Regulation 18(15)(c)
, upon application in ground
        reality, must not be interpreted in a manner to frustrate
        the very law and objective/purpose for which it was
        enacted. We would rather accept a reasonable and
        pragmatic ‘construction’ which furthers the legislative
        purpose and objective. The underlying thrust behind
Regulation 18(15)(c)
is to inform the unitholders of the
        reason and cause for the winding up of the scheme
        and to give them an opportunity to accept and give
        their consent or reject the proposal. It is not to frustrate
        and make winding up an impossibility….”

      Investments by the unitholders constitute the corpus of the

scheme. To deny the unitholders a say, when
Regulation 18(15)(c)
requires their consent, debilitates their role and right to participate. It

is an in-contestable position that the unitholders exercise informed

choice and discretion when they invest or redeem the units.
Regulations envision the unitholders not as domain experts, albeit

as discerning investors who are perceptive and prudent. The

trustees are therefore commanded to inform and be transparent.
Summary reports, periodic and continual statements, annual

reports, audit reports, etc., mentioned in paragraph 11 above are

intended to reveal the current status of the investments, future

prospects, risks and factors that may have bearing on the returns to

enable the unitholders to take deliberative decisions, be it purchase,

redemption or exercise of the right to vote. The unitholders, when in

doubt, as prudent investors may be advised to abstain, but they are

not placid onlookers, impuissant and helpless when the trustees
Page 40 of 77
decide to wind up the scheme in which they have invested. The

      stature and rights of the unitholders can co-exist with the expertise

      of the trustees and should not be diluted because the trustees owe a

      fiduciary duty to them. Thus, the contention that the trustees being

      specialists and experts in the field, their decision should be treated

      as binding and fait accompli has to be rejected not only in view of

      the specific language of
Regulation 18(15)(c)
, but to be in concinnity

      with the objective and purpose of the Regulations.
36.   A hypothetical submission that the unitholders may reject a valid

      and well-considered opinion of the trustees for winding up, and

      therefore
Regulation 18(15)(c)
is directory, should be rejected.

      Assumptions cannot be a ground to wrongly interpret
Regulation

      18(15)(c)
. Situations could arise when the trustees may err in their

      opinion, in which event the unitholders may correct them. Money

      and investment of the unitholders being at stake, a wrong decision

      would obviously have inimical impact on the unitholders themselves.

      We would brace the argument that a good and intelligible decision of

      winding up would invariably be accepted by the unitholders.
37.   ‘Consent’ for the purpose of
Regulation 18(15)(c)
refers to the

      consent of the majority of the unitholders present and voting, and in

      case of a poll, the computation would be with reference to the
Page 41 of 77
number of units held by the unitholder. In fact, in the course of

      hearing, it was conceded that majority of the unitholders belong to

      provident fund trusts or pension funds. The voting pattern referred to

      in our earlier order reflects that voting under
Regulation 18(15)(c)
is

      possible and can work smoothly without much difficulty. The

      apprehensions expressed, therefore, do not carry much weight. It is

      obvious that where the unitholders vote against winding up,

      consequences would follow and accordingly the scheme would not

      be wound up. This is a natural and normal consequence which will

      have to be given effect to. It would, as stated above, happen rarely

      and that too would not happen without any genuine and good

      reason.
38.   SEBI is a Member of International Organisation of Securities

      Commissions (IOSCO). IOSCO in a consultation report published in

      August, 2016 on good practices for the termination of investment

      funds, states that the termination plan should identify rationale for

      terminating the investment fund. Key steps to be taken as part of the

      termination process should be identified. Clauses (28), (29) and (30)

      of the good practices under the heading ‘Decision to terminate’ read

      as follows:
“28. In the majority of cases, the decision to terminate
                is that of the responsible entity. However, in some
                jurisdictions national law or regulatory requirements will
Page 42 of 77
mandate that the decision of the responsible entity is
              approved by investors, or the custodian in some cases.
              The first step in preparing for the voluntary termination
              of an investment fund is to determine whether investor
              approval is required. This may depend on the legal
              structure of the investment fund and whether voting
              rights are attributed to shares / units.
29. Investment in an investment fund usually carries
              with it the right to vote on certain matters and the voting
              requirements for the approval of investors on, inter alia,
              liquidations and terminations are generally prescribed
              in the constitutional documents and the prospectus /
              offering document of the investment fund, or legal and
              regulatory regime of the national regulator, or both. The
              termination plan should set out the process for
              obtaining investor approval, where required.
30. Where investor approval is required and investors
              are asked to vote on the decision to terminate with the
              outcome achieving the minimum voting requirements
              for approval, the decision is binding on all, including
              those who do not vote. Where investor approval is
              required, the rights of investors should be clear from
              the termination plan. In particular, the termination plan
              should document how the interests of dissenting
              investors will be treated.”

      Good practices, as recommended by IOSCO, commend the

      unitholders’ right to vote/approve on matters of termination and

      liquidation.
39.   On and from the date of publication of notices under Regulation

      39(3), the cease and freeze effect of Regulation 40 applies. The

      words used in sub-regulation (3) to Regulation 39 are ‘where a

      scheme is to be wound up in sub-regulation (2)’, that is, a scheme is
Page 43 of 77
to be wound up in terms of clauses (a), (b) or (c) to Regulation

      39(2). Sub-regulation (3) to Regulation 39 also mandates the

      trustees to disclose in the public notice the circumstances leading to

      winding up of the scheme. This obviously means that where the

      trustees form an opinion to wind up a scheme, they must disclose

      the reasons, and thereupon, the unitholders exercise their right to

      vote and give or deny consent. This is the true legal effect on

      harmonious reading of
Regulation 18(15)(c)
and Regulation

      39(2)(a).
40.   The language of clauses (a) and (c) to sub-regulation (2), and sub-
regulation (3) to Regulation 39 does not envisage involvement of the

      unitholders till the publication of notices in case of clauses (b) and
(c) to sub-regulation (2) to Regulation 39. Therefore, when clauses
(a) or (c) of Regulation 39(2) apply, the unitholders are to be

      informed about the winding up by the trustees or SEBI by way of

      public notice. Publication in terms of Regulation 39(3) is even

      required when the unitholders vote for winding up of a scheme

      under clause (b) of Regulation 39(2).
41.   It is manifest that publication of notices under Regulation 39(3)

      should be instantaneous without any interstice between the decision

      of winding up by the trustees under clause (a), by the unitholders
Page 44 of 77
under clause (b) or by SEBI under clause (c). Delay would hold up

      the cease-and-freeze effect of Regulation 40 and consequently

      nullify the salutary purpose and object behind it.
42.   In view of the above discussion and harmoniously interpreting

      Regulations 39 to 42, we hold that the consent of the unitholders, as

      envisaged under clause (c) to
Regulation 18(15)
, is not required

      before publication of the notices under Regulation 39(3). Consent of

      the unitholders should be sought post publication of the notice and

      disclosure of the reasons for winding up under Regulation 39(3).
43.   Read in this manner, we can interpret clause (c) to
Regulation

      18(15)
and Regulations 39 to 42 without the disarray as suggested,

      while not displacing the legal effect of either Regulation 40 or
Regulation 18(15)(c)
. This interpretation takes care of the

      apprehension expressed by SEBI, the trustees and AMC that delay

      or time gap between a decision of the trustees under clause (a) to

      sub-regulation (2) to Regulation 39 and publication of notice under

      sub-regulation (3) to Regulation 39 would postpone the cease-and-

      freeze effect of Regulation 40.
44.   We have referred to Regulation 41(1) and that it requires calling of a

      meeting of the unitholders for authorising the trustees or any other

      person to take steps for winding up of the scheme. In case where
Page 45 of 77
the scheme is being wound up under Regulation 39(2)(a), it is

      possible to hold a meeting of the unitholders under the said

      provision where if the resolution for winding up is passed, the

      unitholders can also decide by simple majority of the unitholders

      present and voting whether the trustees or any other person should

      take steps for winding up of the said scheme. One meeting in many

      a cases would suffice.
45.   To complete interpretation of
Regulation 18(15)
, we have to record

      that clause (a) applies and requires the trustees to obtain consent of

      the unitholders whenever required by SEBI in the interest of the

      unitholders. Clause (b) states that the trustees would obtain consent

      of the unitholders whenever required to do so on the requisition

      made by three-fourths of the unitholders of any scheme.

      Accordingly, clause (a) would apply whenever SEBI mandates and

      clause (b) applies whenever three-fourths of the unitholders of the

      scheme make a requisition.
46.   The impugned judgment, from paragraph 211 onwards, specifically

      refers to the responsibilities and duties of the trustees incorporated

      in the statement of additional information published by the mutual

      fund, which reads:
“(b) The Trustees shall obtain consent of the unit
              holders of the Scheme(s):
Page 46 of 77
i) When the Trustee is required to do so by SEBI in the
              interests of the unit-holders; or
ii) Upon the request of three-fourths of the unit holders
              of any Scheme(s) under the Mutual Fund; or
iii) If a majority of the directors of the Trustee company
              decide to wind up the Scheme(s) or prematurely
              redeem the units.”


            Clause    (iii)   of   the   aforesaid   quotation    dealing    with

      responsibilities and duties of the trustees, requires the trustees to

      obtain consent of the unitholders of the scheme if the majority of the

      directors of the trustee company decide to wind up the scheme or

      prematurely redeem the units. The language of clause (iii) of the

      aforesaid quotation is identical to clause (c) of sub-regulation (15) to
Regulation 18
. The High Court was, therefore, right in observing that

      the trustees and the AMC have understood and accepted that the

      consent of unitholders of the scheme would be necessary if the

      majority of the directors of the trustee company decide to wind up a

      scheme.
47.   The impugned judgment, in paragraph 221, observes that no

      material was placed on record to show compliance with sub-

      regulation (3) to Regulation 39. The trustees and AMC have

      disputed the said position by relying upon notice dated 23rd April
Page 47 of 77
2020 enclosed at page 1262 and the newspaper publications in both

      English and vernacular languages made on 24th April 2020 enclosed

      at pages 3304-3313. In view of the aforesaid factual position, which

      was not seriously disputed by most of the unitholders, we would

      accept that there was compliance with clause (b) of sub-regulation

      (3) to Regulation 39 and accordingly the cease and freeze effect of

      Regulation 40 had become effective.
48.   Our attention was drawn to the Circular dated 31st May 2016 issued

      by SEBI as per which the trustees have the option to suspend

      redemption of units for a period of 10 days in a period of 90 days.

      The relevant portion of the said circular reads as under:
“b. Restriction on redemption may be imposed for a
              specified period of time not exceeding 10 working days
              in any 90 days period”



      SEBI has taken the stand that the benefit of this circular should not

      be taken when the question of winding up is pending consideration

      before the trustees. The position not being ironclad, SEBI may re-
examine whether the trustees/AMC can be permitted to take similar

      benefit pending the decision on the question of winding up, when

      they face frightful redemption pressure.
Page 48 of 77
Challenge to the constitutional validity of the Securities and
Exchange Board of India (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996
49.   This challenge has been raised by one of the appellants, namely,

      Amruta Garg. The contentions forwarded can be summarised as

      under:
(a) The expression ‘happening of any event’ in Regulation 39(2)(a)

            is unspecified and suffers from the vice of excessive delegation

            as it does not give any indication of the type of events which

            would be relevant for winding up of the scheme. It gives

            unbridled power to the trustees to wind up a scheme which, in

            the opinion of the trustees, should be wound up.
(b) In comparison, vide clause (c) to Regulation 39(2), SEBI has

            been invested with the power to issue directions for winding up

            a mutual fund scheme only when it is in the interest of the

            unitholders.
(c)   Further, SEBI has not prescribed/issued guidelines or policy

            regarding formation of opinion by the trustees to wind up the

            scheme.
(d) The opinion of the trustees is given paramountcy and is

            supreme. Even SEBI accepts that it has no role and cannot

            examine and set aside the decision of the trustees. Thus, SEBI,

            as per its own contention and submission, being bound by the
Page 49 of 77
opinion of the trustees, cannot interfere even when it is

             necessary to do so in the interest of unitholders or when the

             trustees have acted in their own vested interest. This is contrary

             to the scheme of the
SEBI Act
whereunder SEBI has been

             constituted primarily to act as a watchdog and to protect

             interests of the investors in the capital market, including the

             unitholders.
(e) There is no provision for appeal or internal challenge against

             the decision of the trustees who may in a given case form a

             wrong opinion regarding winding up of the scheme.
(f) For the above reasons, clause (a) to Regulation 39(2) suffers

             from manifest arbitrariness in the absence of any prescription

             regulating the exercise of the power by the trustees. Reliance is

             placed upon
State of Tamil Nadu and Another v. T.

             Krishnamurthy and Others
;10
Shayara Bano v. Union of

             India and Others
;11
Senior Superintendent of Post Offices,

             Allahabad and Others v. Izhar Hussain
;12 Director General,

             Central Reserve Police Force and Others v. Janardan Singh

             and Others.13




10 (2006) 4 SCC 517
11 (2017) 9 SCC 1
12 (1989) 4 SCC 318
13 (2018) 7 SCC 656
Page 50 of 77
(g) Regulation 39(3) equally suffers from the vice of manifest

    arbitrariness as SEBI merely acts as a drop-box. Though the

    trustees are required to give notice disclosing circumstances

    leading to winding up of the scheme to SEBI, this requirement is

    meaningless and superficial as SEBI cannot go into the

    question and circumstances to be satisfied as to existence of an

    event warranting the extreme action of winding up.
(h) Regulation 41(2)(b) is manifestly arbitrary as it states that the

    sale proceeds under clause (a) shall be first discharged for such

    liabilities as are due and payable under the scheme and only

    the balance amount shall be paid to the unitholders in

    proportion to their respective interests in the assets of the

    scheme as on the date of the decision for winding up was

    taken. Regulation 41 does not prescribe any mechanism or

    manner in which the authorised person or the AMC can

    ascertain the liabilities which are due and payable under the

    scheme. Secondly, the unitholders have been placed below the

    creditors of the scheme and would therefore receive only the

    leftover. This undermines the paramount place and position of

    the unitholders. Further, the SEBI has failed to protect the

    interest of the unitholders who are not only financial creditors

    but, as explicitly provided in
Regulation 18(12)
, their money is
Page 51 of 77
held in the mutual fund in trust and for their benefit. Reliance is

                placed upon
Pioneer Urban Land and Infrastructure Limited

                and Another v. Union of India and Others14
where the home

                buyers have been held to be financial creditors under the Indian

                Bankruptcy Code. Principle of pari passu should be made

                applicable.
(i)   Regulation 42 is also manifestly arbitrary as SEBI is to perform

                only ministerial functions, much less than the functions of a

                regulator. Conspicuously, during the winding up process, SEBI

                has been given a minimalistic role which is contrary to the

                paramount object of the Act.
50.       We would begin by referring to the provisions of the
SEBI Act
and

          by elucidating the powers of SEBI.
Section 11
of the SEBI Act

          prescribes the functions of SEBI. Sub-section (1), in general terms,

          states that it will be the duty of SEBI to protect the interests of

          investors in securities and to promote the development of, and to

          regulate, the securities market. SEBI is empowered to take

          measures in this regard as it thinks fit. Sub-section (2), without

          prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), lists out as many as 17

          specific clauses and states that SEBI is entitled to provide for

          measures relating to those clauses. Thereunder, Clause (e) relates

14   (2019) 8 SCC 416
Page 52 of 77
to prohibiting fraudulent and unfair trade practices relating to

securities markets. Clause (g) concerns prohibition of insider trading

in securities. Clauses (b), (i), (ia), (ib) and (la) relate to registering

and working of the trustees or trust deeds, investment advisors and

such other intermediaries who may be associated with the securities

market in any manner and permits SEBI to call for information from,

undertaking inspection, conducting inquiries and audits of mutual

funds and other persons associated with the securities market,

intermediaries and self-regulatory organisations. They can also ask

for records from any persons, including any bank, any other

authority or board or corporation established or constituted by or

under a central or state Act relevant for investigation or inquiry by

SEBI. It is also authorised to call for and require any agency to

furnish information as may be considered necessary by SEBI for

discharge of its functions. Clause (m) is a residuary clause which

states that SEBI can perform such other functions as may be

prescribed. Sub-section (2A) to
Section 11
is a non-obstante

provision which authorises SEBI to take measures to undertake

inspection of any book or register or other document or record of

any listed public company or a public company, etc. which intends to

get its securities listed on a recognised stock exchange. Sub-section

(3), again, is a non-obstante provision and states that SEBI shall
Page 53 of 77
exercise the same powers as are vested in a civil court under
the

Code of Civil Procedure
while trying a suit in respect of discovery

and production of books of account and other documents,

summoning and enforcing attendance of persons and examining

them on oath, inspection of any books, registers and documents of

any person referred to in
Section 12
, inspection of any book, or

register, or document, or record of a company, and issuing

commissions for examination of witnesses or documents. Sub-

section (4) states that without prejudice to the provisions contained

in sub-section (1), (2), (2A) and (3) and
Section 11B
, SEBI may, by

an order in writing in the interest of the investors or securities

market, take the measures stipulated thereunder either pending

investigation or inquiry or upon completion of investigation or

inquiry. These include suspension of trading of any security;

restraining any person from accessing security markets; attaching,

for a period not exceeding 90 days subject to conditions and for a

further period beyond 90 days subject to confirmation by the special

court, bank accounts and other properties of any intermediary or any

person associated with the securities market in any manner involved

in violation of the provisions of the
SEBI Act
, or Rules or

Regulations made thereunder; direct any intermediary associated

with securities market in any manner not to dispose of or alienate
Page 54 of 77
any asset forming part of any transaction under investigation subject

      to the condition that before or after passing such orders an

      opportunity of hearing shall be given to such intermediaries or

      persons concerned. Sub-section (4A) authorises SEBI to conduct an

      inquiry in the prescribed manner notwithstanding the provisions of

      sub-sections (1), (2), (2A), (3) and (4),
Section 11B
and
Section 15-I
by an order and for reasons to be recorded in writing levy penalty

      under
Sections 15A
,
15B
, etc. Under sub-section (5), the amount

      disgorged pursuant to the directions issued under
Section 11B
of

      the Act or 12
A of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956
etc. is to be credited to the Investor Protection and Education Fund

      established by SEBI and to be utilised in accordance with the

      regulations framed under the Act.
51.
Section 11B
of the Act reads as under:
“Power to issue directions and levy penalty.– (1)
              Save as otherwise provided in
section 11
, if after
              making or causing to be made an enquiry, the Board is
              satisfied that it is necessary–
(i) In the interest of investors, or orderly development
              of securities market; or
(ii) to prevent the affairs of any intermediary or other
              persons referred to in section 12 being conducted in a
              manner detrimental to the interests of investors or
              securities market; or
Page 55 of 77
(iii) to secure the proper management of any such
              intermediary or person,

              it may issue such directions, –
(a) to any person or class of persons referred to in
section 12
, or associated with the securities market;
or
(b) to any company in respect of matters specified in
section 11
A,

              as may be appropriate in the interests of investors in
              securities and the securities market.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in
              sub-section (1), subsection (4A) of
section 11
and
section 15-I
, the Board may, by an order, for reasons to
              be recorded in writing, levy penalty under
sections 15A
,
15B
,
15C
,
15D
,
15E
, 15EA,
15F
,
15G
,
15H
,
15HA
and
15HB
after holding an inquiry in the prescribed manner.

              Explanation.– For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
              declared that the power to issue directions under this
              section shall include and always be deemed to have
              been included the power to direct any person, who
              made profit or averted loss by indulging in any
              transaction or activity in contravention of the provisions
              of this Act or regulations made thereunder, to disgorge
              an amount equivalent to the wrongful gain made or loss
              averted by such contravention.”
52.   As the heading of
Section 11B
states, the provision empowers SEBI

      to issue directions and levy penalty. It stipulates that such powers

      can be exercised if and after making or causing any inquiry SEBI is

      satisfied that it is necessary – (i) in the interest of the investors or

      orderly development of the securities market, (ii) to prevent affairs of
Page 56 of 77
any intermediary or other persons referred to in
Section 12
being

conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of the investors or

securities market; or (iii) to secure proper management of such

intermediary or person. SEBI may issue directions to – (a) any

person or class of persons referred to in
Section 12
or associated

with the securities market, or (b) to a company in respect of the

matters specified in
Section 11A
as may be appropriate, in the

interest of the investors in securities and in the securities market.

The explanation to the Section is important for it clarifies, by way of

removal of doubt, that the directions under this Section shall include

and shall always deem to include power to direct any person, who

has made profit or averted loss by indulging in any transaction or

activity in contravention of the provisions of the Act, or regulations

made thereunder, to disgorge an amount equivalent to the wrongful

gain made or loss averted by such contravention. The provisions of
Section 11B
have been held to be procedural in nature and include

not only an individual but also a company. Therefore, any person

associated with the securities market who commits breach of the
SEBI Act
, Rules and Regulations, can be subjected to such

directions and measures as may be imposed and issued by SEBI.

Sub-section (2) to
Section 11B
states that SEBI may after holding

an inquiry pass an order in writing, and, without prejudice to the
Page 57 of 77
provisions of Section (11), levy penalty under
Sections 15A
,
15B
,

      etc.
53.   Referring to the provisions, the Division Bench of the High Court in

      the impugned judgement has held as under:
“291. Another question is about the powers of SEBI
             under
Section 11B
of the SEBI Act. We have already
             held that the power to issue directions under
Section
             11B(1)
can be exercised to issue directions to AMC
             and the Trustees. The said direction can be issued
             when SEBI, after making or causing to be made an
             enquiry, is satisfied that (a) it is necessary to issue
             directions in the interest of investors or orderly
             development of securities market; (b) to prevent the
             affairs of any intermediary or other persons referred to
             in
Section 12
being conducted in a manner detrimental
             to the interests of investors of securities market; or (c)
             to secure the proper management of any such
             intermediary or person. The first question is whether
             SEBI has power to interfere with the decision taken by
             the Trustees under Regulation 39(2)(a). If SEBI is to
             test the correctness or validity of such decision of the
             Trustees, an adjudication is required. The Trustees and
             AMG will have to be heard in the adjudication process.
Section 11B
does not contemplate any such
             adjudication. If an entity to whom a direction under
Section 11B
has been issued commits any breach
             thereof or disobeys the same, it will attract penalty
             under
Section 15HB
. Before imposing penalty,
             adjudication as contemplated by
Section 15-I
is
             required to be made. There is no provision made in
SEBI Act
for issuing a notice of the proposed direction
             under
Section 11B
and hearing the Trustees or AMC
             before issuing the direction. No adjudication is
             contemplated before issuing the directions. Therefore,
             it is not possible for this Court to accept the contention
             of the petitioners, AMC as well as the Trustees that by
             exercising power under
Section 11B
, SEBI has power
Page 58 of 77
to adjudicate upon the correctness of the decision
              taken by the Trustees to wind up a Scheme. However,
              when SEBI finds that the Trustees or AMC are not
              abiding by the specific provisions of the Mutual Funds
              Regulations, the power to issue directions can be
              exercised by SEBI. By way of illustration, we refer to
              hypothetical cases. After invoking the provisions of
              Regulation 39(2)(a), if the Trustees stop redemption the
              units by taking recourse to Regulation 40 without
              complying with the mandatory requirements of sub-
              clause (a) and (b) of clause (3) of Regulation 39, SEBI
              can always issue a direction under
Section 11B
not to
              stop redemptions, unless compliance is made with
              clause (3) of Regulation 39. If it is found that the
              Trustees continue to carry on business activities of the
              Schemes even after action under clause (3) of
              Regulation 39 is taken, a direction under
Section 11-B
can be issued by SEBI to stop all business activities.”
54.   We have reservations on the said observations for the simple

      reason that if there is a violation of the regulations, i.e. clause (a) to

      Regulation 39(2), 39(3), 40, 41 or 42 by the trustees or the AMC, it

      is open to SEBI to proceed in accordance with law and in terms of
Section 11
and
11B
of the Act. It would be, therefore, incorrect to

      state that the decision of the trustees under clause (a) to Regulation

      39(2) cannot be made subject matter of inquiry or investigation and

      therefore no directions or orders under
Section 11
or 11B of the Act

      can be passed. No doubt, clause (a) to Regulation 39(2) gives

      primacy to the opinion of the trustees and does not require prior

      approval of SEBI, yet SEBI is entitled to conduct an inquiry and

      investigation when justified and necessary to ascertain whether the
Page 59 of 77
trustees have acted in accordance with their fiduciary duty and also

          for reasons which would fall within the four corners of clause (a) to

          Regulation 39(2). If the trustees have acted for extraneous and

          irrelevant reasons and considerations, the action would be in

          violation of clause (a) to Regulation 39(2) and therefore amenable to

          action under the
SEBI Act
, including directions under
Section 11B
.
55.       The view we have taken is in consonance with the earlier decision of

          the Gujarat High Court in
Alka Synthetics and Trading v. SEBI,15
wherein it was observed that power under
Section 11B
is in the

          nature of issuing a command to persons referred to in the provision

          to do a certain act or to forbear from doing a certain act, if as a

          result of an enquiry, SEBI is satisfied about the necessity of issuing

          such direction for the purposes mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and (c).

          The Gujarat High Court, in our opinion, rightly observed that while
Section 11
operates in the field of laying down general regulatory

          measures as a matter of policy,
Section 11B
operates in the field of

          prescribing a specified code of conduct in relation to specified

          persons or classes of persons. On the issue of application of

          principles of natural justice, it was noted that
Section 11B
empowers

          SEBI to issue directions only after it is satisfied about the conditions

          referred to in the provision, as a result of making or causing to be

15   (1999) 95 Comp Cas 663
Page 60 of 77
made an enquiry – which necessarily implies a pre-decisional

         hearing.
Similar view was subsequently expressed in
Nikhil T.

         Parikh v. Union of India16
, wherein the same High Court was of the

         view that
Section 11B
, being an enabling provision, must be so

         construed as to subserve the purpose for which it has been enacted.

         As the term ‘measure’ is not defined in the
SEBI Act
, the High Court

         gave it a meaning prescribed in general parlance, as incorporating

         anything desired or done with a view to the accomplishment of a

         purpose, a plan or course of action intended to obtain some object,

         any course of action proposed or adopted by a Government.
The

         Securities Appellate Tribunal in
Sterlite Industries (India) Ltd. v.

         SEBI,17
has given an expansive interpretation to
Section 11
and
Section 11B
of the SEBI Act, observing that they give enormous

         authority to SEBI. As long as the power exercised under
Section

         11B
is subject to the provisions of the
SEBI Act
and well within the

         legal and constitutional frame work, intended to achieve the

         purposes of the
SEBI Act
and subjecting the persons specified in

         the section, the power will sustain. The Appellate Tribunal called it a

         wholesome provision designed to achieve the objectives of the
SEBI

         Act
.
16   (2014) 2 GLH 582
17   2001 SCC OnLine SAT 28.
Page 61 of 77
56.   The Trustees and the AMC in their written submissions filed before

      the High Court interpreting the
SEBI Act
and the Regulations had

      conceded that SEBI has extensive powers with respect to the

      regulation of mutual funds including the trustee’s decision to wind up

      a scheme of the mutual fund.
Section 11(1)
of the SEBI Act states

      that it is the duty of SEBI to protect the interest of investors in

      securities and to promote the development of, and to regulate the

      securities market, by “such measures as it thinks fit”. Under
Section

      11B
of the SEBI Act, SEBI has broad powers to issue appropriate

      directions if it is satisfied after inquiry that such directions are

      necessary in the interest of investors or for orderly development of

      securities market or to prevent the affairs of any intermediary being

      conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of investors or the

      securities market or to secure proper management of any

      intermediary or other person. The power of SEBI extends to

      regulating and monitoring the functioning and decisions taken by

      mutual funds, the trustees and the AMC. SEBI has the power to

      pass any direction if it deems fit in the interest of unitholders. The

      trustees and the AMC have specifically stated:
“It is evident form the aforesaid provisions that the SEBI
              has extensive powers to regulate, supervise, issue
              directions with respect to and inspect and investigate into
              the affairs of a mutual fund, including with respect to the
              decision of the trustee to wind up a mutual fund scheme
Page 62 of 77
under Regulation 39(2)(a) of the Mutual Funds
              Regulations, including to even stop the winding up of a
              mutual fund scheme, if deemed necessary. The
              existence of such powers of the SEBI is further
              reinforced by
Section 11D
of the SEBI Act, which
              empowers the SEBI to pass an order requiring any
              person who, ‘has violated, or is likely to violate, any
              provisions of this Act, or any rules or regulations made
              thereunder” to ‘cease and desist’ from committing such
              violation. It is submitted that whether SEBI would choose
              to exercise this power is a matter, which may be
              determined by SEBI in its wisdom and there may be
              numerous reasons why SEBI may not wish to interfere in
              a winding up decision by a trustee under Regulation
              39(2)(a) including the reasons submitted by SEBI in its
              affidavit such as the fact that reversal of a decision to
              wind up a mutual fund scheme would likely cause a run
              on the scheme as well as severe market contagion
              (Reference is made to Paras 18,19 at Pg. 6 and 7 of
              the Delhi Reply; Paras 34 and 35 at Pg. 11 and 12 of
              the Gujrat Reply; and Paras 11 and 12 at Pgs. 5 and 6
              of the Madras Reply); however, on a reading of the
              scheme of the
SEBI Act
and regulations as a whole, it is
              submitted that it is clear that such a power does exist.”
57.   However, we agree with the High Court that the Regulations have

      been framed in exercise of power conferred by
Section 30
of the

      SEBI Act which authorises them to make regulations consistent with

      the provisions of the
SEBI Act
to carry out the purpose of the
SEBI

      Act
. The very object of the
SEBI Act
is to preserve confidence of the

      investors and to regulate the capital market, including mutual funds.

      In the first portion of this order, we have elaborately referred to the

      Regulations which thereby create a three-tier system of the sponsor,

      the AMC and the trustees. There are stipulations regulating the
Page 63 of 77
activities of the trustees and the AMC whose powers, obligations

      and rights have been expressly laid down. The power to regulate

      mutual funds, once accepted, would include the power to make

      regulations for winding up of a scheme of the mutual fund. Not

      framing any regulation in this regard would have amounted to

      dereliction of duty on the part of SEBI and subjected it to adverse

      comments.
58.   It cannot be accepted that the trustees under clause (a) to

      Regulation 39(2) have been given absolute and unbridled power to

      wind up a scheme. Language of clause (a) to Regulation 39(2)

      states that the trustees must form an opinion on the happening of

      any event which requires the scheme to be wound up. Further, as

      per Regulation 39(3), the trustees are bound to give notice

      disclosing the circumstances leading to the winding up of the

      scheme. These notices along with the reasons have to be

      communicated to SEBI and made known to the unitholders by

      publication in two daily newspapers having circulation all over India

      and a vernacular newspaper having circulation at the place where

      the mutual fund is formed. The trustees are, therefore, required to

      come to a conclusion that due to specific circumstances articulated

      in writing, the scheme is required to be wound up. Two-thirds of the

      trustees are independent persons who are not associated with the
Page 64 of 77
sponsor,18 and no director, officer or employee of the AMC can be

       appointed as a trustee.19 The trustees hold the assets of the scheme

       in fiduciary capacity on behalf of the investors. They are experts in

       the field and, therefore, conferred the power under Regulation

       39(2)(a) to decide whether or not a scheme should be wound up.

       The words used in the statute including delegated legislation are to

       be understood in the light of that particular statute and not in

       isolation. A duly enacted law cannot be struck down on the mere

       ground of vagueness unless such vagueness transcends into the

       realm of arbitrariness (See
Nisha Priya Bhatia v. Union of India

       and Another20
). In the context of the present case, the expression

       ‘occurrence of any event’ is not to be read in isolation but with the

       words ‘requires the scheme to be wound up’. The expression ‘any

       event’ is therefore qualified with the said requirement. Read in this

       manner, there is no vagueness which can be described as

       transcending into realm of arbitrariness, on the other hand, the pre-

       requisite statutory mandate is clear. This is not a case of excessive

       delegation wherein the legislative function has been abdicated and

       passed on to the trustees who can act as per their whims and

       fancies. The essential legislative function is the determination of

       legislative policy and its formulation as a rule of conduct. In
18
Regulation 16(5)
19
Regulation 16(3)
20 (2020)
13
SCC 56
Page 65 of 77
commercial matters varied and different situations can arise which

      may warrant winding up. Complexities in matters of business and

      commerce can be bafflingly intricate and riddled with urgencies and

      difficulties. Therefore, there is need for flexibility. Otherwise, the

      trustees would be compelled to first take the approval of SEBI,

      which may have its own consequences.
59.   The Statement of Additional Information dated 30th June, 2019

      issued by Franklin Templeton Mutual Fund, under Heading VI –

      ‘Duration of the Scheme and Winding Up’, provides a general

      indication as to when a scheme can be wound up under the

      Regulations, the relevant portion of which is extracted below:
“VI. DURATION OF THE SCHEME AND WINDING UP

                             xx        xx           xx

              However, in terms of the SEBI Regulations, the
              Scheme may be wound up if:
i. There are changes in the capital markets, fiscal laws
              or legal system, or any event or series of events
              occurs, which, in the opinion of the Trustee, requires
              the Scheme to be wound up; or

                             xx        xx           xx
                                                                     ”
60.   We have agreed with the High Court that the opinion of the trustees

      under clause (a) to Regulation 39(2), therefore, must be consented

      to by the unitholders in terms of the mandate of Regulation
Page 66 of 77
18(15)(c). In view of this interpretation, the argument challenging

        constitutional validity of the Regulations on the ground that they give

        unbridled and absolute power to the trustees loses much of its sting

        and force. There are, therefore, sufficient guidance and safeguards

        in the Regulations itself on the power of the trustees to decide on

        winding up of the fund.
61.     The Regulations, in our opinion, rightly draw the distinction between

        creditors and the unitholders. The unit holders are investors who

        take the risk and, therefore, entitled to profits and gains. Having

        taken the calculated risk, they must also bear the losses, if any.

        Unitholders are not entitled to fixed return or even protection of the

        principal amount (See Regulations 38 and 38A).21 Creditors, on the

        other hand, are entitled to fixed return as per mutually agreed

        contracts. Their rate of return is in the nature of interest and not

        profit or loss. Creditors are not risk takers as is the case with the

        unitholders. In this sense, unitholders are somewhat at par with the

21 Guaranteed Returns
38. No guaranteed return shall be provided in a scheme, -
(a) unless such returns are fully guaranteed by the sponsor or the asset management company;
(b) unless a statement indicating the name of the person who will guarantee the return, is made in the
offer document;
(c) the manner in which the guarantee is to be met has been stated in the offer document.

Capital Protection oriented schemes
38A. A capital protection oriented scheme may be launched, subject to the following:
(a) the units of the scheme are rated by a registered credit rating agency from the viewpoint of the ability
of its portfolio structure to attain protection of the capital invested therein;
(b) the scheme is close ended; and
(c) there is compliance with such other requirements as may be specified by the Board
in this behalf.
Page 67 of 77
shareholders of a company. The waterfall mechanism under the
Companies Act
, or the Indian Bankruptcy Code, gives primacy to the

      dues of the creditors over the shareholders. Identical is the position

      of the unitholders. In fact, the argument that the unitholders should

      be treated pari passu with the creditors is farfetched. Similarly, the

      contention that unitholders are identically placed as home buyers

      under the Indian Bankruptcy Code is equally frail and a weak

      argument. Home buyers pay money to the builder and enter into a

      contract for purchase of immovable property. Home buyers are not

      risk or partakers in gains or losses like investors in a mutual fund.

      Home buyers under the Bankruptcy Code are treated as creditors till

      the ownership rights in the immovable property are transferred to

      them, but they do not take the risks and are not entitled to benefit of

      profits or suffer losses, as are taken by the unitholders who invest in

      the mutual funds without any guarantee of returns and know that the

      investment, including the principal, are subject to market risks. To

      equate the unitholders with either the creditors or the home buyers

      will be unsound and incongruous.
62.   The expression ‘due and payable’ with reference to the liabilities is

      significant. The words ‘due and payable’ have to be interpreted with
Page 68 of 77
reference to the context in which the words appear.22 In the context

       in question they refer to the present liabilities which may be in

       praesenti or in futuro. There must be an existing obligation though

       the appointed date of payment may not have arrived. ‘Payable’, in

       this context, means capable of being paid, suitable to be paid and

       legally enforceable. It would exclude labilities that are time barred or

       those not payable in facts or in law.23 In case of any dispute a

       summary but thorough inquiry may be made to ascertain whether

       the liability is due and payable.24 Obviously, the liabilities which are

       not due and payable would not get preferential treatment, thereby

       reducing the amounts payable to the unitholders.
63.    Since the Regulations are in the nature of economic regulations,

       while exercising the power of judicial review, we would exercise

       restraint unless clear grounds justify interference. We would not

       supplant our views for that of the experts as this can put the

       marketplace        into    serious      jeopardy       and     cause      unintended

       complications. Policy decisions can only be faulted on the grounds

       of mala fides, unreasonableness, arbitrariness and unfairness, in

       addition to violation of fundamental rights or exercise of power

       beyond the legal limits. The principle of manifest arbitrariness

22
B.K. Educational Services Private Limited v. Parag Gupta and Associates
, (2019) 11 SCC 633.
23
Union of India v. Raman Iron Foundry
, (1974) 2 SCC 231
24 Regulations do not bar civil remedy.
Page 69 of 77
requires something to be done in exercise in the form of delegated

      legislation which is capricious, irrational or without adequate

      determining principle. Delegated legislations that are forbiddingly

      excessive or disproportionate can also be manifestly arbitrary. In

      view of the interpretation placed by us and the discussion above, the

      Regulations under challenge do not suffer from the vice of manifest

      arbitrariness.
64.   However, we must now refer to a grey area, which we would, at this

      stage, not like to decide till we have full facts and decision in the

      adjudication proceedings. The issue relates to interpretation of

      Regulation 53, which reads:
“53. Every mutual fund and asset management
              company shall,
(a) despatch to the unitholders the dividend warrants
              within 189[30] days of the declaration of the dividend;
(b) despatch the redemption or repurchase proceeds
              within 10 working days from the date of redemption or
              repurchase;
(c) in the event of failure to despatch the redemption or
              repurchase proceeds within the period specified in sub-
clause (b), the asset management company shall be
              liable to pay interest to the unitholders at such rate as
              may be specified by SEBI for the period of such delay;
(d) notwithstanding payment of such interest to the unit-
              holders under sub-clause (c), the asset management
              company may be liable for penalty for failure to
Page 70 of 77
despatch the redemption or repurchase proceeds
              within the stipulated time.
Clause (b) to Regulation 53 requires that the AMC shall

      despatch the redemption or repurchase proceeds within 10 working

      days from the date of redemption or repurchase. Regulation 40, as

      noticed above, states that on or from the date of publication of

      notice under Regulation 39(3)(b), the trustees of the AMC, as the

      case may be, shall cease to cancel or create units of the scheme;

      cease to issue or redeem units of the scheme; and cease to carry

      on any business activity in respect of the scheme so wound up.
65.   Issue in question would, therefore, arise whether the AMC or the

      trustees are bound to honour and pay the redemption or repurchase

      proceeds for requests received before the date of publication of

      notice in terms of Regulation 39(3). Interpreting the word ‘business’

      in clause (a) of Regulation 40, the Division Bench of the High Court

      has held that this expression refers to business activity and,

      therefore, would include payment of redemption proceeds to the

      unitholders, which would include the request for redemption

      received prior to the date of publication under Regulation 59(3). The

      High court has, accordingly, held:
“228. As regards redemption requests received prior to
              compliance with clause (3) of Regulation 39, the
              argument of AMC and the Trustees was that in view of
Page 71 of 77
clause (d) of Regulation 53, the redemption or
             repurchase proceeds are required to be dispatched
             within ten working days from the date of redemption
             notwithstanding the decision of winding up. As held
             earlier, the dispatch of redemption proceeds or
             repayment of redemption proceeds is also a part of
             business activity of a Scheme which is completely
             prohibited once the Regulation 40 triggers in.
             Therefore, the argument that the redemption requests
             made by the unit-holders on 23rd April, 2020 were
             required to be honoured even after Regulation 40 had
             triggered in cannot be accepted. Once there is a
             compliance with clause (3) of Regulation 39, the
             mandatory provisions of Regulation 40 forthwith
             operate. There is no exception carved out to any of the
             clauses in Regulation 40. It is obvious that such a
             failure to dispatch the redemption or repurchase
             proceeds due to applicability of provision of Regulation
             40 cannot be termed as a failure within the meaning of
             sub-clause (c) of Regulation 53. Therefore, the
             consequences such as payment of interests and
             penalty as provided in clause (c) of Regulation 53 may
             not follow.”
66.   On the aspect of borrowings etc. by the AMC to make payment

      towards redemption, the High Court has held:
“225. But, in the context of the Scheme of the Mutual
             Funds Regulations, this Court will have to consider the
             meaning of ‘business activities’. As stated in the earlier
             part of our discussion, a Scheme is launched by AMC
             with the approval of the Trustees. There are different
             categories of Schemes in which the investments are
             made by the members of the public. From plain reading
             of the provisions of Regulation 43, it is clear that the
             money received from the unit-holders and investors is
             required to be invested by AMC strictly in accordance
             with Regulation 43. The investments are to be made
             subject to investment restrictions specified in the
             seventh schedule. As far as borrowings are concerned,
Page 72 of 77
clause (2) of Regulation 44 provides that the Mutual
Fund shall not borrow except to meet temporary
liquidity needs of the Mutual Fund for the purpose of
repurchase, redemption of units or payment of interest
or dividend to the unit-holders. The proviso to clause
(2) of Regulation 44 clearly provides that a Mutual Fund
shall not borrow more than twenty percent (20%) of the
net assets of the Scheme and the duration of such
borrowing shall not exceed a period of six months.
Thus, in short, the business of a Mutual Fund consists
of (i) launching Schemes, (ii) receiving the investments
from the unit-holders/investors, (iii) investing the money
so collected from the unit-holders/investors in
accordance with Regulation 43 and other relevant
Regulations and (iv) paying the returns in various
modes to the unit-holders/investors. The returns can be
in the form of repurchase of the units, redemption of
units, payment of interest or dividend to the unit-
holders, as the case may be, depending upon the
nature of the Scheme. Making such returns is certainly
a business activity of a Scheme. The income so
generated by investments made in accordance with
Regulation 43, can also be invested by AMC. Clause
(3) Regulation 44 provides that save as otherwise
expressly provided, a Mutual Fund shall not advance
any loans for any purposes. However, clause (4) of
Regulation 44 provides that a Mutual Fund may lend
and borrow securities in accordance with the
framework relating to short selling and securities
lending and borrowing specified by SEBI. The
provisions of Mutual Funds Regulations are intended to
regulate activities of Mutual Funds for promoting its
healthy growth and for protecting interest of unit-
holders. In a case of Taxation law, the rules of
interpretation applicable provide that if there are two
interpretations possible, the one in favour of assessee
will have to be preferred. In case of Mutual Funds
Regulations, a construction needs to be adopted which
will subserve the object of
SEBI Act
.
Page 73 of 77
226. It is pertinent to note here that clause (a) of
Regulation 40 uses the words “business activities in
respect of the Scheme” and not merely business of the
Scheme. As siated earlier, the activities of repurchase
of units, redemption of units or payment of interest or
dividend are also a part of business of a Scheme. In
view of clause (2) of Regulation 44, a Mutual Fund can
borrow only for the purposes of meeting temporary
liquidity needs for the purpose of repurchase,
redemption of units, payment of interests or dividend to
the unit-holders. For example, if there are large number
of requests for redemption of units by the unit-holders
in respect of ‘open ended Scheme’, a Mutual Fund may
face temporary liquidity crunch. In such a situation, it is
permissible for a Mutual Fund to make borrowings only
for payment of redemption amount. Therefore,
borrowings made as specified in clause (2) of
Regulation 44 will certainly amount to ‘business
activities’ of a Mutual Fund or a Scheme, inasmuch as,
such borrowings are made for the purpose of meeting
demand for redemption which is a part of business of
the Scheme.
227. Regulation 40 is interlinked with Regulation 41. In
view of Regulation 40, the moment compliance is made
with clause (3) of Regulation 39, the ‘business
activities’ of the Scheme of a Mutual Fund must stop.
The creation or cancellation of units and issue or
redemption of the units of the said Scheme must also
cease. The reasons is, as required by sub-clause (a) of
clause (2) of Regulation 41, all the assets of the
Scheme under winding up are required to be disposed
of in the best interest of unit-holders and thereafter, as
per sub-clause (b) of clause (2) of Regulation 41, the
proceeds of the sale are required to be applied firstly
towards discharge of liabilities of the Scheme.
Secondly, the expenses in connection with the winding
up are required to be set apart and thirdly, the balance
amount remaining after clearing the liabilities has to be
distributed to the unit-holders in proportion to their
respective interest in the assets of the Scheme. The
Page 74 of 77
object of Regulation 40 of the Mutual Funds Regulation
              is to ensure that the moment compliance is made with
              clause (3) of Regulation 39, the assets available at that
              point of time should be made available for sale. The
              assets cannot be allowed to be depleied by creating
              more liability. That is the reason why the redemption
              must immediately cease. Therefore, it must be held that
              the borrowings made by AMC, in terms of clause (2) of
              Regulation 44, are business activities' of a Scheme
              within the meaning of clause (a) of Regulation 40. If
              borrowings are made in accordance with clause (2) of
              Regulation 44, the act of replacement of the borrower,
              as done by the AMC and the Trustees in the present
              case, will have to be also held to be a part of business
              activities in respect of the Scheme.”
67.   The case set up by some parties is at variance with the dictum

      pronounced by the High Court. They have submitted that the mutual

      fund must honour the request for redemptions received on or before

      the date of publication of notice under Regulation 39(3). In other

      words, Regulation 53(b) must be honoured and complied with even

      if the time of payment of redemption, the 10 days period stipulated

      therein, would fall after the date of publication of the notice under

      Regulation 39(3). They are of the opinion that it would be illegal not

      to honour the valid redemption requests. They are also of the

      opinion that the AMC should be allowed and permitted to borrow

      money within the prescribed limits to honour such valid redemption

      requests as long as the valid redemption requests are received prior

      to the cut-off date for winding up.
Page 75 of 77
68.   Before we answer this aspect, we would like to have greater clarity

      on the factual matrix, which would be possible once the proceedings

      in pursuance of show-cause notices etc. are concluded. Notably,

      many of the appellants have not addressed us on this aspect, their

      grievance being that the Forensic Audit Report has not been made

      available to them. At the same time, they did refer to news reports or

      articles to suggest irregularities and illegalities of different kinds,

      including   preferential   payments,   breach    of   trust    and     mis-

      management in deployment of funds of the scheme, violation of

      investment objectives stated in the offer document or scheme

      information document and breach of trust by withholding price

      sensitive information etc. Once the facts are clear and ascertained,

      we would be able to appreciate and understand the practical impact

      of the respective interpretations, i.e. the interpretation placed by the

      High Court and the interpretation sought to be placed and preferred

      by SEBI, the appellants, the trustees and the AMC. This is also the

      reason why we have refrained from referring and commenting on

      facts and left the several issues open at this stage. Nevertheless,

      we clarify that our observations in this Order and the earlier Order

      should not be read as binding factual findings or conclusions on any

      disputed facts, which could be a subject matter of a show-cause

      notice and consequent decision. Of course, the legal interpretation
Page 76 of 77
of
Regulation 18(15)(c)
and Regulations 39 to 42 to the extent

     indicated above are conclusive and binding. For clarity, we would

     also observe that any finding given by the High Court on facts or

     even on legal issues not subject matter of this Order or our earlier

     Order dated 12th February, 2021 would not be treated as conclusive

     and binding as the findings are sub-judice and pending before this

     Court on interpretation as well as merits.
......................................J.
                                                        (S. ABDUL NAZEER)



                                                  ......................................J.
                                                           (SANJIV KHANNA)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 14, 2021.
Page 77 of 77