[Cites
4
, Cited by
17
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Uttar Pradesh vs Manoj Kumar Sharma on 9 July, 2021
Author:
Hemant Gupta
Bench:
Hemant Gupta
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2320 OF 2021
                                 (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 7487 OF 2020)

                         THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH & ORS.                       .....APPELLANT(S)

                                                             VERSUS

                         DR. MANOJ KUMAR SHARMA                                .....RESPONDENT(S)


                                                 JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1.   The challenge in the present appeal is to an order passed by the

                              Division Bench of the High Court of Allahabad, Lucknow Bench at

                              Lucknow on 05.03.2020, affirming the order passed by the learned

                              Single Bench on 07.08.2019. Vide the aforesaid orders, the

                              appellants were directed to calculate and pay 50% of the back

                              wages to the respondent, hereinafter referred to as writ petitioner,

                              and to grant all the consequential benefits in accordance with law.
2.   The writ petitioner was posted in State of Uttaranchal (for short

                              ‘Government of Uttaranchal’ now Uttarakhand, hereinafter referred

                              to as Uttarakhand) as a Medical Officer before the reorganization of

                              the State of Uttar Pradesh. The writ petitioner was transferred to

                              State of Uttar Pradesh as per the option given by Medical Officers
Signature Not Verified
of State of Uttar Pradesh including the writ petitioner. As many as
Digitally signed by
Charanjeet kaur
Date: 2021.07.09
16:37:57 IST
Reason:
208 Medical Officers and 5 Dental doctors of Class -2 Category

                              belonging to the U.P. Provincial Medical and Health Services (Male
1
Cadre) were posted in the State of Uttar Pradesh on 6.3.2002. The

     name of the writ petitioner appears at Serial No. 99 of the said list

     of Medical Officers. The writ petitioner was to report at Badaun

     under the Chief Medical Officer.
3.   The State of Uttarakhand relieved the Medical Officers in phases.
The writ petitioner was amongst 22 Medical Officers in the second

     phase who were relieved by the State of Uttarakhand on 5.7.2003

     in terms of the posting order of the Uttar Pradesh Government

     dated 06.03.2002. The name of the writ petitioner appears at

     Serial No. 13, then posted as Surgeon at District Hospital,

     Uttarkashi, Uttarakhand. The writ petitioner was relieved by Chief

     Medical    Superintendent,      District   Hospital,   Uttarkashi   on

     12.09.2003.
4.   It is thereafter that the writ petitioner instead of reporting at place

     of posting i.e., Badaun, submitted a letter to Director Medical

     Health Services, Lucknow on 19.09.2003 submitting his joining

     report. On the same date, by another letter, a request was made to

     get a posting in Muzaffarnagar, Ghaziabad or Bijnore District. Even

     though the writ petitioner was posted at Badaun, he did not join

     there and was well satisfied by giving a letter to Director Medical

     Health Services of his joining in that office.
5.   Subsequently, the writ petitioner filed a writ petition in the year

     2006 wherein he claimed a writ of mandamus commanding the

     State to post the writ petitioner as Medical Officer in any Hospital

     according to his qualification and experience in the specialized
2
cadre. The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition inter alia

on the ground that the counter affidavit was silent as to in what

manner the office memorandum or the posting order was served

upon the writ petitioner. The argument by the State counsel that

the writ petitioner did not join at Badaun was said to be not

supported by any letter of the writ petitioner. The learned Single

Judge found that no decision has been taken in pursuance of letter

dated 19.09.2003 for posting of the writ petitioner. The Court thus

concluded that the posting order or the transfer order was never

communicated or served upon the writ petitioner at any point of

time. Therefore, the judgments referred to by the State counsel

were not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the case.

Further, the Secretary, Medical Health, Government of U.P. was

summoned to the Court who justified the non-posting of the writ

petitioner. The Court concluded as under:
“The aforesaid conduct of the State Government in dealing
      with its officers is not happy state of affair. The State
      Government should have acted with responsibility and
      should have been quick enough to take a decision in the
      matter. The State Government has been sitting tight over
      the matter since 2006 when the writ petition was filed.
      Action of the State Government, therefore in these
      circumstances, cannot be justified and neither the State
      Government can take benefit of the posting order issued on
      6th March, 2002. We are therefore of the view that a heavy
      cost is required to be imposed upon the State Government
      for approaching in such a callous manner.
We accordingly impose a cost of Rs.50,000/- upon the State
      Government. The State government will deposit the cost
      before this Court within fifteen days, which shall be
      transferred to the Mediation Centre of this Court. Further, a
      writ in the nature of mandamus is issued to the State
      Government to issue a posting order in respect of the
3
petitioner within the aforesaid period.
Question of back wages is left open in the present writ
           petition.
The Secretary, Medical Health need not appear again.”
6.   In pursuance of the said order of the High Court, a fresh posting

     order was issued to the writ petitioner on 09.12.2016, posting him

     under Chief Medical Officer, Muzaffarnagar. Subsequently, another

     writ petition was filed for direction for payment of back wages. The

     writ petition was disposed of with a direction to decide the

     question of back wages within a period of four weeks.
7.   The Principal Secretary declined the grant of back wages on

     27.2.2009 inter alia on the following grounds:
“It is pertaining to mention that Dr. Manoj Kumar Sharma
           Surgeon District Hospital Uttarkashi after being relieved on
           05.07.2003 from the State of Uttaranchal submitted joining
           before Director General Medical and Health Services U.P.
           Lucknow on 18.09.2003, repeatedly made request for
           posting near his home District Saharanpur. If his request for
           place of posting was not accepted it was not open to him to
           say that any hindrance was created in his joining and he
           remained in waiting for posting. The period of Dr. Manoj
           Kumar Sharma from 05.07.2003 to 09.12.2016 cannot be
           treated as compulsory waiting period as he had been given
           posting but he did not comply with posting order and there
           was no justification to sit idle for about 13 years and not
           performing Government work in anticipation of decision to
           be taken on his representation and such attitude does not
           reflect his readiness to work.”
8.   The back wages for the said period were thus declined for the

     reason that the writ petitioner has not performed any government

     work from 05.07.2003 till 09.12.2016 and it cannot be treated as

     compulsory waiting period under the provisions of Fundamental
4
Rules 9(6)(b)(iii) of Financial Hand Book Volume-2-Part 2-4 and he

      was thus granted extra ordinary leave for the aforesaid period.
9.    The writ petitioner challenged the said decision by way of another

      writ petition. The order of the learned Single Bench shows that an

      office memorandum was issued on 08.02.2018 proposing to initiate

      departmental enquiry on the ground of non-joining. The contempt

      petition was filed and it appears that in view of the contempt

      petition, the office memorandum was cancelled on 29.05.2018.
The learned Single Judge in the order dated 7.8.2019 held that the

      order in the writ petition dated 26.09.2016 had attained finality,

      therefore, the benefit of back wages could not have been declined.

      The Court held as under:
“That once the order dated 26.09.2016 attained finality and
           there was no challenge to the same, thus, the issues and the
           findings in the aforesaid writ petition could not be in the
           domain of the respondents to challenge indirectly by issuing
           the impugned office memorandum dated 27.02.2019. It is
           no more res-integra that what cannot be done directly
           cannot be done indirectly either. In the present facts and
           circumstances, the issue regarding the fact of the petitioner
           not being able to join between 05.07.2003 to 09.12.2016
           was the core issue in the earlier writ petition decided on
           26.09.2016. The Division Bench of this Court while deciding
           and allowing the aforesaid writ petition had categorically
           noticed that the State was unable to establish the fact that
           the alleged joining order dated 06.03.2002 was ever served
           or communicated to the petitioner. This Court has already
           re-produced the relevant portion of the aforesaid judgment
           and thus, it is evident that the reason indicated in the office
           memorandum dated 27.02.2019 is the same which stood
           decided in the earlier writ petition in favour of the
           petitioner.”
10.   The learned Single Judge also noticed the fact that the writ

      petitioner was gainfully employed during this period but still
5
granted 50% of back wages. The Court held as under:
“Notwithstanding the aforesaid, this Court has to balance
             the equities in between the parties and considering the fact
             that the petitioner did not deny the plea of the respondent
             that he was gainfully employed even though the burden to
             prove the same was on the employer coupled with the fact
             that the respondent have only taken a bald plea in their
             counter affidavit and no positive evidence or document was
             placed on record to substantiate its plea.
Hence, taking a holistic view, this Court is of the opinion that
             ends of justice would be served if the petitioner is granted
             50% back wages for the period 05.07.2003 to 28.12.2016
             treating the petitioner to be in continuous service. As far as
             the other consequential benefits, admissible under law, are
             concerned the respondents in the impugned order also
             admit that the same are to be given to the petitioner.”



      It is the said order which was affirmed by the learned Division

      Bench, which is subject matter of challenge in the present appeal.
11.   The learned Single Bench in the first round held that the State has

      not produced as to how and when the posting order was

      communicated to him. The Court was aware of the fact that the

      writ   petitioner   has    been    relieved    by   the   Government      of

      Uttarakhand on 12.09.2003 and a communication has been

      addressed by Shri K.M. Mehrotra, Joint Director on 12.09.2003 and

      that he had submitted a joining report on 18.09.2003. The said

      joining report was submitted not at the place of posting but before

      the Director Medical Health Services. We find that the High Court in

      this background, when the writ petitioner stood relieved from

      Uttarakhand, could not have returned a finding that the State has

      not shown as to how the transfer and posting order was conveyed
6
to the writ petitioner. The High Court overlooked a judgment of this

         Court reported as
State of Punjab v. Khemi Ram1
wherein a

         question arose that whether the order of suspension was to be

         actually received by the employee to be affected.                This Court

         examined the question as to whether communicating the order

         means its actual receipt by the concerned government servant.
The Court held as under:
“16. …It will be seen that in all the decisions cited before us
                it was the communication of the impugned order which was
                held to be essential and not its actual receipt by the officer
                concerned and such communication was held to be
                necessary because till the order is issued and actually sent
                out to the person concerned the authority making such
                order would be in a position to change its mind and modify it
                if it thought fit. But once such an order is sent out, it goes
                out of the control of such an authority, and therefore, there
                would be no chance whatsoever of its changing its mind or
                modifying it. In our view, once an order is issued and it is
                sent out to the concerned government servant, it must be
                held to have been communicated to him, no matter when he
                actually received it. We find it difficult to persuade ourselves
                to accept the view that it is only from the date of the actual
                receipt by him that the order becomes effective. If that be
                the true meaning of communication, it would be possible for
                a government servant to effectively thwart an order by
                avoiding receipt of it by one method or the other till after
                the date of his retirement even though such an order is
                passed and despatched to him before such date. An officer
                against whom action is sought to be taken, thus, may go
                away from the address given by him for service of such
                orders or may deliberately give a wrong address and thus
                prevent or delay its receipt and be able to defeat its service
                on him. Such a meaning of the word “communication” ought
                not to be given unless the provision in question expressly so
                provides. ………”
12.     Therefore, it was not open to the writ petitioner to defy the order of

        transfer on the ground of non-communication when more than 100

1     AIR 1970 SC 214
7
Medical Officers were transferred by the same common transfer

      order. Firstly, he stood relieved by the State of Uttarakhand and

      secondly, he did not report at the place of posting but submitted an

      application before Director Medical Health Services. In the first

      round, even after directing to issue a posting order to the writ

      petitioner, the question of back wages was left open. It is

      thereafter, in pursuance of another writ petition, the competent

      authority in the State passed an order declining back wages but

      granted extra ordinary leave for the aforesaid period.
13.   Learned counsel for the writ petitioner submitted that in the writ

      petition he has sought to post him anywhere in the State of Uttar

      Pradesh and that in the order dated 26.09.2016 a finding is

      returned i.e., posting order dated 06.03.2002 was not served upon

      the writ petitioner. It is also pointed out that the Government of

      Uttarakhand has relieved medical officers in stages and all of them

      submitted joining report to the Director Medical Health Services,

      U.P. and not at the place of posting mentioned in the order issued

      by the Uttar Pradesh Government. A reference is made to general

      practice in the Government of Uttar Pradesh as a Medical Officer is

      asked to submit three choices of place of posting and that this

      practice still continues.
14.    We do not find any merit in the arguments raised. The writ

      petitioner was relieved by the Government of Uttarakhand in 2003,

      however, he filed writ petition in 2006, meaning thereby for three
8
years, “he was awaiting posting orders”. Under the guise of

      awaiting   posting   orders,   he   started     private   practice   and

      intentionally delayed the decision on the writ petition for almost 13

      years. The writ petition was dismissed in default on 22.09.2008 and

      was restored on 11.12.2014. Such conduct of the writ petitioner

      suggests that he was not keen to join as a Medical Officer after he

      was relieved by the Government of Uttarakhand. The writ petitioner

      cannot take a stand that he had not received the order dated

      06.03.2002. The order of Uttarakhand Government relieving him on

      05.07.2003 is in pursuance of the order of the Government of Uttar

      Pradesh on 06.03.2002. It is a case of the feigned ignorance. Even

      if there is a practice that the Medical Officer report at the office of

      Director Medical Health Services is not a ground on the basis of

      which illegality can be permitted to be perpetuated. The option of

      posting would be available only if there are general transfers not in

      a case where the Medical Officers have been allocated to their

      parent state in view of the option exercised.
15.   As noticed by the learned Single Bench in the third round, the writ

      petitioner was gainfully employed and it is impossible to imagine

      that a Medical Officer would sit idle for 13 long years. Therefore,

      the grant of 50% of back wages for the entire period would be

      giving benefit of one’s own wrong who intentionally abstained from

      duty for 13 long years and now wants to take benefit of back wages

      as well. Such stand of the writ petitioner is not only unjustified but

      wholly condemnable. The State was remiss in not taking action
9
against the writ petitioner for absence from duty. Once the writ

      petitioner did not join the place of posting, the State should have

      taken steps to initiate disciplinary proceedings.      Still further, the

      State issued posting order as per the directions in the first writ

      petition. The attempt of the State to initiate proceedings in the

      year 2018 invited ire of the Court. The State government cancelled

      the proceedings to initiate disciplinary proceedings.
16.   Another disturbing feature which comes to our notice is that in the

      first round, the Secretary, Medical Health was called in-person in

      the Court. Even in the present proceedings, after stay of the order

      of the Division Bench of the High Court on 22.2.2021, an order was

      passed by the High Court on 2.3.2021 to seek personal presence of

      the officer on the next date of hearing. In these circumstances, this

      Court in the present proceedings passed the following order on

      6.4.2021: -
“On 22.02.2021, we had issued notice in the Special Leave
            Petition and stayed the operation of the impugned order.

            The present application has been filed for stay of the
            contempt proceedings on account of the order passed on
            02.03.2021.
To say the least, we are quite shocked at the perusal of the
            order dated 02.03.2021. Once the operation of the order has
            been stayed, the natural consequence would be that the
            contempt proceedings would be kept in abeyance. It is not
            as if this aspect was not brought to the notice of the learned
            Judge dealing with the Contempt Petition No.139/2020 as an
            application had been filed for exemption from personal
            appearance. However, the exemption from personal
            appearance was granted only for the date of 02.03.2021 and
            the matter was listed on 08.04.2021 once again directing
            both the officers to remain present in Court in pursuance to
10
an earlier order dated 05.02.2021.
Once the order of which contempt was alleged was stayed,
                 there would be no cause for calling the officers as there was
                 no question of any non-compliance of the order which had
                 been stayed. This Court has even on various occasions
                 through judicial pronouncements deprecated the practice of
                 unnecessarily calling officers to Court. In that context, it has
                 been observed that the trust, faith and confidence of the
                 common man in the judiciary cannot be frittered away by
                 unnecessary and unwarranted show or exercise of power.
                 Greater the power, greater should be the responsibility in
                 exercising such power2. The frequent, causal and
                 lackadaisical summoning of high officials by the Court
                 cannot be appreciated. We may add that this does not mean
                 that in compelling situations the same cannot be done but
                 the object cannot be to humiliate senior officials 3. In the
                 present case, we are concerned with contempt proceedings.
                 No doubt if the order is not complied with, presence can be
                 directed unless exempted. However, if the operation of the
                 order is stayed, we fail to understand what purpose was
                 being served by calling the officers for the next date as no
                 specific date had been fixed by the Court post the stay
                 having been granted. We do believe that this is unnecessary
                 harassment of the officers and there was no occasion to
                 pass the order on 02.03.2021. It has resulted in the
                 petitioners being compelled to move the present
                 application.
We stay the contempt proceedings in Contempt Petition
                 No.139/2020 pending before the High Court of Judicature at
                 Allahabad, Lucknow Bench, Lucknow and further make it
                 clear the no presence of any officer concerned is required.
                 We also make it clear that as and when, if the occasion so
                 arises, for restarting the contempt proceedings, the matter
                 will be placed before a Bench of another Judge. A copy of
                 this order be placed before the learned Judge who passed
                 this order as well as the Chief Justice. The IA stands
                 disposed of.”
17.      A practice has developed in certain High Courts to call officers at

         the drop of a hat and to exert direct or indirect pressure. The line of

         separation of powers between Judiciary and Executive is sought to

2
State of U.P. & Ors. v. Jasvir Singh & Ors.
– (
2011) 4 SCC 288
3     R.S. Singh v. U.P. Malaria Nirikshank Sangh & Ors.
– (2011) 4 SCC 281
11
be crossed by summoning the officers and in a way pressurizing

        them to pass an order as per the whims and fancies of the Court.
18.     The public officers of the Executive are also performing their duties

        as the third limbs of the governance. The actions or decisions by

        the officers are not to benefit them, but as a custodian of public

        funds and in the interest of administration, some decisions are

        bound to be taken. It is always open to the High Court to set aside

        the decision which does not meet the test of judicial review but

        summoning of officers frequently is not appreciable at all. The

        same is liable to be condemned in the strongest words.
19.      This Court in a judgment reported as
Divisional Manager,

         Aravali Golf Club & Anr. v. Chander Hass & Anr.4
observed that

         judges must know their limits.        They must have modesty and

         humility, and not behave like emperors.            The legislature, the

         executive and the judiciary all have their own broad spheres of

         operation.      It is not proper for any of these three organs of the

         State to encroach upon the domain of another, otherwise the

         delicate balance in the Constitution will be upset, and there will be

         a reaction. This Court held as under:
“19. Under our Constitution, the legislature, the executive
                and the judiciary all have their own broad spheres of
                operation. Ordinarily it is not proper for any of these three
                organs of the State to encroach upon the domain of another,
                otherwise the delicate balance in the Constitution will be
                upset, and there will be a reaction.
20. Judges must know their limits and must not try to run
                the Government. They must have modesty and humility, and
                not behave like emperors. There is broad separation of
4     (2008) 1 SCC 683
12
powers under the Constitution and each organ of the State—
            the legislature, the executive and the judiciary—must have
            respect for the other and must not encroach into each
            other's domains.
21. The theory of separation of powers first propounded by
            the French thinker Montesquieu (in his book The Spirit of
            Laws) broadly holds the field in India too. In Chapter XI of his
            book The Spirit of Laws Montesquieu writes:
“When the legislative and executive powers are united
                 in the same person, or in the same body of Magistrates,
                 there can be no liberty; because apprehensions may
                 arise, lest the same monarch or senate should enact
                 tyrannical laws, to execute them in a tyrannical
                 manner.
Again, there is no liberty, if the judicial power be not
                 separated from the legislative and executive. Were it
                 joined with the legislative, the life and liberty of the
                 subject would be exposed to arbitrary control; for the
                 judge would be then the legislator. Were it joined to the
                 executive power, the judge might behave with violence
                 and oppression.
There would be an end of everything, were the same
                 man or the same body, whether of the nobles or of the
                 people, to exercise those three powers, that of enacting
                 laws, that of executing the public resolutions, and of
                 trying the causes of individuals.”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)

            We fully agree with the view expressed above.
Montesquieu's warning in the passage above quoted is
            particularly apt and timely for the Indian judiciary today,
            since very often it is rightly criticised for “overreach” and
            encroachment into the domain of the other two organs.”
20.   Thus, we feel, it is time to reiterate that public officers should not

      be called to court unnecessarily. The dignity and majesty of the

      Court is not enhanced when an officer is called to court. Respect to

      the court has to be commanded and not demanded and the same

      is not enhanced by calling public officers. The presence of public

      officer comes at the cost of other official engagement demanding

      their attention. Sometimes, the officers even have to travel long
13
distance. Therefore, summoning of the officer is against the public

      interest as many important tasks entrusted to him gets delayed,

      creating extra burden on the officer or delaying the decisions

      awaiting his opinion. The Court proceedings also take time, as

      there is no mechanism of fixed time hearing in Courts as of now.
The Courts have the power of pen which is more effective than the

      presence of an officer in Court. If any particular issue arises for

      consideration before the Court and the Advocate representing the

      State is not able to answer, it is advised to write such doubt in the

      order and give time to the State or its officers to respond.
21.   The writ petitioner was posted at Badaun. He was to report at the

      place of posting and after reporting at the place of posting, he

      should have asked for transfer, if permissible, according to the

      requirement of the State. But he could not have dictated the place

      of posting without even joining the place where he was first posted.

      Therefore, we find that the orders of the High Court dated

      05.03.2020 and 07.08.2019 are wholly unjustified, unwarranted,

      arbitrary and illegal. The same are set aside and the appeal is

      allowed with no order as to costs.
.............................................J.
                                                    (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL)



                                       .............................................J.
                                                            (HEMANT GUPTA)

NEW DELHI;
JULY 9, 2021.
14