[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sanjay Puran Bagde vs The State Of Maharashtra on 28 July, 2022
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
1

                                                                              REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.143/2020

                         SANJAY PURAN BAGDE & ANR.                            Appellant(s)

                                                         VERSUS

                         THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                              Respondent(s)

                                                     J U D G M E N T
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1.      On   the    fateful   night    intervening    2nd   and   3rd

                           November,    2015   at   about   3    a.m.   the   deceased   Vilas

                           Babusa Gawande and his wife Sau. Anita Vilas Gawande

                           woke up and while the wife was doing preparations for

                           cooking, the husband went to attend to the nature’s

                           call.   The wife (PW-6) heard shouts of the husband that

                           four persons were assaulting him and when she ran to

                           the spot she saw two of them, Manoj Puran Badge and

                           Puran Sakharam Bagde assaulting the husband with an axe

                           and whereas the appellants before us Sanjay Puran Bagde

                           and Rajratna @ Nandu Bagde had caught hold of him.                On

                           her creating a noise loudly, all of them ran away. She

                           found her husband bleeding who also told her that four
Signature Not Verified     of them had caught hold of him and assaulted him by
Digitally signed by
ASHA SUNDRIYAL
Date: 2022.08.03
17:45:51 IST
Reason:                    means of an axe.      She gave some water to the husband on

                           his asking and then went to the house of the neighbours

                           who carried the husband into the house and then by an
2
auto   he   was    carried      to   the    hospital      where    he   was

declared to be dead.
2.      The stated reason for the assault is alleged to

be an evil eye kept on the wife of Manoj Puran Bagde by

the deceased.       The statement of PW-6 was recorded under
Section 161
Cr.P.C. and subsequently under
Section 164
Cr.P.C.     We may say at the threshold itself that though

the learned counsel for the appellant endeavoured to

persuade us, we found no glaring inconsistency between

the two statements.
3.      The       FIR    No.79/2015         dated     03.11.2015        was

registered and in pursuance to the investigation charge

sheet was filed. All the four accused were charged with

the offence of
Section 302
, IPC read with
Section 34
IPC.   On trial being completed, the learned Additional

Sessions    Judge,      Akot,    District     Akola    by    a    judgment

dated 14.09.2017 convicted the first two accused while

acquitting the two appellants.
4.      A scrutiny of the trial Court’ order would show

that the testimony of PW-6 was found to be reliable who

was the only eye witness.                In fact the whole judgment

goes   into   the       defences     raised    by   the     accused     and

rejects all of them.            However, towards the end of the

judgment, in para 46 while referring to some judicial

precedents, it was noticed that the role attributed to
3
the   appellants         was    of     catching      the   victim       without

actual participation or use of weapon to assault and

inflict    the     injuries.           In   that     sense,   it     has      been

stated that as that was the only role, it could not be

said that there was a shared common intention along

with the first two accused to cause death.
5.       On appeal being preferred by the two accused

convicted, as well as the State against acquittal of

the   appellants,         the    High       Court,    in     terms      of    the

impugned       judgment        dated       05.02.2019,       dismissed         the

appeal    of     the   convicted        accused      while    allowing        the

appeal    of     the     State    against        acquittal     of       the   two

appellants.
6.       The High Court has found the approach of the

trial Court unacceptable, while appreciating that the

parties had been roped in with the aid of
Section 34
IPC. In that behalf, it has been observed that the

essence     of     the     liability        is     existence       of    common

intention        and     the    participation         in     commission        of

offence in furtherance of common intention.                              On the

basis of the evidence discussed by the trial Court with

which the High Court agreed, it was found that firstly,

there were estranged relationship between the accused

(all of whom are relatives) and the deceased about a

prior incident and the common intention of the accused

is established by the presence of all four accused on
4
the     spot   in    the     night/early     morning,      armed      with

dangerous weapons, even if the actual attack was made

by the other two while the appellants held on to the

deceased.
7.       The   appellants         have    thus,   preferred     Special

Leave Petition and leave was granted to examine the

case.     The Special Leave Petition preferred by the two

accused who used the axe was dismissed on 20.01.2020

while    notice      had   been    issued   in    the   Special    Leave

Petition of the appellants.
8.       We have heard learned counsel for parties.
9.       In our view, the case falls within the limited

contour as concurrently both Courts have appreciated

evidence to hold that the witnesses were reliable, more

so, PW-6, the wife of the deceased who was an eye

witness and also related what the deceased stated to

her.      By   the    time      the   deceased    was   taken   to    the

hospital, he was declared brought dead. Thus, there

would be no case of recording of any dying declaration.
10.      Learned counsel for the appellant did make a

valiant    endeavour       to    persuade   us    to    look   into   the

entire ambit of the evidence but then that would not be

appropriate. Suffice to say that both the Courts below

as well as us, on a reading of the judgment, find that

there is really no quibble with the manner in which the
5
incident         occurred    or     the    identifying           of    all     the

accused. The only question which arises is whether by

reason      of    the    appellants       only   holding         the    deceased

while the other two attacked the deceased, can it be

said that there was no shared common intention between

all the accused.
11.
In a recent judgment of ours in
Jasdeep Singh

Alias Jassu v. State of Punjab
– (2022) 2 SCC 545, the

ambit and discussion of scope of
Section 34
, IPC has

been examined in the context of the earlier judgments.

It    has    been     emphasized     that
Section        34
of    the    IPC

creates a deeming fiction by infusing and importing a

criminal act constituting an offence committed by one,

into others, in pursuance to a common intention. This

would of course require the quality of evidence to be

substantial,          concrete,     definite     and    clear.          What   is

required is a common intention.
We referred to the

earlier judicial pronouncements including in the case

of
Virendra Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh
- (2010) 8

SCC    407,      to     opine,    taking     a   clue       from
the    said

judgment
, that the dominant feature of
Section 34
is an

element of intention and participation in action. This

participation need not in all cases even be physical

presence but a common intention.                    There has to be a

simultaneous            consensus    of     minds      of        the     persons

participating in the criminal action to bring about a
6
particular result.       That intention can be formed at any

time.
Section 34
, IPC does not create any distinct

offence but it lays down the principle of constructive

liability stipulating that the act must be done in

furtherance of the common intention.
12.     In   the    conspectus         of    the   aforesaid    legal

position, if we examine the facts of the present case,

the very presence at 3.30 in the morning of all the

accused at the house of the appellant with two of them

holding an axe clearly shows that there can be no doubt

about a common intention in behalf of what they were

proposing to do.         It was not an axe picked up at the

site. Two of the accused were carrying the axes. It is

not a sudden incident which has occurred.                  The pre-

meditated intention was thus, clear.               Even at the site,

the intentions had never changed as the appellants were

holding the deceased while the other two attacked.                The

fact that only two of them were using the axe while the

other   were    two      holding       the   deceased     to   ensure

appropriate injuries being inflicted on the deceased

would give no remission to the case of the appellants.
13.     In   view   of    the   aforesaid      reasons,   we   cannot

really fault the conclusion arrived at by the High

Court in reversing the acquittal by the trial Court on

what may be stated as the erroneous principle of law

followed by the trial Court.
7
14.   The   appeal   is   accordingly    dismissed   leaving

parties to bear their own costs.
………………………………………...J.
                                        [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]



                                        ………………………………………...J.
                                             [M.M. SUNDRESH]
 NEW DELHI;
JULY 28, 2022.