[Cites
4
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
M.V. Chandrakanth vs Sangappa on 29 July, 2022
Author:
Indira Banerjee
Bench:
J. K. Maheshwari
,
Indira Banerjee
1


                                                                              REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.                  OF 2022
                                 [ARISING OUT OF S.L.P. (CIVIL) NO.7241 OF 2021]


                         M. V. CHANDRAKANTH                                   ……Appellant


                                                         Versus
                         SANGAPPA & ORS.                                    ….Respondents


                                                         JUDGMENT
Indira Banerjee, J.
Leave granted.
2.   This appeal is against a judgment and final order dated 31 st

                         March 2021 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of

                         Karnataka (Dharwad Bench), allowing Writ Appeal No.100388 of

                         2017(GM-CC) filed by the Respondent No.1 and setting aside an order

                         dated 13th June 2017 passed by the Single Judge dismissing Writ

                         Petition No.1449 of 2006 (GM-CC) filed by the Respondent No.1

                         claiming the benefit of reservation for Other Backward Classes as a

                         member of the ‘Ganiga’ caste.
Signature Not Verified
3.   By a Government Order being G.O. No. SWD 150 BCA 94 dated
Digitally signed by
GULSHAN KUMAR
17th September 1994, the Government of Karnataka formulated a
ARORA
Date: 2022.07.29
16:27:37 IST
Reason:
Reservation Policy, for ‘Scheduled Castes’, ‘Scheduled Tribes’ and
2
‘Other Backward Classes’ for admission to professional courses for

the year 1994-95, which is hereinafter referred to as the “Reservation

Policy”. As per the Reservation Policy the percentage of reservation

was as follows:-
“CATEGORY -I                  -          4%
CATEGORY -II(A)        -           15%
CATEGORY -II(B)        -           4%
CATEGORY -III(A)       -           5%
CATEGORY -III(B)       -           5%


SCHEDULED CASTES              -          15%
SCHEDULED TRIBES              -          3%”
4.    By a Government Order being G.O. No. SWD 251 BCA 94 dated

31st January 1995, the Reservation Policy was made applicable to

employment under the State.
5.    In 1999, the Appellant as well as the Respondent No.1 applied

for Group A and Group B posts of Gazetted Probationary Officers

claiming the benefit of reservation under Category II-A of the

Reservation Policy.
6.    While the Appellant claimed reservation under Category II-A as

a ‘Kuruba’ by caste, the Respondent No.1 claimed Reservation as a

‘Hindu Ganiga’ by caste.
7.    On or about 31st December 1999, a certificate was issued to the

Respondent No.1 from the office of the Tehsildar, Bagalkot certifying
3
that the Respondent No.1 belonged to the Ganiga sub-caste.               The

Respondent No.1 applied for the Group A and Group B posts of

Gazetted Probationary Officer, on the strength of the aforesaid

certificate.
8.      On or about 30th March 2002, the Government of Karnataka

issued an order in terms whereof the Lingayat Ganiga was excluded

from the benefit of reservation to the ‘Ganiga’ sub-caste under

Category II-A, and placed under Category III-B.
9.    On or about 7th October 2005, the Karnataka Public Service

Commission (KPSC) published the provisional list of candidates

selected for the Group A and Group B posts of Probationary Officers.
After publication of the provisional list on 7 th October 2005, KPSC sent

the caste certificate of the Respondent No.1 to the Respondent No.3

for verification.   On 21st October 2005, the Respondent No.3 issued a

certificate    validating   the   caste   certificate   submitted   by   the

Respondent No.1.
10.   KPSC notified the final list of selected candidates on 29 th

November 2005.       The Appellant was selected for the post of Deputy

Superintendent of Police and the Respondent No.1 was selected for

the post of Assistant Commissioner (Junior Grade Scale). Both the

Appellant and the Respondent No.1 were selected under the Reserved

Category II-A of the Reservation Policy. The Respondent No.1 secured

1152 marks and was placed at Sl. No. 15 in the category of posts of

Assistant Commissioner, whereas the Appellant secured 1151 marks
4
and was placed at Sl. No.6 in the category of posts of Deputy

Superintendent of Police.
11.   The Appellant claims that in 2005, he came to know that the

Respondent No.1’s father belonged to the ‘Lingayat’ caste whereas

the Respondent No.1 had claimed the benefit of reservation under

Category II-A of the Reservation Policy claiming that he belonged to

the ‘Ganiga’ caste. The Appellant contends that the ‘Lingayat’ caste

including the sub-castes thereof fall under Category III-B with 5%

reservation whereas Hindu Ganiga falls under Category II-A with 15%

reservation.
12.   The Appellant filed an appeal under Section 4D of the Karnataka

Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes

(Reservation of Appointments, etc.) Act, 1990, hereinafter referred to

as “SC/ST and OBC Reservation Act” before the Respondent No.2

challenging the Caste Validity Certificate issued to the Respondent

No.1 by the Respondent No.3.       In the said appeal, the Appellant

enclosed the school extract of Government Higher Primary School,

Honnihala, Bagalokote wherein the caste of the Respondent No.1’s

father was recorded as ‘Hindu Lingayat’.
13.       The Appellant alleges that Respondent No.3 issued the

Validity Certificate dated 21st October 2005 in undue haste, with scant

regard to the procedure laid down in Rule 7 of the Karnataka

Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes
5
(Reservation of Appointment, etc.) Rules 1992, hereinafter referred to

as “Karnataka SC/ST and OBC Reservation Rules ”.
14.   By an interim order dated 5th December 2005, the Respondent

No.2 stayed the Validity Certificate issued to the Respondent No.1

until further orders.     Thereafter, the Respondent No.2 called for the

records from the Respondent No.1. Notices were also issued to the

Head Masters of the concerned schools for production of original

school admission registers pertaining to the Respondent No.1 and his

father.
15.   After hearing the parties and perusing the records, the

Respondent    No.2      passed   an   order   dated   23 rd   January   2006,

concluding that the Respondent No.1 belonged to the ‘Hindu

Lingayat’ caste as he would inherit the caste of his father. Relying on

the school register of the Respondent No.1’s father of the year 1953,

his High School records and the Service Register of DCC Bank where

he (the Respondent No.1’s father) had worked as Supervisor, the

Respondent No.2 cancelled the Validity Certificate. The Respondent

No. 2 inferred that the entries in the school records of the Respondent

No.1 had been made in the year 1982, with a view to obtain the

benefit of reservation.
16.   Being aggrieved, the Respondent No.1 filed the aforesaid writ

petition being Writ Petition No.1449 of 2006 (GM-CC) in the Karnataka

High Court at Dharwad on or about 27 th January 2006 and obtained an

interim order of status quo. The Appellant filed a Counter Affidavit
6
enclosing extract of the school records of the Respondent No.1’s

father showing that he belonged to the Hindu Lingayat caste.
17.   On or about 1st February 2006, the Government issued

appointment orders of the selected candidates.      The Appellant was

appointed as Deputy Superintendent of Police under II-A Category. On

13th February 2006, the Respondent No.2 directed the Civil Rights

Enforcement Cell to initiate prosecution against the Respondent No.1

under Rule 7A of the Karnataka SC/ST and OBC Reservation Rules for

having obtained false certificate under Category II-A.
18.   On or about 21st June 2006, the Civil Rights Enforcement Cell,

after conducting an enquiry into the caste of the Respondent No.1,

submitted a report to the effect that the Respondent No.1 belonged to

the ‘Ganiga’ caste, and therefore no prosecution could be initiated

against him.
19.   On 11th July 2007, the Respondent No. 1 was appointed to the

post of Assistant Commissioner. According to the Appellant, the

appointment was in violation of the status quo order granted by the

High Court in Writ Petition No.1449 of 2006. The Respondent No.2

filed a counter statement to the Writ Petition in the High Court of

Karnataka.
20.   On or about 27th January 2009, the Government of Karnataka

issued an order, whereby 19 sub-castes within the ‘Veerashaiva

Lingayat’ caste were included in Category III-B of the Reservation
7
Policy. The sub-castes included ‘Ganiga’ sub caste of the ‘Veerashaiva

Lingayat’ caste. As against 15% reserved for Category II-A, only 5%

of the posts were reserved for Category III-B.
21.      By an order dated 28th February 2009, the Government of

Karnataka reverted the position of reservation of some of the sub-

castes       of    the     Veerashaiva     Lingayat     caste      except

‘Lingayath/Veerashaiva-Veerashaiva Panchamashali’ in Serial No.13 to

the position existing prior to the order dated 27 th January 2009. The

sub-castes included the ‘Ganiga’ sub-caste of the Veerashaiva

Lingayat caste. The ‘Lingayat’ caste continued to remain in Category

III-B.
22.      On 4th July 2013, the Appellant was promoted to the post of

Superintendent of Police (Non-IPS) based on Seniority-cum-Merit. On

24th March 2017, the Appellant was appointed to the Karnataka

Administrative Service (Junior Scale) with effect from 1 st February

2006 by creation of supernumerary post by the State Government.

The State Government had placed the matter before the Cabinet and

the Cabinet took the decision to appoint the Appellant with

retrospective effect with effect from 1st February 2006 with all

consequential benefits in the cadre of Karnataka Administrative

Service (Junior Scale). The Appellant joined service in the cadre of

Karnataka Administrative Service (Junior Scale) on 30th March 2017.
23.      By an order dated 13th June 2017, the Writ Petition filed by the

Respondent No.1 was dismissed by the Single Judge.              The Single
8
Judge came to the conclusion that the Respondent No.1 belonged to

the Hindu Lingayat caste as his father’s school records reveal that his

father was a Lingayat or Lingavantha.    The Single Bench found that

the caste ‘Ganiga’ was to be found both in Category II-A and III-B.

There was a lot of difference in the two entries.          There was

reservation of 15% for persons in Category II-A but 5% for persons in

Category III-B.   The Single Bench was of the view that the caste

‘Ganiga’ in Category II-A was not equivalent to Lingayat Ganiga sub-

caste of Lingayat.
24.   Being aggrieved, the Respondent No.1 impugned the order of

dismissal by filing Writ Appeal No. 100388 of 2017 in the Division

Bench of the High Court.
25.   By the impugned judgment and order dated 31 st March 2021,

the Division Bench of Karnataka High Court (Dharwad Bench) allowed

the Writ Appeal filed by the Respondent No.1, set aside the order of

the Single Judge passed in Writ Petition No.1149 of 2006 and quashed

the order of Respondent No.2. In the meanwhile, on 20 th September

2019, the Appellant was promoted to the Senior Scale in the

Karnataka Administrative Service.
26.   The Division Bench observed that from the findings given by the

Single Judge, it was apparent that the Single Judge was also of the

opinion that caste of the Respondent No.1 was ‘Lingayat-Ganiga’.

The Single Judge, however, held that he could not claim reservation

under Category II-A.   The Division Bench accepted that ordinarily
9
children belong to the caste of their father.             The Division Bench,

however, observed, in effect, that the Single Judge also accepted that

the caste of the Respondent might be Lingayat-Ganiga but erred in

arriving at the finding Lingayat-Ganiga could not be construed Hindu

Ganiga.
27.    The Division Bench referred to the judgments of Karnataka High

Court in
Somashekhar Veerappa B. Murgod v. State of

Karnataka and Another1
and Prabhushankar K.V. v. Selection

Committee for Medical Colleges & others2.
In
Somashekhar

Veerappa B. Murgod
(supra), the Single Bench held:-
“6. The evidence recorded and the conclusion reached by the
      Commission, in particular the underlined portions, clearly disclose
      that in the State there is a community which is called ‘Kuruhina
      Setty’.     The hereditary avocation of this community is
      ‘neyge’(weaving). At some point of time in the past some of the
      Kuruhina Settys adopted Veerashaiva or Lingayat faith. Among
      Kuruhina Settys, there are both vegetarians and non-vegetarians
      and those who have adopted Lingayat faith are vegetarians.
      From the finding recorded by the Commission, it is clear that all
      persons belonging to Kuruhina Setty community are considered as
      backward irrespective of the fact that some of them are Lingayats
      and others are not. The petitioner has claimed that he is a
      Kuruhina Setty, though he is a Lingayat. He had also produced
      certificate issued by the Tahasildar in which it is specifically stated
      that the petitioner belongs to Kuruhina Setty Community. The
      only reason given by the Selection Committee for rejecting the
      claim of the petitioner is that in the transfer certificate produced
      by the petitioner, the community of the petitioner is given as
      Lingayat. Even the petitioner does not dispute that he is a
      Lingayat. The fact that he is a Lingayat does not mean that he
      does not belong to Kuruhina Setty community. As pointed out by
      the commission, among persons belonging to Kuruhina Setty
      community some have become Lingayats, but all of them are
      considered and identified as belonging to backward community.
      Therefore, a Kuruhina Setty who has become a Lingayat is not
      disentitled to the benefit of reservation. In this behalf it is
      necessary to set out the relevant portion in the appendix-1 to
      Government Order No. ED 44 TGL 77, Bangalore, dated 18 th May,
      1977, which sets out all the communities falling under the
1 AIR 1980 Karnataka 62
2 (1981) 1 Kant.L.J. 255
10
category of Neygi who are considered as Backward Community.
The relevant portion reads:
“(i) BACKWARD COMMUNITIES
              XXX XXX      XXX XXX
10. Neygi : Kuruhinasetti, Bilimagga, Thogata, Seniga,
           Jamkhana, Ayiri, Avir, Sale, Padmasale, Saale, Kaikolan,
           Neikar, Jadar, Jandra, Swakulasale.”
                                     ***
9. In the result, I hold that every person who belongs to
      Kuruhina Setty community whether a Lingayat or not belongs
      to Backward community for the purpose of the Government
      Order, and can claim the benefit of special provisions subject to
      the income test prescribed in the Government Order and,
      therefore, the Selection Committee erred in rejecting the claim
      of the petitioner for selection to 1st Year M.B.B.S. Course as
      against seats reserved for Backward Communities.”
28.    In Prabhushankar v. Selection Committee for Medical

Colleges (supra), a Single Bench of Karnataka High Court held:-
“6. In my view there is nothing unnatural in the conduct of the
      petitioner or his parents in not indicating that the petitioner apart
      from being a Lingayat also belonged to Ganiga Community, as no
      one knew at that stage that special provisions would be made in
      their favour and omission to do so does not preclude the
      petitioner from claiming the benefit of reservation if in truth the
      petitioner belongs to Ganiga community as indicated in the
      certificate issued by the Tahsildar who is the competent authority
      to issue the necessary certificate.
7. In the face of the certificate issued by the Tahsildar, it was not
      open for the Selection Committee to reject the claim of the
      petitioner on the mere ground that in the transfer certificate the
      community of the petitioner was shown as Lingayat as the
      possibility of a Lingayat being a Ganiga could not be excluded.
Therefore in the absence of any other material evidence before
      the Selection Committee on the basis of which it could have come
      to the conclusion that the positioner did not belong to Ganiga
      Community, the application could not have been rejected.
      Therefore, the petitioner is entitled to the reconsideration of his
      case.”
29.    The Division Bench analysed the facts of the case but found

that reservation to backward classes had not been introduced when
11
the Respondent No.1’s father had been admitted to school in 1953.

By the time the Appellant came to be admitted to school, Reservation

Policy for backward classes had been introduced. This could be the

reason why the caste was not entered in the school records of the

Respondent No.1’s father where only ‘Lingayat’ was mentioned but in

the case of the Respondent No.1 the caste was mentioned as ‘Hindu-

Ganiga’
30.    The Division Bench rightly held that, if the Respondent No.1’s

father was, in fact, Ganiga, the mere fact that his caste may not have

been mentioned in his school records, or elsewhere, would not mean

that he would have to be treated as a non-Ganiga by caste.                    The

Division Bench referred to a report of the Karnataka Backward Classes

Commission constituted under the Chairmanship of L.J. Havanur and

in particular Paragraph 11 thereof which reads:-
“11.    Veerashaivas (Lingayats) claim to belong to a religion of
      their own, though legally they are considered as a Hindu
      denomination. It originated by uniting certain caste-blocks, and
      has grown by adding new ones which did not accept the principle
      of status or rank ascribed by birth. The unit of endogamy
      amongst veerashaivas in principle, is their denominational
      community, but in the process of expanding itself into a still larger
      community, it has allowed, perhaps, the new entrants to retain
      their autonomy and identity. That appears to be the reason why
      we find separate religious heads and monasteries of each section
      widespread in the State. The cases of those caste-units who have
      not yet been wholly assimilated into, or are half-way to, the
      Veerashaiva community but who could be readily identified and
      whose population could be ascertained have been considered
      separately. Such cases include the Ganigas (oil pressers), the
      Kumbaras (potters), the Kshowrikas (barbers), the Agasas
      (washermen), some Neygis (weavers), etc."
31.    It appears that the finding of the Single Bench that the earlier

notification in which Category II-A comprised many castes of which
12
Ganiga was one, did not include Lingayat-Ganiga is misconceived. In

the Government notification issued on 3 rd March 2002, Category II-A

comprised of Ganiga and other castes without referring to Lingayat

Ganigas. Subsequently, on 27th January 2009, an order was issued by

the Government of Karnataka to the effect that 19 sub-castes within

Veerashaiva Lingayat were included in Category III-B.        One of the

castes so brought under Category III-B was Lingayat/Veerashaiva-

Ganiga.       Subsequently,    however    the   Government     issued    a

Notification on 28th February 2009 to the effect that the caste in Serial

No.1 to 12 and 14 to 19 which were included in Category III-B as per

the order/notification dated 27th January 2009 were deleted from the

Category III-B and restored to the earlier position prevailing before

27th January 2009.
32.   As observed by the Division Bench, the order dated 27 th January

2009 shows that 19 sub-castes of Lingayat/Veerashaiva were included

in Category III-B. One of the sub-castes was ‘Lingayat/Veerashaiva-

Ganiga’. However, by another notification issued within a month that

is 28th February 2009, the caste mentioned in Serial Nos. 1 to 12 and

14 to 19 Category III-B were deleted and the position prevailing before

27th January 2009 was restored.      Lingayat/Veerashaiva-Ganiga was

deleted.   The intent of the order was to extend the benefit of

reservation under Category II-A to the Lingayat-Ganigas also.
33.   The Division Bench found that the finding of the Single Judge

that Hindu-Ganiga and Lingayat-Ganiga were two different castes was
13
not possible to accept. A Lingayat is also a Hindu governed by the
Hindu Succession Act
1956, the
Hindu Marriage Act
1955, the
Hindu

Minority and Guardianship Act
1956 and the Hindu Adoption and

Maintenance Act 1956.        The caste of the Respondent No.1 was thus

shown as ‘Hindu-Lingayat’ in the school registers by the Respondent

No.1’s father.
34.      The Division Bench was correct in its finding that, the mere fact

that the Caste Verification Committee gave a report of about 16

candidates in a few days cannot be a reason to doubt the correctness

of the report.     The Division Bench found that the report was made in

accordance with the provisions of SC/ST and OBC Reservation Act.
35.      Furthermore,    during   the   pendency      of    the   Writ   Petition,

Respondent No.1 produced a registered document of the year 1909

where the caste of the great grandfather of the Respondent No.1 was

shown as ‘Ganiger’. The said document was taken on record by the

Writ Court, but there was no discussion about it in the impugned

order.    The document is relevant in that it proves the caste of the

Respondent No.1 to be ‘Ganiga’.         ‘Ganiger’ is a variant of the word

‘Ganiga’ found in north Karnataka region. Respondent No.1 had also

relied    upon   caste   certificates   issued   to   the    relatives    of   the

Respondent No.1 showing their caste as ‘Ganiga’.
36.      The Respondent No.1 also referred to an order of this Court in

Lawrence Salvador D’Souza v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.

(Civil Appeal No.6539/2016), where this Court directed the
14
Committee to consider the caste certificate of the niece of the

Appellant in that case for making a report about his caste.     In this

case, the Appellant has produced a number of caste certificates of his

relatives indicating their caste as ‘Hindu-Ganiga’. After perusing the

documents produced, this Court held that since the caste of the

forefather of the Appellant was mentioned as ‘Ganiger’, an inference

may be drawn with the help of this document that the caste of the

Appellant was also ‘Ganiga’.
37.   The decision of the Civil Enforcement Cell not to initiate the

prosecution may have been against the directions issued by the

Respondent No.2.    The decision however, was justified, considering

the materials on record showing the caste of the forefather and

relatives of the Respondent No.1 as ‘Ganiger’ or ‘Ganiga’. Even if the

Caste Certificate and the Validity Certificate are ignored, there are

materials including a pre-constitution registered sale deed of the

Respondent No.1’s grandfather showing his caste was ‘Ganiga’.
38.   In our considered opinion, the well reasoned judgment and

order of the Division Bench does not call for interference. Considering

that the disputes pertaining to the case of the Respondent No.1 has

been going on for years, the Division Bench rightly did not remand the

matter to the Respondent No.2 for adjudication. We find absolutely

no ground to interfere with the judgment. The appeal is, accordingly,

dismissed.
15
.………………………………….J.
                 [INDIRA BANERJEE]




                .…………………………………..J.
                 [J. K. MAHESHWARI]
NEW DELHI;
JULY 29, 2022