[Cites
25
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
R.M. Sundaram @ R.Meenakshisundaram vs Sri Kayarohanasamy And Neelayabhakshi ... on 11 July, 2022
Author:
Ajay Rastogi
Bench:
Ajay Rastogi
REPORTABLE

                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 3964-3965 OF 2009

R.M. SUNDARAM @ MEENAKSHISUNDARAM                              ...    APPELLANT

                                  VERSUS

SRI KAYAROHANASAMY AND
NEELAYADHAKSHI AMMAN TEMPLE
(THROUGH ITS EXECUTIVE OFFICER)
NAGAPATTINAM, TAMIL NADU                                       ...   RESPONDENT




                                     JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
The dispute in the present appeals arises from two separate

          suits in relation to (i) the dedication of 26 items of jewellery1, some

          of which are embedded with diamonds and precious stones, to the

          deity Sri Neelayadhakshi Amman of the Sri Kayarohanasamy and

          Neelayadhakshi Amman Temple;2 and (ii) the exclusive possession

          of the ‘Kudavarai’ (safe vaults) of the Temple which houses the suit

          jewellery.
1   For short, ‘suit jewellery’.
2   Hereinafter referred to as the ‘respondent’ or ‘Temple’.
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                      Page 1 of 38
2.     It is the case of the appellant, R.M. Sundaram, that the suit jewellery

       was inherited by him as his personal property being the adopted

       son of Muthuthandapani Chettiar and his wife, M. Thangammal. On

       6th November 1985, the appellant had instituted a civil suit (O.S. No.

       156/1986) before the court of the District Munsiff of Nagapattinam

       seeking, inter alia, a mandatory injunction directing the Temple to

       comply with the undertaking given in the letter dated 4th October

       1962 and thereby permit the appellant to “maintain independent

       and exclusive possession and enjoyment of the Kudavarai” of the

       Temple. It was pleaded that during the lifetime of his father,

       Muthuthandapani Chettiar, the suit jewellery known as ‘Abaranam’,

       that was owned and possessed by Muthuthandapani Chettiar, was

       licensed to be kept in the Kudavarai of the Temple. The proprietary

       right, title and interest in the suit jewellery continued to vest with

       Muthuthandapani Chettiar, who had retained possession and

       remained the exclusive owner of the suit jewellery throughout his

       lifetime. By way of gratitude, Muthuthandapani Chettiar, in terms of

       a letter of undertaking dated 4th October 1962, had given the keys

       of two external locks of the Kudavarai to the Executive Officer of

       the Temple to temporarily store the Temple jewellery, which is

       different from the suit jewellery, in the Kudavarai. This was a

       temporary arrangement, as expressly stated in the undertaking,
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                Page 2 of 38
and the Temple jewellery would be shifted back to the treasury

       room of the Temple after it was renovated. The plaint also refers to

       a civil suit filed by the respondent/Temple in the year 1981 (O.S.

       No. 99/1981) before the Subordinate Judge of Nagapattinam, an

       aspect which we would advert to in some detail later on.
3.     The respondent/Temple contested the suit on several grounds

       including, inter alia, the appellant’s right to file such a suit, the

       maintainability of the suit filed, the appellant’s status as the adopted

       son on Muthuthandapani Chettiar, the appellant’s lack of title over

       the suit jewellery, and the custody over the keys of the Kudavarai

       by    Muthuthandapani          Chettiar   being   merely   an   honorary

       responsibility. On merits, it was contended by the Temple that the

       suit jewellery, namely Abaranams, and the Temple jewellery were

       acquired from time to time over the past few centuries by way of

       donations or endowments made by unknown donors. The suit

       jewellery as well as the other Temple jewels have always been in

       the custody, use, enjoyment and possession of the idol/deity, Sri

       Neelayadhakshi Amman, only through the functionaries of the

       Temple and no other person. The suit jewellery was donated by the

       ancestors of Muthuthandapani Chettiar absolutely to the idol/deity

       and constitutes a specific endowment attached to the Temple. The

       donations      have been recorded as              Sri Adipoora Amman
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                    Page 3 of 38
(Neelayadhakshi Amman) Thiruvabaranam Endownment. The suit

       jewellery is adorned by Sri Neelayadhakshi Amman deity for ten

       days in the month of Adi every year marking the festival of

       adolescence and puberty in a celestial and mythological sense. On

       this occasion, many people, particularly women, celebrate the

       festival with great enthusiasm by distributing all sorts of ‘Mangala

       Samans’ to all women devotees and worshippers thronging the

       Temple. During this festival time, the ‘Utsava’ deity of Sri

       Neelayadhakshi Amman (popularly known as Sri Adipoora Amman)

       and the deity idol (Sri Neelayadhakshi Amman) used to be/are

       decked and decorated in all glory and grandeur with gold and silver

       jewellery studded with precious stones from ‘Kireedam to Thiruvadi’

       and then taken out in a Temple car and ratham in grand procession

       around the four streets on all ten days of the festival. The Kudavarai

       is located inside the Temple and is the innermost and integral

       portion of the Temple. It is guarded in terms of security and

       operated on a system of ‘Multiple Lock and Keys and Joint Control,

       Operation and Maintenance’ (MLKJCOM), to ensure safe custody

       of jewellery and valuable articles. Therefore, the suit jewellery was

       only used on the occasion of the Adipooram festival and could not

       be taken out of the Kudavarai frequently or at will. While admitting

       that two keys of the external door-way of the Kudavarai as well as
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                Page 4 of 38
the keys of the iron safe, wherein the suit jewellery was kept, were

       with the appellant, it is stated that the management of the

       respondent/Temple was in possession of several keys, including

       keys of the external door-way of the Kudavarai. Apart from the

       wooden jewellery boxes inside the iron safe, the Kudavarai also

       houses the two steel almirahs wherein the Temple jewellery and

       other Thiruvabaranams are kept. These articles and the suit

       jewellery do not belong to any person or private individual and

       were/are for the use of the deity.
4.     With reference to the letter of undertaking dated 4th October 1962,

       it is stated that the undertaking is a dead letter as it creates no right

       or privilege in favour of the appellant and in any event,

       Muthuthandapani Chettiar and his wife, M. Thangammal, had

       neither sought to enforce this letter-undertaking nor sought return

       of the two keys during their lifetime. The appellant had, nearly 23

       years thereafter, raised a claim in respect of the suit jewellery.
5.     The suit filed by the appellant was dismissed by the trial court, vide

       judgment dated 26th November 1990, primarily on the ground that

       the suit was not maintainable and that the undertaking was not

       acted upon by the appellant’s adoptive father, Muthuthandapani

       Chettiar. The respondent/Temple being a religious institution under
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                  Page 5 of 38
the
Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act,

           1959
,3 the Government can frame rules regarding the custody of

           jewels, other valuables and documents of religious institutions

           under
Section 116(2)(xii)
of the 1959 Act, which would also apply

           to the suit jewellery in the Kudavarai. The appellant, instead of

           applying to the Commissioner, had filed the civil suit which was not

           maintainable under
Section 108
of the 1959 Act. The claim for

           possession of Kudavarai was also barred as it interfered with the

           internal administration of the Temple.
6.         In relation to the undertaking dated 4th October 1962, the trial court

           observed that it was never acted upon by Muthuthandapani Chettiar

           prior to his death in 1969 and that the relief sought by the appellant

           was barred by limitation as it was instituted beyond the period of

           three years as stipulated in
Article 113
of the
Limitation Act, 1963
.
7.         The first appeal (A.S. No. 354/1992) preferred by the appellant

           against this judgment was also dismissed by the Subordinate

           Judge, Nagapattinam, vide judgment dated 30th August 1993, who

           reiterated that the suit was barred under the 1959 Act and the

           undertaking dated 4th October 1962 was not acted upon during the

           lifetime of Muthuthandapani Chettiar.
3   Hereinafter referred to as the ‘1959 Act’.
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                    Page 6 of 38
8.     The appellant had, thereupon, preferred a second appeal (S.A. No.

       1522/1993) before the High Court which has been dismissed by the

       impugned judgment dated 30th June 2008.
9.     The impugned common judgment, however, allowed the second

       appeal (S.A. No. 829/2000) preferred by the respondent/Temple

       which had arisen from a separate independent suit (O.S. No.

       87/1990, renumbered as O.S. No. 56/1996) instituted by the

       Temple on 11th June 1990 before the Subordinate Judge of

       Nagapattinam seeking, inter alia, a declaration of existence of

       specific endowment in respect of the suit jewellery in favour of the

       deity, Sri Neelayadhakshi Amman, and for a decree of permanent

       injunction restraining the appellant from interfering with the right of

       the deity to take out the suit jewellery from the Kudavarai.
10.    The trial court vide judgment dated 17th October 1996 decreed the

       suit accepting the version of the respondent/Temple that the suit

       jewellery was donated by the ancestors of Muthuthandapani

       Chettiar since 1894. Specific reliance was placed on the Temple

       Account Book (Exhibit A-1), which had recorded and given details

       of the suit jewellery. Further, witnesses produced by the

       respondent/Temple had deposed that the suit jewellery was

       adorned by the Amman idol and the suit jewellery would be taken
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                Page 7 of 38
out by Muthuthandapani Chettiar from the Kudavarai for this

       purpose. It was observed that the undertaking dated 4th October

       1962, which was marked as Exhibit B-1, was not acted upon by

       Muthuthandapani Chettiar, as was recorded in the decision of the

       trial court dated 26th November 1990 in the appellant’s suit. The trial

       court held that the reliance placed by the appellant upon the

       adoption deed (marked as Exhibit A-6), entered into after the death

       of Muthuthandapani Chettiar, was of no avail as the suit jewellery

       had been donated to the Temple and stored within the premises of

       the Temple since 1894. The suit jewellery was not made for the

       benefit of the family of Muthuthandapani Chettiar. The suit jewellery

       was kept inside the vault of the respondent/Temple as it was

       donated by the ancestors of Sri Muthuthandapani Chettiar for

       decorating and use of the idol Amman. The trial court was also of

       the view that the appellant had not been able to prove his adoption

       by Muthuthandapani Chettiar and his wife, M. Thangammal, an

       aspect which was not examined by the High Court in the second

       appeal.
11.    The trial court, while granting a decree of declaration, refused to

       issue a decree for permanent injunction since that the Temple had

       stated that two keys of the main door of the Kudavarai and the iron
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                Page 8 of 38
safe were in the possession of Muthuthandapani Chettiar and the

          evidence indicated the right of possession of Muthuthandapani

          Chettiar to the extent of taking out and keeping back the suit

          jewellery as a mark of honour. As such, the appellant had the right

          of possession to give and take back the donated suit jewellery

          during the Adipooram festival days. The appellant, it was observed,

          would render full cooperation in opening the Kudavarai and giving

          the suit jewellery on the festive occasion. Granting an injunction

          would result in depriving the members of the family of

          Muthuthandapani Chettiar from the honour of opening the doors of

          Kudavarai with the keys in their possession and handing over the

          suit jewellery for adorning the idol/ deity.
12.       The appellant, however, succeeded in the first appeal (A.S. No.

          6/1999) before the Additional Subordinate Judge of Nagapattinam

          wherein the appellant court, vide judgment dated 5th August 1999,

          held that the suit filed by the respondent/Temple for declaration was

          barred under
Order II Rule 2 of Code of Civil Procedure
, 19084 as

          the respondent had earlier filed a civil suit in 1981(O.S. No.

          99/1981) with a prayer for appointment of a receiver to make an

          inventory of the suit jewellery which was dismissed by the trial court



4   For short, the ‘Code’
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                   Page 9 of 38
on 6th September 1982. The first appellate court held that the

       Temple had omitted to seek a declaration as to the ownership of

       the suit jewellery and as such the Temple was barred from filing a

       suit for declaration of the suit jewellery as a specific endowment. At

       the same time, the first appellate court held that the suit was not

       barred by limitation as the suit jewellery was in custody of the

       respondent Temple being kept in the Kudavarai situated inside the

       Temple. The two keys of the Kudavarai were also with the

       respondent/Temple and, therefore, it was clear that the locks of the

       Kudavarai could be jointly operated by the appellant and the

       respondent/Temple, and the suit jewellery boxes could not be

       opened without joint operation. The first appellate court examined

       the question of ownership and affirmatively accepted the case of

       the respondent that the suit jewellery was donated by the ancestors

       of Muthuthandapani Chettiar and is an endowment vested in the

       respondent/Temple. The suit jewellery was also recorded in the

       register, Exhibit A-1, maintained by the respondent/Temple even in

       the year 1963.
13.    The cross-appeal (A.S. No. 40/1997) preferred by the respondent/

       Temple against rejection of the prayer for grant of injunction was

       also dismissed by the first appellate court.
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                               Page 10 of 38
14.    Aggrieved, the respondent/Temple had preferred a second appeal

       before the High Court, which was allowed by the impugned

       judgment, which as noticed above, had also decided the second

       appeal preferred by the appellant dismissing his suit for mandatory

       injunction.
15.    It is clear from the aforesaid discussion that, as far as endowment

       of the suit jewellery is concerned, there are concurrent findings of

       fact by the three courts in favour of the respondent/Temple and

       against the appellant. As per the said findings, the suit jewellery, 26

       in number, had been gifted by the ancestors of Muthuthandapani

       Chettiar for the specific purpose of adorning the deity, Sri

       Neelayadhakshi Amman, during the Adipooram festival. No doubt,

       the keys of the Kudavarai were in the custody of Muthuthandapani

       Chettiar and thereafter, his widow, M. Thangammal. However, this

       was more out of deference and honour, as the ancestors of

       Muthuthandapani Chettiar had donated the jewellery, and not on

       account of personal ownership of Muthuthandapani Chettiar or his

       ancestors. The administration of the Temple was originally vested

       with Nagai District Devasthanam Committee. Pursuant to Order No.

       G.O. 135 dated 16th January 1942, a revised scheme of Hindu

       Religious and Charitable Endowment was implemented and the

       respondent/Temple came under direct administration of the Hindu
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                               Page 11 of 38
Religious and Charitable Endowments under the Madras Hindu

          Religious Endowments Act, 1926 enforced with effect from 19th

          January 1927. Subsequently, on enforcement of the 1959 Act, the

          management was taken over by the Executive Officer and Trustees

          appointed under the 1959 Act. It is to be noted that two important

          festivals are celebrated at the Temple, namely Adipooram and

          Panchakrosam. Adipooram is a unique festival spread over ten

          days celebrating the coming of age of the goddess. On the tenth

          day, after sacred bath, the idol of goddess Sri Neelayadhakshi

          Amman is taken in procession in a Temple car. During the

          Adipooram festival, the goddess Sri Neelayadhakshi Amman is

          adorned with the suit jewellery. The High Court rereferred to the

          evidence on record, including testimony of the witnesses, who, it is

          obvious, could not have deposed as to the donation of the ‘suit

          jewellery’ which had taken place in or before 1894, but what was

          seen and noticed by the witnesses during their lifetime. PW-3,

          Abadhthothranam Chettiar5, the son of an erstwhile trustee of the

          Temple, had testified that the ancestors of Muthuthandapani

          Chettiar gave the suit jewellery to the Temple which was used

          during the ten days of the Adipooram festival to adorn the idol/deity,

          Sri Neelayadhakshi Amman, and could not be used by members of


5   ‘Abathaoranam Chettiar’ in the record of evidence
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                  Page 12 of 38
the family of Muthuthandapani Chettiar. The jewellery was never

          taken out of the Temple and Muthuthandapani Chettiar had the

          honour of taking and giving out the suit jewellery at the Adipooram

          festival. Members of the family of Muthuthandapani Chettiar had

          never claimed rights over the suit jewellery. PW-4, Sundarajan 6,

          another erstwhile trustee of the Temple during the period 1972-

          1977, had similarly deposed that the jewellery was only adorned by

          the idol/        deity, Sri         Neelayadhakshi   Amman,   and neither

          Muthuthandapani Chettiar nor the members of his family claimed

          any right over the suit jewellery. There was no custom to take the

          suit jewellery by the family of Muthuthandapani Chettiar outside the

          Temple. PW-5, Kalimuthu7, who had been closely associated with

          Muthuthandapani Chettiar, had affirmatively stated that the suit

          jewellery was gifted by ancestors of Muthuthandapani Chettiar to

          be adorned by the idol/ deity during the Adipooram festival. On this

          festive occasion, Muthuthandapani Chettiar would be happy to

          open the Kudavarai and take out the suit jewellery for being

          adorned by the deity. In doing so, Muthuthandapani Chettiar would

          follow the practice of his ancestors and had never claimed any right

          over the suit jewellery.
6   ‘Soundarajan’ in the record of evidence
7   ‘Marimuthu’ in the record of evidence
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                       Page 13 of 38
16.    It is interesting to note that the appellant does not dispute that the

       Kudavarai is located in the Temple. In his testimony in Suit No.

       156/86, the appellant Sundaram as PW-1 had deposed that

       Muthuthandapani Chettiar had plenty of ornaments which belonged

       to the family, and the claim made is that Kudavarai in the Temple,

       was allotted to them to keep the ornaments for safety. The stand is

       ex-facie implausible and unbelievable, given the fact that the

       Temple is a public temple. Kudavarai is not a public vault where

       people keep their personal jewellery, and the suit jewellery kept in

       it since 1894 was always and only used for adorning the Temple

       deity for ten days at the Adipooram festival.
17.    Referring to the documents on record, specific reference has been

       made by the High Court to Exhibit A-1, the register containing

       details and particulars of the suit jewellery, wherein the suit

       jewellery (26 in number) were shown as ‘Adipooram Ambal Thiru

       Abaranam’. In the remarks column it was noted that the jewellery

       “are in the custody of Mr. S.M.T.M. Muthuthandapani Chettiar of

       Nagapattinam”. Other jewellery items were shown in different

       headings of ‘Temple Series’. The impugned judgment observes that

       the 26 items of suit jewellery being identified as ‘Adipooram Ambal

       Thiru Abaranam’, is a strong piece of evidence which supports the

       respondent’s case. Exhibit A-1 was a register maintained in regular
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                               Page 14 of 38
course of administration of Temple containing details and

       particulars of jewels of the Temple. Even in 1963, the suit jewellery

       had been shown as ‘Adipooram Ambal Thiru Abaranam’.

       Muthuthandapani Chettiar died on 21st August 1969 and had never

       claimed any right on the suit jewellery during his lifetime. Reference

       was also made to Exhibit A-3 which indicated that the respondent/

       Temple was under the administration of Devasthanam Committee

       of Nagapattinam District. Thereafter, in terms of the revised scheme

       dated 16th January 1942, the Temple had come under the State

       administration, which had continued under the 1959 Act with

       appointment of Executive Officer and Trustees. The High Court

       referred to
Section 29(d)
of the 1959 Act in relation to preparation

       of register of every religious institution for “jewels, gold, silver,

       precious stones, vessels and utensils and other movables

       belonging to the institution, with their weights and estimated value”

       and placed reliance on illustration (e) to
Section 114
of the Indian

       Evidence Act, 1872 concerning the presumption that an official act

       has been regularly performed, to hold that the Exhibit A-1 is

       unimpeachable evidence showing that the suit jewellery are

       ‘Adipooram Ambal Thiru Abaranam’. The High Court also made

       reference to Exhibit B-1, the family settlement dated 26th October

       1969, which was entered into, after the death of Muthuthandapani
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                               Page 15 of 38
Chettiar, by the wife of Muthuthandapani Chettiar, M. Thangammal,

         and his brother’s widow, which referred to the large number of

         family properties dedicated for endowment to various temples by

         the family of Muthuthandapani Chettiar. Exhibit B-1 records that

         Muthuthandapani Chettiar and his ancestors were liberal in creating

         endowments and dedicating family properties to temples and

         performance of other dharmams. Exhibit B-1 referred to the

         ‘Adipooram Ambal Thiru Abaranam’ and the fact that after the death

         of Muthuthandapani Chettiar, his wife, M. Thangammal, “had the

         keys of the Kudavarai and she will hand over the jewellery during

         the festival sessions or whenever required.”
18.      We are in agreement with the said findings recorded by the High

         Court. The findings are supported by the legal position on the effect

         of endowment, which is well settled and we would like to refer to

         only a few decisions.
19.
In
Deoki Nandan v. Murlidhar and Others,8
a bench of five Judges

         of this Court has held that:
“the true beneficiaries of religious endowments are not
                      the idols but the worshippers, and that the purpose of
                      the endowment is the maintenance of that worship for
                      the benefit of the worshippers, the question whether an
                      endowment is private or public presents no difficulty.
                      The cardinal point to be decided is whether it was the

8   AIR 1957 SC 133
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                       Page 16 of 38
intention of the founder that specified individuals are to
                   have the right of worship at the shrine, or the general
                   public or any specified portion thereof. In accordance
                   with this theory, it has been held that when property is
                   dedicated for the worship of a family idol, it is a private
                   and not a public endowment, as the persons who are
                   entitled to worship at the shrine of the deity can only be
                   the members of the family, and that is an ascertained
                   group of individuals. But where the beneficiaries are not
                   members of a family or a specified individual, then the
                   endowment can only be regarded as public, intended to
                   benefit the general body of worshippers.
xx                  xx                 xx

                   Endowment can validly be created in favour of an idol
                   or temple without the performance of any particular
                   ceremonies, provided the settlor has clearly and
                   unambiguously expressed his intention in that behalf.
Where it is proved that ceremonies were performed,
                   that would be valuable evidence of endowment, but
                   absence of such proof would not be conclusive against
                   it.”
20.      Following the above ratio in The Commissioner for Hindu

         Religious      and     Charitable     Endowments,        Mysore         v.   Sri

         Ratnavarma Heggade (Deceased) by his L. Rs.,9 this Court has

         observed that:
“Neither a document nor express words are essential
                   for a dedication for a religious or public purpose in our
                   country. Such dedications may be implied from user
                   permitted for public and religious purposes for sufficient
                   length of time. The conduct of those whose property is
                   presumed to be dedicated for a religious or public
                   purpose and other circumstances are taken into
                   account in arriving at the inference of such a dedication.
                   Although religious ceremonies of Sankalpa and


9   (1977) 1 SCC 525
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                       Page 17 of 38
Samarpanam are relevant for proving a dedication, yet,
                   they are not indispensable”

                Thus, extinction of private character of a property can be

        inferred from the circumstances and facts on record, including

        sufficient length of time, which shows user permitted for religious or

        public purposes.
21.     Earlier, in
M.R. Goda Rao Sahib v. State of Madras,10
this Court

        has observed that in an absolute dedication, the property is given

        out and out to an idol or religious or charitable institution and the

        donor divests himself of all beneficial interests in the property

        comprised in the endowment. Where the dedication is partial, a

        charge is created on the property or there is a trust to receive and

        apply a portion of the income for the religious or charitable

        purposes. In the latter case, the property descends and is alienable

        and partible in the ordinary way, but the only reference is that it

        passes with a charge upon it. The Court had relied on the provisions

        of the
Madras Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments

        Act,1951
and in particular to Section 3211 thereof, to observe that:
10 (1966) 1 SCR 643
11
Section 38(1)
of the 1959 Act reads- “
Section 38
- Enforcement of service or charity in certain cases
-(1) Where a specific endowment attached to a math or temple consists merely of a charge on property
and there is failure in the due performance of the service or charity, the trustee of the math or temple
concerned may require the person in possession of the property on which the endowment is a charge,
to pay the expenses incurred or likely to be incurred in causing the service or charity to be performed
otherwise. In default of such person making payment as required, the Commissioner in the case of a
specific endowment attached to a math, and the Joint Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner, as
the case may be, in the case of a specific endowment attached to a temple, may, on the application of
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                                      Page 18 of 38
“There is no dispute that in order that there may be an
                   endowment within the meaning of the Act, the settlor
                   must divest himself of the property endowed. To create
                   an endowment he must give it and if he has given it, he
                   of course has not retained it; he has then divested
                   himself of it. ….By the instrument the settlors certainly
                   divested themselves of the right to receive a certain part
                   of the income derived from the properties in question.
They deprived themselves of the right to deal with the
                   properties free of charge as absolute owners which they
                   previously were. The instrument was a binding
                   instrument. This indeed is not in dispute. The rights
                   created by it were, therefore, enforceable in law. The
                   charities could compel the payment to them of the
                   amount provided in Schedule B, and, if necessary for
                   that purpose, enforce the charge. This, of course, could
                   not be if the proprietors had retained the right to the
                   amount or remained full owners of the property as
                   before the creation of the charge….By providing that
                   their liability to pay the amount would be a charge on
                   the properties, the settlors emphasised that they were
                   divesting themselves of the right to the income and the
                   right to deal with the property as if it was
                   unencumbered. By creating the charge they provided a
                   security for the due performance by them of the liability
                   which they undertook. Further
Section 32
of the Act
                   provides that where a specific endowment to a temple
                   consists merely of a charge on property, the trustees of
                   the temple might require the person in possession of
                   the properties charged to pay the expenses in respect
                   of which the charge was created. This section
                   undoubtedly shows that the Act contemplates a charge
                   as an endowment.”


                Interpreting the said section, this Court held that specific

        endowment attached to a math or a temple may consist merely of

        a charge on the property. Therefore, in order to constitute specific


the trustee and after giving the person in possession, a reasonable opportunity of stating his objections
in regard thereto, by order determine the amount payable to the trustee.”
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                                       Page 19 of 38
endowment it is not necessary that there must be transfer of title or

       divestment of the title to the property.
22.    For the sake of completeness, we must record that under the 1926

       Act, the expression ‘religious endowment’ or ‘endowment’ was

       defined vide sub-section (11) to
Section 9
to mean

                  “all property belonging to, or given or endowed for the
                 support of, maths or temples or for the performance of
                 any service or charity connected therewith and includes
                 the premises of maths or temples but does not include
                 gifts of property made as personal gifts or offerings to
                 the head of a math or to the archaka or other employee
                 of a temple”.
The 1959 Act, on the other hand, defines ‘religious

       endowment’ or ‘endowment’ in sub-section (17) to
Section 6
as

       under:
““Religious endowment” or “endowment” means all
                 property belonging to or given or endowed for the
                 support of maths or temples, or given or endowed for
                 the performance of any service or charity of a public
                 nature connected therewith or of any other religious
                 charity; and includes the institution concerned and also
                 the premises thereof, but does not include gifts of
                 property made as personal gifts to the archaka, service
                 holder or other employee of a religious institution
                     Explanation.— (1) Any inam granted to an archaka,
                     service holder or other employee of a religious
                     institution for the performance of any service or
                     charity in or connected with a religious institution
                     shall not be deemed to be a personal gift to the
                     archaka, service holder or employee but shall be
                     deemed to be a religious endowment.
Explanation.— (2) All property which belonged to,
                     or was given or endowed for the support of a
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                   Page 20 of 38
religious institution, or which was given or endowed
                      for the performance of any service or charity of a
                      public nature connected therewith or of any other
                      religious charity shall be deemed to be a “religious
                      endowment” or endowment” within the meaning of
                      this definition, notwithstanding that, before or after
                      the date of the commencement of this Act, the
                      religious institution has ceased to exist or ceased to
                      be used as a place of religious worship or
                      instruction or the service or charity has ceased to
                      be performed:
Provided that this Explanation shall not be
                             deemed to apply in respect of any property
                             which vested in any person before the 30th
                             September 1951, by the operation of the law
                             of limitation;”


              Sub-section (19) to
Section 6
defines ‘specific endowment’

       reads as under:
““specific endowment” means any property or money
                 endowed for the performance of any specific service or
                 charity in a math or temple or for the performance of any
                 other religious charity, but does not include an inam of
                 the nature described in Explanation (1) to clause (17);
                     Explanation. — (1) Two or more endowments of the
                     nature specified in this clause, the administration of
                     which is vested in a common trustee, or which are
                     managed under a common scheme settled or
                     deemed to have been settled under this Act, shall
                     be construed as a single specific endowment for the
                     purposes of this Act ;
Explanation.— (2) Where a specific endowment
                     attached to a math or temple is situated partly within
                     the State and partly outside the State, control shall
                     be exercised in accordance with the provisions of
                     this Act over the part of the specific endowment
                     situated within the State;”
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                     Page 21 of 38
In the context of the present case and the facts recorded above, it

          is clear that the suit jewellery was a ‘specific endowment’ for the

          performance of the specific service of adorning the deity, Sri

          Neelayadhakshi Amman, to be taken out in the Temple car and

          ratham in a grand procession during the Adipooram festival.
Further, as explained below, it was a charity in favour of the Temple

          and was for performance of a religious charity. The involvement of

          the family of the appellant was limited and restricted to retaining the

          keys of the Kudavarai and the iron safe which were to be opened

          at the time of the festival of Adipooram and the suit jewellery was

          to be taken out for the specific purpose of adorning the deity, Sri

          Neelayadhakshi Amman.
23.       Lastly, we would refer to a recent judgment of this Court in Idol of

          Sri Renganathaswamy represented by its Executive Officer,

          Joint Commissioner v. P.K. Thoppulan Chettiar, Ramanuja

          Koodam Anandhana Trust, represented by its Managing

          Trustee and Others12 which draws a distinction between a

          ‘religious charity’ as defined in sub-section (16) to
Section 6
from a

          charity associated with a finite group of identifiable persons, which

          is a charity of a private character. It was observed that:
12   (2020) 17 SCC 96
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                    Page 22 of 38
“for a charity to constitute a “religious charity”, there is
                   no requirement for the public charity to be connected
                   with a particular temple or a math. In terms of the
                   statutory definition, for a charity to constitute a “religious
                   charity” under the 1959 Act, two conditions must be
                   met. First, it must be a “public charity” and second, it
                   must be “associated with” a Hindu festival or
                   observance of a religious character. If these two
                   conditions are satisfied, a charity is a “religious charity
                   (emphasis added)

                            xx                  xx                  xx

                   Where the beneficiaries of a trust or charity are limited
                   to a finite group of identifiable individuals, the trust or
                   charity is of a private character. However, where the
                   beneficiaries are either the public at large or an
                   amorphous and fluctuating body of persons incapable
                   of being specifically identifiable, the trust or charity is of
                   a public character.”
24.       This decision has referred to an earlier decision in
M.J.

          Thulasiraman and Another v. Commissioner, Hindu Religious

          and Charitable Endowment Administration and Another,13
which had examined and elucidated on the words ‘endow’ and

          ‘endowment’ to state that they relate to idea of giving, bequeathing

          or dedicating something, whether property or otherwise, for some

          purpose. The purpose should be with respect to religion or charity.

          In our opinion, the said tests are satisfied in the present case and

          the specific endowment of the suit jewellery as religious charity is

          established beyond doubt.
13   (2019) 8 SCC 689
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                          Page 23 of 38
25.     Therefore, in view of the judgments quoted above and the aforesaid

        statutory provisions, it must be held that the case of the appellant

        that there was no endowment or specific endowment must fail and

        has no legs to stand on. The dedication of the suit jewellery does

        not require an express dedication or document, and can be inferred

        from the circumstances, especially the uninterrupted and long

        possession of the suit jewellery by the respondent/Temple. The

        private character of the jewels had extinguished long back and the

        appellant has no basis to claim that the suit jewellery was inherited

        by him from his adoptive parents. The endowment is clearly public

        in nature and for the purposes of performing religious ceremonies.

        As confirmed by three courts, with which we are in agreement, the

        suit jewellery was dedicated for a specific purpose and can only be

        used during the performance of the religious ceremony during the

        Adipooram festival.
26.     The claim of the appellant based on the principle of res judicata and

        constructive res judicata/ Order II Rule 2 of the Code14 as the

        respondent/ Temple has earlier filed a suit for appointment of a




14 “Order II - Suit to include the whole claim.—…
(2) Relinquishment of part of claim.—Where a plaintiff omits to sue in respect of, or intentionally
relinquishes, any portion of his claim, he shall not afterwards sue in respect of the portion so omitted
or relinquished.”
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                                      Page 24 of 38
receiver for taking inventory of the suit jewellery is also without

       merit.
27.    The respondent had filed a civil suit in November 1981 (O.S. No.

       99/1981) before the Subordinate Judge, Nagapattinam against the

       present appellant, R. M. Sundaram, and his mother, M.

       Thangammal. It was stated that there is a separate room in the

       Temple called the Kudavarai which has an iron gate. Inside the

       Kudavarai, there are two steel almirahs and an iron safe. The two

       steel almirahs contain many items of gold jewellery belonging

       exclusively to the respondent/Temple and the iron safe in the

       Kudavarai had 26 items of jewellery, namely the suit jewellery,

       which were donated to the respondent/Temple about 80 years back

       by the ancestors of Muthuthandapani Chettiar. It was further stated

       that the keys of the iron safe were with the family of

       Muthuthandapani Chettiar while the keys of the two almirahs were

       with the Joint Sub-Registrar, Nagapattinam, in the capacity as

       Double Lock Officer. One set of the keys of the outer door was with

       the Executive Officer and the other set was with the family of

       Muthuthandapani Chettiar. The Kudavarai cannot be accessed

       unless the two sets of keys were jointly operated to open the main

       door. It was stated that large items of jewellery were missing from
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                            Page 25 of 38
the Temple premises for some time and the then Executive Officer

       of    the     respondent/Temple    had    died    under   suspicious

       circumstances. Some jewellery was found to be missing from the

       Temple which was being investigated by the police, and shortage

       of jewellery had also been discovered in other temples. In these

       circumstances and on the instructions of the State Government, the

       Commissioner, under the 1959 Act, had directed all temples to

       verify the jewellery as per the original appraisement register. The

       family of Muthuthandapani Chettiar had been requested and was

       served with the notice in this regard, but had expressed their

       inability to comply with the request for inspection.
28.    In the written statement filed by the appellant, they had accepted

       use of the suit jewellery on the festive occasions for adorning the

       presiding deity but had pleaded that there was no dedication or

       charity, absolute or conditional. It was submitted that the suit

       jewellery was used by the family of Muthuthandapani Chettiar. The

       suit jewellery was licensed to be kept in the Kudavarai under the

       control of the respondent /Temple to avoid loss on account of

       natural calamity or cyclone and tidal waves. The suit jewellery was

       kept for safe custody with the right to revoke the license. The

       appellant, therefore, contended that he was entitled to remove the
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                              Page 26 of 38
suit jewellery to a place of his choice and even to stop the

          respondent/Temple from using the suit jewellery during Adipooram

          festival.
29.       As is evident, the prior suit of 1981 arose from a very peculiar set

          of facts and circumstances and the cause of action as per the plaint

          are completely unrelated to the suits being considered in the

          present appeals. In our opinion, the High Court has rightly rejected

          the plea of res judicata and constructive res judicata / Order II Rule

          2 of the Code.
30.       This Court in
Sheodan Singh v. Daryao Kunwar (SMT
)15 has laid

          down that the following conditions must be satisfied to constitute a

          plea of res judicata:
“(i) The matter directly and substantially in issue in the
                      subsequent suit or issue must be the same matter
                      which was directly and substantially in issue in the
                      former suit;
(ii) The former suit must have been a suit between the
                      same parties or between parties under whom they or
                      any of them claim;
(iii) The parties must have litigated under the same title
                      in the former suit;
(iv) The court which decided the former suit must be a
                      court competent to try the subsequent suit or the suit in
                      which such issue is subsequently raised; and
(v) The matter directly and substantially in issue in the
                      subsequent suit must have been heard and finally
                      decided by the court in the first suit. Further Explanation

15   AIR 1966 SC 1332
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                          Page 27 of 38
1 shows that it is not the date on which the suit is filed
                 that matters but the date on which the suit is decided,
                 so that even if a suit was filed later, it will be a former
                 suit if it has been decided earlier. In order therefore that
                 the decision in the earlier two appeals dismissed by the
                 High Court operates as res judicata it will have to be
                 seen whether all the five conditions mentioned above
                 have been satisfied.”
31.    General principle of res judicata under
Section 11
of the Code

       contains rules of conclusiveness of judgment, but for res judicata to

       apply, the matter directly and substantially in issue in the

       subsequent suit must be the same matter which was directly and

       substantially in issue in the former suit. Further, the suit should have

       been decided on merits and the decision should have attained

       finality. Where the former suit is dismissed by the trial court for want

       of jurisdiction, or for default of the plaintiff’s appearance, or on the

       ground of non-joinder or mis-joinder of parties or multifariousness,

       or on the ground that the suit was badly framed, or on the ground

       of a technical mistake, or for failure on the part of the plaintiff to

       produce probate or letter of administration or succession certificate

       when the same is required by law to entitle the plaintiff to a decree,

       or for failure to furnish security for costs, or on the ground of

       improper valuation, or for failure to pay additional court fee on a

       plaint which was undervalued, or for want of cause of action, or on

       the ground that it is premature and the dismissal is confirmed in
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                      Page 28 of 38
appeal (if any), the decision, not being on the merits, would not be

          res judicata in a subsequent suit.16 The reason is that the first suit is

          not decided on merits.
32.       In the present case, the suit filed in 1981 for appointment of the

          receiver for preparing an inventory of the suit jewellery was not

          decided on merits but was dismissed on the ground that the

          respondent had prayed for mandatory injunction and had not made

          a prayer for declaration of title. Thus, the suit was dismissed for

          technical reasons, which decision is not an adjudication on merits

          of the dispute that would operate as res judicata on the merits of

          the matter. Further, to succeed and establish a prayer for res

          judicata, the party taking the said prayer must place on record a

          copy of the pleadings and the judgments passed, including the

          appellate judgment which has attained finality. In the present case,

          the appellant did not place on record a copy of the appellate

          judgment and it is accepted that the second appeal filed by the

          respondent was dismissed, giving liberty to the respondent to file a

          fresh suit with a prayer of declaration of title/endowment in respect

          of the suit jewellery. The liberty granted was not challenged by the

          appellant. The right to file a fresh suit to the Temple, therefore,



16
Sheodan Singh v. Daryao Kunwar (SMT
) AIR 1966 SC 1332
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                    Page 29 of 38
should not be denied. The bar of constructive res judicata/ Order II

          Rule 2 of the Code is not attracted.
33.       The plea of constructive res judicata/Order II Rule 2 of the Code

          also fails as the cause of action in the first suit filed in 1981 was

          limited and predicated on account of the failure of the appellant to

          open the locks of the safe and the main door of the Kudavarai, the

          keys of which were available with the appellant and required joint

          operation. Here again, the party claiming and raising the plea of

          constructive res judicata/Order II Rule 2 of the Code must place on

          record in evidence the pleadings of the previous suit and establish

          the identity of the cause of actions, which cannot be established in

          the absence of record of judgment and decree which is pleaded to

          operate as estoppel.
In this regard, we would like to refer to

          judgment of this Court in
Gurbux Singh v. Bhooralal17
wherein it

          has been observed:
“In order that a plea of a Bar under Order 2 Rule 2(3) of
                   the Civil Procedure Code should succeed the defendant
                   who raises the plea must make out; (i) that the second
                   suit was in respect of the same cause of action as that
                   on which the previous suit was based; (2) that in respect
                   of that cause of action the plaintiff was entitled to more
                   than one relief; (3) that being thus entitled to more than
                   one relief the plaintiff, without leave obtained from the
                   Court omitted to sue for the relief for which the second
                   suit had been filed. From this analysis it would be seen
                   that the defendant would have to establish primarily and

17   AIR 1964 SC 1810
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                      Page 30 of 38
to start with, the precise cause of action upon which the
                   previous suit was filed, for unless there is identity
                   between the cause of action on which the earlier suit
                   was filed and that on which the claim in the latter suit is
                   based there would be no scope for the application of the
                   bar. No doubt, a relief which is sought in a plaint could
                   ordinarily be traceable to a particular cause of action but
                   this might, by no means, be the universal rule. As the
                   plea is a technical bar it has to be established
                   satisfactorily and cannot be presumed merely on basis
                   of inferential reasoning. It is for this reason that we
                   consider that a plea of a bar under Order 2 Rule 2 of the
                   Civil Procedure Code can be established only if the
                   defendant files in evidence the pleadings in the
                   previous suit and thereby proves to the Court the
                   identity of the cause of action in the two suits.
Just as in the case of a plea of res judicata which cannot
                   be established in the absence on the record of the
                   judgment and decree which is pleaded as estoppel, we
                   consider that a plea under Order 2 Rule 2 of the Civil
                   Procedure Code cannot be made out except on proof of
                   the plaint in the previous suit the filing of which is said
                   to create the bar. As the plea is basically founded on
                   the identity of the cause of action in the two suits the
                   defence which raises the bar has necessarily to
                   establish the cause of action in the previous suit. The
                   cause of action would be the facts which the plaintiff had
                   then alleged to support the right to the relief that he
                   claimed.”
34.       Reiterating the above principle, this Court in Virgo Industries

          (Eng.)
Private Limited v. Venturetech Solutions Private

          Limited18
observed that:
“The object behind the enactment of Order 2 Rules 2(2)
                   and (3)
CPC
is not far to seek. The Rule engrafts a
                   laudable principle that discourages/prohibits vexing the
                   defendant again and again by multiple suits except in a

18   (2013) 1 SCC 625
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                       Page 31 of 38
situation where one of the several reliefs, though
                 available to a plaintiff, may not have been claimed for a
                 good reason. A later suit for such relief is contemplated
                 only with the leave of the court which leave, naturally,
                 will be granted upon due satisfaction and for good and
                 sufficient reasons.
xx               xx                xx

                 The cardinal requirement for application of the
                 provisions contained in Order 2 Rules 2(2) and (3),
                 therefore, is that the cause of action in the later suit
                 must be the same as in the first suit.”
35.    There is some merit in the contention of the appellant that the

       impugned judgment is contradictory as it has affirmed the decree of

       the trial court, which was upheld by the first appellate court,

       accepting the plea of the respondent that the suit for mandatory

       injunction filed by the appellant is not maintainable in view of the

       bar under the provisions of the 1959 Act.
Section 63
of the 1959 Act

       states that the Joint Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner

       has the power to enquire into and decide the disputes and matters

       concerning “whether any property or money is a religious

       endowment” and “whether any property or money is a specific

       endowment”. Any decision of the Joint or Deputy Commissioner in

       terms of
Section 63
of the 1959 Act can thereafter be challenged in

       appeal before the Commissioner under
Section 69
of the 1959 Act.

       Pursuant to
Section 70
of the 1959 Act, a party aggrieved by an

       order passed by the Commissioner in respect of any matter
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                   Page 32 of 38
specified under
Section 63
(including determination of a religious or

       specific endowment) can be challenged before the court within 90

       days of the receipt of the order. Further, a party aggrieved by a

       decree of the court, under
Section 70
, can within 90 days from the

       date of decree, appeal to the High Court. In the light of the

       aforesaid, it can be urged that the suit filed by the respondent would

       not be maintainable. The appellant did not raise this plea, possibly

       because he had himself filed a civil suit. In fact, this argument would

       also recoil on the appellant insofar as he has raised the plea of res

       judicata and constructive res judicata/ Order II Rule 2 of the Code,

       for the said pleas would not be available in case the civil court had

       lacked subject matter jurisdiction. We would have normally allowed

       the appeal preferred by the appellant in the present case and

       relegated the appellant and the Temple to take recourse to the

       remedy available under
Section 63
of the 1959 Act. However, we

       do not think it will be appropriate and proper to permit the appellant

       to do so in the present case as it would be a futile and useless

       exercise. It is crystal clear that there was a specific endowment of

       the suit jewellery way back in 1894 and the challenge made by the

       appellant has no legs to stand on and is totally devoid of merit. It is

       difficult to reconcile the testimony of the appellant, in the suit filed

       by him, that the suit jewellery was kept in the Kudavarai of the
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                Page 33 of 38
respondent/Temple only for the purposes of safe-keeping, with the

       fact that the suit jewellery was only used for the purposes of

       adorning the idol/ deity during the Adipooram festival. The appellant

       eventually backtracked from this position and has testified, in the

       later suit filed by the respondent/Temple, to the effect that he is

       unaware on “what basis, the 26 items of suit ornaments (suit

       jewellery) for what purpose are kept in the kudavarai…I don’t

       directly know for what reason the suit jewels were kept in the room

       in the plaintiff temple”. In these circumstances, we do not want

       another round of litigation which would serve no purpose. We also

       have no hesitation in holding that the findings recorded above

       would operate as res judicata even if the appellant is to initiate

       proceedings under the 1959 Act.
36.    We have noted the decree passed by the trial court in the suit filed

       by the respondent whereby the relief of injunction was declined,

       albeit observing that the appellant must open the locks and make

       the suit jewellery available during the festival season. The cross

       appeal filed by the respondent/Temple against rejection of its

       prayer of injunction was dismissed by the first appellate court

       agreeing with the observations made by the trial court regarding the

       endowment of the suit jewellery. The High Court, in the impugned

       order, has modified the aforesaid observations of the trial court and
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                              Page 34 of 38
has also directed the appellant to hand over the keys to the Joint

          Commissioner, Tanjore who would perform the necessary

          responsibility of handing over the jewels during the Adipooram

          festival. We feel this decree or direction is beyond what was sought

          by the respondent/ Temple in the plaint. This court in
Bachhaj

          Nahar v. Nilima Mandal and Another19
has clearly stipulated the

          limits of a court to grant reliefs beyond the prayer and pleadings of

          the parties and observed that:
“It is fundamental that in a civil suit, relief to be granted
                   can be only with reference to the prayers made in the
                   pleadings. That apart, in civil suits, grant of relief is
                   circumscribed by various factors like court fee,
                   limitation, parties to the suits, as also grounds barring
                   relief, like res judicata, estoppel, acquiescence, non-
                   joinder of causes of action or parties, etc., which require
                   pleading and proof. Therefore, it would be hazardous to
                   hold that in a civil suit whatever be the relief that is
                   prayed, the court can on examination of facts grant any
                   relief as it thinks fit. In a suit for recovery of rupees one
                   lakh, the court cannot grant a decree for rupees ten
                   lakhs. In a suit for recovery possession of property ‘A’,
                   court cannot grant possession of property ‘B’. In a suit
                   praying for permanent injunction, court cannot grant a
                   relief of declaration or possession. The jurisdiction to
                   grant relief in a civil suit necessarily depends on the
                   pleadings, prayer, court fee paid, evidence let in, etc.”
37.       In fact, to be fair to the High Court, the impugned judgment also

          records that the decree for permanent injunction as prayed for is

          granted to the respondent/Temple. Accordingly, we clarify and pass


19   (2008) 17 SCC 491
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                         Page 35 of 38
a decree restraining the appellant from interfering in any manner

       with the right of the Temple authorities to take out the suit jewellery

       from the Kudavarai whenever the occasion demands. In other

       words, the appellant would cooperate with the request(s) made by

       the Executive Officer and Trustees of the respondent/Temple to

       open the Kudavarai doors and take out the suit jewellery from the

       iron-safe whenever required.
38.    Accordingly, the final order and directions issued by the trial court

       in its decision dated 17th October 1996 in the respondent’s suit

       (Original Suit No.56/96) and the first appellate court rejecting the

       Temple’s prayer for injunction is set aside, and a decree of

       injunction is passed in the aforesaid terms. The respondent/Temple

       would be entitled to file an application for execution of the decree

       of injunction in case of non-compliance and violation of the decree.

       Further, and in case the appellant fails to honour the commitment

       made and followed, that is, to open the doors of the Kudavarai and

       the safe to take out the suit jewellery whenever required by the

       Temple, it will be open to the respondent to take steps and initiate

       proceedings under the 1959 Act or by way of a civil suit as permitted

       in law, in which event the authorities/court would consider passing

       an order directing the appellant to hand over the keys of the door of

       the Kudavarai and the iron safe; As any failure to abide by the
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                               Page 36 of 38
convention and ‘the charge’, which forms the basis of this order,

       would be a fresh or recurring cause of action, and the plea of

       limitation or Order II Rule 2 of the Code would not apply.
39.    It is to be noted in the impugned judgment that one of the items in

       the suit jewellery (item no. 14) is missing, and a review of the

       evidence on record reflects that it is with the appellant. The

       appellant must surrender and give physical possession of the said

       item to the respondent/ Temple within 30 days from the date of

       pronouncement of this judgment. In case, the appellant does not

       give possession of the said item, it would be open for the

       respondent/ Temple to initiate civil as well as criminal proceedings

       in accordance with law. In case any such proceeding is initiated,

       the same would be examined on merits, though the findings

       recorded herein would be binding. The appellant would have the

       right to raise all defences as are available with him under law.
40.    Accordingly, we dismiss the appeals and uphold the judgment of

       the High Court affirming the decree of declaration passed by trial

       court in Suit No. 56/96, which was also upheld by the first appellate

       court, and thereby confirm existence of specific endowment known

       as Adipooram Thiruvabaranam comprising of the 26 items of

       jewellery mentioned in the plaint, as endowed in favour of Sri
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                              Page 37 of 38
Neelayadhakshi Amman, the presiding deity of the Temple. The

       decree of injunction as passed by the High Court, it is clarified, is in

       the terms of the prayer made in the suit (OS No.56/96) and also is

       in terms of this judgment. There would be no order as to costs.
......................................J.
                                                               (AJAY RASTOGI)



                                                   ......................................J.
                                                            (SANJIV KHANNA)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 11, 2022.
Civil Appeal Nos. 3964-3965 of 2009                                       Page 38 of 38