[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Gorabai vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 20 July, 2022
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
NON-REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1293 OF 2018

                             GORABAI                                      .....     APPELLANT

                                                       VERSUS

                             STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                      .....   RESPONDENT

                                                            WITH

                                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 859 OF 2021


                                                       JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
Seventibai (since deceased) and Kalabai stand convicted for

                                the offences under Section 302 read with Section 147, whereas

                                Natwar, Hosilal and Gaurabai1 have been convicted for the offences

                                under Section 302 read with Section 149, and
Section 147
of the

                                Indian Penal Code, 18602.
2.     Dying declarations of the deceased, Nandabai are the cynosure to

                                the prosecution’s case.
Signature Not Verified
3.     Tarabai (PW-1)-sister-in-law of Nandabai; Munna Lal (PW-3);
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2022.07.26
11:36:44 IST
Reason:
Kailash (PW-5); Durga Das (PW-6)- husband of Nandabai; and

                         1Also referred to as “Gorabai”.
2For short, “
IPC
”.
Criminal Appeal No.1293 of 2018                                 Page 1 of 6
Tarachand (PW-16)- brother-in-law of Nandabai, have spoken and

       articulated about the oral dying declaration of Nandabai, which she

       made immediately after she and her three minor daughters had

       suffered burn injuries at her home on 31.07.1996. These witnesses

       had reached the residence where Nandabai and her three minor

       daughters were staying and have testified that Nandabai, on being

       questioned about the injuries, had implicated the appellants and

       Seventibai as the perpetrators.
4.     Learned counsel for the appellants submits that Tarabai (PW-1),

       has deposed that as per Nandabai, Seventibai had poured

       kerosene oil and Kalabai had set her and her daughters on fire with

       a diya. However as per the testimonies of Munna Lal (PW-3),

       Kailash (PW-5), Durga Das (PW-6) and Tarachand (PW-16),

       Nandabai had stated that Seventibai, Kalabai, Gaurabai, Natwar,

       and Hosilal surrounded them, and thereupon, Seventibai had

       poured kerosene oil and set them to fire from the kerosene chimney

       or oil lamp.
5.     Tarabai’s (PW-1) deposition, while setting out the direct role of

       Seventibai and Kalabai, it is correct has not mentioned about

       Gaurabai, Natwar, and Hosilal. This is explainable because, as per

       Tarabai (PW-1), Seventibai and Kalabai had poured kerosene oil

       and set the fire. Tarabai (PW-1) is an innocent illiterate villager, who
Criminal Appeal No.1293 of 2018                                      Page 2 of 6
would not be aware of the legal significance of the physical

       presence of other appellants at that time. Further, this lack of

       summation is not sufficient to discard a detailed and elaborate

       account of the dying declaration by Nandabai, as narrated by

       Munna Lal (PW-3), Kailash (PW-5), Durga Das (PW-6) and

       Tarachand (PW-16). Nandabai and her three daughters were

       subjected to restraint and thereupon were inflicted burns in the

       presence of other appellants is born out and proven.
6.     The prosecution equally relies on the dying declaration recorded in

       writing by Ravi Shankar (PW-13), City Superintendent of Police,

       Khandwa, marked Exhibit P-23. In the dying declaration recorded

       by Ravi Shankar (PW-13), Nandabai had named Seventibai and the

       appellants as the perpetrators who had caused the burn injuries by

       pouring kerosene oil and setting the fire. Ravi Shanker (PW-13) has

       referred to the presence of the doctor, namely, Dr Chauhan, who

       was not examined, but his signatures on Exhibit P-23 have been

       proved. The testimony of Ravi Shankar (PW-13) is corroborated by

       Jagan (PW-15), one of the witnesses to the written dying

       declaration, who was present in the hospital at that time.

       Munna Lal (PW-3), Kailash (PW-5) and Durga Das (PW-6) have

       deposed that Nandabai was intermittently conscious after the

       incident.
Criminal Appeal No.1293 of 2018                                  Page 3 of 6
7.     Munna Lal (PW-3) has stated that on being informed about the

       incident, he went inside the house of Nandabai and saw Nandabai

       and her three children lying burnt. Thereupon, he had proceeded to

       speak to the Surpunch Babu Lal (PW-4), who then came to the spot.

       On the statement of Surpunch Babu Lal (PW-4), the First

       Information Report3 No. 444/96, marked as Exhibit P-16, was

       recorded at the Police Station of Khandwa. Surpunch Babu Lal

       (PW-4) was declared hostile, however, the statement made by

       Surpunch Babu Lal (PW-4), which was the basis for registering the

       FIR stands proven by P.S. Yadav (PW-9), Assistant Sub-Inspector,

       who had recorded his statement. The FIR refers to the written dying

       declaration as recorded by Ravi Shankar (PW-13).
8.     There is also evidence to establish the motive. Tarabai (PW-1),

       Durga Das (PW-6) and Tarachand (PW-16) have deposed that the

       appellants believed that Nandabai was responsible for defaming

       Gaurabai due to her suspicion that Gaurabai was having illicit

       relations with her husband, Durga Das (PW-6). This was objected

       to and taken as an offence by the family members of Gaurabai,

       namely, her grandmother- Seventibai, her mother- Kalabai, her

       father- Natwar and her uncle- Hosilal.
3For Short, “FIR”.
Criminal Appeal No.1293 of 2018                                  Page 4 of 6
9.     Kailash (PW-5), the neighbour of the deceased, has testified that at

       around 7.00 P.M., he had seen the appellants and Seventibai

       outside the house of the deceased and at that time appellant Hosilal

       was saying that he would kill Nandabai and ruin their family.

       Thereafter, Kailash (PW-5), had proceeded to his own house to do

       work. Subsequently, Kailash (PW-5) had seen the appellants

       running away from the side of the house of one Shobhalal towards

       the lane. On being asked why the appellants were running, the

       appellants did not say anything. Kailash (PW-5) had proceeded to

       the house of the deceased, and saw Tarabai (PW-1) and Manohar

       (PW-2) extinguishing the fire. He also saw a kerosene chimney or

       oil lamp inside the house of the deceased.
10.    Baldev Singh Thakur (PW-17), who was posted as the City

       Inspector at the Police Station, Khandwa, had seized burnt hair,

       cloth, matchbox, and other articles vide Seizure Memo Exhibit P-25

       from the house. He had also seized the ration card vide Exhibit P-

       10 as per which five litres of kerosene oil were purchased on

       22.07.1996.
11.    The homicidal death of Nandabai and her three minor daughters is

       established from the testimonies of Dr Shashi Kant (PW-7), Dr A.K.

       Shukla (PW-10), Dr Avtar Singh (PW-11), and Dr Sanjay Srivastava
Criminal Appeal No.1293 of 2018                                   Page 5 of 6
(PW-12), who had proved the post-mortem reports of Nandabai and

       her three minor daughters, marked Exhibits P-12, P-18, P-20 and

       P-22. The cause of death of Nandabai and her daughters is

       attributed to shock resulting from extensive burn injuries which were

       antemortem.
12.    In our view, in the present case, the dying declarations are fully

       corroborated by the evidence on record. The alleged discrepancies

       as contended by the learned counsel for the appellants are minor

       in nature and do not, in any way, dent the court testimony of the

       witnesses on the oral and the recorded dying declaration of

       Nandabai.
13.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, we do not have any hesitation

       in upholding the conviction of the appellants and the sentence

       awarded to them. Accordingly, the present appeals are dismissed.
......................................J.
                                                          (SANJIV KHANNA)


                                                 ......................................J.
                                                          (BELA M. TRIVEDI)

NEW DELHI;
JULY 20, 2022.
Criminal Appeal No.1293 of 2018                                            Page 6 of 6