[Cites
46
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Bhagwandas B. Ramchandani vs British Airways on 29 July, 2022
Author:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
K.M. Joseph
REPORTABLE

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                   CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4978 of 2022
               ARISING OUT OF SLP (C) NO. 16767/2018


M/S BHAGWANDAS B. RAMCHANDANI                               ...APPELLANT(S)

                                   VERSUS

BRITISH AIRWAYS                                           …RESPONDENT(S)


                                 JUDGMENT
PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA, J.
1.    Leave granted.
2.1   Carriage by
Air Act, 1972
, incorporates international air traffic

conventions of Warsaw, 1929, Hague Protocol, 1955, and Montréal Convention,

1999 in the First, Second, and the Third Schedules of the Act. Rule 30 of the

Second Schedule, which incorporates the Hague Protocol, provides that the right

to damages will be extinguished if an action is not brought within a period of two

years from the dates mentioned in the Rule. Sub-rule (2) of Rule 30 provides that

the method of calculating the period of limitation shall be determined by the law

of the Court seized of the matter.
As Limitation Act, 1963
is the law applicable

to the Courts in India, it is contended on behalf of the consumers of the Airlines
Page 1 of 48
that the exclusion of periods of limitation provided in the
Limitation Act
shall

apply for computation of the period of two years mentioned in Rule 30 (1).

2.2   Two substantial questions of law have arisen for our consideration. The

first relates to the applicability of the
Limitation Act
when the right itself is

extinguished, as against a barring of remedy, as in the case of
Section 3
of

Limitation Act. The second question is whether the provisions of the Carriage by
Air Act, 1972
expressly exclude the
Limitation Act, 1963
as provided in
Section 29
.
2.3   On the first question, we have resolved the apparent conflict between Sub-

rule (1) and Sub-rule (2) of Rule 30 by referring to the legislative history of the

conventions as provided in the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, 1969.

The travaux preparatoires leading to the formation of the Convention

establishes that the Convention sought to exclude any interruption in the

period of two years specified in the Article. We have also followed the well -

recognized principle that while interpreting municipal laws giving effect to

International Conventions, Courts must endeavor to maintain uniformity in

the interpretation in order to sub-serve the very purpose of the Conventions.

Having examined the judgments of various jurisdictions, we are satisfied that

they are in consonance with the interpretation that we have adopted in

construing Sub-rule (2) of Rule 30. Sub-rule (2) in our opinion does not

derogate from the intent of Sub-rule (1) excluding the applicability of the
Page 2 of 48
Limitation Act
but merely empowers the Court to determine the period of two

years.
2.4        On the second question, after examining the provisions of the Carriage

by
Air Act, 1972
, we have held that Rule 30 expressly excludes the
Limitation

Act
as provided in
Section 29
.
Facts and Proceedings:
3.         The Appellant is a sole proprietary concern engaged in the business of

imports and exports. The Appellant sent a cargo containing fruits and

vegetables from Mumbai to Canada via London by employing services of

British Airways 1 on 04.01.2010. However, on 06.01.2010 due to bad weather

conditions in London the flight could not depart to Canada, as a result the

fruits and vegetables were damaged and were consequently destroyed. The

Appellant lodged a claim for ₹1,70,221.56/- with the Respondent. On

30.06.2010, the Appellant once again sent a similar cargo containing fruits

and vegetables from Mumbai to Canada. Yet again, the cargo could not be

sent due to packaging and other issues and, as a consequence, the cargo had

to be destroyed. The Appellant raised a claim dated 20.07.2010 for

₹4,27,922/-. Acknowledging the receipt of the notice, the Respondent sent a

mail on 02.11.2010 offering to settle the matter at 50% of the claim amount.
1
hereinafter referred to as the ‘Respondent’.
Page 3 of 48
4.       It is in the above-referred background that the Appellant instituted a

suit being OS No. 5164/2012 on 15.09.2012 before the City Civil Court,

Mumbai for recovery of the amount of ₹9,17,642.56/-, with interest at the rate

of 21% per annum2. The Respondent filed written statements stating inter alia

that the suit is barred by limitation.
Before the Trial Court:
5.       The Trial Court framed a preliminary issue on the ground of limitation

and by its judgment dated 05.02.2014 held that the suit is not barred by

limitation as the period prescribed in Rule 30 of the Second Schedule to the

Carriage by
Air Act, 1972
3 could be calculated from 28.10.2010, that is, the

date when the Respondent had acknowledged a proposed settlement of the

claim at 50% of the demand. For this purpose, the Trial Court relied on
Section 18
of the Limitation Act by taking it for granted that the said Act is

applicable to proceedings under the
Air Act
.
6.       Aggrieved by the decision of the Trial Court on the preliminary issue,

Appellant filed a Writ Petition No. 6647/2014 before the High Court of

Bombay. By the judgment impugned herein, the High Court allowed the Writ

Petition holding that the suit is barred by limitation. The reasoning adopted

by the High Court is that the
Air Act, 1972
being a later and a special statute,
2
For completion of the narration, it may be stated that the appellant had initially approached the District Consumer
Forum which took the view that the transaction is commercial in nature and therefore, it did not have the
jurisdiction. The appeal and revision against that order were also dismissed, though on the ground of delay.
3
hereinafter referred to as ‘
Air Act, 1972
’.
Page 4 of 48
will have an overriding effect over the earlier and the general statute, being

the
Limitation Act, 1963
.
Before the High Court:
7.1     The High Court relied on the decisions of the High Court of Madras in

M.R.F. Ltd. v. M/s Singapore Airlines Ltd. 4, M/s Air India Bombay Airport

and Another v. M/s
Asia Tanning Co. and Anr.5, The Shipping Corporation

of India Ltd., Bombay and Anr. v. Union of India
6,
The East and West

Steamship Company, Georgetown, Madras v. S.K. Ramalingam Chettiar
7,
Air

India Ltd. v. Tej Shoe Exporters P. Ltd. and Anr.8
and
Gulf Air Company v.

Nahar Spinning Mills Ltd. and Others9
which took the view that Carriage by
Air Act, 1972
excludes the applicability of
Limitation Act
. The High Court

observed that: -
“30. Thus, consistent view taken by the Apex Court and
                also by various High Courts is that the Carriage by
Air
                Act
1972, being a special statute, enacted to give effect
                to the international convention, the provisions thereof
                will have an overriding effect. In view thereof,
section
                18
of the Limitation Act, which is a general enactment,
                cannot have any application in the present case to
                extend the period of limitation, which is prescribed in
                Rule 30 of
Schedule II of the Act
.”
4
2014 SCC Online Mad 247.
5
2002 SCC Online Mad 802.
6
2004 SCC Online Mad 489.
7
AIR 1960 SC 1058.
8
2013 SCC Online Del 3749.
9
1999 SCC Online P&H 915.
Page 5 of 48
7.2        As a consequence of such a decision, the High Court set aside the

decision of the Trial Court on the preliminary issue and held that the suit is

barred by limitation and dismissed the same.
Submissions:
8.1        Shri Vinay Navare, Senior Advocate, appearing for the Appellant

submitted that
Section 29(2)
of the Limitation Act provided that unless the
Limitation Act
is expressly excluded, its provision applies to any law

prescribing a distinct period of limitation. He submitted that Rule 30 of the
Second Schedule of the Air Act, 1972
has not expressly excluded the

applicability of the
Limitation Act
. He further submitted that Rule 30 (2)

explicitly enables “method of calculating the period of limitation” based on

the law of the Court seized of the case. On this basis, he urged that the

provisions of the statutes are complementary to each other and must be read

harmoniously. He fairly brought to our notice the judgment of the Court of

Appeal in the United Kingdom in Laroche v. Spirit of Adventure (UK) Ltd. 10

and the judgment of the Second Circuit of the United States Court of Appeals

in Fishman v. Delta Airlines11. In these cases, the Courts have taken the view

that the municipal laws governing the period of limitation are not to be applied

for claims made under the statutes based on international conventions. Shri

Navare distinguished these judgments on the ground that the statutory
10
(2009) EWCA Civ 12.
11
938 F. Supp. 228 (1996)
Page 6 of 48
position based on
Section 29(2)
of the Limitation Act read with correct

interpretation of Rule 30 of
Second Schedule of the Air Act,1972
would stand

on a different footing, and therefore these judgments are distinguishable.

8.2      Ms. Ritu Singh Mann, Advocate for the Respondent-Airlines, primarily

contended that the exclusion under
Section 29(2)
can be implied from the

provisions of the
Air Act,1972
. The Learned Counsel relied on the judgment

of this Court in
Hukumdev Narain Yadav v. Lalit Narain Mishra
12. In the

written submissions, for the first time, the Respondent sought to argue that it

is Rule 35 of the Third Schedule and not Rule 30 of the
Second Schedule of

the Air Act, 1972
which will be applicable to the case at hand 13.
Our attention

was also drawn to the judgments of the Courts in United Kingdom (Sidhu v.

British Airways14, Philips v. Air New Zealand 15), the United States of America

(Fishman v. Delta Airlines 16, Kahn v. Trans World Airlines 17) and Australia

(Bhatia v. Malaysian Airline System Berhad 18) to buttress the submissions.

Issues:
9.       In view of the rival submissions, the following issues arise for

consideration:
12
(1974) 3 SCR 31.
13
The submission of the Respondent, taken for the first time in the written submission that it is Section 4A and
the
Third Schedule of the Act
, which is applicable need not detain us as there is virtually no difference between
Rule 35 of the Third Schedule and Rule 30 of the Second Schedule. We will therefore proceed based on Second
Schedule only.
14
[1997] 1 All ER 193
15
(2002) EWHC 800 (Commercial Court).
16
Supra no. 11.
17
82 A.D. 2d 696: (1981) 443 NYS 2d 79.
18
(2018) FCA 1471.
Page 7 of 48
1.
Does Limitation Act, 1963
apply to the period specified in Rule 30
             of the Second Schedule of the Carriage by
Air Act, 1972
?
2. Whether the Air Act, 1972, particularly Rule 30 of the Second
             Schedule expressly excludes the applicability of the
Limitation Act,
             1963
?
Issue No.1:
Does Limitation Act, 1963
apply to the period specified in Rule 30 of the
Second Schedule of the Carriage by
Air Act, 1972
?
10.      It is to be noticed that matters concerning the international carriage of

persons, baggage, or cargo performed by aircraft for reward are the subject

matter of International Conventions. These are incorporated into our laws

through the Schedules to the Air Act, 1972.
Section 319
of the Air Act, 1972

incorporates the Warsaw Convention, 192920 into the First Schedule and

specifically provides that it shall have the status of law in India.
Section 4
21
incorporates the Hague Protocol dated 28.09.1955 and provisions it in the

Second Schedule and gives it the status of law in India. Similarly, Section

4A22 brought into force in 2009 for giving effect to the Montréal Convention,
19
Section 3
: Application of Convention to India
(1) The rules contained in the First Schedule, being the provisions of the Convention relating to the rights and
liabilities of carriers, passengers, consignors, consignees, and other persons, shall, subject to the provisions of
this Act, have the force of law in India in relation to any carriage by air to which those rules apply, irrespective
of the nationality of the aircraft performing the carriage.
20
Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules Relating to International Carriage by Air, Signed at Warsaw
on 12 October 1929.
21
Section 4
: Application of amended Convention to India
(1) The rules contained in the Second Schedule, being the provisions of the amended Convention relating
to the rights and liabilities of carriers, passengers, consignors, consignees and other persons, shall,
subject to the provisions of this Act, have the force of law in India in relation to any carriage by air to
which those rules apply, irrespective of the nationality of the aircraft performing the carriage.”
22
Section 4A: Application of Montreal Convention to India
(1) The rules contained in the Third Schedule, being the provisions of the Montreal Convention relating to the
rights and liabilities of carriers, passengers, consignors, consignees, and other persons, shall, subject to the
Page 8 of 48
199923 incorporates it in the
Third Schedule to the Act
and gives it the status

of law in India.
11.        Chapter III of the Second Schedule relates to, ‘Liability of the Carrier’,

which recognizes the principle of International Law of lex fori, as per which

suits and proceedings in the judicial fora of the member nations are to be

governed by the law of the Court in which the proceeding is instituted 24. This

principle is recognized by Rule 29(2) of the Second Schedule itself;
“Rule 29. (1) An action for damages must be brought,
                   at the option of the plaintiff, in the territory of one of
                   the High Contracting Parties, either before the Court
                   having jurisdiction where the carrier is ordinarily
                   resident, or has his principal place of business, or has
                   an establishment by which the contract has been made
                   or before the Court have jurisdiction at the place of
                   destination.
(2) Question of procedure shall be governed by the
                   law of the Court seized of the case.”
12.        The procedural law governing the institution and adjudication of civil

suits in India includes the Civil Procedure Code,1908 as well as the
Limitation

Act, 1963
.
The Limitation Act
is a branch of adjectival law, and applies to all

proceedings which it governs from the date of its enactment. There is however

a well-established principle, which states that when the right itself is

extinguished, the provisions relating to limitation have no application. A



provisions of this Act, have the force of law in India in relation to any carriage by air to which those rules apply,
irrespective of the nationality of the aircraft performing the carriage
23
Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules Relating to International Carriage by Air, Signed at Montreal
on 28 May, 1999.
24
Rukmaboye v. Lulloobhoy Motichand (1935) 5 HIA 234.
Page 9 of 48
direct example where the right itself is extinguished, can be evidenced in

Section 1125 as well as
Section 2726
of the Limitation Act, 1963.
Section 11
deals

with suits filed in India with respect to contracts entered in foreign countries.

Following the Principle of lex fori, the Section provides that rules of limitation

provided in a foreign jurisdiction are not applicable. However, the exception to

this Rule is provided in
Section 11 (2)(a)
, when the Contract i.e., the right itself

expires. Similarly,
Section 27
also recognizes the principle of extinguishment of

Right to Property being an exception to the applicability of the
Limitation Act,

1963
.
13.1 The distinction between barring a remedy as exception is well established,

as can be seen in the following precedents. The extinguishment of the right

and its effect on limitation is well recognized by courts of law. We may refer

to some of the important precedents.
13.2 A similar issue as in the present case, arose for consideration in
The

East and West Steamship Company v. S.K. Ramalingam Chettiar
27, where this

Court had to consider 3 rd Clause of Para 6 of Article III in Schedule to the
25
Section 11
. Suits on contracts entered into outside the territories to which the Act extends
(1) Suits instituted in the territories to which this Act extends on contracts entered into in the State of Jammu and
Kashmir or in a foreign country shall be subject to the rules of limitation contained in this Act.
(2) No rule of limitation in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir or in a foreign country shall be a defence to
a suit instituted in the said territories on a contract entered into in that State or in a foreign country unless-
(a) the rule has extinguished the contract; and
(b) the parties were domiciled in that State or in the foreign country during the period prescribed by such
      rule.
26
Section 27
. Extinguishment of right to property
At the determination of the period hereby limited to any person for instituting a suit for possession of any property,
his right to such property shall be extinguished.
27
Supra no. 7.
Page 10 of 48
Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 1925 28 wherein, while interpreting the

expression discharge from the liability, this Court held as under: -
“….The question we have to decide is whether in saying
                 that the ship or the carrier will be “discharged from
                 liability”, only the remedy of the shipper or the consignee
                 was being barred or the right was also being terminated.
                 It is useful to remember in this connection the
                 international character of these rules, as has been already
                 emphasized above. Rules of limitation are likely to vary
                 from country to country. Provisions for extension of
                 periods prescribed for limitation would similarly vary. We
                 should be slow therefore to put on the word “discharged
                 from liability” an interpretation which would produce
                 results varying in different countries and thus keeping the
                 position uncertain for both the shipper and the shipowner.
                 Quite apart from this consideration, however, we think
                 that the ordinary grammatical sense of "discharged from
                 liability" does not connote "free from the remedy as
                 regards liability" but are more apt to mean a total
                 extinction of the liability following upon an extinction of
                 the right. We find it difficult to draw any reasonable
                 distinction between the words "absolved from liability"
and "discharged from liability" and think that these words
                 "discharged from liability" were intended to mean and do
                 mean that the liability has totally disappeared and not only
                 that the remedy as regards the liability has disappeared.
                 We cannot agree with the learned Judge of the Madras
                 High Court that these words merely mean that "that even
                 though the right may inhere in the person who is entitled
                 to the benefits, still the liability in the opposite party is
                 discharged by the impossibility of enforcement. "The
                 distinction between the extinction of a right and the
                 extinction of a remedy for the enforcement of that right,
                 though fine, is of great importance. The Legislature could
                 not but have been conscious of this distinction when using
                 the words “discharged from all liability” in an article
                 purporting to prescribe rights and immunities of the
                 shipowners. The words are apt to express an intention of
                 total extinction of the liability and should, specially in
28
“In any event the carrier and the ship shall be discharged from all liability in respect of loss or damage
unless suit is brought within one year after the delivery of the goods or the date when the good s should
have been delivered.”
Page 11 of 48
view of the international character of the legislation, be
                  construed in that sense. It is hardly necessary to add that
                  once the liability is extinguished under this clause, there
                  is no scope of any acknowledgment of liability thereafter.”

13.3 In
RM. AR. AR. RM. AR. Ramanathan Chkttiar and others v. K.M.CL.M.

Somasundaram Chettiar and Ors.29
, it was held as follows: -
“It is a well-accepted rule of International Law that all
                  matters of procedure will be governed by the law of the
                  country in which the Court where any legal proceeding is
                  initiated is situate. Statutes of limitation in so far as they
                  prescribe periods within which claim should be enforced,
                  whereby the remedy alone is barred, are regarded as
                  merely procedural.
But there may be provisions in such statutes which
                  extinguish the rights of the parties.
S. 28
of the Indian
                  Limitation Act is an instance where on the remedy being
                  barred the right to property also stands extinguished. In
                  such a case, that is, where there is no right alive by reason
                  of its extinguishment by a statute there could obviously be
                  nothing to be enforced in that country or in any foreign
                  country. Provisions of that kind cannot be regarded as
                  merely procedural as they create or destroy substantive
                  rights of parties. This principle has been recognised in a
                  statutory-form in
S. 11 (2)
of the Indian Limitation Act.”
13.4 In
Punjab National Bank and others v. Surendra Prasad Sinha
30, this

Court held:
“5. …The rules of limitation are not meant to destroy
                  the rights of the parties.
Section 3
of the Limitation Act
                  36 of 1963, for short “the Act” only bars the remedy,
                  but does not destroy the right which the remedy relates
                  to. The right to the debt continues to exist
                  notwithstanding the remedy is barred by the limitation.
                  Only exception in which the remedy also becomes
                  barred by limitation is that the right itself is destroyed.
29
(1964) 77 LW 399.
30
1993 Supp (1) SCC 499.
Page 12 of 48
For example, under
Section 27
of the Act a suit for
                   possession of any property becoming barred by
                   limitation, the right to property itself is destroyed.
                   Except in such cases which are specially provided
                   under the right to which remedy relates in other case
                   the right subsists. Though, the right to enforce the debt
                   by judicial process is barred under
Section 3
read with
                   the relevant article in the schedule, the right to debt
                   remains. The time barred debt does not cease to exist
                   by reason of
Section 3
. That right can be exercised in
                   any other manner than by means of a suit. The debt is
                   not extinguished, but the remedy to enforce the liability
                   is destroyed. What
Section3
refers is only to the remedy
                   but not to the right of the creditors. Such debt continues
                   to subsist so long as it is not paid….”

13.5 The principles
laid down in
the above referred precedents are

consistently followed in decisions of this Court in
Khadi Gram Udyog Trust

v. Ram Chandraji Virajman Mandir31
, State of Kerela and Ors. v. V.R.
32
Kalliyanikutty and Anr.                     and also in
Prem Singh and Ors. v. Birbal and

Ors.33
.
31(1978) 1 SCC44.
“4. ……There is ample authority for the proposition that though a debt is time-barred, it will be a debt due though
not recoverable, the relief being barred by limitation. In Halsbury’s Laws of England (Third Edn.) Vol. 24 at p. 205,
Article 369
, it is stated “except in the cases previously mentioned, the Limitation Act, 1939 only takes away the
remedies by action or by set-off; it leaves the right otherwise untouched and if a creditor w hose debt is statute-
barred has any means of enforcing his claim other than by action or set -off, the Act does not prevent him from
recovering by those means”. The Court of appeal in Curwen v. Milburn [(1889) 42 Ch D 424] Cotton, LJ said:
“Statute-barred debts are dues, though payment of them cannot be enforced by action.” The same view was expressed
by the Supreme Court in
Bombay Dyeing and Manufacturing Co. Ltd. v. State of Bombay
[AIR 1958 SC 328: 1958
SCR1122 : (1958) 1 Lab LJ 778] where it held that the statute limitation only bars the remedy but does not extinguish
the debt, except in cases provided for by
Section 28
of the Limitation Act, which does not apply to a debt.”
32(1999) 3 SCC 657
“15. It has been submitted before us that the statute of limita tion merely bars the remedy without touching the right.
Therefore, the right to recover the loan would remain even though the remedy by way of a suit would be time -barred.
Reliance was placed on
Khadi Gram Udyog Trust v. Ram Chandraji Virajman Mandir
, (1978) 1 SCC 44 in this
connection. The Court there observed that though a debt may be time -barred, it would still be a debt due.
The right
remains untouched and if a creditor has any means of enforcing his right other than by action or set -off, he is not
prevented from doing so. In
Punjab National Bank v. Surendra Prasad Sinha
[1993 Supp (1) SCC 499] this Court
held that the rules of limitation are not meant to destroy the rights of parties.
Section 3
of the Limitation Act only
bars the remedy but does not destroy the right which the remedy relates to. Excepting cases which are specifically
provided for, as for example, under
Section 27
of the Limitation Act, the right to which the remedy relates subsists.
Though the right to enforce the debt by judicial process is barred, that right can be exercised in any manner other
than by means of a suit. For example, a creditor’s right to make adjustment against time -barred debts exists.”
33(2006)   5 SCC 353.
Page 13 of 48
14.      In view of the well-established position of law relating to Lex Fori in

International Law, with the equally well-established exception arising out of the

extinguishment of the right or the liability itself, we will now examine the

position in India as per Rule 30 in the
Second Schedule of the Air Act, 1972
relating to liability of the carrier. Rule 30 is of the
Air Act, 1972
is extracted as

under: -
“30. (1) The right to damages shall be extinguished if
                   an action is not brought within two years, reckoned
                   from the date of arrival at the destination, or from the
                   date on which the aircraft ought to have arrived, or
                   from the date on which the carriage stopped.
(2) The method of calculating the period of limitation
                   shall be determined by the law of the Court seized of the
                   case.”

Analysis of Sub-Rule (1) of Rule 30:
15.1 While Rule 29 speaks about judicial remedy for initiating an action for

damages, Rule 30 uses the expression right to damages. It is in the context of

right as against a remedy that the purpose, object and meaning of Rule 30 is to be

understood. Further, Rule 30 also uses the expression “extinguishment” as

against “bar”, which is generally used in the context of a remedy. Therefore, the

extinguishment is of right, that is, the right to damages is the subject matter of

Sub-Rule (1) of Rule 30. The expressions, ‘right’ and ‘extinguished’ employed

by the Convention as adopted and incorporated by the Parliament in Rule 30 of



“11. Limitation is a statute of repose. It ordinarily bars a remedy, but, does not extinguish a right. The only exception
to the said rule is to be found in
Section27
of the Limitation Act, 1963 which provides that at the determination of
the period prescribed thereby, limited to any person for instituting a suit for possession of any property, his right to
such property shall be extinguished.”
Page 14 of 48
the Second Schedule clearly establishes the intention of the law-giver that the

right to damages would not subsist after the expiry of the period mentioned

therein.
15.2 Once the right to damages is extinguished upon the expiry of two years

reckoned from the three alternative dates mentioned in the Rule itself, nothing

would remain for enforcement.
Section 3
of the Limitation Act only bars the

remedy, but when the right itself is extinguished, provisions of the
Limitation Act
have no application. For this reason, in The East and West Steamship Co.34, this

Court held that once the right of liability is extinguished under the clause, there

is no scope of acknowledging the liability thereafter.

15.3 This is the position of law is obtained from the plain language of Sub-Rule

(1) of Rule 30. The position is however very different when we proceed further

to consider Sub-Rule (2) of Rule 30.
Sub-Rule (2) of Rule 30:
16.1 Sub-Rule (2) is extracted as under: -
“(2) The method of calculating the period of limitation
                    shall be determined by the law of the Court seized of
                    the case.”

16.2 In its plain and simple language, Sub-Rule (2) seems to adopt the

applicability of the
Limitation Act, 1963
as Courts in India exercise

jurisdiction. ‘The method of calculating the period specified in Sub-rule (2)
34
Supra no. 7.
Page 15 of 48
naturally relates to the period’ specified in Sub-rule (1). Sub-Rule (1)

identifies and fixes two incidents. The period of limitation and the date of

commencement of the said period (the three specified dates). Therefore, when

the period of limitation, as well as the date of commencement of the said

period, are already given, the method of calculation of the period of limitation

contemplated under Sub-Rule (2) must relate to some other factor. However,

without specifying the variable to which the method of calculating the period,

is to apply, Sub-rule (2) merely provides that it “shall be determined by the

law applicable to the Court seized of the case.” This has caused uncertainty

about the intent of the lawmakers, be it the Convention or Rule 30 of the
Second Schedule of the Act
.
16.3 Further, the expression in Rule 30(2) calculating the period of

limitation is synonymous to the expression computation of period of

limitation provided in
Part-III of the Limitation Act, 1963
. Part-III which

relates to the exclusion of certain time periods is to sub-serve a just cause

based on public policy which recognizes human vulnerabilities. Broadly,

these periods relate to (i) the date from which the period is to be reckoned

(
Section 12
); (ii) the time taken for seeking to contest as a pauper, (Section
13); (iii) the bona fide period involved in the perusal of a remedying the wrong

Court (
Section 14
); (iv) fraud (
Section 17
); (v) acknowledgment of debt

(
Section 18
); (vi) admitted payments on account of debt (
Section 19
); (vii)
Page 16 of 48
continuous breach etc. These are the periods that can be excluded while

computing the period of limitation under the
Limitation Act, 1963
.


17.1 It is in the above-referred context that Shri Navare, learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the Appellant has emphasized the affirmation of the
Limitation Act
to proceedings under the
Air Act, 1972
as per the plain

language of Rule 30(2) and submitted that the expression, ‘method of

calculating limitation period’ in Rule 30(2) is akin to the expression ‘for the

purpose of determining any period of limitation’ provided in
Section 29(2)
of

the Limitation Act. He contends that the Sub-Rule (2) of Rule 30 specifically

incorporates
Limitation Act
into the legal regime of the
Air Act, 1972
.

17.2 On the other hand, Ms. Ritu Singh Mann, relied on
Section 29(2)
of the

Limitation Act to submit that the provisions of the
Limitation Act
are

expressly excluded by the special law of the
Air Act, 1972
. The written

submissions emphasized the purpose and object of the International

Conventions, which provided for ‘collective State action for further

harmonization and codification of certain rules governing international

carriage by Air’. It is then submitted that if courts of every signatory state

were to interpret the provisions of the Convention in their own way, then the

very purpose of achieving uniformity in application of the Conventions would

be lost. For the first time in the written submissions, the Respondent has taken

a plea that it is Rule 35 of the Third Schedule and not Rule 30 which will be

applicable. However, on consideration we do not find any notable difference
Page 17 of 48
between the two and hence, we would proceed to refer Rule 30 of the Second

Schedule in our further analysis.
18.   The rival submissions surface due to an apparent conflict between Sub-

Rule (1) and Sub-Rule (2) of Rule 30 of the Second Schedule. While Sub-

Rule (1) extinguishes the right itself upon the expiry of the period of two

years, after which nothing would remain for enforcement, Sub-Rule (2) seems

to suggest that the Court seized of the case can apply the law of limitation

applicable to its proceedings and entertain the suit of the proceedings. We

will now analyze and interpret Rule 30 of the Second Schedule.

19.1 However, before we proceed to interpret Rule 30, it is necessary to

clear certain doubts about the applicability of the correct Schedule. While the

suit was instituted on the assumption that it is Rule 30 of the Second Schedule

adopting the Warsaw Convention, 1929 as amended by the Hague Protocol,

1955 would be applicable to the proceedings, the Trial as well as the High

Court and even the parties assumed that this is the correct Rule that would

apply to the facts of the case. It is for the first time in the written submission

that the Respondent stated that it is Rule 35 of the Third Schedule of the

Montréal Convention, 1999 that will apply to the facts of the case. The change

in the stand is apparently due to the deletion of two words “of limitation”

occurring in Sub-Rule (2) of the Second Schedule from the same provision

introduced under Rule 35 of the Third Schedule. Based on this minor change

the Appellant advanced an argument in the written submission that the
Page 18 of 48
conscious deletion of the expression “of limitation” clarifies the position that

Sub-Rule (2) only relates to a period of two years and has got nothing to do

with “a period of limitation” and therefore, the
Limitation Act
has no

application.
19.2 A comparative statement of the Third Schedule relatable to the Warsaw

Convention, 1929, Warsaw Convention as amended by Hague Protocol, 1955,

and the Montréal Convention of 1999 is reproduced herein for ready

reference: -
Rule 29 Schedule I        Rule 30 Schedule II Rule 35 Schedule III
 (
Article 29
of the Warsaw (
Article 29
of the Warsaw (
Article 35
of the Montreal
 Convention, 1929)         Convention as amended by Convention, 1999)
                           Hague Protocol, 1955)

 The right of damages shall     (1) The right to damages       (1) The right to damages
 be extinguished if an action   shall be extinguished if an    shall be extinguished if an
 is not brought within two      action is not brought within   action is not brought within
 years, reckoned from the       two years, reckoned from       a period of two years,
 date of arrival at the         the date of arrival at the     reckoned from the date of
 destination, or from the       destination, or from the       arrival at the destination,
 date on which the aircraft     date on which the aircraft     or from the date on which
 ought to have arrived, or      ought to have arrived, or      the aircraft ought to have
 from the date on which the     from the date on which the     arrived, or from the date on
 carriage stopped.              carriage stopped.              which      the     carriage
                                                               stopped.
(2)    The    method     of    (2)    The     method     of
                                calculating the period of      calculating the period shall
                                limitation    shall      be    be determined by the law of
                                determined by the law of       the Court seized of the
                                the Court seized of the        case.
                                case.
19.3 It would be apparent from the above that even after the deletion of the

expression “of limitation” in the Montréal Convention of 1999, the difficulty
Page 19 of 48
persists in as much as Sub-Rule (2) talks about the method of “calculating the

period” and as such a period must necessarily relate to the period of two years

as specified in Sub-Rule (1) of Rule 30. Calculation of the period for an action

for damages would necessarily involve law of Limitation as that is an

adjective statute governing suits and other proceedings instituted in India.
Even assuming that the deletion of the expression brings more clarity to the

scope and ambit of the Rule, that will be confined to Rule 35(2) of the Third

Schedule and the difficulty would continue to prevail with respect to the

period during which Rule 30 of the Second Schedule operates. It is, therefore,

compelling and the primary duty of the Court to analyze, interpret and declare

the true and correct meaning of the said provision.


Interpretation
20.     Our task is to decipher and declare the correct meaning and purport of

Rule 30 of the
Second Schedule of the Act
.
Schedule Two of the Act
merely

incorporates the Warsaw Convention, as amended by the Hague Protocol,

1955. It is well known that incorporation of a Convention or a treaty into

municipal laws is normally carried out in three ways and the status that it

enjoys depends on the nature of incorporation. Referring to the Use of

International treaties in Part XIV under Section 221, Francis Bennion35

observed as under:
35
See, Bennion on Statutory Interpretation, 6th Edition, 2013. [Part XIV: The Informed Interpretation Rule
(Legislative History), pg. 632.]
Page 20 of 48
“(1) An international treaty may have three different
                kinds of status, considered as a source of law-
(a) an Act may embody, whether or not in the
                  same words, provisions having the effect of the
                  treaty (in this Code referred to as direct
                  enactment of the treaty);
(b) an Act may say that the treaty is itself to
                  have effect as law, leaving the treaty’s provisions
                  to apply with or without modification (in this
                  Code referred to as indirect enactment of the
                  treaty);
(c) the treaty may be left simply as an
                  international obligation, being referred to in the
                  construction of a relevant enactment only so far
                  as called for by the presumption that Parliament
                  intends to comply with public international law.
            (2) Whichever status a treaty has, its provisions may
                be referred to as an aid in the interpretation of a
                relevant enactment. So too may its preparatory
                work (travaux preparatoires), the decision on it of
                foreign courts (la jurisprudence) and the views on
                it of foreign jurists (la doctrine).”
21.   Vienna Convention on Law of Treaties, 1969 can be referred to as a

“treaty on treaties”. It establishes comprehensive rules, procedures, and

guidelines for how treaties are defined, drafted, amended, interpreted, and

generally operated.
Section 3
of Vienna Convention relates to interpretation

of treaties, of which
Articles 31
and
32
are relevant for our purposes and are

extracted herein below for ready reference.
“SECTION 3. INTERPRETATION OF TREATIES
Article 31:
General rule of interpretation
1. A treaty shall be interpreted in good faith in accordance
            with the ordinary meaning to be given to the terms of the
            treaty in their context and in the light of its object and
            purpose.
Page 21 of 48
2. The context for the purpose of the interpretation of a
            treaty shall comprise, in addition to the text, including its
            preamble and annexes:
(a) any agreement relating to the treaty which was made
               between all the parties in connection with the
               conclusion of the treaty;
(b) any instrument which was made by one or more
               parties in connection with the conclusion of the treaty
               and accepted by the other parties as an instrument
               related to the treaty.
3. There shall be taken into account, together with the
            context:
(a) any subsequent agreement between the parties
               regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the
               application of its provisions;
(b) any subsequent practice in the application of the
               treaty which establishes the agreement of the parties
               regarding its interpretation;
(c) any relevant rules of international law applicable in
               the relations between the parties.
4. A special meaning shall be given to a term if it is
            established that the parties so intended.”
22.   Apart from
Article 31
, it is also important for us to note
Article 32
which relates to "Supplementary means of Interpretation".
“Article 32: Supplementary means of interpretation
            Recourse may be had to supplementary means of
            interpretation, including the preparatory work of the
            treaty and the circumstances of its conclusion, in order to
            confirm the meaning resulting from the application of
article 31
, or to determine the meaning when the
            interpretation according to
article 31:
(a) leaves the meaning ambiguous or obscure; or
(b) leads to a result which is manifestly absurd or
            unreasonable.”
23.   When statutes are enacted to give effect to a treaty or convention,
Articles

31
and
32
of the Vienna Convention becomes relevant for interpretation of such
Page 22 of 48
statutes36. The court must be untrammeled by notions of its national legal culture,

for the true, autonomous and international meaning of the treaty. And, there can

only be one true meaning.37 One event of adaptation of this method occurred in

the case of Fothergill v. Monarch Airlines38, in construing the Carriage by Air

Act, 196139 in the United Kingdom which was enacted to give effect to the

Warsaw Convention. The House of Lords held that in dealing with such an Act,

a purposive construction should be applied and reference could be made to the

opinion of international jurists as also to travaux preparatoires of the convention

in a limited sense.40
24.      Following
Article 32
authorizing recourse to supplementary means of

interpretation, including preparatory works of a treaty, we will now proceed

to examine the legislative history of
Article 29
of the Warsaw Convention,

1929 which eventually was modified in 1955 in the Hauge Protocol and

thereafter by the Montréal Convention in 1999. The original draft of this

clause as of 1929 occurred as
Article 28
was as under:
“28. The right of damages shall be extinguished if an
                  action is not brought within two years, reckoned from
                  the date of arrival at the destination, or from the date
                  on which the aircraft ought to have arrived, or from the
                  date on which the carriage stopped.
36
R v. Secretary of State
for the Home Department exparte Adan, (1999) 4 All ER 774. p. 785 (CA);
37
R. (on the application of Mullen) v. Secretary of State for the Home Department (2004) 1 All ER 65, p. 84)
See further, Justice G.P. Singh, Principles of Statutory Interpretation. 14 th Edition, pg 693.
38
(1980) 2 All ER 696.
39
The Act
sets out the convention in a schedule in two parts. Part I sets out the English text and Part II, the French
text. In case of inconsistency, the Act says that the French text is to prevail.
40
(1980) 2 All ER 696: (1981) AC 251.
Page 23 of 48
(2)"the manner of calculating the period of limitation,
                 as well as the causes for suspension and interruption of
                 the period of limitation, shall be determined by the law
                 of the forum court."
25.1 The above draft fell for consideration before it was adopted in the

convention as
Article 29.
The member States deliberated on the proposed

Articles of the Carriage by Air Convention between 4 th to 12th October, 1929

in Warsaw. During the process, the members deliberated on
Article 28
on

07.10.1929. At that time, Republic of Italy raised the following objection

with respect to the draft Article:
“The period of time, in order that there be interruption
                 of the period of limitation, varies with the country, and
                 it is very difficult for the shipper, the consignor to know
                 when the interruption or the suspension begins. Despite
                 the period of two years fixed for the period of limitation,
                 he must always wait until this period of limitation runs
                 and this period of two years which is necessary to give
                 some kind of tranquility is modified.
Moreover, the system which we have proposed becomes
                 very simple; if two years after the accident no action
                 has been brought, all actions are extinguished. As a
                 consequence, the second paragraph would disappear,
                 and it would be necessary to modify the first paragraph
                 in adding some words to better render the formula. We
                 get across the meaning, but, from the French point of
                 view, perhaps the wording needs to be reexamined."41

        It was further elaborated in their memo that:
“If one considers that the period of limitation is long
                 enough and that, particularly taking into account the
                 causes of suspension, it may, according to the law of
                 several countries, be prolonged indefinitely, it’s not a
                 good idea to refer the determination of the
41
Robert C.; Legrez Horner, Didier, Translators. Second International Conference on Private Aeronautical Law,
October 4-12, 1929, Warsaw: Minutes (1975) at p.110.
Page 24 of 48
aforementioned causes to the law of the court chosen by
                    the plaintiff. Perhaps the law of the aircraft’s
                    nationality could constitute a surer and more just
                    element of determination vis a vis the carrier. The
                    above-cited disadvantages could be eliminated in a
                    more radical fashion in substituting for the period of
                    limitation a period of forfeiture. This would render the
                    second paragraph useless. Moreover, one must add,
                    after the word ‘instituted’ the phrase ‘under penalty of
                    forfeiture’ 42.”

25.2 Their objection stemmed from the concerns expressed by shippers, who

would be subjected to multiple jurisdictions without any clarity with respect

to the position of law in each jurisdiction. It is in this context, that the Italian

Delegation sought amendment of
Article 29
seeking immunity from

interference on the ground of limitation, which varies from jurisdiction to

jurisdiction, causing great amount of uncertainty. In reply, the Delegation

from France stated:
"MR. RIPERT (France): I am not at all opposed to the
                    Italian proposal, but it is aimed, in the final analysis,
                    only at the causes of suspension of the period of
                    limitation, which must disappear. It must, all the same,
                    be indicated that it's the law of the forum court which
                    will fix how, within the period of two years, the court
                    will be seized, because in all the countries of the world
                    suits are not brought in the same way.
One has to act within two years; who will fix the
                    beginning of the suit? A text is necessary which says
                    that it will be the forum court which will say if the suit
                    was properly begun. In France, there is the pretrial
                    conference; in other countries referral to the civil
                    court is indispensable; but I am very much of the
                    opinion that we must eliminate the interruption of the
                    period of limitation, and I ally myself with the Italian
                    proposal.
42
Ibid. Pg 112-113.
Page 25 of 48
MR. MOTONO (Japan): I'd like to point out one
                    question of wording. The liability action means
                    interruption of the period of limitation.
MR. RIPERT (France): Exactly, it's because the suit is
                    not introduced in all countries in the same way that it
                    has to be, that the forum court will indicate how it must
                    be introduced.”43

25.3 After the deliberations, Sub-Article (2) was modified and in its place,

the following clause was inserted and the Convention was brought into force.
Thus,
Article 29
in its present form is as under:
“Article 29
1. The right to damages shall be extinguished if an action
                    is not brought within two years, reckoned from the date of
                    arrival at the destination, or from the date on which the
                    aircraft ought to have arrived, or from the date on which
                    the carriage stopped.
2. The method of calculating the period of limitation shall
                    be determined by the law of the Court seized of the case.”
26.         We must at this stage mention a minor fact, which has no bearing on

the issue that we are concerned with but it is necessary to make a reference

to it. We have noticed that sub-article (2) of
Article 29
of the Warsaw

Convention, 1929 does not find place in Rule 29 as incorporated in Schedule

I of the Indian Carriage by Air Act, 1934. After independence, when the

Parliament enacted the Carriage by
Air Act, 1972
, after repealing the 1934

Act and incorporated the Warsaw Convention, 1929 in First Schedule. Here

also sub-article (2) of the Warsaw Convention is missing in Rule 29.
However, Second Schedule incorporating the Warsaw Convention, as
43
Ibid pg 111.
Page 26 of 48
amended by the Hague Protocol, 1955 consisting of the
Article 29 (1)
and
(2)
is fully incorporated in Rules 30 (1) and (2) in the Second Schedule. We need

not say anything more than this after noting the minor variation.
27.        The legislative history of the Warsaw Convention coupled with the

deliberations at the International Conferences as a result of which the d raft

got modified and took the shape as it stood in
Article 29
of the Convention,

lends sufficient clarity to the purpose and object of introducing sub-article

(2) to
Article 29
, which is to exclude the suspension of any period of

limitation. As noticed in the conference, suits are not brought in the same way

across jurisdictions and therefore this deliberation is specifically left to the

forum Court to fix and determine the beginning of the suit or the proceeding.
28.        This position is well articulated in the judgment of the Appellate

Division of the Supreme Court of New York in Kahn v. Trans World

Airlines44.
“Moreover, it is equally clear from the delegates’
                     discussion that the only matter to be referred to the
                     forum court by paragraph 2 of the present
article 29
was the determination of whether the plaintiff had taken
                     the necessary measures within the two year period to
                     invoke that particular court's jurisdiction over the
                     action. An obvious example of the need for such a
                     provision is the difference between the method of
                     commencing an action in the New York State courts as
                     opposed to the Federal courts. Thus, in New York,
                     depending upon the forum chosen, the plaintiff in an
                     action governed by the Warsaw Convention must either
                     effect service upon the defendant (CPLR 304) or file a
                     complaint in the Federal District Court (Fed Rules Civ
44
Supra no. 17.
Page 27 of 48
Pro, rule 3 [in US Code, tit 28, Appendix] within the
            time limited by
article 29
, i.e., two years.
Accordingly, regardless of whether or not the
            Convention itself "creates" any causes of action, it is
            readily apparent that the time limitation incorporated
            in
article 29
was intended to be in the nature of a
            condition precedent to suit, and that it was never
            intended to be extended or tolled by infancy or other
            incapacity. In addition, such an intent on the part of the
            draftsmen is fully consistent with one of the
            Convention’s over-all purposes-that of establishing “a
            uniform body of world-wide liability rules to govern
            international aviation.”
29.   In view of the uncertainty in the language of sub-article (2) of
Article 29
, as in the case of Sub-Rule (2) of Rule 30 for India, courts of law

across jurisdictions were called upon to consider the rival submissions on the

construct of the said provision. Learned counsels appearing for both the

parties have placed before us the decisions of foreign courts that have ruled

upon
Article 29
and interpreted the said provision, more or less consistently

taking a view that the domestic laws of limitation will have no bearing on the

period of two years. Before we consider these judgments, it is important to

restate a well-recognized principle that courts of law must endeavor to

maintain a uniformity of interpretation with courts of other jurisdictions

while interpreting international treaties and conventions.
Page 28 of 48
30.     The need for a uniform policy and a global approach has been underlined

by the House of Lords in Morris v. KLM Royal Dutch Airlines45 and in a number

of other decisions.46

                 "81. In an ideal world the Convention should be accorded
                 the same meaning by all who are party to it. So, case law
                 provides a further potential source of evidence. Careful
                 consideration needs to be given to the reasoning of courts
                 of other jurisdictions which have been called upon to deal
                 with the point at issue, particularly those which are of high
                 standing. Considerable weight should be given to an
                 interpretation which has received general acceptance in
                 other jurisdictions. On the other hand, a discriminating
                 approach is required if the decisions conflict, or if there is
                 no clear agreement between them."
31.     Having said so, we will now refer to some leading judgments on the

issue from the jurisdictions of the United Kingdom, United States of America

and Australia which examined
Article 29
of the Warsaw Convention.

United Kingdom
32.     The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom passed a judgment in

Laroche v. Spirit of Adventure 47 where it examined the history of
Article 29
of the Warsaw Convention and held that it provided a substantive time bar

and not a procedural time bar. It further held that the Warsaw Convention

provides a code that is exclusive of any resort to the Articles of domestic law.

The Court traced the history of the provision as above and ultimately held
45
[2001] 3 WLR 351
46
Zicherman v. Korean Air Lines Co. Ltd.,516 US 217, (1996), EI AI Israel Airlines Ltd. V. T.Y.Tseng 525 U.S.
155 (1999).
47
Supra no. 10.
Page 29 of 48
that the Warsaw Convention sought to adopt the position suggested by t he

Republic of Italy. It was held,

            “70. The judge was in my view, right to hold at [48] to [51]
            that
article 29(2)
does not permit the 2 year period to be
            suspended, interrupted or extended by reference to
            domestic law. The only thing that it leaves for
            determination by the court seized of the case is the
            calculation of the precise dates of the beginning and end
            of the relevant two year period and the determination of
            whether the action has been brought within that two year
            period.
71. In reaching his conclusion on this issue, the judge had
            regard to what was said in the travaux preparatoires to the
            Warsaw Convention in relation to what became
article 29.
The first draft of what became
article 29(2)
was in these
            terms:
"The method of calculating the period of
                 limitation, as well as the causes of suspension and
                 interruption of the period of limitation, shall be
                 determined by the law of the court having taken
                 jurisdiction" (emphasis added).
72. The Italian delegation objected that the words in italics
            made "the legal situation of the carrier too uncertain". The
            Italians later proposed deleting the second paragraph so
            that "after two years any action dies and is no longer
            admissible". Their reasoning was that "the period of time,
            in order that there be interruption of the period of
            limitation, varies with the country, and it is very difficult
            for the shipper, the consignor to know when the
            interruption or the suspension begins". Their proposal was
            "very simple; if two years after the accident no action has
            been brought, all actions are extinguished". After further
            discussion, the Italian proposal was adopted. These
            discussions were in plenary session. It seems that the
            matter was raised again in committee, when it was decided
            to accept the modified Italian proposal to adopt the
            wording "the liability action must be instituted under pain
            of forfeiture within a period of two years". Despite the
            puzzling French contribution at that stage that "one
            determines at the same time the periods of interruption and
Page 30 of 48
of limitation. We are in agreement in substance", the
Italian proposal was adopted. There was then yet further
discussion which led to the adoption of
article 29
in the
form in which it was finally signed.
73. Although it is difficult to follow the minutiae of these
negotiations, in my view it is clear that the signatories
to the Warsaw Convention intended to adopt the Italian
proposal that, in the interests of certainty, at the expiry
of the two-year period, all claims under the Convention
would be "extinguished" and that the only matters for
determination by the court seized of the matter would
be determination of the dates and whether the action
was brought within the two-year period. This is a
powerful indicator that the words of
article 29(1)
mean
what they say and that the two-year period is not subject
to suspension, interruption or extension in any
circumstances.
74. So to interpret article 29(1) would also further the
object of the Convention that it was to be "a uniform
international code, which could be applied by the courts
of all the high contracting parties without reference to the
rules of their own domestic law": see per Lord Hope in
Sidhu v British Airways Plc [1997] AC 430, 453C-D.
75. I also accept the submission of Mr Lawson that this
interpretation is consistent with the rule that a general
provision (such as
article 29(2)
) cannot give validity to a
rule of procedure of the court seized of the case that is in
conflict with an express provision of the Convention. As
Phillips LJ said in Milor S.R.L v British Airways Plc
[1996] QB 702, 707E: "by way of example, if the
procedural law of the chosen forum imposed a 12 month
limitation period, it does not seem to me that this could
displace the two year period of limitation laid down by
article 29
of the Convention.
76. As regards US jurisprudence, the decision of New
Pentax v Trans World relied on by Mr Davey is a first
instance decision. In the subsequent decision of Fishman
v Delta Air Lines Inc 132 F 3d 138, the Court of Appeal of
the same circuit rejected the proposition that
article 29(2)
permitted the limitation period to be determined in
Page 31 of 48
accordance with the lex fori. In reaching this conclusion,
                the court had regard to the travaux preparatoires to the
                Warsaw Convention and reached the same conclusion on
                their meaning and effect as I have done at [73] above.
                Although New Pentax does not appear to have been cited
                in Fishman, the latter is a decision of a superior court.”
33.     A similar view has been taken in a number of other judgments 48 in the

United Kingdom.
United States of America
34.     The Second Circuit of the Court of Appeals in the United States of

America in Fishman v. Delta Air Lines Inc 49, a burn injury was inflicted on

an infant by an air hostess. The infant, through her mother, brought an action

against the airline after a period of 2 years, claiming that the local limitation

law suspends limitation for infants. The Court of Appeals also traced the

history of the provision in the Warsaw Convention to find that:
“Almost every court that has reviewed the drafting
                minutes of the Convention, including the district court
                in this case, has rejected the contention that
Article
                29(2)
incorporates the tolling provisions otherwise
                applicable in the forum. See, e.g., Castro v. Hinson, 959
                F. Supp. 160, 163 (E.D.N.Y. 1997); Fishman, 938 F.
                Supp. at 230; Royal Ins. Co., 834 F. Supp. at 636; Kahn,
                443 N.Y.S.2d at 87. The minutes reveal that the drafters
                of the Convention specifically considered and rejected
                a proposed provision that would have allowed the
                limitations period to be tolled according to the law of
                the forum court. See R.C. Horner and D. Legrez,
                Minutes of the Second International Conference on
                Private Aeronautical Law, 110-13 (1975); Kahn, 443
                N.Y.S.2d at 86-87; Royal Ins. Co., 834 F. Supp. at 636.
48
See, Sidhu v. British Airways (1997) 2 WLR 26; Philips v. Air New Zealand (2002) EWHC 800 (Commercial
Court).
49
Supra no. 11.
Page 32 of 48
As the district court recognized, the main concern of the
                   drafters in rejecting the tolling proposal was "to
                   remove those actions governed by the Convention from
                   the uncertainty which would attach were they to be
                   subjected to the various tolling provisions of the laws
                   of the member states." Kahn, 443 N.Y.S.2d at 87.
Moreover, the debates over the language ultimately
                   adopted in
Article 29
indicate that the only matter to be
                   referred to the forum court by subsection 2 of
Article 29
was "the determination of whether the plaintiff had
                   taken the necessary measures within the two-year
                   period to invoke that particular court's jurisdiction
                   over the action."
35.        Similarly, the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit of the United

States of America in Narayanan v. British Airways 50 affirmed the position

under the Warsaw Convention and found that the Montreal Convention also

envisages the same position. It was held,

                   “The drafting history of the Warsaw Convention also
                   reveals that the drafters intended
Article 29
to operate
                   as a statute of repose, which, “like a jurisdictional
                   prerequisite, extinguishes a cause of action after a fixed
                   period of time … regardless of when the cause of action
                   accrued.” Albillo-De Leon v. Gonzales 410 F.3d 1090,
                   1097 n.5 (9 th Cir. 2005). The drafters considered – and
                   rejected – a proposal that would have allowed the
                   limitations period to be tolled in accordance with the
                   law of the forum court. See R.C. Horner and D. Legrez,
                   Minutes of the Second International Conference on
                   Private Aeronautical Law, 110-13 (1975); see also
                   Fishman, 132 F.3d at 144 (observing that “[a]lmost
                   every court that has reviewed the drafting minutes of
                   the [Warsaw] Convention … has rejected the
                   contention that
Article 29(2)
incorporates the tolling
                   provisions otherwise applicable in [a] forum [state]”.
                   Instead, the Warsaw Convention’s drafters adopted a
                   “very simple” proposal advanced by the Italian
50
2014 U.S. App. LEXIS 5173: 747 F.3d 1125
Page 33 of 48
delegation: “if two years after the accident no action
                     has been brought, all actions are extinguished.”
                     …
                     Consistent with this history, the prevailing view among
                     courts across jurisdictions is that the Montreal
                     Convention’s limitation period operates as a condition
                     precedent to suit and, as such, is not subject to
                     equitable tolling.”
36.        The Supreme Court of New York also came to a similar conclusion in

Kahn v. Trans World Airlines Inc.51 In this case, the Court had occasion to

examine the history of the provision once again. It looked into the travaux

preparatoires and found that the provision was debated and based on the

debates, it held that:
“Based upon the foregoing, it is abundantly clear that
                     the delegates to the Warsaw Convention expressly
                     desired to remove those actions governed by the
                     Convention from the uncertainty which would attach
                     were they to be subjected to the various tolling
                     provisions of the laws of the member States, and that
                     the two-year time limitation specified in
article 29
was
                     intended to be absolute — barring any action which had
                     not been commenced within the two-year period.
                     Moreover, it is equally clear from the delegates'
                     discussion that the only matter to be referred to the
                     forum court by paragraph 2 of the present
article 29
was the determination of whether the plaintiff had taken
                     the necessary measures within the two-year period to
                     invoke that particular court's jurisdiction over the
                     action. An obvious example of the need for such a
                     provision is the difference between the method of
                     commencing an action in the New York State courts as
                     opposed to the Federal courts. Thus, in New York,
                     depending upon the forum chosen, the plaintiff in an
                     action governed by the Warsaw Convention must either
                     effect service upon the defendant (CPLR 304) or file a
                     complaint in the Federal District Court (Fed Articles
51
Supra no. 17.
Page 34 of 48
Civ Pro,
Article 3 [
in US Code, tit 28, Appendix])
                     within the time limited by
article 29
, i.e., two years.”


Australia
37.        The Federal Court of Australia, in Bhatia v. Malaysian Airline System

Berhad52 followed the judgments in Laroche and Kahn and held that the local

limitation law will not apply in view of
Article 29(1)
of the Warsaw

Convention. It was held in Para 34:
“34. The Convention has as its purpose the uniformity
                     and certainty of the law, among its signatories, in
                     relation to (relevantly) personal injury suffered by
                     passengers in the course of international air carriage
                     to which it applies. The rights created by the
                     Convention (given the force of law in Australia) are
                     rights enjoyed by persons referred to as “passengers”.
                     The corresponding liabilities are imposed upon persons
                     referred to as “carriers”. The word “action” in Art 35
                     must be given a construction that advances the object
                     of providing certainty in the legal relationship between
                     these two persons. The “right to damages” subject to
                     extinguishment under Art 35, may naturally be
                     understood as referring to the right possessed by one
                     person that is enforceable against another person
                     having a corresponding liability. It follows that the
                     steps necessary to bring an “action” must include steps
                     sufficient to invoke the jurisdiction of a court to
                     determine the controversy concerning the respective
                     rights and liabilities of the first person in relation to the
                     second. Thus, the words “brought” and “action” must
                     be understood as referring to a process by which the
                     disputed rights and liabilities of the two persons come
                     before a court for adjudication.”
52
Supra no. 18.
Page 35 of 48
38.     We have come across one decision of France's Cour de Cassation in

Lorans v. Air France 53 which has taken a different view of the matter.

However, the decisions that we have referred have considered the issue from

all perspectives including the decision of the French Court, and did not accept

the reasoning adopted therein. It is also important to mention that there are

some decisions of the US Courts in the case of Joseph v. Syrian Arab

Airlines54 and Flanagan v. McDonnell Douglas Corp 55 which have also not

deliberated the issue in detail on arriving at the interpretation as is done in

the cases that we have referred to hereinabove. Excluding these minor

variations, an overwhelming majority of the decisions have taken an

informed view that
Article 29
excludes and is intended to exclude the

application of municipal legislations, excluding the periods of limitation.
39.     So far as India is concerned there is no direct decision of this
Court on

the Air Act, 1972
. The closest we get is the decision of this Court under the

Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 1925, which fell for interpretation in
East and West Steamship Co. v. S.K. Ramalingam Chettiar56
, where this

Court had observed that “Rules of limitation are likely to vary from country to

country. Provisions for extension of periods prescribed for limitation would

similarly vary. We should be slow therefore to put on the word “discharged from

liability” an interpretation which would produce results varying in different
53
(1977) 31 RFDA 268: (Cour de Cassation [Assemblee Pleniere] Jan,14, 1997).
54
88 F.R.D. 530 (S.D.N.Y. 1980).
55
428 F.Supp. 770 (C.D. Calf. 1977).
56
Supra no. 7.
Page 36 of 48
countries and thus keeping the position uncertain for both the shipper and the

shipowner…It is hardly necessary to add that once the liability is extinguished

under this clause there is no scope of acknowledgment of liability thereafter.

Apart from this, we have certain decisions of the High Courts that have

interpreted Rule 30 of the
Second Schedule of the Act
.


Decisions of our High Courts on Rule 30, Second Schedule:
40.     The High Courts across the country have also taken a similar view that

the
Limitation Act, 1963
will be excluded from operation for a claim under

the
Air Act
. The High Courts have reasoned that the
Air Act
is a special

statute and would thus prevail over the
Limitation Act, 1963
, which is a

general statute. The High Court of Delhi in Air India Ltd. v. Tej Shoe Exports

P. Ltd.57, Sailesh Textile Industries v. British Airways & Anr.58, Indian

Airlines v. Angelique International Ltd. & Anr.59, Ethopian Airlines v.
Federal Chemical Works Ltd.60, the High Court of Madras in M/s
M.R.F Ltd.

v. Singapore Airlines
61 and
Air India, Bombay Airport v. Asia Tanning Co.,62

and the High
Court of Bombay, in the judgment impugned before us, have all

taken this view.
41.     There is only one decision that has taken a different view of the matter,

and that is the decision of the High Court of Gujarat in
National Aviation
57
Supra no. 8.
58
2003 SCC Online Del 318 (at paras 10 to 15).
59
2014 SCC Online Del 6825 (at para 16).
60
2004 SCC Online Del 862 (at para 15).
61
Supra no. 4.
62
2002 SCC Online Mad 802 (at para 7).
Page 37 of 48
Company of India Ltd. v. Jatnadevi Tejraj Jain,63
. The High Court reasoned

that
Article 30(2)
of Schedule II makes the law of the Court seized of the

matter applicable and the law of the Court seized of the matter in India is the
Limitation Act, 1963
. It was held:
"10. The aforesaid Rule provides that right to damages
                   shall be extinguished if the action is not brought within
                   two years from the date on which the aircraft ought to
                   have arrived at or stopped. However, sub-rule (2)
                   expressly provides that the calculation of the period of
                   limitation shall be as per the method determined by the
                   law of the Court seized with the case. Therefore, it is
                   apparent that after applying the method as provided by
                   the law of the Court, the period of 2 years is to be
                   counted, and thereafter, the right to damages shall get
                   extinguished if the action is not brought within the said
                   period of 2 years. The law of the Court seized with the
                   case is the
Limitation Act, 1963
.
Part III of the
                   Limitation Act
provides for computation of the period
                   of limitation, which can be said as at par with the
                   method of calculation of the period of limitation.
Section 14
of the Act provides for exclusion of the time
                   of proceeding bona fide in Court without jurisdiction.
                   Therefore, while computing the period of limitation of
                   two years, in our view,
section 14
of the Limitation Act
                   would apply.”
42.        We have already considered the true and correct meaning of Rule 30

(2), or as the case may be Rule 35 (2) of the Third Schedule by referring to

the Conventions, coupled with travaux preparatoires. The Gujarat High

Court has not considered the matter in the right perspective while interpreting

Rule 35 (2).
63
2011 SCC Online Guj 7601 (at para 10).
Page 38 of 48
43.    In the ultimate analysis, keeping in view the legislative history of the

Convention and in view of the consistent interpretation of
Article 29
of the

Convention adopted in different jurisdictions, for the purpose of uniformity

and also to subserve the purpose and object of the Convention, we are of the

view that Rule 30 (2) does not enable applicability of exclusion of periods

for the purpose of reckoning the period of two years.
Issue No. 2
Whether the Air Act, 1972, particularly Rule 30 of the Second Schedule
expressly excludes the applicability of the
Limitation Act, 1963
?
44.1   On this issue Shri Navare made a two-prong submission. Rule 30 of

Second Schedule in terms reiterates the applicability of
Section 29
of the

Limitation Act and at the same time the
Air Act, 1972
being a special law, the

provisions of
Limitation Act
apply as there is no express exclusion.

44.2 Shri Navare submits that firstly, there is no provision whatsoever in the
Air Act
expressly excluding the applicability of the
Limitation Act
. For this

reason, the provisions of the
Limitation Act
must apply as a matter of public

policy. Secondly, Rule 30 (2) of the
Air Act
in terms reiterates the

applicability of the
Limitation Act
. In the written submissions he has

highlighted the fact that
Section 29
of the Limitation Act is very different

from
Section 39
of the Limitation Act, 1980 of the United Kingdom.


44.3 On the other hand Ms. Ritu Singh Mann has submitted that the
Air Act,

1972
excludes the applicability of the
Limitation Act
.
Page 39 of 48
45.   While dealing with Issue No.1, we have held that the right to damages

itself is extinguished after the expiry of the period of two years and therefore

the provisions of the
Limitation Act
have no application as there is no right

subsisting for enforcement. In this context we have referred to
Section 3
of

the Limitation Act which merely bars the remedy and not the right itself, but

when the statute extinguishes the right itself the position is very different. We

will however consider the present argument of Shri Navare as an alternative

plea and proceed forthwith to deal with the same.
46.   Where a period of Limitation is prescribed in a special law, by virtue of
Section 29
of the Limitation Act, such period will apply as if it was provided

in the
Schedule of the Limitation Act
. Consequently, the provisions of
Sections 4
to
24
will apply for the purpose of computation of period of

limitation. This provision is subject to a bright exception that the
Limitation

Act
will not apply if it is “expressly excluded” by the
Special Act
.
Section 29
of the Limitation Act to the extent that is necessary is as under: -
“29. Savings
            (1)…..….
(2) Where any special or local law prescribes for any
            suit, appeal or application a period of limitation
            different from the period prescribed by the Schedule,
            the provisions of
section 3
shall apply as if such period
            were the period prescribed by the Schedule and for the
            purpose of determining any period of limitation
            prescribed for any suit, appeal or application by any
            special or local law, the provisions contained in
sections 4
to
24 (inclusive)
shall apply only in so far as,
            and to the extent to which, they are not expressly
            excluded by such special or local law.”
Page 40 of 48
47.     The statutory requirement of express exclusion is considered by this

Court in a number of decisions.64 Express empowerment is not to be

understood in a pedantic manner. Express empowerment is to be gathered

from the provisions of the statute.
In
Shanmugam v. Commissioner
for

Registration65, the Privy Council held that:
“It is argued that the Act does not contain the "express
                 provision" required by the Interpretation Ordinance to
                 make it applicable. Their Lordships do not agree. Upon
                 the meaning of the words "express provision" counsel
                 relied upon in re Meredith and stated that it must be
                 provision the applicability of which did not arise by
                 inference. He argued that there was no "express
                 provision" as no reference had been made to pending
                 proceedings. Their Lordships are of the view that it is
                 correct to state that express provision is provision the
                 applicability of which does not arise by inference. The
                 applicability, however, of the provision under
                 discussion to the present case does not arise by
                 inference; it arises directly from the language used.
                 The Fact that the language used is wide and
                 comprehensive and covers many points other than the
                 one immediately under discussion does not make it
                 possible to say that its application can arise by
                 inference only. To be “express provision” with regard
                 to something it is not necessary that that thing should
                 be specially mentioned; it is sufficient that it is directly
                 covered by the language however broad the language
                 may be which covers it so long as the applicability
                 arises directly from the language used and not by
                 inference therefrom. The argument fails."
48.
In
Hukumdev Narain Yadav v. Lalit Narain Mishra
66, the Court held
as under: -
64
Needle Industries (India) Ltd. and Anr. v. Needle Industries Newey (India) Holding Ltd. and Ors (1981) 3 SCC
333.
65
[1962] 2 All E.R. 609.
66
(1974) 2 SCC 133.
Page 41 of 48
“17. ……….Even assuming that where a period of
                     limitation has not been fixed for election petitions in the
Schedule to the Limitation Act
which is different from
                     that fixed under
Section 81
of the Act,
Section 29(2)
would be attracted, and what we have to determine is
                     whether the provisions of this Section are expressly
                     excluded in the case of an election petition. It is
                     contended before us that the words “expressly
                     excluded” would mean that there must be an express
                     reference made in the special or local law to the
                     specific provisions of the
Limitation Act
of which the
                     operation is to be excluded. As usual the meaning given
                     in the Dictionary has been relied upon, but what we
                     have to see is whether the scheme of the special law,
                     that is in this case the Act, and the nature of the remedy
                     provided therein are such that the Legislature intended
                     it to be a complete code by itself which alone should
                     govern the several matters provided by it. If on an
                     examination of the relevant provisions it is clear that
                     the provisions of the
Limitation Act
are necessarily
                     excluded, then the benefits conferred therein cannot be
                     called in aid to supplement the provisions of the Act. In
                     our view, even in a case where the special law does not
                     exclude the provisions of
Sections 4
to
24
of the
                     Limitation Act by an express reference, it would
                     nonetheless be open to the Court to examine whether
                     and to what extent the nature of those provisions or the
                     nature of the subject-matter and scheme of the special
                     law exclude their operation.”
49.        Following the principle
laid down in
Hukumdev67, we will now examine

the relevant provisions of the
Air Act, 1972
, its Schedules, and Rule 30, in

particular, to see if these provisions have the effect of expressly excluding the

applicability of the
Limitation Act
.
67
Supra no. 66.
Page 42 of 48
Carriage by
Air Act
, 1972
50.
The Air Act, 1972
is an Act to give effect to various International

Conventions for the unification of certain Articles relating to international

carriage by air. The Preamble of the Act states:
“
An Act
to give effect to the Convention for the
              unification of certain rules relating to international
              carriage by air signed at Warsaw on the 12th day of
              October, 1929 and to the said Convention as amended
              by the Hague Protocol on the 28th day of September,
              1955 1 [and also to the Montreal Convention signed on
              the 28th day of May, 1999 and to make provision for]
              applying the rules contained in the said Convention in
              its original form and in the amended form (subject to
              exceptions, adaptations and modifications) to non-
              international carriage by air and for matters connected
              therewith.”
51.   The International Conventions incorporated in the Act are the (i)

Warsaw Convention, 1929; (ii) The Warsaw Convention, 1929 as amended

by the Hague Protocol on 28.09.1955 and (iii) the Montréal Convention,

1999.
Section 3
of the Act incorporates the Warsaw Convention into the Act

as the First Schedule and specifically provides it the status of law in India.
Section 4
incorporates the Hague Protocol and provisions it in The Second

Schedule. Section 4A for giving effect to Montréal convention, provides
The

Third Schedule to the Act
and specifically provides the status of law to these

provisions.
52.   The Warsaw Convention as amended by the Hague Protocol is a

complete code within itself for all questions relating to carriage by air by

international carriages. Rule 1(1) provides that the Hague Protocol shall
Page 43 of 48
apply to “all international carriage of persons, baggage or cargo performed

by aircraft for reward”. Rule 2 provides that the Convention will apply to

carriage performed by the State or by legally constituted public bodies.

Chapter II of the Convention (Rules 3 to 16) is entitled “Documents of

Carriage”. Rule 3 relates to the documents that a carriage of passengers must

deliver. Rule 4 prescribes a mechanism for baggage check. Rule 5 to 11

relates to the air waybill in cases of cargo carriages. Rule 12 relates to the

right of the consignor to dispose of the goods in a manner that is not

prejudicial to the carrier. Rule 13 pertains to the rights of the consignee upon

the arrival of the goods. Rule 13(3) provides that where there is a loss of

goods, the consignee shall be entitled to enforce the rights which ‘flow from

the contract of carriage’. Rule 14 provides for the consequences of non-

compliance of Rule 12 and 13.
53.   The Chapter with which we are presently concerned with is Chapter III

which is titled ‘Liability of the Carrier’. Rule 17 provides for the liability of

a carrier for damages in the event of death or wounding or other injuries

caused to a passenger while onboard the aircraft. Rule 18 envisages the

liability of a carrier in the event of destruction, loss, damage etc. of car go.

Similarly, Rule 19 concerns the liability of a carrier upon delay in the carriage

of passengers, baggage or cargo. Rule 20 provides for an equitable exemption

to the carrier if he proves that he had taken all necessary measures to negate

the delay or damage. Rule 21 is yet another equitable provision that protects
Page 44 of 48
the carrier in cases of contributory negligence. Rule 22 specifies the

minimum liability of the carrier. Rule 23 nullifies all limits which are lower

than those provided in Rule 22.
54.   Rule 24 stipulates that any action for damages “can only be brought

subject to the conditions and limits set out in these rules”. Rule 25 relates to

the vicarious liability of the carrier. Rule 26 provides that a servant/agent of

a carrier shall be exempted from liability if he proves that he acted within the

scope of his employment. Rule 27(1) specifies that receipt of baggage or

cargo is prima facie proof of its good condition. Rule 27(2) provides that

where the goods are damaged, a complaint must be made within 7 days of the

date of receipt of baggage and 14 days from the date of receipt of cargo. Rule

27(3) provides that a complaint shall be made in writing. Rule 27(4) further

provides that if no complaint is made within the period specified, no a ction

shall lie against the carrier except in cases of fraud. Rule 28 stipulates that

the legal representatives of a deceased person can bring an action for

damages. Rule 29 is the jurisdictional clause, and provides that the action

may be brought in the territory of one of the State Parties, either before the

court of the domicile of the carrier or of its principal place of business or

where it has a place of business through which the contract has been made,

or before the court at the place of destination. Rule 29(2) stipulates that the

‘questions of procedure shall be governed by the law of the court seized of

the case.’
Page 45 of 48
55.   Rule 30, which is the fulcrum of the case, may be extracted in full:
“30. (1) The right to damages shall be extinguished if
            an action is not brought within two years, reckoned
            from the date of arrival at the destination, or from the
            date on which the aircraft ought to have arrived, or
            from the date on which the carriage stopped.
(2) The method of calculating the period of limitation
            shall be determined by the law of the Court seized of the
            case.”
56.   Chapters IV, and V are not of much relevance to the case at hand.

Suffice it to say that they are machinery provisions that do not affect the

interpretation of Rule 30.
57.   The Convention certainly incorporated two variables in the context of

reckoning the period specified in Rule 30 (1) of limitation. The first event

relates to the time, which is a fixed period of two years. The second event

relates to the commencement of cause of action which has been specified as

any of the three events being (i) arrival at the destination; or (ii) date on which

the aircraft ought to have arrived; or (iii) the date on which the carriage

stopped. Now, the only event that remains is the date on which the action for

damages is initiated as this would depend upon the law of the Court seized of

the case. Rule 30(2) specifically provides that “the method of calculating the

period will be determined by the law of the Court seized of the case.” This

should necessarily follow for the reason that the period of two years for

enforcing the right would be extinguished if an action is not brought within

the said period.
Page 46 of 48
58.    We may also note that giving effect to the meaning of the words the

‘law of the court seized of the case’ would lead to an anomalous situation

where the law of every country would be incorporated into the Convention,

thereby defeating the purpose of an International Convention which is to

bring about uniformity across the globe in the laws applicable to carriage by

air.
59.    Sub-Rule (2) must therefore be interpreted harmoniously keeping in

mind not only the content of Sub-Rule (1) but also the purpose and object of

the Convention which is to bring about the unification of Rules relating to

International Carriage by Air. The intention behind
Article 35(2)
was merely

to fix the date on which the suit (or action) has ‘begun’ and the date on which

limitation expires, as per the laws of the country. The example given by the

French Delegation makes this position clear as it was to accommodate

provisions such as pre-trial conferences. As stated above, in India, such a

position could possibly arise if the legislature envisages mandatory pre-trial

mediation. It is in order to accommodate for this eventuality that the law-

makers left some room for the domestic law to operate.
60.    Having considered the matter in detail, we are of the opinion that Rule

30 of the Carriage by
Air Act
1972, expressly excludes the applicability of

the
Limitation Act,1963
. Issue No.2 is answered accordingly.
61.    For the reasons stated above, the Appeal arising out of SLP No. 16767

of 2018, from the judgment of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay in WP
Page 47 of 48
No. 6647 of 2014 is accordingly dismissed. The parties shall bear their own

cost.
62.     We place on record the valuable assistance given by Shri Vinay Navare,

assisted by Shri Pravartak Pathak, Advocate, Ms. Gwen Karthika, Advocate

and Ms. Abha R. Sharma, AOR for the Appellants and Ms. Ritu Singh Mann

for Respondent assisted by Shri Dheeraj K. Garg, Advocate and Shri Rajan

K. Chourasia, AOR.
……………………………….J.
                                                   [K.M. JOSEPH]


                                          ……………………………….J.
                                  [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]
NEW DELHI;
JULY 29, 2022
Page 48 of 48