[Cites
31
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Sunil Sikri vs Guru Harkrishan Public School on 28 July, 2022
Author:
K.M. Joseph
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
K.M. Joseph
REPORTABLE

                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5562 OF 2017

          SUNIL SIKRI                                                 … APPELLANT(S)

                                                VERSUS


          GURU HARKRISHAN PUBLIC SCHOOL & ANR.                       … RESPONDENT(S)



                                        JUDGMENT
K.M. JOSEPH, J.
1.
The Delhi School Education Act
1973 (hereinafter

          referred to as “the Act”) was promulgated on 9th April,

          1973. In the very same year on the 31st December, 1973,

          the            Delhi    School    Education          Rules,         1973     were

          promulgated. The said Rules are referred to as “the

          Rules”.
Chapter IV of the Act
deals with the terms and

          conditions             of   Service    of      Employees       of   recognised
Signature Not Verified
Private
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2022.07.28
Schools.    What    is       relevant   to    the    lis   are
17:05:51 IST
Reason:
Sections 8
and
11
of the Act, and they read as follows:
1
“8. Terms and conditions of service         of
employees of recognised private schools.—

(1) The Administrator may make rules regulating
the minimum qualifications for recruitment,
and the conditions of service, of employees of
recognised private schools:
Provided that neither the salary nor the
rights in respect of leave of absence, age of
retirement and pension of an employee in the
employment of an existing school at the
commencement of this Act shall be varied to the
disadvantage of such employee:
Provided further that every such employee
shall be entitled to opt for terms and
conditions of service as they were applicable
to him immediately before the commencement of
this Act.
(2) Subject to any rule that may be made in
this behalf, no employee of a recognised
private school shall be dismissed, removed or
reduced in rank nor shall his service be
otherwise terminated except with the prior
approval of the Director.
(3) Any employee of a recognised private school
who is dismissed, removed or reduced in rank
may, within three months from the date of
communication to him of the order of such
dismissal, removal or reduction in rank, appeal
against such order to the Tribunal constituted
under
section 11
.
(4) Where the managing committee of a
recognised private school intends to suspend
any of its employees, such intention shall be
communicated to the Director and no such
suspension shall be made except with the prior
approval of the Director:
2
Provided that the managing committee may
suspend an employee with immediate effect and
without the prior approval of the Director if
it is satisfied that such immediate suspension
is necessary by reason of the gross misconduct,
within the meaning of the Code of Conduct
prescribed under
section 9
, of the employee:
Provided further that no such immediate
suspension shall remain in force for more than
a period of fifteen days from the date of
suspension unless it has been communicated to
the Director and approved by him before the
expiry of the said period.
(5) Where the intention to suspend, or the
immediate   suspension   of   an  employee  is
communicated to the Director, he may, if he is
satisfied   that   there    are  adequate  and
reasonable grounds for such suspension, accord
his approval to such suspension.
11. Tribunal. —

(1) The Administrator shall, by notification,
constitute a Tribunal, to be known as the
“Delhi School Tribunal”, consisting of one
person:
Provided that no person shall be so
appointed unless he has held office as a
District Judge or any equivalent judicial
office.
(2) If any vacancy, other than a temporary
absence, occurs in the office of the presiding
officer of the Tribunal, the Administrator
shall appoint another person, in accordance
with the provisions of this section, to fill
the vacancy and the proceedings may be
continued before the Tribunal from the stage
at which the vacancy is filled.
(3) The Administrator shall make available to
the Tribunal such staff as may be necessary in
the discharge of its functions under this Act.
3
(4) All expenses incurred in connection with
     the Tribunal shall be defrayed out of the
     Consolidated Fund of India.
(5) The Tribunal shall have power to regulate
     its own procedure in all matters arising out
     of the discharge of its functions including the
     place or places at which it shall hold its
     sittings.
(6) The Tribunal shall for the purpose of
     disposal of an appeal preferred under this Act
     have the same powers as are vested in a court
     of appeal by
the Code of Civil Procedure
, 1908
     (5 of 1908) and shall also have the power to
     stay the operation of the order appealed
     against on such terms as it may think fit.”
2.   Next, we may notice the provisions in the Rules.
Rule 115 deals with suspension. We need notice only

Rule 115(1) and 115(4), inter alia:
“115. Suspension
     (1) Subject to the provision of sub-sections
     (4) and (5) of
section 8
, the managing
     committee may place an employee of a recognised
     private school, whether aided or not, under
     suspension: —
a) where a disciplinary proceeding against
     such employee is contemplated or pending; or
(b) where a case against him in respect of any
     criminal offence is under investigation or
     trial; or
(c) where he is charged with embezzlement; or
(d) where he is charged with cruelty towards
     any student or other employee of the school;
     or
(e) where he is charged with misbehaviour
     towards any parent, guardian, student or
     employee of the school; or
4
(f) where he is charged with the breach of any
     other code of conduct.
xxx     xxx      xxx

     (4) Where a penalty of dismissal, removal or
     compulsory retirement from service imposed
     upon an employee is set aside or rendered void,
     in consequence of or by, a decision of a court
     of law or of the Tribunal; and the disciplinary
     authority    on   a   consideration    of   the
     circumstances of the case decides to hold
     further inquiry against such employee on the
     same allegations on which the penalty of
     dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement
     was originally imposed, such employee shall be
     deemed to have been placed under suspension by
     the managing committee from the date of
     original order of dismissal, removal or
     compulsory retirement and shall continue to
     remain under suspension until further orders:
Provided that no such further enquiry shall be
     ordered unless it is intended to meet a
     situation where the court has passed an order
     purely on technical grounds without going into
     the merits of the case.”
3.   Rule 117 deals with penalties and disciplinary

authority. Under the category of major penalties are

reduction in rank, compulsory retirement, removal from

service and dismissal from service. Rule 120 deals with

procedure for imposing major penalty. Rule 121 which

is at the centre stage of the controversy provides as

follows:
5
“121. Payment of     pay   and   allowances   on
reinstatement -
(1) When an employee who has been dismissed,
removed or compulsorily retired from service
is reinstated as a result of appeal or would
have been so reinstated but for his retirement
on superannuation while under suspension
preceding the dismissal, removal or compulsory
retirement, as the case may be, the managing
committee shall consider and make a specified
order: -
(a) with regard to the salary and allowances to
be paid to the employee for the period of his
absence from duty, including the period of
suspension preceding his dismissal, removal or
compulsory retirement, as the case may be; and
(b) whether or not the said period shall be
treated as the period spent on duty.
(2) Where the managing committee is of opinion
that the employee who had been dismissed,
removed or compulsorily retired from service
had been fully exonerated, the employee shall
be paid the full salary and allowances to which
he would have been entitled had he not been
dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired
from service or suspended prior to such
dismissal, or compulsory retirement from
service, as the case may be:
Provided that where the managing committee
is of opinion that the termination of the
proceedings instituted against the employee
had been delayed due to reasons directly
attributable to the employee, it may, after
giving a reasonable opportunity to the employee
to make representations and after considering
the representation, if any, made by the
employee, direct, for reasons to be recorded
by it in writing, that the employee shall he
paid for the period of such delay only such
6
proportion of the salary and allowances as it
     may determine.
(3) The payment of allowances shall be subject
     to all other conditions under which Midi
     allowances are admissible and the proportion
     of the full salary and allowances determined
     under the proviso to sub-rule (2) shall not be
     less than the subsistence allowance and other
     admissible allowances.”
4.   Having set out the statutory framework, the time

is now ripe to notice the relevant facts which led to

the litigation. We may notice the facts as set out in

the impugned judgment:
“The second respondent was appointed as a PGT
     (Chemistry) by the Guru Harkishan Public
     School, admittedly a minority institution, on
     July 02, 1984. As per the school, on January
     22, 1994 the respondent No.2 not only
     misbehaved but even molested a newly married
     employee of the school in full public view and
     when the tormented lady complained to the
     principal of the school, on being summoned the
     said respondent not only profusely apologized
     but to save his honour and respect so that no
     stigma   was    cast   tendered   a   voluntary
     resignation on January 22, 1994 and requested
     the principal of the school to accept the same
     forthwith. The principal forwarded the letter
     of resignation to the Chairperson of the
     Managing Committee of the School who accepted
     the same; and thus ceased the employer-employee
     relationship between the school and the second
     respondent. The respondent No.2 disputes the
     version and claims that the resignation was the
     result of coercion and that the letter of
     resignation was withdrawn the next day on
7
January 23, 1994 before it could be acted upon.
He also questions the competence of the
     Chairperson of the Managing Committee of the
     school to accept the same. It is in this
     backdrop that appeal No.14/1994 fell in the lap
     of the Delhi School Education Tribunal for
     decision. Unfortunately, the appeal came to be
     decided after 17 years of it being filed. Vide
     order dated August 18, 2011 the Tribunal held
     that the letter of resignation submitted by the
     said respondent was withdrawn before it was
     accepted and thus could not be acted upon. The
     Tribunal has also held that the Chairperson of
     the Managing Committee was not the Competent
     Authority to accept the resignation. As a
     result,   the   termination   of   the   second
     respondent's service has been held to be
     illegal. The said respondent has been directed
     to be reinstated in service: 50% back wages
     have been directed to be paid. The writ
     petition challenges the award granting 50% back
     wages.”
5.   The Learned Single Judge noting the conflicting

opinions between two learned Judges referred the matter

to the Larger Bench. The point of controversy is this.
The writ petitioner contended that the Tribunal did not

have the power to decide on the issue of back wages.

The said question is squarely covered by provisions of

Rule 121. Under Rule 121, it is the Managing Committee,

which is to take a decision.
8
6.   The   Full   Bench,   by       the   impugned   Judgement,

proceeded to answer the reference in the following

manner:
“45. We answer the reference as under: -
(i) The law declared by the learned Single Judge
     of this Court in the decision reported as 43
     (
1991) DLT 139 The Manager Arva Samaj Girls
     Higher Secondary School & Anr. Vs. Sunrita
     Thakur
correctly lays down the 1aw concerning
     the interpretation of Rule 121 of the Delhi
     School Education Rules, 1973 and the view taken
     by the learned Single Judge in the decision
     dated January 17, 2006 in W.P.(C) No.7617/2000
     The Managing Committee Heera Lal Jain Vs. Shri
     Chander Gupt Sharma & Ors. is overruled.
(ii)    Rule 121 of the Delhi School Education
     Rules, 1973 would apply to minority unaided
     schools recognized under the Delhi School
     Education Rules, 1973.”
7.   The appellant before us is the second respondent

in the writ petition. We have heard learned counsel for

the appellant Anuj Agrawal and Shri A.P.S. Ahluwalia,

learned Senior    Counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondent.
8.   The appellant would dub Rule 121 as ultra vires.

He would point out that it would be open to this Court

to pronounce the Rule unconstitutional despite the fact

that the Rule has not been challenged before the High
9
Court.
In this context, he relies upon the Judgment of

this Court in
Bharathidasan University and another v.

All-India Council
for Technical Education and others1.

It is the appellant’s further case that the Tribunal

under
Section 7
has the same power as are vested in the

court of appeal under
the Code of Civil Procedure
. The

Appellate Court has the power as the court of original

jurisdiction possesses. It is pointed out that the

court     of     original       jurisdiction     is      the    Managing

committee, and therefore, the power of the Tribunal

extends to awarding back wages. It is further contended

that the Tribunal already has incidental and ancillary

powers to make the express statutory powers effective.
He relies upon the judgment of this Court in
State of

A.P. v. P. Narasimha
and another2                and
Karnataka Bank

Ltd.     v.    State    of   Andhra    Pradesh
and   others3.       The

Lawgiver intended to create a Specialised Tribunal.

Being a Specialised Tribunal, it has all the power of

an    Appellate        Court.   The    statutory    Rule       cannot   be

inconsistent or repugnant with the parent Act. Rule 121


1   (2001) 8 SCC 676
2   (1994) 4 SCC 453
3   (2008) 2 SCC 254
10
is     confined    to     cases    of      dismissal,   removal       and

compulsory retirement.
In
Shashi Gaur v. NCT of Delhi
and others4, this court has taken the view that an

aggrieved       employee     can        challenge    all   kinds       of

termination of service. If that is so, in cases not

falling within the ambit of Rule 121, it would empower

the Tribunal to award back wages, whereas it would be

prevented from doing so in regard to cases falling

under Rule 121. It is contended that the Tribunal has

the power to award back wages.
The Tribunal must have

the power to decide the issue of back wages in all

cases in view of the factors and guidelines
laid down

in
Deepali Gundu Surwase v. Kranti Junior Adhyapak

Mahavidyalaya (D.Ed
.) and others5.                The correctness of

the impugned judgment in regard to the finding that

Rule     121    applies     to    all      institutions,   including

minority       institutions,       is      not   questioned.     It   is

contended that Fundamental Rule 54 applies only to a

departmental appeal. In the case of a complaint about

subsistence       allowance,      a    departmental     appeal    lies;



4   (2001) 10 SCC 445
5   (2013) 10 SCC 324
11
otherwise, there is no provision for any departmental

appeal.
The appellant relies on
Devendra Pratap Narain

Rai Sharma v. State of Uttar Pradesh
and others6 and
Union of India v. Madhusudan Prasad7
.
9.     Per contra, the contention of the respondent is as

follows, inter alia. The Tribunal under
Section 8
read

with
Section 11
of the Act does not possess any express

power. Reliance is placed on the judgment of this Court

in
Smt. Ujjam Bai v. State of Uttar Pradesh8
. It is

further pointed out that the view taken in the impugned

Judgment by the Full Bench has been followed in a large

number of cases. It is contended that if a judgment has

been     consistently   followed   for    a    long   time,   the

principle of certainty of law requires that it should

not be disturbed. The spirit of the law is that after

the Tribunal directs re-instatement it would direct the

Managing Committee to conduct an inquiry under Rule
121.      An   aggrieved   employee      can    challenge     the

proceedings in the appropriate forum and clothing the

Tribunal with the power to award back wages would


6    AIR 1962 SC 1334
7   (2004) 1 SCC 43
8   AIR 1962 SC 1621
12
render Rule 121 redundant and superfluous. The Managing

Committee would decide the matter after an inquiry and

it   is   even   stated   after   recording   evidence.   The

Tribunal may     award damages in an arbitrary manner

without determining relevant facts relating to gainful

employment, running of any business or joining some

other school during the period of absence. In our view,

the following points would arise:
“(I) Whether there is any express power under
Sections 8
and
11
to order back wages?
(II) Whether Fundamental Rule 54 fortifies the
      contention of the respondent?
(III) Is there any conflict between
Sections 8
and
11
on the one hand and Rule 121 on the
      other hand? Is Rule 121 ultra vires to parent
      enactment?
(IV) Whether the tribunal has incidental and
      ancillary power to direct payment of pay and
      allowance on setting aside the order of
      termination?”


ANALYSIS
10. We have noticed that
Section 8
provides for an
appeal limited to dismissal, removal or compulsory

retirement. However, this Court in the decision in
13
Shashi Gaur v. NCT of Delhi
and others9 held that an

appeal lies under
Section 8(3)
also against termination

otherwise. The only exception carved out is termination

of service upon the service having come to an end by

efflux of time. We may in this context, no doubt, notice

what this Court noticed in Paragraph 8. It reads as

under:
“8. In this view of the matter, we are
        persuaded to take the view that under sub-
        section (3) of
Section 8
of the Act, an appeal
        is provided against an order not only of
        dismissal, removal or reduction in rank, which
        obviously is a major penalty in a disciplinary
        proceeding, but also against a termination,
        otherwise except, where the service itself
        comes to an end by efflux of time for which
        the   employee   was    initially   appointed.
        Therefore, we do not find any infirmity with
        the order of the High Court not entertaining
        the writ application in exercise of its
        discretion though we do not agree with the
        conclusion that availability of an alternative
        remedy ousts the jurisdiction of the court
        under
Article 226
of the Constitution.”
11. We will proceed further on the basis that the
provisions will apply across the board as found by the

full Bench, which includes minority institutions.
9   (2001) 10 SCC 445
14
12. The first question, we must decide is, whether the
argument of the respondent that
Sections 8
and
11
do

not contain any express provision for ordering back

wages is correct? In this context we must also bear in

mind the contention of the appellant that the law giver

has created a right of appeal before the Tribunal and

it is to act armed with the wide powers of the court

of appeal under
the Code of Civil Procedure
. Section

107 of the Code of civil Procedure, reads as follows:
“(1) Subject to such conditions and limitations
     as may be prescribed, an Appellate Court shall
     have power-
(a) to determine a case finally;
(b) to remand a case;
(c) to frame issues and refer them for trial;
(d) to take additional evidence or to require
     such evidence to be taken.
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the Appellate Court
     shall have the same powers and shall perform
     as nearly as may be the same duties as are
     conferred and imposed by this Code on Courts
     of original jurisdiction in respect of suits
     instituted therein.”
13. The appellant lays store by the said provision.
14. As far as
Section 8(2)
is concerned, the provision
proscribes dismissal, removal or reduction in rank or

the termination otherwise of an employee except with
15
the prior approval of the Director. This is indeed to

safeguard the right of the employee.
Section 8(3)
gives

the right to an employee limited under the statute to

one who has been dismissed, removed or reduced in rank

to file an appeal before the Tribunal constituted under
Section 11
. We have already noticed the view taken by

this court in
Shashi Gaur
(supra) that any employee

whose service is terminated except as declared therein

and not limited to what is provided in the statute can

challenge     the    termination        before    the     Tribunal

constituted    under
Section    11
.     The    Tribunal    is   to

consist of a person who has held the Office as District

Judge   or    any    equivalent    Judicial        Officer.       Any

indication about power of the Tribunal is to be found

in
Sections 11(5)
and
11(6)
.
Section 11(5)
purports to

empower the Tribunal to regulate its own procedure.
Section 11(6)
is perhaps more apposite and declares

that the Tribunal for the purpose of disposal of an

appeal has the power vested in the court of appeal by
the Code of Civil Procedure
and shall also have the

power   to    stay   operation     of    the     order.     We    may

incidentally also notice that Rule 120(3) declares that
16
an employee of a recognised private school who is

aggrieved by any order imposing on him the penalty of

compulsory retirement or any minor penalty may appeal

to the Tribunal.
15.      As far as Section 107 of the Code of civil

Procedure is concerned, it declares that subject to

such conditions and limitations that may be prescribed,

the appellate court has the power to determine a case

finally. It is also blessed with the power to remand a

case. It can also frame issues and refer the issues for

trial.    It   is    also   authorised    to   take   additional

evidence or permit the evidence to be taken. Section

107(2) declares that the appellate court would have the

same power and perform nearly the same duty as are

conferred      and   imposed   on   the   courts   of   original

jurisdiction in respect of suits instituted therein.
16.   Reliance placed on
Section 107
of the CPC, if

inspiration is sought to be drawn to the emphasis

supplied to the words “may decide the case finally”,

to find that there is express power to decide on the

question of emoluments as well, does not appeal to us.

The purport of the provisions in Section 107 is to only
17
declare that the Appellate Court has a wide range of

options, which include the power to finally decide the

case. This should be understood to only mean that there

is also a power to remand the case or to grant other

relief, which may not result in the final disposal of

the case. This cannot be understood as meaning that the

Appellate Court has the express power to grant the

relief of back-wages or to decide upon the question as

to whether the period of absence should be treated as

duty. This is the power coupled with a duty which is

squarely vested with the        Management. The right of

appeal under
Section 8
is given with respect to the

order of termination which has been interpreted by this

Court in
Shashi Gaur
(supra) to include all kinds of

termination except for termination which occurs by

efflux of time. The argument of the appellant is that

the disciplinary authority is to be treated as the

original authority and, therefore, the tribunal in

terms of
Section 107(2)
of the Code of the Civil

Procedure must be likened to an Appellate Court and

what   is   more,   the   disciplinary   authority   must   be

equated with the Trial Court. Therefore, there is power
18
to   award    back      wages.    The   comparison     between    an

Appellate Court and the Trial Court and the vesting of

powers on the Appellate Court in terms of the power

available to the Trial Court may not be an appropriate

and apposite analogy when it comes to the tribunal

considering an appeal against the order of disciplinary

authority under
Section 8
. The tribunal will no doubt

have the power to pronounce on the legality of the

original order, the impugned order of termination and

also order reinstatement.
The events subsequent to the

termination which have been recognized as relevant in

cases including
Deepali Gundu
(supra) which decision

has been relied upon by the appellant himself may not

strictly     be   the   subject    matter   of   the   appeal    for

reasons, which we will more elaborately dwell upon. We

repel the argument of the appellant.
17. Before we proceed further, we must pause and
enquire as to whether the lawgiver elsewhere has been

more expressive in the matter of grant of specific

power in the area of dispute.
In
Deepali Gundu Surwase

v. Kranti Junior Adhyapak Mahavidyalaya (D.Ed
.) and
19
Others10, this Court had the occasion to deal with a

case that arose under the
Maharashtra Employees of

Private School (Conditions of Service) Regulation Act,

1977
.     It   is     worthwhile     to      notice   that
Section    9
provided for an appeal before the Tribunal under the

said Act.
Section 10
purported to set out the general

power and procedure of the Tribunal. It, inter alia,

declared that the Tribunal would have the same power

as are vested in Appellate Court under
the Code of

Civil     Procedure
.        This   is     besides     any   other   power

conferred on it by or under the Act.
Section 11
provided       for    the   powers      of   the    Tribunal   to    give

appropriate          reliefs   and      directions.
Section     11(2)
expressly provided that the Tribunal, may inter alia,

direct the management to give arrears of emoluments to

the employee for such period as it may specify. It was

also provided further with the power to give such other

reliefs to the employee, inter alia. Apart from the

fact that provisions similar to Rule 121 is not seen

reflected in
the said judgment
, what makes the Judgment

relevant is that this court had before it a law which


10   (2013) 10 SCC 324
20
provided for the right of appeal before the Tribunal

and which expressly conferred power on the Tribunal to

grant the relief of arrears of emoluments. Such a

provision is conspicuous by its absence in
Section 11
of the Act. It is on the conspectus of the said

provisions that this Court proceeded to lay down the

principles in regard to the award of the back wages.

This Court, inter alia, laid down follows:
“38.2. The aforesaid rule is subject to the
     rider that while deciding the issue of back
     wages, the adjudicating authority or the court
     may take into consideration the length of
     service of the employee/workman, the nature of
     misconduct, if any, found proved against the
     employee/workman, the financial condition of
     the employer and similar other factors.
38.3. Ordinarily, an employee or workman whose
     services are terminated and who is desirous of
     getting back wages is required to either plead
     or at least make a statement before the
     adjudicating authority or the court of first
     instance that he/she was not gainfully employed
     or was employed on lesser wages. If the
     employer wants to avoid payment of full back
     wages, then it has to plead and also lead
     cogent    evidence    to    prove   that    the
     employee/workman was gainfully employed and
     was getting wages equal to the wages he/she was
     drawing prior to the termination of service.
This is so because it is settled law that the
     burden of proof of the existence of a
21
particular fact lies on the person who makes a
             positive averment about its existence. It is
             always easier to prove a positive fact than to
             prove a negative fact. Therefore, once the
             employee shows that he was not employed, the
             onus lies on the employer to specifically plead
             and prove that the employee was gainfully
             employed   and   was   getting   the  same   or
             substantially similar emoluments.”
18. We              are   conscious   of   the   fact   that   the

jurisdiction of an appellate court is not to be

construed in a pedantic manner. In fact, the effort

of the Court must be to not abridge the power of the

appellate court.
In
Shanmugam v. Commissioner
for

Registration11 , no doubt, the Privy Council held as

follows:
“It is argued that the Act does not contain
             the “express provision” required by the
             Interpretation    Ordinance    to   make    it
             applicable.    Their Lordships do not agree.
             Upon the meaning of the words “express
             provision” counsel relied upon in re Meredith
             and stated that it must be provision the
             applicability of which did not arise by
             inference.    He argued that there was no
             “express provision” as no reference had been
             made to pending proceedings. Their Lordships
             are of the view that it is correct to state
             that expression provision is provision the
             applicability of which does not arise by
             inference. The applicability, however of the
             provision under discussion to the present case
11
(1962) 3 LR 200 PC
22
does not arise by inference; it arises directly
     from the language used.     The fact that the
     language used is wide and comprehensive and
     covers many points other than the one
     immediately under discussion does not make it
     possible to say that its application can arise
     by inference only. To be “express proivision”
     with regard to something it is not necessary
     that that thing should be specially mentioned;
it is sufficient that it is directly covered
     by the language however broad the language may
     be which covers it so long as the applicability
     arises directly from the language used and not
     be inference therefrom. The argument fails.”

                                   (Emphasis supplied)
19. The   decision   in
Nalla     Karumburu    Kayambu

Shanmugam
(supra), arose as an appeal from the Supreme

Court of Ceylon, dismissing an appeal from an Order of

the Commissioner, refusing to register the appellant

as a citizen of Ceylon. The relevant law insisted upon

certain conditions to be fulfilled. The refusal was

based on the appellant’s wife not having resided in

Ceylon as required and the appellant had not satisfied

the requirement that he was permanently settled in

Ceylon. The application of the appellant was made in

July, 1951. The provision relating to the residence of

the wife was, according to the applicant, inapplicable
23
as it was made in the year 1952. However, it was given

retrospective effect as follows.
“The amendments effected by the preceding
      sections of this Act shall be deemed to have
      come into force on the date appointed under
Section   1
of   the   principal   Act;   and
      accordingly, but subject to the provisions of
      Sub-section (3) of this section, the principal
      Act shall be deemed on and after that date to
      have had effect, and shall have effect, in like
      manner as though it had on that date been
      amended in the manner provided by this Act.”
20.   The applicant therein sought support from the

following provision which formed the basis for the

discussion we have referred to:
“6(3) Whenever any written law repeals either
      in whole or part a former written law, such
      repeal shall not, in the absence of any express
      provision to that effect, affect or be deemed
      to have affected –
(c) any action, proceeding, or thing pending
      or incompleted when the repealing written law
      comes into operation, but every such action,
      proceeding, or thing may be carried on and
      completed as if there had been no such repeal.”
21. We would think that it may not be apposite to draw
any support from
the said decision
. It is clear that

in the facts and on a conspectus of the provisions

involved therein, the principle, as to whether there

is an express provision, was applied, it is a matter
24
to be decided on the inevitable effect flowing from the

width of the words used. It is not a case where the

court countenanced presence of express provisions on

the basis of an inference which method is expressly

frowned upon. In this case, we are dealing with the

case of express powers with a Statutory Tribunal. We

are of the view that having regard to the words used

in
Section 11(6)
of the Act, it may not be appropriate

to describe the provision as conferring express power

with the Tribunal to pass an award of back wages. We

feel reinforced in our findings by noticing how, in a

similar legislation, a Lawgiver has expressly conferred

such powers on the       Tribunal. We would,    therefore,

conclude that we cannot but find that the respondent

is right in contending that
Section 8
read with
Section

11
of the Act do not confer an express power with the

Tribunal to order back wages.
22. In this regard, we may at once notice the case of
the   appellant   that   Fundamental   Rule    54   has   no

application as the said Rule contemplates departmental

appeal whereas Rule 121 deals with an appeal to the

Tribunal.
25
23.
In this regard the appellant seeks support from
the decision of this Court in
Devendra Pratap Narain

Rai Sharma
(supra). Therein the Court considered the

case    which     involved   the     question    as   to     whether

Fundamental Rule 54 stood in the way of decree of the

civil court (that is the High Court in an appeal in the

suit which held that the appellant therein was not

afforded the opportunity to defend him before he was

visited    with     the   punishment     of     dismissal)    being

effectuated. The High Court declared the dismissal to

be void and that the appellant therein must be deemed

to be in service.         Fundamental Rule 54 is essentially

in substance pari materia with Rule 121 with which we

are dealing with.         In the facts, this Court held as

follows:
“..This rule has no application to cases like
       the present in which the dismissal of a public
       servant is declared invalid by a civil court
       and he is reinstated. This rule, undoubtedly
       enables the State Government to fix the pay of
       a public servant whose dismissal is set aside
       in a departmental appeal.    But in this case
       the order of dismissal was declared invalid in
       a civil suit. The effect of the decree of the
       civil suit was that the appellant was never to
       be deemed to have been lawfully dismissed from
       service and the order of reinstatement was
       superfluous. The effect of the adjudication of
26
the civil courts is to declare that the
      appellant had been wrongfully prevented from
      attending to his duties as a public servant.
      It would not in such a contingency be open to
      the authority to deprive the public servant of
      the remuneration which he would have earned had
      he been permitted to work.”
24. The     contention    of   the    appellant      is    that    the

respondent cannot be permitted to rely upon Rule 121

for   the    reason    that    no     departmental        appeal    is

contemplated under the Rules and what is contemplated

is only an appeal to the Tribunal. We are unable to

accept the contention of the appellant. What Rule 54

undoubtedly contemplates is a re-instatement on the

basis of an order passed in an appeal or other remedy

under the Service Rules. We may describe them as a

departmental remedy. Fundamental Rule 54 has been found

inapplicable    in
Devendra      Pratap    Narain      Rai   Sharma
(supra) when it was the civil court which declared the

dismissal as non est for non-compliance with natural

justice. Rule 121, in fact, specifically contemplates

re-instatement    of     the   employee      whose   services      are

terminated on the basis of the decision in an appeal

and what is most important is the very premise of the

re-instatement is the decision in an appeal and it is
27
beyond dispute that the lawgiver has contemplated an

appeal only to the Tribunal constituted under Section
11.
In other words, unlike the position in
Devendra

Pratap Narain Rai Sharma
(supra), where the court had

to deal with the decree of a civil court, which was

outside the scope of Rule 54, in a case covered by Rule

121, the Managing Committee is to act thereunder only

when there is re-instatement necessitated by an order

of the Tribunal under
Section 11
in an appeal. In other

words, a departmental appeal under fundamental Rule 54

is to be conflated to an appeal under
Section 11
in the

case of Rule 121.
25. The next question which would arise is whether
there is merit in the argument of the appellant that

Rule 121 is to be found as ultra vires the
Section 11
of the Act. It is not in dispute that the appellant has

not laid any challenge to Rule 121. However, he would

contend that this Court is armed with necessary power,

even in the absence of any challenge, to hold that Rule

121 is ultra vires.
In this regard, he sought support

from
Bharathidasan University and another
(supra). In

the said case, this Court was dealing with the question
28
as to whether Regulations (Subordinate Legislation)

framed by AICTE could oblige even a university to

obtain prior approval. The contention of the appellant-

University was that the
AICTE Act
in question made a

distinction           between        Technical      Institution           and

Universities. The offensive Regulations, were found to

be specifically violative of the power conferred under
Section     23
to        make     regulations     subject       to     the

limitations       which       were     contained     in    specific       and

unambiguous       language.          The    definition     of     the    word

“Technical Institution” excluded a university. Special

care was made whenever the University was within the

contemplation         of     the     lawgiver.     It     was     in    clear

violation    of       the    limitation      on    the    power    to   make

regulations, namely, that the AICTE could not make any

regulation       to    bind        Universities,     inter      alia,     the

regulation       in    question       was   made   and    it    was     while

dealing with the said case, this Court held that it may

not be necessary to specifically challenge subordinate

legislation. The decision must not be understood as

laying down the principle that the court may lightly

depart from the ordinary rule that when a law is
29
questioned    as   ultra    vires    and,   therefore,

unconstitutional, a proper challenge must be mounted

against the same. The maker of the law must be a party

before the court. We may notice in this regard that

under the Act, the rule-making power is conferred on

the Administrator under
Section 28
. A perusal of the

party array would reveal that the Administrator is

conspicuous by his absence.
In fact, in the decision

relied upon by the appellant-
Bharathidasan University

and another
(supra), the Authority, which made the

regulation, which was found to be ultra vires, was the

respondent.
26.   Even otherwise, it may be difficult to find that

this is a case where we could hold in the absence of

express and exclusive power which is conferred on the

Tribunal to make an order for payment of emoluments

that Rule 121 which clothes the Managing Committee with

the said power, is ultra vires.
27.   Let us now analyse Rule 121 and also the context

provided by the neighbouring provisions. As we have

already noticed Rule 117 provides for penalties which

includes the four major penalties. Rule 120 lays the
30
procedure for imposing the penalty. Against the major

penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement,

the law contemplates an appeal before the Tribunal

constituted under
Section 8
read with
Section 11
. What

Rule   121    provides        for,   is   the    authority       with   the

Managing Committee to consider and make two specific

orders. Now the question will arise is, at what stage

is the said orders to be passed and what is the nature

of the order to be passed apart from how it is to be

passed. The question will further arise as to whether

it   is   a    discretionary         power      or    whether    the    law

contemplates a mandatory duty. In our view, Rule 121

enshrines the principle of power coupled with duty.

This   conclusion        is    inevitable       on    account     of    two

reasons.      In   the   first       place,     the    Rule-maker       has

employed language that the Managing Committee ‘shall’

consider and pass specific order. The use of the word

‘shall’       is   crucial.          It   would        require     strong

circumstances provided by the context, the purpose of

the law, the consequences that would follow to dilute

the mandatory consequences that ordinarily flow from

the deliberate choice of the word ‘shall’. Far from the
31
context providing any material to the contrary, the

setting of Rule 121, the purpose of the Rule and the

consequences        of   not      giving    a      mandatory     flavour

overwhelmingly indicate that the lawgiver has made it

an    inflexible     duty      on   the    part     of    the    Managing

Committee to pass an order if the elements declared in

Rule   121    are    present.       In    other     words,      where   an

employee, who has been dismissed, removed or compulsory

retired challenges his termination in an appeal which

must   be    understood      as     an    appeal    to    the    Tribunal

constituted under
Section 11
of the Act and he is re-

instated, then it is not merely an enabling provision

which undoubtedly it is, in the sense that it confers

a power on the Managing Committee but we would go

further and hold that it becomes the duty of the

Managing Committee to consider and pass an order. Any

other view would put the employee at the mercy of the

employer.
28.    Now coming to what would constitute the subject

matter   of   the    order     to    be    passed,       Rule   121(1)(a)

contemplates that the Managing Committee must consider

and pass an order and provide for salary and allowances
32
to be paid to the reinstated employees. The salary and

allowances    is   to   be   provided   for    the   period   the

employee remained absent from duty. This would include

his absence from duty caused by his suspension prior

to his dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement.

The   next   specific   matter      which   should   engage   the

attention of the Managing Committee is as to whether

the reinstated employees must be treated as on duty

during the period of absence. Rule 121(2) confers a

power with the Managing Committee to consider the

question as to whether ‘in its opinion’, the employee

has been fully exonerated. The plain meaning of this

provision is that when the order passed by the Tribunal

directing reinstatement, is implemented, the Managing

Committee is duty bound to look into the proceeding

culminating in the order of the Tribunal and find

whether the Tribunal has fully exonerated the employee

in question. If it is so found, the employee is to be

paid full salary and allowances.            The proviso to Rule

121(2) empowers the Managing Committee to come to a

conclusion that the employee is guilty of delaying the

proceedings instituted against him. It can be done only
33
after   giving      a    reasonable       opportunity      to    make   a

representation, and after considering the version of

the employee. It can direct that the employee need be

paid only such allowances as it finds supported by

reasons in writing for the period of such delay. This

is subject to the limitations which are carved out in

Rule 121(3).
29. A perusal of Rule 121 would reveal that the power
coupled with the duty will come into play only after

the order of the Tribunal directing reinstatement is

accepted by the Management. This we say for the reason

that Rule 121 speaks about the employee who had been

dismissed,     removed         or      compulsory    retired      being

reinstated by the Management. Of course, Rule 121 would

also apply if but for his retirement or superannuation,

the employee would have been reinstated. Both these

consequences     will         follow     only   if   the      order     of

reinstatement of the Tribunal becomes final. In other

words, if the order of the Tribunal is under challenge

and   the   stage       has   not   arrived     where   the     Managing

Committee actually reinstates or would have reinstated

but for his retirement, Rule 121 would not apply. We
34
are not diluting for a moment the duty to implement the

order in the absence of an order from the competent

court permitting it being suspended.
30. At this juncture, we may notice the impact of Rule
115(4).     Under        Rule     115(4),       the        Lawgiver       has

contemplated as follows:
If the penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory

    retirement is set aside or rendered void by a

    decision of the court of law or Tribunal, it is

    provided       that    the    disciplinary         authority         on   a

    consideration          of    the   case    may     decide      to    hold

    further inquiry against the employee on the same

    allegations       on    which      the    original       penalty      was

    imposed.       The     Rule    provides         that    in    such        an

    eventuality, the employee shall be deemed to have

    been placed under suspension from the original

    order     of     dismissal,          removal       or        compulsory

    retirement.          The      proviso      mandates          that     the

    disciplinary          authority          cannot     order       further

    inquiry unless the penalty has been set aside

    purely on technical grounds. Now let us see the

    impact    of    this        Rule   qua    the     argument      of    the
35
appellant about the availability of power under
Section 11
to order back wages. In a case where

    Tribunal sets aside the penalty and it is done on

    a   technical    ground,   the   disciplinary    authority

    becomes entitled to launch further enquiry. Can

    the   Tribunal    order    the   payment   of   back   wages

    without giving an opportunity to the disciplinary

    authority to take a decision? Would Rule 115(4)

    then become ultra vires
Section 11
? We would think

    it would not be a reasonable interpretation to

    place on the Act and the Rules.
31. Now, let us consider the matter from another
perspective.
Section 8(3)
as also Rule 120(3) provide

for a right of appeal which right must be understood

in the light of the law declared by this Court as

expanded to include all cases of termination except

termination brought about by the efflux of time. [See

Shashi Gaur judgment]. The appeal is not filed against

the order of a Trial Court as such. No doubt, the power

available to the civil court under
the Code of Civil

Procedure
are showered upon the Tribunal. The Tribunal

is not clothed with specific powers to grant relief of
36
payment of the allowances. The Tribunal is also not

empowered to deal with the question as to whether the

employee must be treated as on duty for the period when

the employee remains absent on account of both the

absence, whether or not,          on account of         suspension

before the termination and compelled absence after the

penalty    is    imposed.   The   appellant     relies     on   the

judgment    of
Deepali   Gundu
(supra).   One    of    the

questions, which would fall for consideration, is the

question as to whether the              employee was     gainfully

employed   elsewhere    during     the    period   of    compelled

absence. The Tribunal is called upon to decide the

legality    and    correctness     of    the   penalty.    It   is

certainly entitled to act as an appellate body and come

to the conclusion that there was no basis either for

reasons which are technical or on the basis that no

case is made out even on merits to impose the penalty

against the employee. Should the Tribunal set aside the

penalty covered by Rule 121, it is always open to the

management to take recourse to remedies open to it.

The order of re-instatement does not become final.              The

employee remains absent undoubtedly on the basis of the
37
order obtained by the Management in the superior court.

What is relevant is the actual re-instatement under

Rule 121 which would set the stage for holding the

inquiry thereunder. The inquiry, it must be noticed is

not   merely   limited   to   the   question   of   pay   and

allowances. The management is given the powers coupled

with the duty to hold an inquiry and to pass an order

as to whether the employee must be found to be on duty

or not and for what period during his absence. The

Lawgiver has conferred a power with the management. The

use of the words “in its opinion” indicates that the

Managing Committee must apply its mind and consider all

aspects and take a view. This must, undoubtedly, be

done after putting the employee on notice. The employee

must be afforded an opportunity. The employee would be

in a position to point out that he was not employed

elsewhere. He would also be able to establish that he

was fully exonerated. We have noticed that the order

of the appellate authority in an appeal directing re-

instatement may not be final as it can be impugned in

the higher forum. We would, therefore, find that it may

not be appropriate or apposite to find that Rule 121
38
is in any manner ultra vires
Sections 8
and
11
of the

Act.      Properly    appreciated         and       implemented,      the

provisions     of    the    parent      Act   and    the    subordinate

legislation can be harmonized.
32. There is no express power with the Tribunal of the
kind which is present in the
Maharashtra Act
which fell

to   be   decided    in
Deepali      Gundu
(supra).      There   is

express     power    with    the     Managing       Committee    to   be

exercised at a particular point of time which arrives

when re-instatement is effected or re-instatement would

have followed but for retirement of the employee. Rule

121, in our view, while being an enabling provision

must also be interpreted as a case of power coupled

with a duty. The power must be exercised promptly and

without fail by the Managing Committee immediately

following the re-instatement of the employee which

would be the result of any voluntary order of re-

instatement     or   re-instatement,          which    is    inevitable

following     the    binding       orders     of     the    court.    The

management is duty bound to conduct an inquiry to pass

the orders contemplated under Rule 121(1)(a) and (b).

The presence of the words “in its opinion” do indicate
39
a   certain   amount    of     authority   with   the   Managing

Committee. This however, is not to be confused with any

right to act with arbitrariness or caprice. In other

words, it is duty bound to look into all the inputs

including the orders which are finally passed which led

to the re-instatement of the employee. It is duty bound

to act fairly. The question about the employee being

gainfully employed and the amount received till the

stage of reinstatement, is aptly gone into under Rule
121. After putting the employee on notice and giving

him an opportunity, the Managing Committee must provide

for the matters which are provided therein, namely Rule
121.
33. We cannot on a conspectus of the provisions and
the    discussion      about     the   context,    object   and

consequences that would flow, agree with the appellant,

that the Appellate Tribunal must be ceded implied

powers to assume the specific powers ceded to the

Managing Committee. While we are not averse to adopting

a liberal view when it comes to clothing an appellate

body to deal with matters arising in the proceeding in

a fair and effective manner, the scheme that we have
40
found and the consequences that ensue dissuade us from

vesting such implied powers. It involves rendering Rule

121   otiose   and   redundant.   It   would   have   been   a

different matter if the rule did not exist and more

importantly, we did not unravel a distinct scheme and

purpose.
34. The power coupled with duty takes life not only
upon there being an order of reinstatement in an appeal

but upon the Managing Committee proceeding to implement

the direction to reinstate, issued by the Tribunal. If

the power is to be exercised by the Tribunal apart from

the fact that there would be situations, such as,

contemplated in Rule 115 of the Rules, which would

render both the Rule and right given to the Management

under the said Rule, meaningless and futile, it would

involve the Tribunal being called upon to exercise the

duty and the power, which is best exercised by the

Managing Committee.
41
35. We are inclined to take the view that Rule 121 is
part of a scheme, which consists of both
Sections 8
and
11
of the Act as also Rules 115(4) and 121. The Rules

have been enacted in the same year within eight months,

as noticed by the High Court. The Administrator, who

has authored the Rules under
Section 28
of the Act, has

produced the Rules, which are found to be in harmony

with        the     Act.    We   are     unable   to    cull      out   any

inconsistency between
Section 8
read with
Section 11
on the one hand and Rule 121 on the other. While we are

not maintaining for a moment that the Court is rendered

powerless or not bound by a duty to unravel the mind

of     the        Legislature    and     strike   at    a    subordinate

Legislation, where it is ultra vires, we do not find

any scope for applying the said principle in the facts.

In this regard, while we are conscious of the view

taken that subordinate legislation cannot control the

interpretation to be placed on the parent enactment,

it     is    not      the    same   as      holding    irrespective      of

irreconcilable              differences       between       the     parent

enactment and the subordinate legislation not been

present, full play should not be given to the latter.
42
36. As far as the question of the delay in the employee
getting relief on the interpretation placed by the Full

Bench in the impugned Judgment, we are of the view

that, though attractive, the argument must fail. While

we would not be loath to place an interpretation, which

is in agreement with the appellant’s appeal to us, we

feel that for the reasons, which we have given, the

argument of the appellant is in the teeth of a scheme,

which is intended to be worked in accordance with a

value judgement, which reaches justice to both sides.

Undoubtedly, we make it clear that there should not be

any room for needless and unjustifiable delay on the

part of the Management in concluding the proceedings

under Rule 121. This is different from saying, however,

that such proceedings can be dispensed with or the

Tribunal can or should be burdened with the task, which

is aptly and appropriately timed and positioned to be

performed by the Managing Committee.
37. We cannot be unmindful of the principle canvassed
by the learned Senior Counsel for the respondent that

the view of the Full Bench, in the impugned Judgment,

is a view which upholds a line of reasoning, which has
43
largely held the field for a long period of time. While

it is not a ground to not overturn a view, which is

palpably erroneous, the view taken, if it is otherwise

a plausible view, must receive deference.
38.   No doubt, the appellant has a case that in view

of the fact in
Shashi Gaur
(supra), this Court enlarged

the scope of the appellate remedy under
Section 11
to

cases of termination other than, what is provided in

the Rule 121 and, what is more,
Section 8
itself. He

would submit that as Rule 121 is not applicable to

cases which are not enumerated in Rule 121, it would

create a situation where, in cases of termination not

covered by Rule 121, the Tribunal would have the power

to grant back-wages. Whereas the Tribunal would have

the said power, in cases not covered by Rule 121. This

creates an anomalous position, it is contended.
39.
In the impugned Judgment, the High Court has
proceeded to hold that in view of the expanded right

of appeal based on the Judgment of this Court in
Shashi

Gaur
(supra), the Managing Committee would have the

power to make the specific order in respect of any

termination in the light of the Judgment of this Court
44
in
Shashi Gaur
(supra). In the case of penalty of

reduction in rank (which is also a major penalty), the

High Court has brought out the following distinction:
“23. The learned Single Judge has reasoned
        that it would be anomalous to hold that the
        Delhi School Tribunal would have the power
        to direct full wages to be paid to an
        employee who has been reduced in rank but
        has been restored to the original rank but
        would have no power to pass such an order
        if an employee is reinstated in service. The
        reasoning by the learned Single Judge
        overlooks a very vital and critical fact
        which clearly distinguishes cases of a
        penalty of reduction in rank being set aside
        and the rank being restore.cl vis-a-vis a
        penalty of dismissal 1 removal or compulsory
        retirement being set aside and reinstatement
        ordered. In the former situation the
        employee would be working in the school,
        albeit at a lower post and there would be
        no case warranting an inquiry to be held of
        the kind contemplated by Rule 121 of the
        Delhi School Education Rules, 1973 i.e.
        whether the employee was gainfully employed
        somewhere else. But where a penalty of a
        kind where secession takes place is passed,
        the employee has not to report to the
        employer and may be gainfully employed
        somewhere else.”


    We would take the example of a termination of

service, which was explicitly before this Court in
Shashi Gaur
(supra). The termination of the employee

therein was ordered as he was not possessed of the
45
requisite qualification.             We proceed further that in

such a case, the employee is placed under suspension.
An    inquiry   is      also      held    and   the   services   are

terminated. We further proceed on the basis that in

terms of what is permitted under
Shashi Gaur
(supra),

he files an appeal before the Tribunal under
Section 8
and   obtains      an     order    for    reinstatement.    In   the

meantime, we further take it that it is a case where

he is gainfully employed. The question would arise in

his case also as to the pay and allowances to be

granted. The question would further arise as to whether

his period of absence should be treated as duty.
This

situation arises in view of the interpretation placed

in    the   case     of
Shashi       Gaur
(supra).   In    such

circumstances, in view of the interpretation placed by

this Court creating the situation, by which an appeal

is permitted against an order of termination, other

than specifically mentioned in, both
Section 8(3)
and

Rule 121, we are not in a position to find fault with

the view taken by the Full Bench.
46
40. The upshot of the above discussion is that we find
no merit in the Appeal and the Appeal stands dismissed

with no order as to costs.
………………………………………………………………………J.
                        [K.M. JOSEPH]




                        ………………………………………………………………………J.
                        [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]

NEW DELHI;
DATED: JULY 28, 2022.
47