[Cites
50
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Abu Salem Abdul Kayyum Ansari vs The State Of Maharashtra on 11 July, 2022
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
REPORTABLE


                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 679 OF 2015


                         ABU SALEM ABDUL KAYYUM ANSARI                             …Appellant

                                                          Versus


                         THE STATE OF MAHARASHTRA                          …Respondent

                         With
                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.180/2018



                                                   JUDGMENT
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
1.    Crime and punishment is something which has agitated the judicial

                           minds. Punishment cannot be disproportionately high or low. It should

                           not be oppressive, but should serve the purpose of deterrence against

                           crimes in a society along with a sense of justice to the victim and their
Signature Not Verified     family. This is a delicate balance, which has to be kept in mind – an
Digitally signed by
RASHMI DHYANI
Date: 2022.07.11
17:21:57 IST
Reason:
1
aspect recently discussed in the judgment of this Court in
Jaswinder

   Singh (Dead) Through Legal Representative v. Navjot Singh Sidhu &

   Ors.1 As
was observed in the said case, the principle of just punishment

   is the bedrock of sentencing in respect of a criminal offence. We are

   faced with a somewhat similar scenario though with certain crucial

   nuances, which have to be considered.
Facts :
2.      Abu Salem Abdul Kayyum Ansari has a history – and not a

   palatable one at all. He has been a part of the crime syndicate as is

   obvious from the facts of the two criminal appeals before us. Criminal

   Appeal No.679/2015 emanates from threatening a party in a civil dispute

   relating to a property and extracting money, which under threat was

   conceded by the litigating party, i.e., Jain brothers. On failure to make

   the payment of some instalments of the threat money, one of the Jain

   brothers, i.e., Pradeep Jain, was murdered on 07.03.1995. As a result the

   crime was registered at D.N. Nagar Police Station under Sections 302,

   307, 452, 506(ii) read with
Section 120-B
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860

   (hereinafter referred to as the ‘
IPC
’), read with
Sections 5
,
27
of the


12022 SCC OnLine SC 652
2
Arms Act, 1959
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘
Arms Act
’) read with
Sections 3(2)(i)
,
3(2)(ii)
,
3(5)
and
5
of the Terrorist and Disruptive

Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘TADA’).
3.    The second Criminal Appeal No.180/2018, deals with the factual

scenario where the very foundation of the civil society of our country

was threatened and disrupted by causing bomb explosions at vital

Government installations, public and crowded places in Mumbai and its

suburbs (commonly known as the ‘Bombay Bomb Blasts’). Loss of life

and loss of properties in enormous amount was the result. The appellant

was alleged to have stored, distributed and transported illegally smuggled

AK-56 rifles, hand grenades as well as boxes of magazines from the

godown in Gujarat to Mumbai in a Maruti van which had specially

crafted secret cavities and all this was done after conspiratorial meetings

relating to the blasts. In order to evade the penal consequences of his

actions, the appellant left Mumbai and later entered Portugal under an

assumed name on a Pakistani passport, which reflects from where the

conspiracy and support may have emanated.
4.    The appellant could not be arrested for his crime having moved out
3
of the country during the course of the investigation and, thus, the

   Designated Court, Mumbai issued Proclamation No.15777 of 1993

   against him on 15.09.1993. As the appellant did not appear before the

   court, he was declared as a proclaimed offender on 15.10.1993. He was

   shown as an absconder in the chargesheet dated 04.11.1993. Thereafter,

   common charge of conspiracy was framed by the Designated Court,

   Mumbai against all the accused persons on 10.04.1995. The Designated

   Court, Mumbai issued a non-bailable warrant against the appellant and

   Interpol Secretariat General, Lyons, France also issued a Red Corner

   notice for his arrest on 18.09.2002.
Detention in Republic of Portugal:
5.    The appellant having travelled on a fake passport to the Republic

   of Portugal was charged with the same and convicted and sentenced on

   18.09.2002. The said sentence would have been completed on

   18.03.2007 without taking into consideration any remission or

   commutation or conditional release. The fact remains that the appellant

   served the sentence from 18.09.2002 to 12.10.2005 when he was granted

   conditional release for the remaining sentence.
4
6.    It is during this period of detention that on 18.09.2002, the

  appellant was also formally detained (already in custody) by the

  Portuguese Police in Lisbon on the basis of the Red Corner notice. To

  complete the period of detention, he was again imprisoned from

  12.10.2005 till 10.11.2005 for a month when he was handed over to the

  Indian authorities.
Extradition request and Sovereign assurance by the Government of India:
7.    The Government of India through Mr. Omar Abdullah, who was

  the then Minister of State for External Affairs, submitted a requisition for

  extradition dated 13.12.2002 to Portugal in nine criminal cases relying on

  the International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings

  and on an assurance of reciprocity as applicable in international law.
Along with the requisition, relevant facts of the cases were enclosed in

  the form of duly sworn affidavits of the concerned police officers along

  with supporting documents.      Subsequently, the Government of India

  issued a notification under
Section 3(1)
of the Extradition Act, 1962

  (hereinafter referred to as the ‘
Extradition Act
’) applying the provisions

  of the
Extradition Act
to Portugal with effect from 13.12.2002.
5
8.    The Government of India further gave a solemn sovereign

assurance on 17.12.2002 through the then Deputy Prime Minister, Shri

L.K. Advani, to the effect that the Government will exercise its powers

conferred by the Indian laws to ensure that if extradited by Portugal for

trial in India, the appellant would not be visited by death penalty or

imprisonment for a term beyond 25 years. The assurance reproduced
Section 34C
of the Extradition Act mandating that in case of extradition

of a fugitive criminal involved in the commission of offences punishable

with death in India, on his surrender, he shall not be liable for death

penalty and shall be liable for punishment of life imprisonment in place

of death penalty, for the said offence. The sovereign assurance also

referred to
Article 72(1)
of the Constitution of India (hereinafter referred

to as the ‘Constitution’) to emphasise that the President of India has

power to grant pardon, reprieve, respite, or remit punishment or suspend,

remit or commute the sentence of any person convicted of any offence.

Lastly, the assurance also mentioned that
Sections 432
and
433
of the

Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the

‘
Cr.P.C
.), which confer power on the Government to commute the

sentence of life imprisonment to a term not exceeding 14 years. In a
6
way, the relevant constitutional and legal provisions were brought to the

notice of Portugal to give them confidence that there were provisions in

India which would ensure that the commitments given would be adhered

to.
9.         The Ministry of Justice, Portugal by its order dated 28.03.2003,

admitted the appellant’s extradition for offences such as, inter alia,

Section 120-B read with
Section 302
of the IPC and
Section 3(2)
of the

TADA. The ministerial order, however, declined extradition for offences

such as
Sections 201
,
212
,
324
,
326
, and
427
of the IPC,
Sections 3(4)
,
5
and
6
of the TADA,
Sections 4
and
5
of the Explosive Substances Act,

1908 (hereinafter referred to the ‘
Explosive Substances Act
’),
Section 9-

B
of the Explosive Act, 1984 and
Sections 25
(1-A) and (1-B) of the Arms

Act.
10.        The Ambassador of India in Lisbon gave another solemn assurance

on 25.05.2003 that if the appellant is extradited, then:
i.      he will not be prosecuted for offences other than those for

      which the extradition was sought, and
      ii.   he will not be extradited to any third country.
7
11.   The appellant preferred an appeal against the aforesaid ministerial

       order dated 28.03.2003 before the Court of Appeal, Lisbon and the said

       Court vide order dated 14.07.2004 allowed the appellant’s extradition for

       offences mentioned in the request, except those which are punishable

       with death or life imprisonment.       The Supreme Court of Portugal

       confirmed the aforesaid order of the Court of Appeal, Lisbon on

       27.01.2005 in view of the assurance given by the Government of India

       that the person extradited would not be visited with death penalty or

       imprisonment for a term beyond 25 years.          The Courts in Portugal

       granted extradition for the following offences:
S.No.                       Offence                         Maximum
                                                            Punishment
i.           The offence of criminal conspiracy Death penalty in the
             punishable under
Section 120-B
IPC       present case
ii.          Murder punishable under Section 302 Death Penalty
IPC
iii.         Attempt to murder punishable under Imprisonment for life
Section 307
IPC
iv.          Mischief punishable under Section 435 Imprisonment for 7
IPC
years
v.           Mischief by fire or explosive punishable Imprisonment for life
             under
Section 436
IPC
vi.          Offence punishable under
Section 3(2)
of Death penalty in this
             the
TADA Act
case
vii.         Offence punishable under Section 3(3) of Life Imprisonment
             the TADA Act
viii.        Offence punishable under Section 3 of Life Imprisonment
             the Explosive Substances Act, 1908
8
ix.         Offence punishable under Section 4 of Imprisonment for 10
            the Prevention of Damage to Public years
            Property Act
The Supreme Court of Portugal while emphasising on the “principle of

      speciality” stated that it cannot be suspected that the appellant will be

      subjected to trial for committing offences not included in the extradition

      request.
12.   The consequence of the failure of the Indian Government to fulfil

      its undertaking to impose a sentence as submitted in its assurance was

      clearly specified in the aforesaid order dated 27.01.2005, i.e., Portugal

      either officiously or upon the interested party’s request, could timely

      demand devolution of the appellant. The Court specifically observed in

      para 12.2 of its judgment that the Government of India cannot guarantee

      that the sentence as assured by the Government of India will be applied

      by the Courts in India, in view of the Indian judicial system where the

      Courts are independent of the Executive. Hence, the Court stated that it

      could only request a guarantee that should such sentence be imposed, in

      order to restrict the sentence, it will resort to all legal measures available,

      the description of which had already been set out in the request letter. On
9
13.06.2005, the appellant’s appeal against this order dated 27.01.2005

   was rejected by the Constitutional Court of Portugal.
13.   The custody of the appellant was handed over to the Indian

   authorities on 10.11.2005, the appellant was extradited to India from

   Portugal on 11.11.2005 and was arrested on 24.11.2005. On 09.12.2005,

   the Designated Court, Mumbai altered the common charge of criminal

   conspiracy by adding the appellant’s name in the list of the accused

   persons before the court, by deleting his name from the list of absconding

   accused in the said charge. That brought to an end the saga of ensuring

   that the appellant is brought back to India and is tried and sentenced for

   what he had done.
History of Proceedings:
14.   It is not necessary in view of the limited pleas urged and examined

   in this case to get into a further detailed examination of facts and

   evidence. Suffice to say that by Criminal Appeal No. 990 of 2006, the

   appellant first assailed the order dated 13.06.2006 of the Designated

   Court, Mumbai, which had separated the trial of the appellant from the

   main trial as well as a prior order dated 18.03.2006 of the Designated
10
Court, Mumbai, where substantive charges were framed against the

appellant for different offences relating to the
IPC
and TADA. In

addition, Criminal Appeals Nos. 1142-1143 of 2007 were filed against

the order framing charges dated 16.04.2007. A writ petition was also filed

seeking quashing of charges and proceedings against him on the ground

that the trial for offences for which he has specifically not been

extradited is violative of the fundamental rights enshrined under
Article

21
of the Constitution. This was coupled with the appellant moving an

application before the Court of Appeal, Lisbon which was predicated on

the violation of the assurance given by India as he was sought to be tried

in India in violation of “principle of speciality”.
15.   The Court of Appeal in Lisbon passed an order dated 18.05.2007

while opining that it did not have the competence to order the devolution

of the appellant, observed that if the alleged violations were confirmed, it

could only justify the accountability of the State (India in this case) at an

international level, which does not depend on the action of any

Portuguese Court and adequate use of defence by the appellant under

Indian laws. On appeal to the Supreme Court of Portugal, the matter was

remitted to the Court of Appeal, Lisbon by an order dated 13.12.2007 to
11
enquire whether violation of the “principle of speciality” had taken place.

It further opined that if any violation did take place, the Court of Appeal,

Lisbon would extract all due consequences such as declaring the

termination of the authorisation for extradition, in which case the

presence of the appellant in India would have to be considered illegal.

However, the Court of Appeals, Lisbon considered it appropriate to defer

consideration of the matter till the Supreme Court of India passed a final

order in the aforementioned appeals and the writ petition. The Supreme

Court of India passed a common order dated 10.09.2010 with respect to

the aforementioned appeals and the writ petition and observed that

Portugal had not included certain offences for which charges had been

framed against the appellant by the Designated Court, Mumbai.

However, it opined that a bare reading of
Section 21
of the Extradition

Act indicated that the appellant could be tried for lesser offences, in

addition to the offences for which he had been extradited. These charges

made in addition were punishable with lesser punishment than the

offence for which he had been extradited and, thus, these lesser offences

could not be equated with the term “minor offence” as mentioned in
Section 222
of the Cr.P.C. The opinion given was that there had been no
12
violation of the “principle of speciality” and the solemn sovereign

assurance given by the Government of India in the letter by the Indian

Ambassador dated 25.05.2003.
16.   On the aforesaid opinion being delivered of the Supreme Court of

India, the Court of Appeal, Lisbon in its order dated 14.09.2011 held that

the authorisation granted for the appellant’s extradition ought to be

terminated.   It was also held that while not considering the limits

imposed by Portugal on the appellant’s extradition, India had violated the

“principle of speciality”. If the extradition for certain crimes was not

admissible in the ministerial order dated 28.03.2003 due to lapses of the

criminal cases, then India could not impute and try the appellant for

identical crimes at a subsequent time, even if it is well founded on

different facts. The Court further opined that Law 144/99 of 31 August

does not anticipate any specific consequences for violation of “principle

of speciality”, however, this did not prevent Portugal from calling for

intervention of instances of international jurisdiction, drawing due

political conclusions from the case, and reacting through political-

diplomatic channels, for which the judgment passed by the Portuguese

Courts would be relevant. However, crime punishable under
Section 3(3)
13
of the TADA had not been expressly or implicitly excluded by Portugal

in the appellant’s extradition and, thus, the same could be imputed on the

appellant without violation of “principle of speciality” laid down in
Article 16
of Law 144/99 of 31 August, which reads as under:
“Article 16 – Rule of Speciality
1. The person who, as a consequence ofan act of international
         cooperation appears in Portugal to participate in a penal
         procedure as a suspect, defendant or convicted person cannot
         be prosecuted, tried, detained or subjected to any other
         restriction of his freedom for a fact prior to his presence on
         national territory, other than the one which gives rise to the
         request for cooperation formulated by a Portuguese authority.
2. The person who, under the terms of the number above,
         appears before a foreign authority cannot be prosecuted,
         detained or tried or subjected to any other restriction of his
         freedom for a fact or conviction prior to his leaving the
         Portuguese territory other than those determined in the request
         for cooperation.
3. Before the transfer referred to in the number above is
         authorised, the State that formulates the request must provide
         the assurance required for the compliance with the rule of
         speciality.
4. The immunity referred to in this article ceases whenever:
a. the person under consideration has the possibility of
            leaving the Portuguese or foreign territory and does not do
            so within 45 days; or

            b. He voluntarily returns to one of those territories;
14
c. After earlier hearing the suspect, defendant or the
             convicted person, the State that authorises the transfer gives
             consent for the derogation of the rule of speciality.
5. The provisions of numbers 1 and 2 do not exclude the
         possibility of requesting by means of a new request for the
         extension of the cooperation to facts other than those that laid
         the foundation for the previous one, a request which will be
         submitted and prepared under the terms of this legal statute.
6. In the case referred to in the number above, the submission
         of proceedings containing the declarations of the person who
         benefits from the rule of speciality is mandatory.
7. In the event of the request being submitted to a foreign State,
         the cases referred to in the number above, are drawn up by the
         High Court situated in the place where the person who benefits
         from the rule of speciality resides or is present.”
17.   The Union of India filed an appeal before the Supreme Court of

Portugal, which was dismissed on 11.01.2012 as the Court observed that

the non-observance of the “principle of speciality” requires two orders of

consequences in the ambit of international relations – first, the mistrust

on a State that does not have a credible and reliable behaviour in its

international relations, and second, a discredit of the judicial power that

is used by the institution of extradition in duplicity manner, generating

doubts on the administration of justice. A further appeal before the

Constitutional Court of Portugal was also dismissed on 05.07.2012 and,
15
thus, the termination of appellant’s extradition attained finality. There

rests the story of the extradition proceedings in Portugal.
18.   However, the appellant filed Criminal Appeal Nos. 415-416 of

2012 before the Supreme Court of India challenging the order of the

Designated Court, Mumbai dated 08.11.2011, which had dismissed the

applications filed by the appellant for stay of all further proceedings in

view of the order dated 14.09.2011 passed by the Court of Appeals,

Lisbon treating the extradition order dated 28.03.2003 as having been

withdrawn. The abovementioned appeals were still pending when the

Central Bureau of Investigation (for short ‘CBI’) filed an application for

clarification/modification of the judgment and order dated 10.09.2010 of

the Supreme Court of India and prayed for permission to withdraw

certain charges levelled against the appellant. It was the submission of

the CBI that in the interest of comity of courts and united fight at

international level against global terrorism, the Government of India was

making further efforts through diplomatic talks and the additional

charges framed against the appellant might come as an impediment in

furthering such diplomatic talks. The application of the CBI was allowed

by the Supreme Court of India in terms of its order dated 05.08.2013 to
16
the extent of withdrawal of additional charges under
Sections 3(3)
,
5
and
6
of the TADA,
Sections 4(b)
and
5
of the Explosive Substances Act,
Sections 25
(1-A), (1-B)(a) read with
Section 387
of the Arms Act, as

well as
Section 9-B
of the Explosives Act, 1884. The Court observed

that the offences for which the appellant was extradited to India are grave

enough to award the appellant with maximum punishment and, therefore,

it would not be detrimental to any of the parties. This Court also held

that the ministerial order dated 28.03.2003 stands valid and effective in

the eyes of law and that the Portugal Courts had categorically stated that

the Portuguese law does not provide for any specific consequence for

violation of the “principle of speciality”.    Thus, the findings of the

Portugal Courts may not be construed as a direction to the Union of India

to return the appellant to Portugal but shall serve as a legal basis for the

Government of Portugal to seek return of the appellant through political

or diplomatic channels, which had not been done till that date according

to the then learned Attorney General. The Court also recorded the then

Attorney General’s assurance that they were in the process of

withdrawing other charges pending in various States against the

appellant, which were claimed to be in violation of the extradition order.
17
Thus, what the Government of India sought to do was to bring the legal

   process fully in conformity with the extradition order of Portugal albeit

   belatedly and the consequences of the termination of the appellant’s

   extradition attained finality. This showed that the Government of India

   was conscious of its sovereign assurance and sought to do everything to

   abide by its assurance at that stage.
Trial Court Proceedings:
A. Sovereign Assurance:
19.   The State initially pressed for awarding death sentence to the

   appellant in Special Case No.1/2006. However, after the arguments of

   the defence, the State submitted that death penalty is out of question in

   the appellant’s case but in view of
Section 34C
of the Extradition Act and
Section 302
of the IPC, the appellant was liable to be punished with

   imprisonment for life. It was urged that the solemn sovereign assurance

   given by the Deputy Prime Ministry of India could not be construed as a

   guarantee that no court in India would award the punishment provided by

   Indian law and the same would, thus, come into play after awarding the

   punishment by the Designated Court, Mumbai.
18
20.   On the other hand, the appellant sought to urge that the solemn

sovereign assurance given to Portugal was construed as an undertaking

that no court in India shall award punishment of death or punishment for

a period of more than 25 years and a paramount duty had been cast upon

the Designated Court, Mumbai to enforce the solemn sovereign

assurance while awarding the punishment. While conceding that
Section

34C
of the Extradition Act,
Section 302
of the IPC and
Section 3(2)(i)
of

the TADA are mandatory in character, the plea was that the hands of the

Designated Court, Mumbai are tied from awarding punishment for more

than 25 years.
21.   The   Designated    Court,   Mumbai     examined     the   aforesaid

submissions and expressed concerns about serious repercussions if a

decision was taken contrary to the letter and spirit of Indian law. At the

same time, the spirit of the solemn sovereign assurance given by the

Deputy Prime Minister of India and understood by the Supreme Court of

Justice, Portugal in its judgment dated 27.01.2005 could not be lost sight

of as in substance, the principles of comity of courts and respect for

Indian Government and law was in issue.
Section 34C
of the Extradition

Act mentioned in the sovereign assurance made it clear that no court in
19
India was empowered in the appellant’s extradition to award death

sentence to him and that he could only be liable for life imprisonment.
The objective of incorporating
Article 72
of the Constitution and
Sections

432
and
433
of the Cr.P.C. was to assure that the Union of India would

ensure that while executing the sentence or punishment imposed by the

Court in India, the Union of India would exercise its powers and bring

down the punishment consistent with the solemn sovereign assurance

given to the Government of Portugal.
22.   The trial court opined that the sovereign assurance was a plain and

simple assurance that death penalty was out of question and if any other

punishment was awarded as per law by Indian Courts, the Government of

India would exercise the powers under the Constitution, Indian

Extradition Act and the
Cr.P.C
. to bring the punishment in conformity

with the assurance. The Government of India was conscious of the

principle of the independence of the Judiciary. The sovereign assurance

could not have been construed as an assurance of the Courts of India and,

in fact, had not been so construed by the Courts at Portugal.         The

independence of Judiciary would not support impeding the powers of the

Designated Court, Mumbai to exercise its jurisdiction to award
20
punishment provided under the law. This is so as the application in

   awarding the punishment fell within the domain and jurisdiction of the

   court, whereas the execution of the punishment fell within the domain

   and jurisdiction of the executive and this power of the executive was

   independent and not subject to judicial review.
23.     The effect of the aforesaid was that the Judiciary had to perform its

   functions of imposing sentence in accordance with law, while the

   executive would have to perform its duty by restricting the sentence in

   conformity with the assurance given to the Portuguese Courts.


    B. Set off claimed by the Appellant:
24.     The appellant relied upon the decision of this Court in State of

   Maharashtra & Anr . v. Najakat Ali Mubarak Ali2 and submitted that as

   per
Section 428
of the Cr.P.C., the period of imprisonment undergone by

   an accused as an undertrial prisoner during investigation, inquiry or trial

   of a particular case, irrespective of whether it was in connection to that

   very case, or another case can be set-off for the period of detention

   imposed on conviction in that particular case.         The appellant, thus,

   submitted that he was entitled to the benefit of set off as he was already

2(2001) 6 SCC 311
21
in custody for a time period in Portugal.
25.    On this aspect, the Designated Court, Mumbai opined that the

   appellant was not kept in detention till 12.10.2005 exclusively pursuant

   to the execution of the Red Corner notice by the Interpol and, thus, could

   not be granted set off for the period for which he was undergoing the

   sentence awarded to him by the Portuguese Court against the sentence

   awarded to him in the present case. A set off would amount to granting

   benefit to the appellant even for the period for which he was sentenced

   for commission of offences as per Portuguese law in the Republic of

   Portugal.
26.    The judgment in
Allan John Waters v. State of Maharashtra

   &Anr.3
sought to be relied upon by the appellant was distinguished as
in

   that case
the accused was not arrested in USA for commission of offence

   under the laws of USA while in the present case it was so.            The

   proposition of law in Najakat Ali Mubarak Ali4 case was also found not

   applicable.
The appellant was arrested on 11.11.2005 and was arrested in

   TADA Special Case No.1/2006 later, where the benefit of set off had


32012 SCCOnline Bom 389
4(supra)
22
been granted to him. The appellant would, thus, have the benefit of set

  off from that date against the sentence that would be imposed on him.
27.   The Designated Court, Mumbai convicted the appellant and

  sentenced him under the different provisions of law as reflected in the

  judgment, which need not be referred to by us because that does not have

  a bearing on the propositions advanced before us.
The Present Proceedings:
28.   The appeal was taken up for hearing on 02.02.2022, when the

  learned counsel for the appellant, Mr. Rishi Malhotra made a four-fold

  submission recorded in that order as under:
“1) The stand of the Government of India/State Government
           (three appeals have been prosecuted by the State while two
           other by the C.B.I.) vis-à-vis the solemn sovereign assurance
           given by them to the Court in Portugal while seeking
           extradition of the appellant (on 17.12.2002 and 25.05.2003). In
           a nutshell it is his submission that the imprisonment term
           cannot extend beyond 25 years as per the assurance given, even
           though the TADA Courts said it was not bound by the
           assurances as the judicial system was independent of the
           executive. He submits that even if the TADA Court does not
           have the power, this Court can pass necessary orders based on
           an affidavit to be filed by the Central Government/prosecuting
           agencies. Learned counsel for the State submits that by and
           large they will follow the guidance of the Central Government
           in this behalf but we believe in any case the Central
           Government/prosecuting agencies may discuss this issue with
23
the State Government to file an appropriate affidavit before us.
2) The period of set-off, as according to the learned counsel for
          the appellant(s) he was detained on 18.09.2002 by the Portugal
          authorities on account of the look out notice, that should be the
          reckoning time and not when he was released from the Portugal
          Court and taken into custody by the Indian authorities on
          12.10.2005.
3) The consequences of Portugal Courts withdrawing the
          permission for extradition on account of breach of the solemn
          sovereign assurance given to them.
4) The Merits of the controversy.”
29.     He made a submission, which was recorded, that it may be

possible to resolve these appeals if a reasonable stand is taken at least on

the first aspect and on the second aspect, also the authorities might take a

stand or in the alternative he would endeavour to persuade the Court. We

found that a fair stand was taken by the counsel and called upon the

Union of India to take a stand on both these aspects. However, the

affidavit filed was not found to be satisfactory. We wanted a clear stand

on behalf of the Government of India as to whether it stood by the

international commitment made by the former Deputy Prime Minister of

India and, thus, called upon the Home Secretary to file an affidavit in the

case.
24
30.   On 21.04.2022, we recorded a detailed order. We went into the

affidavit filed by the Home Secretary, who had emphasised what was

only obvious, that it was a dastardly act conducted with pre-meditation in

which the appellant played a very active role, was absconding and

brought back to India under the
Extradition Act
. These powers were

stated to be Executive powers which would bind the Executive of the

respective States but the Judiciary, as the Constitution of India envisaged

was independent in deciding the cases in accordance with the law

applicable. Para 6 of that affidavit referred to the assurance given vide

letter dated 17.02.2002 as solemn assurance to the Government of

Portugal by the Government of India, while para 7 stated as under:
“It is respectfully submitted that the Government of India is bound
      by the assurance dated 17.12.2002.The period of 25 years which is
      mentioned in the assurance will be abided by the Union of India at
      an appropriate time subject to the remedies which may be
      available.”
31.   We did not appreciate the underlined portion aforesaid as once it

was recognised that the Government would abide by the assurance,

nothing more or less was to be said. As far as the courts were concerned,

they were to take a view as to the effect of that assurance.
25
32.   The affidavit also averred that the occasion for the Union of India

   honouring the assurance will arise only when period of 25 years was to

   expire. We noted that we had to take a call on the effect of that assurance

   and we could not postpone the hearing of the appeal on that basis, nor

   was it permissible for the Government to say on an affidavit that the

   appellant could not raise this argument. In effect, the affidavit sought to

   urge this Court to decide the appeal on merits. As to what the Court will

   do will be the Court’s own call. If the convict was accepting his guilt, he

   could not be compelled to urge on the merits of the appeal. Learned

   counsel for the appellant on that date also clearly stated that his third and

   fourth pleas recorded aforesaid stood withdrawn. In view of the

   assurance of the Government of India, he only sought that the sentence

   should be 25 years in terms of the solemn assurance. The other point

   sought to be urged and debated before us is the point of set off. The

   appeal was finally heard on 05.05.2022 and judgment was reserved.


Legal Pleas urged before us:
33.   The matter remained in a narrow contour in view of what we have

   recorded aforesaid, i.e., on the two aspects of sovereign assurance and set
26
off.
Plea of Sovereign Assurance:
34.    The appellant submitted that solemn sovereign assurance dated

  17.12.2002 categorically mentioned that under Portuguese law, an

  offender cannot be extradited to the requesting country if the offences

  committed attract either death penalty or imprisonment for an indefinite

  period beyond 25 years. The supplementary assurance dated 25.05.2003

  envisaged that the appellant will not be prosecuted for offences other

  than those for which extradition had been sought.           The affidavit

  submitted by the Home Secretary, Government of India dated 18.04.2022

  also stated that the Government of India was bound by its assurance.

  These solemn assurances were considered by the Court of Appeals,

  Lisbon in its judgment dated 14.07.2004 and the Supreme Court of

  Justice, Portugal in its judgment dated 27.01.2005. It was opined that the

  rule of traditional estoppel doctrine as well as International Public Law

  (for instance, with respect to principle of reciprocity) required that the

  solemn sovereign guarantees provided by sovereign States are respected

  in future. The consequence of failure to do so gave Portugal the right to

  timely demand devolution of the person to be extradited through
27
diplomatic or judicial channel.
35.     The aforesaid aspect has been kept in mind by the Designated

    Court, Mumbai in its main judgment dated 07.09.2017, wherein it opined

    that India would ensure that while executing the sentence or punishment

    imposed by the court in India, it would exercise its power and bring

    down the punishment consistent and commensurate with the solemn

    sovereign assurance.
36.     The only real submission in this behalf by the learned counsel for

    the appellant was that in view of the Constitution Bench decision of this

    Court in
Union of India v. V. Sriharan
alias Murugan & Ors. 5 it had

    been opined that the powers to impose a modified punishment providing

    for any specific term of incarceration lies only either with the High Court

    or the Supreme Court, and not any inferior court. Thus, what the counsel

    urged was that this Court should opine now itself as to when the term

    would end and direct the release of the appellant on expiry of that term.
37.     On the other hand, learned ASG, Mr. K.M. Nataraj urged that in

    the Constitutional Scheme of India, there was a doctrine of separation of


52016 (7) SCC 1 (paras 104 & 105)
28
powers with the Judiciary being independent and, thus, the solemn

sovereign assurance given by the Executive was carefully worded such

that it could not bind the Judiciary while deciding the case on merits.
The Extradition Act
enabled the Executive of one State to extradite

accused/convicts of another State. These were Executive powers, by only

the Executive of the respective States were bound.
38.   It was sought to be urged that honouring the period of 25 years

mentioned in the assurance will arise only when the 25 years were to

expire, i.e., on 10.11.2030 and that the Union of India would abide by the

period of 25 years at an appropriate time subject to remedies, which may

be available and that such a plea cannot be raised as an argument before

the period elapses.
39.   We tend to agree with the submissions of the learned ASG on the

larger conspectus, i.e., the separation of Judicial and Executive powers

and the scheme of the Indian Constitution cannot bind the Indian courts

in proceedings under the
Extradition Act
. Thus, the courts must proceed

in accordance with law and impose the sentence as the law of the land

requires, while simultaneously the Executive is bound to comply with its
29
international obligations under the
Extradition Act
as also on the

principle of comity of courts, which forms the basis of the extradition. A

reference to the solemn sovereign assurance on 17.12.2002 itself makes it

clear that the assurance, which was given on behalf of the Executive in

India was that if the appellant was extradited by Portugal for trial in

India, he would not be visited with death penalty or imprisonment for a

term beyond 25 years. To achieve this objective the methodology placed

before the Portugal Courts was that
Article 72(1)
of the Constitution

conferred power on the President of India to grant pardon, reprieve,

respite or remit punishment or suspend, remit or commute the sentence of

any convict person convicted of any offence.          This was with the

assurance under
Sections 432
and
433
of the Cr.P.C. which conferred the

power on the Government to commute the sentence to life imprisonment

with terms not exceeding 14 years. It is also the subsequent solemn

assurance of the Ambassador of India given on 25.05.2003 that on the

appellant being extradited, he will not be prosecuted for offences other

than those for which the extradition was sought and he will not be

extradited to any third country.      Insofar as the latter assurance is

concerned, it is nobody’s subsisting case that there is a violation or there
30
can at all be a violation. As far as the first assurance is concerned, there

was some ostensible deviation from it, but the ultimate affidavit in the

earlier proceedings before the Supreme Court sought to correct it by

limiting the trial to the offences for which he was extradited. That is the

reason that the challenge to the extradition proceedings on account of

extradition order being recalled by Portugal Courts was given up before

us. No doubt those proceedings attained finality before the Portugal

Courts but it is subsequently in the earlier proceedings before the

Supreme Court of India that the Government of India possibly realising

the larger consequences, sought to bring it within the conformity with the

order of the Portugal Courts.
40.   A significant aspect is that the Courts in Portugal realised the

constraints of the extent to which the Government of India could give an

undertaking considering that the courts in India were independent of

Executive control. Thus, it was opined in para 12.2 of the judgment of

the Supreme Court of Portugal dated 27.01.2005 that what could be

requested was only a guarantee by the Government of India that should a

sentence be imposed higher than that is specified, the Government of

India would take all measures to comply with its obligations. As to how
31
the obligations were to be complied with, was also specified by the

    Government of India in the solemn sovereign assurance dated

    17.12.2002, in view of the powers of the President of India under
Article

    72(1)
of the Constitution. The President acts under the aid and advice of

    the Government of India under the provisions of
Article 74
of the

    Constitution and, thus, the Government of India bound itself to advice

    the President of India to commute the sentence to 25 years in view of its

    commitment to the Courts in Portugal. The sovereign assurance also

    mentioned
Sections 432
and
433
of the Cr.P.C., by which the

    Government could itself suspend or remit, and commute the sentence

    respectively.
41.    We do believe that looking into the grievousness of the offence in

    which the appellant was involved, there is no question for this Court

    exercising any special privileges to commute or restrict the period of

    sentence of the appellant. In fact, different States in India have followed

    different patterns before even a case for remission is considered. We,

    thus, do not accept that the plea of the learned counsel for the appellant

    based on the judgment of this Court in
Sriharan6
case.


6(supra)
32
42.   However, we are in agreement with the submissions of the learned

counsel for the appellant and do not accept the contention of the learned

ASG that we should not opine on this aspect at present. The affidavit of

the Union of India through the Home Secretary is clear, at least, to the

effect that they will abide by the assurance given by the Government of

India to Portugal. Thus, on completion of the period of 25 years of

sentence, in compliance of its commitment to the courts in Portugal, it is

required that the Government of India advise the President of India to

exercise its powers under
Article 72(1)
of the Constitution to commute

the remaining sentence, or that the Government of India exercise powers

under
Sections 432
and
433
of the Cr.P.C. We do believe that there is a

necessity of making this time bound so that it does not result in an

unending exercise and, thus, the Government of India must exercise the

aforesaid powers or render advice on which the President of India is

expected to act, within a month of the period of completion of sentence.

We say so also to respect the very basis on which the Courts of Portugal

observed the principles of comity of courts by recognising that there is a

separation of powers in India and, thus, the Courts cannot give any

assurance. The corresponding principle of comity of courts, thus, has to
33
be observed such that the Government of India having given the solemn

   assurance, and having accepted the same before us, is bound to act in

   terms of the aforesaid. We are, thus, taking a call on this issue now and

   do not want to leave it to any uncertainty in future. This is of course

   subject to any aggravating aspect of the appellant.


Plea of Set off:
43.    The appellant was arrested on 18.09.2002 on the basis of the Red

   Corner notice. Thereafter, the appellant’s extradition proceedings started

   on 28.03.2003. The Designated Court, Mumbai did not give benefit of

   any set off from 18.09.2002 till 12.10.2005.
44.    Learned counsel for the appellant urged that as per
Section 428
of

   the Cr.P.C., an accused person is entitled to set off for the period of

   detention undergone by him during any investigation or inquiry and such

   period would be set off against the remainder of the sentence. It was also

   urged that it is immaterial that the appellant was in custody for some

   other case in Portugal and was also serving a sentence there, as it is not

   the requirement of law that an accused has to be only in exclusive

   custody of that particular case for which the set off is claimed. To
34
support this proposition learned counsel for the appellant relied upon the

    following judicial pronouncements:
i.     Allan John Waters7: The petitioner therein was arrested

                    in pursuance of a Red Corner notice on 02.07.2003 and

                    remained in custody till 06.09.2004.         The extradition

                    procedure had commenced in America and the competent

                    court had allowed the extradition to India on 24.11.2003

                    though the petitioner was finally brought to India only on

                    06.09.2004. The Bombay High Court vide its judgment

                    dated 13.03.2012 referred to
Section 2(h)
of Cr.P.C.,

                    which    defines       ‘investigation’ and   held    that    all

                    proceedings      for    collection   of   evidence   etc.,   is

                    investigation, and hence the proceedings adopted by the

                    investigating officer for seeking arrest was also part of

                    the investigation. Hence, the detention in America of the

                    appellant
in that case
was his detention during

                    investigation.
7(supra)
35
ii.   Najakat Ali Mubarak Ali8: This court observed that
Sections 427
and
428
of the Cr.P.C. are intended to

                 provide amelioration to the prisoner. Under
Section 427
of the Cr.P.C., the sentence of life imprisonment imposed

                 on the same person in two different convictions would

                 converge into one and thereafter it would flow through

                 one stream alone. Even if the sentence in one of those

                 two cases is not imprisonment for life, but only a lesser

                 term, the convergence will take place and post-
convergence flow would be through the same channel.

                 In all other cases, it is left to the court to decide whether

                 the sentences in two different convictions should merge

                 into one period or not. Under
Section 428
of the Cr.P.C.,

                 if the convict was in prison, for whatever reason, during

                 the stages of investigation, inquiry or trial of a particular

                 case and was later convicted and sentenced to any term

                 of imprisonment
in that case
, the earlier period of

                 detention undergone by him should be counted as part of

                 the sentence imposed on him and it is immaterial if the

8(supra)
36
prisoner was undergoing a sentence of imprisonment in

                      another case also during the said period.
iii.
Bhagirath v. Delhi Administration9
: The Constitution

                      Bench held that the assumption that the word “term”

                      under
Section 428
of Cr.P.C. implies a concept of

                      ascertainability, or conveys a sense of certainty is

                      contrary to the letter of law and hence the period of

                      detention undergone by the accused as undertrial

                      prisoners shall be set off against the sentence of life

                      imprisonment imposed on them.
45.     The nutshell of the submission was that the set off period should

   commence from 18.09.2002 when the appellant was arrested pursuant to

   the Red Corner notice, or at worst from 28.03.2003, i.e., the date of the

   ministerial order when extradition was granted to the appellant for

   various offences.
46.     On the other hand, learned ASG referred to the fact that the

   appellant was convicted by the Courts in Portugal for an offence

   committed in Portugal and was serving a sentence which cannot be for

9(1985) 2 SCC 580
37
the appellant’s benefit for purposes of
Section 428
of the Cr.P.C. The

period undergone by the appellant then was not as an undertrial prisoner

as in the present case. In any case, assuming that the Union of India is

bound by its assurance, the period would start only from the date the

appellantwas handed over to the Indian authorities, i.e., 10.11.2005.
47.   Learned ASG also submitted that the convicts sentenced to life

imprisonment are liable to undergo imprisonment for the rest of their

normal life, subject to power under
Sections 432
and
433
of the Cr.P.C.,

or
Article 72
or 161 of the Constitution and
Section 428
of the Cr.P.C.

will be attracted only if and when such power is exercised. Thus,
Section

428
of the Cr.P.C. applies to a specified term, and not the whole life of

the accused as there is no purpose of setting off a few years from the

punishment of life imprisonment. However, no order under
Sections 432
and
433
of the Cr.P.C.,
Article 72
or 161 of the Constitution has been

passed in the present case so far and as such
Section 428of
the Cr.P.C.

has no application.
48.   Learned ASG sought to rely upon the judgment of this Court in
38
Raghbir Singh v. State of Haryana
10, wherein it was held that to secure

   the benefit of
Section 428
of the Cr.P.C., the prisoner should show that he

   had been detained in prison for the purpose of investigation, inquiry or

   trial of the case in which he is later on convicted and sentenced. The

   Court also held that an accused cannot claim a double benefit under
Section 428
of the Cr.P.C., i.e., the same period being counted as part of

   the period of imprisonment imposed for committing the former offence

   and also being set off against the period of imprisonment imposed for

   committing the latter offence as well.
This view was also followed in
Atul Manubhai Parek v. CBI11
.
49.
In the context of the judgment of this Court in Najakat Ali

   Mubarak Ali12 case, it was submitted by learned ASG that the judgment

   in
Raghbir Singh13
case was considered, but not overruled.
It was urged

   before us that there is apparently a misreading of the opinion of Justice

   Phukan as it aligned with the dissenting opinion of Justice R.P. Sethi and

   did not concur with Justice K.T. Thomas’s opinion, which had opined

   that any other period, which is not connected with a case cannot be said


10(1984) 4 SCC 348
11(2010) 1 SCC 603
12(supra)
13(supra)
39
to be reckonable for set off.
It was submitted that these judgments have

    also been mentioned in
Atul Manubhai Parek14
case but the Court has

    followed the view taken in
Raghbir Singh15
case.
50.     On examination of the submissions, we are unable to concur with

    the view sought to be propounded by learned counsel for the appellant. It

    cannot be lost sight that when reference is made in a set off for

    adjustment of periods, the reference is to proceedings within the country.

    The criminal law of the land does not have any extra-territorial

    application. Thus, what happens in another country for some other trial,

    some other detention, in our view, would not be relevant for the purposes

    of the proceedings in the country.     The factual scenario is that the

    appellant was charged with having a fake passport. He was found guilty

    and convicted of sentence from 18.09.2002. This had nothing to do with

    the proceedings against him in India. His sentence would have been

    completed on 18.03.2007 de hors the aspect of remission or

    commutation.     However, he was granted conditional release for the

    remaining sentence on 12.10.2005. The mere fact that there was also a

    detention order under the Red Corner notice was of no significance. He

14(supra)
15(supra)
40
was again imprisoned from 12.10.2005 till 10.11.2005, i.e. when he was

    handed over to the Indian authorities. The period till 10.12.2005, when

    he was serving out the sentence, certainly could not have been counted.

    That leaves the period of less than a month only, which is really more of

    an academic exercise.
51.     We cannot accept the plea of the learned counsel for the appellant

    that the formal arrest on 18.09.2002 of the appellant under the Red

    Corner notice is the date to be taken into reckoning for serving out

    sentence in the present case or for that matter that the relevant date

    should be 28.03.2003, when the extradition proceeding started. In view

    of what we have said, the only case which could emerge was of taking

    the date when he was given a conditional release on 12.10.2005. Thus, if

    one looks from the perspective of detention of the case in India, the

    period commences only on his being detained at Portugal on 12.10.2005,

    albeit giving him benefit of a little less than one month.
52.     The factual scenario aforesaid, thus, makes the debate over the

    judgment in
Raghbir Singh16
case,
Atul Manubhai Parek17
case and


16(supra)
17(supra)
41
Najakat Ali Mubarak Ali18 case more academic.
Suffice for us to say

    that the judgment on this issue in
Atul Manubhai Parek19
case discusses

    the earlier two opinions in
Raghbir Singh20
case and Najakat Ali

    Mubarak Ali21 case to opine that the accused cannot claim a double

    benefit under
Section 428
of the Cr.P.C. As already stated, the law would

    have application within the country and does not have anything to do

    with extra-territorial application where the trial and conviction has taken

    place for a local offence, i.e. Portugal in this case.
53.     Now turning to
Allan John Waters22
case relied upon by learned

    counsel for the appellant, the factual scenario is quite different from the

    present case. The petitioner there was arrested pursuant to a Red Corner

    notice on 02.07.2003 and remained in custody till 06.09.2004. In this

    time period, the extradition process was on. Since the detention was in

    pursuance of a case in India, the benefit of period in detention in the USA

    was given to him. In fact, to that extent we have followed that principle

    in the present case by giving the benefit of detention period qua the

    present case and, thus, treated the date of detention in custody from

18(supra)
19(supra)
20(supra)
21(supra)
22(supra)
42
12.10.2005. We have ignored the formal detention order passed earlier

  for the reason that the period the appellant was serving out his sentence

  in Portugal, in pursuance of a local offence, cannot be a set off against

  the detention in the present case. It is also apparent from the fact that on

  serving his sentence and getting the benefit of conditional release, his

  detention thereafter was in pursuance of the present proceedings on the

  same date of 12.10.2005.
Conclusion:
54.   In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we conclude that

  the detention of the appellant commence from 12.10.2005 in the present

  case. On the appellant completing 25 years of sentence, the Central

  Government is bound to advice the President of India for exercise of his

  powers under
Article 72
of the Constitution, and to release the appellant

  in terms of the national commitment as well as the principle based on

  comity of courts. In view thereof, the necessary papers be forwarded

  within a month of the period of completion of 25 years sentence of the

  appellant. In fact, the Government can itself exercise this power in terms

  of
Sections 432
and
433
of the Cr.P.C. and such an exercise should also

  take place within the same time period of one month.
43
55.   The appeals are accordingly disposed of leaving the parties to bear

  their own costs.
………………………J.
                                                  [Sanjay Kishan Kaul]



                                                  ....……………………J.
                                                       [M.M. Sundresh]
New Delhi.
July 11, 2022.
44