[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Ex. Sep. R. Munusamy on 19 July, 2022
Author:
Indira Banerjee
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
Indira Banerjee
REPORTABLE

                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6536 OF 2021



                         UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                  ……Appellant(s)


                                                              VERSUS


                         EX. SEP. R. MUNUSAMY                                   ...Respondent(s)




                                                    JUDGMENT
Indira Banerjee, J.
This appeal is against a judgment and order dated 18 th February

                         2020 passed by the Chennai Regional Bench of the Armed Forces

                         Tribunal allowing the application being O.A. No. 53 of 2018 filed by

                         the Respondent about 20 years after he was discharged from the

                         Indian Army, and holding that the Respondent was entitled to

                         disability pension. The arrears were restricted to a period of three

                         years prior to the date of application before the Tribunal.
2.    The Respondent was enrolled in the Army on 26th March 1987.
Signature Not Verified
By an order dated 5th April 1997, the Respondent was discharged from
Digitally signed by
GULSHAN KUMAR
ARORA
Date: 2022.07.19
service on administrative grounds, as an undesirable Soldier under
16:34:22 IST
Reason:
Rule 13(3) III(v) of the Army Rules, 1954.        The Respondent had
1
rendered service for nine years seven months and one day excluding

161 days of non-qualifying service. Annexed to the appeal is a copy

of the Order/Certificate of the Commandant dated 12 th October 1996

regarding the proposal to discharge the Respondent. As per the

certificate of the Commandant, service of the Respondent was no

longer required. The cause of discharge was shown in paragraph 20

as “Undesirable Soldier under Rule 13 III(V) of Army Rules, 1954”.
3.    At the time of discharge, the Respondent was in low medical

category.    A meeting of the Release Medical Board held on 30 th

January     1997    found   “Right   Partial   Seizure     with     Secondary

Generalization 345” neither attributable to nor aggravated (NANA) by

military service. The disability was assessed @ 20% for two years.
4.    The Respondent did not challenge his discharge under Rule

13(3) III(v) of the Army Rules, 1954 as an undesirable soldier. The

Respondent,    however,     made     an   application    claiming    disability

pension.    By order No. G-3/85/318/11-97 dated 19 th May 1998, the

Office of the Chief CDA(P), Allahabad rejected the claim of the

Respondent for disability pension.        Relevant part of the said order

reads as under :-
“3. Accordingly, for clauses (i) & (ii) of Para 1 above, no
     disability pension is admissible under the existing rules. The
     above decision may pl. be communicated to the individual
     under registered post alongwith MA(P)’s findings, and a
     clause may also be added therein that he may appeal
     against the decision not later than six months from the date
     of issue of this letter, on such grounds as he may deem fit to
     put forth, if desired by him.
2
4. A sum of Rs.10450 on account of invalid gratuity and a
      sum of Rs.15711 on account of dcrg has been admitted. In
      case, the individual dies before receiving dcrg amount it
      should not be paid to his heirs & the matter referred to g-4
      section of this office.”
5.     On 6th October 1998, the Respondent filed an appeal against

the rejection of disability pension. The Appellate Authority rejected

the appeal. By a communication dated 11 th January 2000, the

Respondent was informed that his appeal against rejection of

disability pension had been rejected by the first Appellate Authority.
6.     On 25th August 2017 i.e. almost 20 years after his discharge and

over seventeen and a half years after the dismissal of his appeal

against the rejection of disability pension, the Respondent sent a

legal notice claiming disability pension on the ground of parity with

one Dharamvir Singh and one Rajbir Singh.
7.     The case of the Respondent appears to be distinguishable since

the Respondent was not discharged on medical grounds, unlike Rajbir

Singh or Dharamvir Singh. It appears that in course of his career, the

Respondent had earned red ink entries in his service records on seven

occasions, as per the particulars given hereinbelow :-
“S.   Date of              Punishment awarded                 Sec of     Remarks
No.   Offence                                                 Army Act
1950
(a)   25 Oct    28 days Imprisonment in military custody        39(b)    Red Ink
      1990      while serving with 4002 Field Ambulance                  entry
(b)   25 Apr    14 days detention in military custody while     39(b)    Red Ink
      1991      serving with Command Hospital (Western                   entry
                Command) Chandimandir
(c)   05 Sep    28 days Rigorous Imprisonment in military       39(b)    Red Ink
3
1993      custody while serving with 166 Military             entry
                Hospital, c/o 56 APO
(d)   30 May    28 days Rigorous Imprisonment in military   39(b)   Red Ink
      1994      custody while serving with 166 Military             entry
                Hospital, c/o 56 APO
(e)   22 Jun    28 days Rigorous Imprisonment in military   39(b)   Red Ink
      1995      custody while serving with 155 Base                 entry
                Hospital C/o 99 APO
(f)   12 Sep    28 days Rigorous Imprisonment in military   39(b)   Red Ink
      1995      custody while serving with 155 Base                 entry
                Hospital, c/o 99 APO
(g)   14 Feb    28 days Rigorous Imprisonment in military   39(b)   Red Ink
      1996      custody while serving with 155 Base                 entry”
                Hospital c/o 99 APO
8.     The Appellants contend that the Respondent was a habitual

offender who kept breaching military discipline, notwithstanding

repeated counseling and advice given by his superiors. He proved to

be an inefficient soldier. Be that as it may, the fact remains that, for

20 years, the Respondent did not question his discharge.
9.     By a communication dated 27th October 2017, the Appellant No.

3 replied to the said notice stating:-
“You have been discharged under Army Rule 13(3) III (v)
      being undesirable soldier and not invalidated out from
      service as mentioned in your above legal notice. Hence,
      disability pension is not admissible as per existing rules in
      force”
10.    Being aggrieved, the Respondent filed O.A. No. 53 of 2018

before the Tribunal claiming disability pension and benefits under

Regulation 183 of the Army Pension Regulation, 1961. The application

has been allowed by the judgment and order impugned.
4
11.   At the cost of repetition, it is reiterated that the Respondent

was discharged under Rule 13(3) III(v) of the Army Rules, 1954 on

administrative grounds as an undesirable soldier and not on the

ground of medical disability.       Any opinion of the Release Medical

Board held on 30th January 1997 with regard to the ailment of the

Respondent does not entitle the Respondent to disability pension, as

the ailment did not lead to his discharge. In any case, even as per

the opinion of the Release Medical Board, the disability, if any, of the

Respondent was not attributable to military service.           The Tribunal

recorded that the Release Medical Board had in Paragraph 3(d) stated

“Disability constitutional in origin, unrelated to service”.
12.   For over 20 years from the date of the discharge, the

Respondent did not challenge his discharge on the administrative

ground     of   being     an   undesirable   soldier.   His   discharge   on

administrative grounds could not have been challenged after two

decades.
13.   In the considered opinion of this Court, the Tribunal fell in error

in passing its order dated 2nd November 2018 directing the Appellants

to convene a Resurvey/Review Medical Board at the Military Hospital,

Chennai or a designated hospital for the purpose of examining the

applicant and assessing the degree of disability due to “Right Partial

Seizure with Secondary Generalisation 345” and the probable

duration of disability.    The tenor of the order itself shows that even

the Tribunal realized that accurate medical opinion could not have
5
been obtained after lapse of 30 years from the date of recruitment of

the Respondent and after 20 years from the date of his discharge.
The Tribunal, therefore, sought assessment of ‘probable duration of

disability’.
14.    Be that as it may, the Appellants, in compliance of the order of

the Tribunal, convened a Review Medical Board as directed and

submitted a report. The Tribunal noted :-
“7. From the Resurvey Medical Board dated 11.4.2019 held
      pursuant to our order dated 02.11.2018 placed before us, it
      is seen that the applicant’s disease “Right Partial Seizure
      with     Secondary     Generalisation   345”   has   now   been
      considered as ‘Remained Static’ and the degree of the
      disability has been assessed @ 20% for life with effect from
      08.04.2019.     The Board also assessed the degree of
      disability for the intervening period from 27.03.1989 and
      25.03.1989 @ 20%. The applicant has prayed for grant of
      disability pension.”
15.    Significantly, even the Resurvey Medical Board did not opine

that the disability, if any, of the Respondent was either caused or

aggravated by military service.         Even otherwise, the question of

entitlement of soldier to disability pension cannot be determined on

the basis of medical examination conducted 20 years after his

discharge.
16.    The Tribunal does not sit in appeal over the expert opinion of a

Medical Board holding that the disability suffered by a soldier was not

attributable to or aggravated by military service. There was no reason
6
for the Tribunal not to accept the opinion of the Release Medical

Board held on 30th January 1997 and no reasons have been disclosed.

In the absence of any finding of infirmity in the decision making

process adopted by the Release Medical Board, there could be no

reason to direct the constitution of a Resurvey Medical Board, and in

any case, not after two decades from the date of discharge.
17.   The Tribunal relied on the judgment of this Court dated 13 th

February 2015 in Civil Appeal No.2904 of 2011 (
Union of India v.

Rajbir Singh1
) heard and disposed of along with 23 other appeals.

In the aforesaid case, this Court dismissed appeals arising out of

orders passed by the Armed Forces Tribunal and upheld directions for

grant of disability pension to the concerned ex-soldiers.
18.
In
Rajbir Singh
(supra), it was not in dispute that the

Respondents in all the appeals had been invalidated out of service on

account of medical disability as shown in the chart set out in the

judgment.
The judgment in
Rajbir Singh
(supra) was rendered in

the context of invalidation from service on medical grounds, having

regard to the provisions of the Entitlement Rules for Casualty

Pensionary Awards, 1982, hereinafter referred to as “the Entitlement

Rules”.
19.   Rule 14 of the Entitlement Rules, referred to in
Rajbir Singh
(supra) is extracted hereinbelow for convenience: -
1 (2015) 12 SCC 264
7
“14. Diseases.- In respect of diseases, the following rule
      will be observed –
(a) Cases in which it is established that conditions of military
      service did not determine or contribute to the onset of the
      disease but influenced the subsequent courses of the
      disease will fall for acceptance on the basis of aggravation.
(b) A disease which has led to an individual’s discharge or
      death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service, if
      no note of it was made at the time of the individual’s
      acceptance for military service. However, if medical opinion
      holds, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not
      have been detected on medical examination prior to
      acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to
      have arisen during service.
(c) If a disease is accepted as having arisen in service, it
      must also be established that the conditions of military
      service determined or contributed to the onset of the
      disease and that the conditions were due to the
      circumstances of duty in military service.
(emphasis supplied)”
20.    Rule 14(b) of the Entitlement Rules relied upon in
Rajbir Singh
(supra) is not attracted in this case, because the Respondent was not

discharged on account of any disease, ailment or disability, but for

administrative reasons.     The Rule is only attracted when a disease

leads to an individual’s discharge or death. Such disease is ordinarily

to be deemed to have arisen in service, if no note of it was made at

the time of the individual’s acceptance for military service, but not

always. In any case, the presumption under Rule 14(b) of the

Entitlement Rules is rebuttable. If medical opinion holds, for reasons

to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on

medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will

not be deemed to have arisen during service. There was no direction

on the Review Medical Board to give any opinion as to the question of
8
whether the ailment of the Respondent could or could not have been

detected at the time of his recruitment. Furthermore, the mere fact

that an ailment or disease may have arisen in service does not mean

that the ailment or disease is attributable to service conditions.
21.   In the instant case, as observed above, the discharge of the

Respondent was not on account of any disability or disease but on

administrative grounds and such discharge was not questioned for

two decades. The judgment in
Rajbir Singh
(supra) or the judgments

relied upon in
Rajbir Singh
(supra) have no application in the facts

and circumstances of this case. The learned Tribunal noted red ink

entries in the service records of the Respondent on the ground of

unauthorized absence, but arrived at the purported finding in effect

that the absence of the Respondent was only on account of his

ailment/disability. Such finding is patently conjectural, and not based

on any materials on record.
22.   Moreover, even in the case of discharge on account of any

disability or disease, the authorities might dispute that such disability

or disease was caused or aggravated by military service. The Medical

Board might, for reasons to be stated, give an opinion that the disease

could not have been detected on medical examination prior to

appointment, in which case the disease/disability would not be

deemed to have arisen during service.
23.   Moreover, as provided in Rule 14(c) of the Entitlement Rules, if a

disease were accepted as having arisen in service, it must also be
9
established that the conditions of military service determined or

contributed to the onset of the disease and that the conditions were

due to the circumstances of duty in military service.
24.   Even though, the Tribunal accepted that there might be cases,

where an ailment/disease could be wholly unrelated to military

service and the denial of disability pension could be justified on that

ground, the Tribunal overlooked the mandate of Rule 14(c) of the

Entitlement Rules. From the Report of the Resurvey Medical Board, as

extracted in the impugned judgment and order, it does not appear

that the Review Medical Board gave any opinion as contemplated in

Rule 14(b) or 14(c) of the Entitlement Rules. There were no materials

before the Tribunal, on the basis of which the Tribunal could have

been satisfied that, the conditions of service of the Respondent

contributed to his disability and/or ailment.     The Review Medical

Board only assessed the extent of the disability of the Respondent

and the approximate duration of the disability, but not the cause

thereof.
25.   What exactly is the reason for a disability or ailment may not be

possible for anyone to establish. Many ailments may not be

detectable at the time of medical check-up, particularly where

symptoms occur at intervals. Reliance would necessarily have to be

placed on expert medical opinion based on an in depth study of the

cause and nature of an ailment/disability including the symptoms

thereof, the conditions of service to which the soldier was exposed
10
and   the   connection    between    the    cause/aggravation    of   the

ailment/disability and the conditions and/or requirements of service.

The Tribunal patently erred in law in proceeding on the basis of a

misconceived notion that any ailment or disability of a soldier, not

noted at the time of recruitment but detected or diagnosed at the

time of his discharge or earlier, would entitle the soldier to disability

pension on the presumption that the disability was attributable to

military service, whether or not the disability led to his discharge, and

the onus was on the employer to prove otherwise, which the

Appellants in this case had failed to do.
26.   In this case, since the discharge was on administrative grounds

and not medical grounds, there was no occasion for the Release

Medical Board or for that matter, the Resurvey Medical Board to give

any opinion as to cause and nature of the ailment of the Respondent

of “Right Partial Seizure with Secondary Generalisation 345” as

diagnosed, whether such disability/ailment could reasonably have

gone undetected at the time of appointment of the Respondent, in

terms of Rule 14(b) of the Entitlement Rules.    The Appellants did not

get the opportunity to show that the ailment was not caused or

aggravated by military service in terms of Rule 14(b) and 14(c) of the

Entitlement Rules
referred to above
. The claim of the Respondent for

disability pension should not have been entertained and that too, 20

years after his discharge.
11
27.   The appeal is, therefore, allowed. The impugned judgment and

order is set aside. There shall be no order as to costs.
...…………………………………,J.
[INDIRA BANERJEE]




                                         ...…………………………………,J.
[V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN]
NEW DELHI;
JULY 19, 2022.
12