[Cites
11
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Gujarat vs Cadila Healthcare Ltd. on 11 July, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
B.V. Nagarathna
// 1 //

                                                                              [REPORTABLE]


                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.7322 OF 2021

                         STATE OF GUJARAT                                     .. Appellant


                                                      Versus


                         CADILA HEALTHCARE LTD.                               ..Respondent




                                                  JUDGMENT
M.R. Shah, J.
1.   Feeling aggrieved   and   dissatisfied   with    the   impugned

                              judgment and order dated 05.07.2016 passed by the High

                              Court of Gujarat, at Ahmedabad in STR No.4 of 2005 by

                              which the High Court has answered the reference in favour

                              of the respondent – assessee – dealer holding that the

                              product “KADIPROL” sold by the respondent can be
Signature Not Verified
categorized as “Poultry Feed” falling under Entry 25 of
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.07.11
17:11:56 IST
Reason:
Schedule I of the Gujarat Sales Tax Act
(hereinafter referred

                              to as “GST Act”) and not as a “Drug and Medicine” under
                              // 2 //

      Entry 26(1) of Schedule II Part A of the GST Act, the State of

      Gujarat has preferred the present Appeal.
2.    At the outset it is required to be noted that the present

      proceeding arise out of the Determination Order passed by

      the Deputy Commissioner of Sales Tax under Section 62 of

      the GST Act by which the Deputy Commissioner held that

      the product in question – KADIPROL would be covered as

      “Drug and Medicine” under Entry 26(1) of Schedule II Part A

      of the GST Act.
2.1   The respondent filed an application before the Deputy

      Commissioner of Sales Tax under Section 62 of the GST Act

      to determine the rate of tax on “KADIPROL” sold under their

      invoice dated 20.03.1989. The respondent also preferred an

      application before the Assistant Commissioner, Food and

      Drugs   Control   Administration    regarding   whether   the

      respondent is required to obtain a license under the
Drugs

      and Cosmetics Act, 1940
(hereinafter referred to as “Act,

      1940”) for manufacturing the product “KADIPROL”. That, the

      Authority under the Act, 1940 informed the respondent that

      the license for manufacturing of product “KADIPROL” under

      the Act, 1940 was not required. However, the Deputy

      Commissioner of Sales Tax, by his order dated 16.04.1990
                              // 3 //

      held that the product in question contains some preventive

      medicine and therefore, categorized as “Drug and Medicine”

      as per Entry 26(1) of Schedule II Part A of the GST Act. The

      Tribunal upheld the order of the Deputy Commissioner. The

      respondent preferred a Reference Application under Section

      69 of the GST Act before the Tribunal for referring the matter

      for decision of the High Court. The reference was made to

      the High Court which was numbered as Sales Tax Reference

      No.4 of 2005.
2.2   By impugned judgment and order, the High Court has

      answered the reference in favour of the respondent –

      assessee and has held that the product “KADIPROL” would

      be covered as “Poultry Feed” under Entry 25 of Schedule I of

      the GST Act.
2.3   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with       the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court holding that

      the product “KADIPROL” manufactured by the respondent

      would be covered by Entry 25 of Schedule I of the GST Act

      as “Poultry Feed”, the State of Gujarat has preferred the

      present Appeal.
3.    Ms. Aastha Mehta, learned Counsel has appeared on behalf
                               // 4 //

      of the appellant – State of Gujarat and Ms. Kavita Jha,

      learned Counsel has appeared on behalf of the respondent –

      assessee.
4.    Ms. Aastha Mehta, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of

      the appellant – State of Gujarat has submitted that in the

      facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has

      committed grave error in overturning the findings given by

      the Tribunal and the Deputy Sales Tax Commissioner

      holding that the product “KADIPROL” can be categorized as

      “Drug and Medicine”.
4.1   It is submitted that the High Court has not given any reason

      whatsoever to overturn the findings given by the Tribunal as

      well as the Deputy Sales Tax Commissioner. It is submitted

      that both the authorities below in fact considered the expert

      literature on the subject which ought not to have been

      brushed aside by the High Court without giving any

      independent reasoning.
4.2   It is submitted that the composition of “KADIPROL” for every

      100 gm was (a) Emporium (Amprolium) Hydrochloride – 25

      gm and (b) Vitamin K3 – 250 gm.
// 5 //

4.3   It is submitted that the same product was used to provide

      protection against coccidiosis due to anti­coccodial property

      of emporium. It is submitted that the presence of Vitamin K

      in “KADIPROL” prevents loss of blood by ensuring adequate

      availability of prothrombin and thus supplements the anti­

      coccidial action for emporium. It is submitted that product

      also eliminates subclinical coccidian infection and improves

      the health of the blood. It is submitted that therefore the

      predominant purpose for which the product in question was

      used by persons rearing poultry is to eliminate subclinical

      coccidian infection. It is submitted that the indirect effect of

      the said drug is only consequential and may be to improve

      the health of the poultry or help in growth of poultry. It is

      submitted that however that does not dilute the main

      purpose of the ingredients, the composition as well as the

      purpose for which it was administered. It is submitted that

      therefore the product would fall under Entry 26(1) of

      Schedule II Part A of the GST Act as “Drug and Medicine”.


4.4   It is further submitted on behalf of the State that a drug can

      be administered either for prevention or treatment of

      disease. The Deputy Sales Tax Commissioner considering

      the expert literature specifically held that the drug is to
                              // 6 //

      ensure that an infectious disease does not spread and was

      administered to the poultry feed as a “preventive measure”.

      It is submitted that if the nutrition is not for predominant

      purpose, then the product cannot be ‘poultry feed’.


4.5   It is submitted that the Tribunal considered the decision of

      the High Court in the case of State of Gujarat vs. M/s. Pfizer

      (India) Ltd. in Sales Tax Reference No.38 of 1980 in which

      the High Court held that if main purpose is medicinal and

      not nutrition, then even if there is some indirect help in

      increasing production of eggs, the product would not be

      called “poultry feed”. It is submitted that in the present case

      the Tribunal specifically held that the product is a “non­

      nutritional additive” which as per the existing literature falls

      within the category of “Drug”. It is submitted that even in

      the case of M/s. Pfizer (India) Ltd. (Supra), one of the

      products which had Terramycin and was used for the

      purpose of preventing or treating diseases was held to be a

      “drug”. It is submitted that in the case of M/s. Pfizer Ltd.

      (Supra), it was specifically held that the product which does

      not have any nutritional value as predominant use cannot

      be a poultry feed.
It is submitted that while deciding the

      reference in the case of M/s. Pfizer (India) Ltd. (Supra), the
                              // 7 //

      High Court also considered its earlier decision in the case of
Glaxo Laboratories (India) Ltd. vs. State of Gujarat
[(1979) 43 STC 386 (Guj)]. It is submitted that neither

      Pfizer judgment nor Glaxo judgment of the High Court have

      held that non­nutritional additives would be considered as

      “poultry feed”.
4.6   It is submitted that the view taken by the High Court relying

      on the decision in case of M/s.
Pfizer (India) Ltd.
(Supra) has

      widened the ambit of “poultry feed” so as to restrict the

      meaning of Entry “Drug and Medicine”. It is submitted that

      no Entry under the Schedule can be interpreted so broadly

      so as to include even products which have medicinal

      properties. It is submitted that since the product is sought to

      be exempted under Entry 25, the meaning given to “poultry

      feed” cannot be widened and has to be construed strictly. It

      is submitted that such an interpretation gives undue and

      subjective power on dealers to use any product as “poultry

      feed” thereby getting exemption of tax.
4.7   It is submitted that in the case of
Eskayef Limited vs.

      Collector of Central Excise
[(1990 4 SCC 680], it is held

      by this Hon’ble Court that the products “Neftin­50 and
                              // 8 //

      Neftin­200” which are used for prevention and treatment of

      ailments such as “coccidiosis” and “histomonoiasis” in

      poultry cannot be considered as ‘poultry feed’ and ought to

      be categorized as a “drug”. It is submitted that in
the said

      decision
it is specifically held that merely because these

      products can be used for improving egg production and

      increase in growth rate of broilers would not in any way

      detract from the fact that said products are medicine. It is

      submitted that in the present case also, “KADIPROL” is used

      for the purpose of prevention and treatment, with an indirect

      positive consequence for the health of the poultry.


4.8   Making   above    submissions      and   relying   upon   above

      decisions, it is prayed to allow the present appeal and quash

      and set aside the impugned judgment and order passed by

      the High Court and restore the decisions of the Sales Tax

      Tribunal as well as the Deputy Sales Commissioner and to

      hold that the product “KADIPROL” can be categorized as

      “Drug and Medicine” under Entry 26(1) of Schedule II Part A

      of the GST Act and not as “poultry feed” falling under Entry

      25 of Schedule I of the GST Act.
5.    Present appeal is vehemently opposed by Ms. Kavita Jha,
                              // 9 //

      learned Counsel appearing for the respondent.


5.1   Ms. Jha, learned Counsel appearing for the respondent –

      dealer – assessee has submitted that as such as on date

      there is no existing demand on the respondent pertaining to

      the issue and even all the assessments under the GST Act

      are also closed with respect to the respondent. It is

      submitted that therefore as such the issue involved in the

      present appeal would be academic.
5.2   Making submissions on merits, learned Counsel appearing

      for the respondent has vehemently submitted that in the

      facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court has not

      committed any error in categorizing the product “KADIPROL”

      as “poultry feed” under Entry 25 of Schedule I of the GST

      Act. It is submitted that while holding so the High Court has

      taken into consideration the fact that over a period of time

      concept of “poultry feed” has changed considerably.


5.3   It is submitted that the words “poultry feed” has acquired

      definite connotation in livestock farming and so also has the

      concentrates and whereas the feed simpliciter is essential for

      the maintenance of poultry, the concentrates i.e. vitamins in

      the food stuff enable the poultry to maintain energy; to
                              // 10 //

      perform the vital process of life and provide the material to

      replace the essential tissues; breakdown of which occurs in

      the body continuously. It is submitted that the ration of

      poultry may be divided for convenience into two parts: (1)

      maintenance ration, viz. the portion of the died which just

      enables the poultry at rest to carry on the essential

      processes of life, such as breathing and circulation of blood,

      without either gain or loss of weight; and (2) feed supplied

      over and above the maintenance requirement for augmenting

      the production for growth or fattening; or for augmenting egg

      laying capacity.
5.4   It is submitted that in the present days when the

      maintenance of the poultry has become so costly, the poultry

      is not kept in a farm in a state of non­production. It is

      submitted that to make the poultry financially viable, it is

      but necessary to supply a balanced poultry feed to increase

      the production of eggs or fat and growth if the poultry is kept

      for consumption of its meat. It is submitted that over a

      period of time, when the concept of poultry feed has changed

      considerably,   it   does   not   mean   food   for   poultry   in

      conventional sense. It consists not only of concentrates but

      even additives, like vitamins, minerals and antibodies which
                               // 11 //

      are essential for better development of poultry etc. which is

      purpose of having a good yield from such activities. In

      support of above submissions, reliance is placed on the

      following decisions.
(
1)   Glaxo Laboratories (India) Limited vs. State of Gujarat
(1979) 43 STC 386 (Guj)

      (2)   Glindia Ltd. vs. Union of India
            1989 (
22) ECC 311

      (3)   State of Gujarat vs. Pfizer Ltd
.
(
1991) 82 STC 374 (Guj)

      (4)   Sun Export Corporation vs. Collector of Customs,
            Bombay
(1997) 6 SCC 564

      (5)   M/s.
Golden Streak Drug & Pharmaceuticals Ltd.,
            Lucknow vs. Commissioner Trade Tax Lucknow
            2017­TIOL­2502­HC­ALL­CT
5.5   It is submitted that the product “KADIPROL” is added to

      “poultry feed” so as to make good deficiency of Vitamin K.

      The product “KADIPROL” is aimed at preventing loss of blood

      in the intestine by enhancing clotting time of blood in birds.

      It is submitted that the said product is an essential poultry

      feed supplement and is liable to be classified as “poultry

      feed” under Entry 25 of Schedule I of the GST Act.


5.6   It is further submitted by Ms. Jha, learned Counsel

      appearing    for   the   respondent      that   this   Court   has
                              // 12 //

      consistently taken the view that in determining the meaning

      of an article in a tariff schedule, one principle which is fairly

      well­settled is that those words and expressions should be

      construed in the sense in which they are understood in the

      trade by the dealer and the consumer. It is submitted that

      therefore while considering a particular product / article, a

      common parlance test is to be applied.
In support of above

      submissions, reliance is placed on the decisions of this

      Court in the case of
Collector of Central Excise, Kanpur

      vs. Krishna Carbon Paper Co.
[(
1989) 1 SCC 150] and

      Plasmac     Machine     Manufacturing      Company       Private

      Limited vs. Collector of Central Excise, Bombay
[(1992)

      84 STC 107 (SC) : [1990] Supp 3 SCR 384].
5.7   It is submitted that in the present case, poultry rearing

      industry, poultry feed concentrates like “KADIPROL” are not

      bought as “Drug and Medicine”, but infact the same is

      bought as “poultry feed”. It is submitted that even the

      respondent is marketing its product “KADIPROL” as “not for

      medicinal use”. It is submitted that therefore applying

      common parlance test also, the product “KADIPROL” is to be

      considered as “poultry feed”.
// 13 //


5.8   It is submitted that the subsequent decision of this Court in

      the case of
Commissioner of Customs (Import) Mumbai

      vs. Dilip Kumar and Company and Ors.
[(2018) 9 SCC 1]

      by which this Court overruled the decision of this Court in

      the case of
Sun Export Corporation vs. Collector of

      Customs, Bombay
[(1997) 6 SCC 564] to the extent

      wherein
Sun Export
Case held that in case of ambiguity,

      benefit of exemption notification should go to the assessee,

      shall not be applicable to the facts of the case on hand. It is

      submitted that in the present case, it is not the case of

      respondent that the product “KADIPROL” was covered within

      the ambit of any exemption notification and therefore, in

      case of ambiguity, the benefit should go to the respondent. It

      is submitted that present case pertains to the classification

      of the product “KADIPROL” which is poultry feed supplement

      as to whether the same is classifiable as “poultry feed” or as

      “Drug and Medicine”.
5.9   It is further submitted by Ms. Jha, learned Counsel

      appearing for the respondent that even under the
Gujarat

      Value Added Tax Act, 2003
(hereinafter referred to as

      “
Gujarat VAT Act
”), sale and purchase of “poultry feed” are
                                // 14 //

     exempt from tax under Entry 48
Schedule I of the Gujarat

     VAT Act
. It is submitted that even under the
Gujarat VAT

     Act
, food and dietary supplements are specifically excluded

     within the ambit of Drug and Medicine. It is submitted that

     thus, the same reflects intention of the legislature that entry

     “Drug and Medicine” will not imbibe food and dietary

     supplements within its ambit. It is submitted that by

     drawing an analogy in the present case as well, it can be

     argued       that   even   “poultry   feed”   supplements   like

     “KADIPROL” will not be covered within the ambit of “Drug

     and Medicine” under Entry 26(1) of Schedule II of the GST

     Act.
Making above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss the

     present appeal.
6.   Heard learned Counsel appearing for the respective parties

     at length.
7.   Having heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

     respective parties and having perused the order passed by

     the learned Tribunal as well as the impugned judgment and

     order passed by the High Court, it is noticed that the

     product in question was sold in a sachet/packet of 100 gm.
                            // 15 //

     It was not meant to be given as a food to the poultry. It was

     required   to   be   mixed   with   the   feed   given    to   the

     poultry/birds. It cannot be directly fed and/or given to the

     birds. Therefore, there is some merit in the contention of the

     Revenue that the impugned judgment and order does not

     deal with the reasoning given by the Tribunal.           It merely

     quotes and relies upon the two decisions in the case of
Glaxo Laboratories (India) Ltd.
(supra) and M/s.
Pfizer

     (India) Ltd.
(Supra) without a detailed and an in­depth

     examination of the facts as found. Therefore, usually in the

     aforesaid background, we would have remitted the matter to

     the High Court for a fresh decision.      However, we are not

     inclined to pass an order of this nature as it is accepted that

     the issue in question is of academic interest and even if we

     decide the appeal in favour of the Revenue, it would not have

     any revenue implication as there are no tax dues.
8.   In view of the above facts and as the issue in question is in

     the academic interest and as there is no revenue implication

     as there are no tax dues and therefore there is zero tax

     effect, we close the present proceedings keeping the larger

     question on the Common Parlance Test open, to be

     considered in an appropriate case in a like matter.
                            // 16 //


     With this, the present appeal stands disposed of.
……………………………..J.
                                        [M.R. SHAH]




                                        ……………………………..J.
                                        [SANJIV KHANNA]

New Delhi,
July 11, 2022