[Cites
14
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
State Bank Of India vs Dr. Vijay Mallya on 11 July, 2022
Author:
Uday Umesh Lalit
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
S. Ravindra Bhat
,
Uday Umesh Lalit
1

                                                                                 REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         INHERENT JURISDICTION

                              CONTEMPT PETITION (C) NOS.421-424 OF 2016

                                                        IN

                           SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS.6828-6831 OF 2016


           STATE BANK OF INDIA AND ORS.                                   ...PETITIONERS


                                                    VERSUS

          DR. VIJAY MALLYA                                                …RESPONDENT


                                                    ORDER
Uday Umesh Lalit, J.
1.              These Contempt Petitions have come up before us pursuant to the

                         Judgment and Order dated 9.5.2017 passed by this Court in “I.A Nos.9-12

                         & 13-16 of 2016 in SLP (C) Nos.6828-6831 of 2016 with I.A. Nos.1-4 of

                         2016 in and with Contempt Petition (C) Nos.421-424 of 2016 in SLP (C)

                         Nos.6828-6831 of 2016”.
2.              After dealing with the facts which led to the filing of the aforestated
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Interim Applications and Contempt Petitions, this Court found
Date: 2022.07.11
17:12:08 IST
Reason:
Respondent No.3 (Dr. Vijay Mallya) guilty of committing contempt of
2
Court on two counts. Paragraphs 22 to 30 of said Judgment and Order

dated 9.5.2017 were: -
“22. We now turn to the alleged violation of orders dated
03.09.2013 and 13.11.2013 passed by the High Court of
           Karnataka. It is not disputed that such orders were passed
           restraining the concerned respondents including Respondent
           No.3 and that the orders were passed in proceedings arising
           from O.A. No.766 of 2013 before DRT Bengaluru. The
           present proceedings before this court have also arisen from
           the very same O.A. No.766 of 2013. The orders of restraints
           passed by the High Court were therefore in the very same
           proceedings with which we are presently concerned. Said
           orders bound the concerned respondents including
           Respondent No.3 and restrained them from transferring,
           alienating, disposing or creating third party rights in respect
           of movable as well as immovable properties belonging to
           them till further orders in the proceedings. A question has
           been raised by Mr. Vaidyanathan learned senior advocate
           whether the orders would be restricted only so far as the
           properties which were in the hands of the concerned
           respondents as on the date when those orders of restraint
           were passed. In other words, whether any properties which
           in future or subsequent to the Orders had come in the hands
           or control of the concerned respondent would be covered by
           such orders or not. On plain reading of the Orders, in our
           view, whether the properties were in the hands of the
           concerned respondents on the date when the orders of
           restraint were passed by the High Court or had come in their
           hands or under their control at a later point in time,
           regardless of such qualification all properties whether
           movable or immovable were governed by the orders of
           restraint. There is no ambiguity of any sort and the Orders
           of restraint are quite clear. Consequently, funds amounting
           to US$ 40 million which came to be under the control of
           and in the hands of Respondent No.3 were completely
           covered and governed by said orders of restraint.
23. The memo dated 28.06.2016 filed by Respondent No.10
           in said O.A. No.766 of 2013 annexed, “Extract confirming
           payment of US$ (US Dollars) 40 Million to Defendant No.3
           on 25.02.2016”. It is thus beyond any doubt that the
           payment of US$ 40Million was received by Respondent
           No.3 on 25.02.2016. These facts are admitted by
           Respondent No.3 in Paragraph 3 of his “further counter
           affidavit”. The explanation that the funds now stand
           transferred in favour of the trusts over which Respondent
           No.3 has no control at all, in fact aggravates the extent of
3
violation. It is clear that the funds which were in control of
                       Respondent No.3 have now been sought to be put beyond
                       the reach of processes of court, which is reflective of the
                       intent.
24. The applications moved by the petitioners-banks on
                       02.03.2016 themselves had made clear reference to the fact
                       that as disclosed by respondent Nos.10 and 11 to London
                       Stock Exchange and Bombay Stock Exchange respectively
                       Respondent No.10 would pay to Respondent No.3 a sum of
                       US$75 million and accordingly petitioners-banks had
                       moved four interlocutory applications for orders against
                       respondent Nos.10 and 11 for disbursing said amount of
                       US$ 75 million. The amount of US$ 40 Million so received
                       by Respondent No.3 was therefore subject matter of the
                       present controversy. The least that was expected of
                       Respondent No.3 was to disclose relevant facts pertaining to
                       receipt and disbursement of US$ 40 million. The violation
                       on that count is thus not only against the directions issued
                       by this court but also against express mandate of orders
                       dated 03.09.2013 and 13.11.2013 passed in the proceedings
                       in question.
25. Having thus found that the actions on the part of
                       Respondent No.3 in disbursing the amount of US$ 40
                       million was against the text and tenor of the orders passed
                       by the High Court of Karnataka, the question then arises
                       whether this Court can take cognizance of such violation or
                       should it leave it to be decided by the High Court of
                       Karnataka itself in a properly instituted legal proceeding.
26.
In Delhi Judicial Service Association, Tis Hazari
                       Court,
Delhi v. State of Gujarat
and others1, a question
                       arose whether the power and jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 129
of the Constitution is confined to “the contempt
                       of this Court” alone. Submissions advanced in that behalf
                       were noted in paragraph 14 of the judgment which sets out
                       the submission of the learned Attorney General:
“...The Supreme Court as the Apex Court is the
                            protector and guardian of justice throughout the
                            land, therefore, it has a right and also a duty to
                            protect the courts whose orders and judgments are
                            amenable to correction, from commission of
                            contempt against them.”

                            The subsequent paragraphs of the judgment namely
                       paragraph 26 onwards show that the contentions so
                       advanced by the learned Attorney General were accepted by
                       this Court. It is true that the discussion was in the context of
1   (1991) 4 SCC 406
4
the contempt of a subordinate court. However, the nature of
power exercisable by this Court was considered in the
backdrop that this Court has supreme appellate jurisdiction
over all courts and tribunals in the country which is clear
from the observations in paragraph 31 of the judgment. We
must say that Mr. Vaidyanathan did not seriously contend to
the contrary but his submission was that if the jurisdiction is
so assumed and cognizance is taken by this Court,
Respondent No.3 would lose one opportunity of having the
matter assessed at the level of the High Court. In our
considered view, since we are dealing with the very same
cause in which the orders of restraint were passed by the
High Court and since it is coupled with the violation of
orders of this Court as well, the matter can and ought to be
dealt with by this Court.
27. The record shows that by order dated 11.01.2017 the
violation of those orders for restraint passed by the High
Court of Karnataka was taken note of by this Court and the
Counsel appearing for respondent had sought time to file an
appropriate reply. However, no such reply was filed.
Respondent No.3 was thus put to clear notice about the
violation of those orders of restraints passed by the High
Court of Karnataka. As such, no prejudice has been caused
or visited upon Respondent No.3.
28. We find that the allegations against Respondent No.3 of
committing of contempt are on two counts, in that –
a) He is guilty of disobeying the Orders passed by this
   Court in not disclosing full particulars of the assets as
   was directed by this Court.
b) He is guilty of violating the express Orders of
   Restraint passed by the High Court of Karnataka in the
   same Cause from which the present proceedings have
   arisen.
Though the contempt on the second count is theoretically
of the orders passed by the High Court of Karnataka since
those orders pertain to the very same Cause and the actions
on part of Respondent No.3 in not disclosing the account in
question through which the transfers were affected also fall
with respect to contempt on first count, we proceed to
exercise our contempt jurisdiction even with regard to the
second count. As stated above, Respondent No.3 was
adequately put to notice and no prejudice has been caused
as a result of such assumption of jurisdiction by this court.
29. Having considered the entirety of the matter, we find
that Respondent No.3 is guilty of having committed
5
contempt of court on both the counts. At this stage it must
                be stated that in terms of Rule 6 (1) of Rules to Regulate
                Proceeding for Contempt of Supreme Court 1975,
                Respondent No.3 was obliged and duty bound to appear in
                person in response to the notice issued by this Court in
                Contempt Petition. Instead, he chose to file application
                seeking recall of the orders issuing notice. Having
                considered the matter, we see no reason to recall that order
                and dismiss I.A. Nos.1 to 4 of 2016 preferred by
                Respondent No.3 in Contempt Petition Civil Nos.421-424
                of 2016. Respondent No.3 is therefore duty bound to appear
                in person in the present contempt proceedings.
30. Since Respondent No.3 has not filed any reply to the
                Contempt Petition nor did he appear in person, though we
                have found him guilty of having committed contempt of
                court, we deem it necessary to give him one more
                opportunity and also hear him on the proposed punishment.
                We therefore adjourn matter to 10.07.2017 for hearing
                Respondent No.3 in person on matters in issue including
                one regarding the proposed punishment to be awarded to
                him for contempt of court. The instant contempt petitions
                and connected cases shall now be listed at 2 o'clock on
                10.07.2017. Respondent No.3 may keep his affidavit ready
                to be tendered on the same day by stating mitigating
                circumstances, if any and any other submissions he chooses
                to advance.
31. We direct the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of
                India, New Delhi to secure and ensure presence of
                Respondent No.3 before this Court on 10.07.2017. A copy
                of this Judgment be sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs for
                compliance”.
3.   The disbursement of US$ 40 million which had entered the account held

     in Edmond De Rothschild (Suisse) S.A. was dealt with in detail and

     paragraph 3 of the “further counter affidavit” filed by Respondent No.3

     was also quoted by this Court as follows: -
“16. Respondent No.3 thereafter filed “further counter
                affidavit” in aforementioned I.A. Nos.9-12 of 2016 on
                23.11.2016. The affidavit enclosed letter dated 18.11.2016
                issued by Edmond De Rothschild (Suisse) S.A. Paragraph 3
                of the affidavit was to the following effect:
6
“On a mere perusal of the letter dated 18th
                    November, 2016 issued by Edmond De Rothschild
                    (Suisse) S.A. (Annex. “R-2” hereto), it is evident that
                    the US$ 39,999,994 million paid by Diageo Plc was
                    received on 25th February, 2016. On instructions of
                    Respondent No.3, an aggregate sum of US$
                    39,999,993.99 was paid to the following parties on
                    26th and 29th February, 2016 respectively:
NAME OF PARTY                   AMOUNT
                    S. Three Gift Settlement     US$13,000,000 (On
                    (a Trust the sole            26.02.2016) & US$
                    beneficiary of which is      333,331.33
                    Siddartha Mallya, son of     (on 29.02.2016)
                    Respondent No.3)
                    L. Three Gift Settlement     US$13,000,000 (On
                    (a Trust the sole            26.02.2016) & US$
                    beneficiary of which is      333,331.33
                    Leena Mallya, daughter       (on 29.02.2016)
                    of Respondent No.3)
                    T. Three Gift Settlement     US$13,000,000 (On
                    (a Trust the sole            26.02.2016) & US$
                    beneficiary of which is      333,331.33
                    Tanya Mallya, daughter       (on 29.02.2016)
                    of Respondent No.3)
                            TOTAL                US$ 39,999,993.99
Each of the three children of Respondent No.3,
                    who are the sole beneficiaries of the aforesaid Trusts,
                    are majors and are citizens of the United States of
                    America. Respondent No.3 is neither the Settlor nor
                    the Trustee nor the beneficiary of any of the aforesaid
                    named Trusts, and has no control over the Trusts or
                    the manner in which the respective corpuses of each
                    of the aforesaid Trusts is utilized. However, the
                    respective corpuses as they stood on 31st March, 2016
                    have been included in the statements of assets of the
                    three children handed over to this Hon’ble Court in
                    sealed envelope on 26th April, 2016.” ”
4.   As stated in paragraphs 29 and 30 quoted hereinabove, an opportunity

     was given to Respondent No.3 (hereafter referred to as the Contemnor) to

     file his response and advance submissions on the proposed punishment.
The matter was accordingly adjourned to 10.7.2017.
7
5.   The Contemnor however sought review of the Judgment and Order dated

     9.5.2017, which application remained pending for some time and was

     rejected by this Court vide Order dated 03.08.2020. By said order the

     Contemnor was directed to appear before this Court; and the Ministry of

     Home Affairs, Government of India, New Delhi, was directed to facilitate

     and ensure the presence of the Contemnor on the date of such appearance.
6.   The subsequent developments in the matter stand captured in the Order

     dated 30.11.2021 passed by this Court, which for facility, is extracted

     here:-
“By judgment dated 09.05.2017 passed by this Court
                in I.A. Nos.9-12 and 13-16 of 2016 in SLP (Civil)
                Nos.6828-6831 of 2016 and I.A. Nos.1-4 of 2016 in
                Contempt Petition (C) Nos.421-424 of 2016 in SLP (Civil)
                Nos.6828-6831 of 2016, respondent no.3 Dr. Vijay Mallya
                was found to be guilty of having committed contempt of
                court. The judgment directed that the matter be listed on
                10.07.2017 to hear respondent no.3 on matters in issue
                including one regarding the proposed punishment to be
                awarded to him for contempt of court. However, because of
                proceedings, which at the relevant time, were going on in
                the Courts of United Kingdom, the presence of respondent
                no.3 could not be secured.
In its subsequent order dated 02.11.2020, this Court
                noted that certain proceedings were going on in United
                Kingdom, though the details of such proceedings were not
                forthcoming. This Court rejected the submission made by
                Mr. E.C. Agrawala, learned Advocate seeking discharge and
                it was directed that the learned Advocate would continue to
                appear for respondent no.3. Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned
                Solicitor General was then granted time to place Status
                Report on record.
The matter was thereafter adjourned on few occasions
                and because of COVID-19 pandemic situation, the matter
                could not be listed and taken up.
8
Today when the matter was called out, Mr. Tushar
Mehta, learned Solicitor General invited our attention to the
Office Memorandum dated 30.11.2021 issued under
signature of Deputy Secretary (Extradition), CPV Division,
Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India.
Paragraphs 2 to 5 of the Memorandum read as under:
“2. It may be recalled that an extradition request in
     respect of VM was forwarded to UK side on 9
     February 2017 in CBI Case under Sections 120B read
     with 420 of the
Indian Penal Code
and
Section 13(2)
read with
Section 13(1)(d)
of the Prevention of
     Corruption Act, 1988. On 10 December 2018, the
     Senior District Judge Westminster Magistrate’s Court,
     London recommended VM’s extradition to India. VM
     appealed the Order of his extradition before the High
     Court of London. The appeal was admitted on the sole
     ground of sufficiency of prima facie case. The High
     Court of London dismissed the appeal on 20 April
     2020. VM applied leave to appeal to the Supreme
     Court in the High Court. On 14 May 2020 the High
     Court of London rejected his application for
     permission to appeal to Supreme Court. VM has thus
     exhausted all avenues of appeal in the UK.
3. Following the refusal of leave to appeal, VM’s
     surrender to India should, in principle, have been
     completed within 28 days. However, the UK Home
     Office intimated that there is a further legal issue
     which needs to be resolved before VM’s extradition
     may take place. The UK side further said that this
     issue is outside and apart from the extradition process,
     but it has the effect that under the United Kingdom
     law, extradition cannot take place until it is resolved.
The High Commission was further informed that the
     issue is confidential and so it cannot be disclosed.
4. In compliance with the Order of the Hon’ble
     Supreme Court dated 31.08.2020, the Government of
     India again took up the pending extradition case of
     VM with the Government of UK so as to seek his
     early extradition and facilitate his presence before the
     Hon’ble Supreme Court on 5 October 2020.
5. The UK side has informed that extradition of VM
     cannot take place until a separate legal issue, which is
     judicial and confidential in nature is resolved. The UK
     side emphasized that neither they can provide any
     more details nor intervene in the process. They have
     also indicated that through the designated channel, the
9
UK Home Office has received a request to serve
                     summons on VM for his hearing before the Hon’ble
                     Supreme Court. The British Home Office has
                     forwarded the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s Order
                     through the Hertfordshire Police on 17 September
                     2020 for serving it to VM.”

                  As indicated in paragraph 2 of the Memorandum, the
                proceedings for extradition have attained finality and
                respondent no.3 has exhausted all avenues of appeal in the
                United Kingdom. However, paragraphs 4 and 5 deal with
                some proceedings which are stated to be confidential and
                with regard to which no details are forthcoming. It appears
                that these are the same proceedings which were referred to
                in the order dated 02.11.2020.
Having considered all the circumstances on record, it is
                directed:
a. The matter in terms of the directions issued by this
                    Court in its order dated 09.05.2017 shall now be listed
                    on 18.01.2022.
b. Respondent No.3 is at liberty to advance such
                    submissions, as are deemed appropriate, pertaining to
                    the issues set out in the order dated 09.05.2017.
c. If, for any reason, respondent no.3 is not present to
                    advance such submissions, learned counsel on his
                    behalf can advance such submissions as are open to
                    respondent no.3, in law.
d. We request Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned Senior
                    Advocate of this Court to assist the Court as Amicus
                    Curiae in the matter.
Mr. Gupta will be at liberty to avail services of any
                    Advocate-on-Record of his own choice in the instant
                    matter.
The Registry is directed to supply papers of this matter
                    to Mr. Gupta within a week.
e. The matter shall be dealt with finally on 18.01.2022.”
7.   The matter thereafter came up before this Court on 10.03.2022 on which

     date the following Order was passed: -
10
“1. Pursuant to orders passed from time to time and more
particularly orders dated 30.11.2021 and 10.02.2022, the
matter is posted today for hearing.
2. In terms of Directions (b) and (c) issued by this Court
vide order dated 30.11.2021, the contemnor was given
specific liberty to advance submissions pertaining to the
issues set-out in the judgment dated 09.05.2017.
Additionally, he was given further liberty to advance such
submissions through his learned Counsel.
3. Mr. Ankur Saigal, learned counsel appearing on behalf
of the contemnor submits that all the orders including the
orders dated 30.11.2021 and 10.02.2022 were brought to
the notice of the contemnor and that there was exchange of
communications between the learned counsel and the
contemnor. A copy of the communication dated 17.01.2022
has been placed for our perusal which communication inter
alia states inability on part of the Solicitors of the
contemnor to provide any information about the nature of
proceedings and the relief sought in the pending
proceedings in the United Kingdom.
4. We then invited Mr. Ankur Saigal, learned counsel to
advance submissions on merits of the matter in keeping
with the directions issued in last two orders. Mr. Saigal
expressed his inability to advance the submissions.
5. We have heard Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned Senior
Advocate, who has assisted this Court as Amicus Curiae
very ably. He has invited our attention to various aspects of
the record including the judgment dated 09.05.2017 in
State Bank of India & Others v. Kingfisher Airlines Ltd. &
Others
, (2017) 6 SCC 654, provisions of the
Contempt of
Courts Act
and the Supreme Court Rules, 2013.
He has
also relied upon various decisions of this Court including
the decision in Supreme Court
Bar Association v. Union of
India & Another
, (1998) 4 SCC 409.
6. Mr. Gupta may file his written submissions on or before
12.03.2022.
7. Even though Mr. Ankur Saigal, learned counsel has
expressed his inability to advance submissions though he
was invited to do so, we still grant one more opportunity to
file his submissions on or before 15.03.2022, with an
advance copy to the learned Amicus Curiae.”
11
8.    The oral arguments advanced by Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned Amicus

      Curiae were summarized in his Written Submissions as under: -
“A.      The sum of the money which was received by
                      Edmond deRothschild (Suisse) M.A. was, on the
                      instruction of the Respondent No.3/ contemnor, paid to
                      three trusts wherein the sole beneficiaries were the son and
                      two daughters of the Respondent No.3/ Contemnor. The
                      aforementioned amount had been transferred in violation of
                      order of court by taking advantage of the very act of
                      contempt which has been held against the Contemnor/
                      Respondent No.3. It is, therefore, submitted that this
                      Hon’ble Court may give appropriate direction for reversal
                      of the aforesaid transactions by declaring the said
                      transactions to be void.
B.      The present contempt proceedings arise out of
                      recovery proceedings by Banks. It is stated by the
                      Counsel on behalf of State Bank of India that decrees have
                      been passed against the Respondent No.3 in the said
                      recovery proceedings and Recovery Officer has been
                      appointed for enforcement and execution of the said
                      decree. It thought fit, this Hon’ble Court may give
                      appropriate direction to the said Recovery Officer to trace
                      the said funds into the hands of whoever they may have
                      been transferred to and use the same in execution of the
                      decree.
C.     In the event the said funds are found inadequate to
                      purge the said contempt, appropriate orders may be passed
                      for sequestration of the assets of the respondent no.3/
                      contemnor both in India and outside. Assistance of the
                      Banks and/ or the Union of India may be taken to find out
                      all assets that may be available to the respondent No.3/
                      Contemnor. Alternatively, a forensic auditor may be
                      appointed to undertake such an exercise.”


             Reliance was placed by the learned Amicus Curiae on the decisions

      of this Court in Supreme Court Bar Association v. Union of India & Anr.2,

      Noorali Babul Thanewala v. K.M.M. Shetty & Ors. 3, Rama Narang v.
2 (1998) 4 SCC 409.
3 (1990) 1 SCC 259.
12
Ramesh Narang4, Pravin C. Shah v. K.A. Mohd. Ali & Anr.5
to submit that

        in contempt jurisdiction the Court can direct the contemnor to purge the

        contempt by reversing the very transaction that was found to be

        contumacious.
On the remedy of sequestration of assets, reliance was

        placed on Rose v. Laskington6,
Mir v. Mir7
and Richardson v. Richardson8.
9.      In spite of repeated opportunities afforded to the Contemnor, no

        submissions were advanced on his behalf either on purging of contempt

        or on the quantum of punishment.
10.     The actions on part of the Contemnor having been found to be

        contumacious and established in the Judgment and Order dated

        09.05.2017, we are presently concerned with the issues as to what orders

        be passed regarding punishment and purging of contempt. The approach

        in such cases was succinctly stated by this Court in Pravin C. Shah v.
K.A. Mohd. Ali & Anr.5 as under:
“23. Now we have to consider the crucial question — how
                        can a contemnor purge himself of the contempt? According
                        to the Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of India,
                        purging oneself of contempt can be done by apologising to
                        the court. The said opinion of the Bar Council of India can
                        be seen from the following portion of the impugned order:
“Purging oneself of contempt can be only by
                             regretting or apologising in the case of a completed
                             action of criminal contempt. If it is a case of civil
                             contempt, by subsequent compliance with the orders

4   (2009)   16 SCC 126.
5   (2001)   8 SCC 650.
6   (1989)   3 AllER 306.
7   (1992)   1 AllER 765.
8   (1989)   3 AllER 779.
13
or directions the contempt can be purged of. There is
     no procedural provision in law to get purged of
     contempt by an order of an appropriate court.”
24. Purging is a process by which an undesirable element is
expelled either from one's own self or from a society. It is a
cleaning process. Purge is a word which acquired
implications first in theological connotations. In the case of
a sin, purging of such sin is made through the expression of
sincere remorse coupled with doing the penance required.
In the case of a guilt, purging means to get himself cleared
of the guilt. The concept of purgatory was evolved from
the word “purge”, which is a state of suffering after this life
in which those souls, who depart this life with their deadly
sins, are purified and rendered fit to enter into heaven
where nothing defiled enters (vide Words and Phrases,
Permanent Edn., Vol. 35-A, p. 307). In Black's Law
Dictionary the word “purge” is given the following
meaning: “To cleanse; to clear. To clear or exonerate from
some charge or imputation of guilt, or from a contempt.” It
is preposterous to suggest that if the convicted person
undergoes punishment or if he tenders the fine amount
imposed on him the purge would be completed.
25. We are told that a learned Single Judge of the
Allahabad High Court has expressed a view that purging
process would be completed when the contemnor
undergoes the penalty [vide
Madan Gopal Gupta
(Dr) v. Agra University
[AIR 1974 All 39] ]. This is what
the learned Single Judge said about it: (AIR p. 43, para 13)

     “In my opinion a party in contempt purged its
     contempt by obeying the orders of the court or by
     undergoing the penalty imposed by the court.”
26. Obeying the orders of the court would be a mode by
which one can make the purging process in a substantial
manner when it is a civil contempt. Even for such a civil
contempt the purging process would not be treated as
completed merely by the contemnor undergoing the
penalty imposed on him unless he has obeyed the order of
the court or he has undone the wrong. If that is the position
in regard to civil contempt the position regarding criminal
contempt must be stronger.
Section 2
of the Contempt of
Courts Act categorises contempt of court into two
categories. The first category is “civil contempt” which is
the wilful disobedience of the order of the court including
breach of an undertaking given to the court. But “criminal
contempt” includes doing any act whatsoever, which tends
to scandalise or lowers the authority of any court, or tends
14
to interfere with the due course of a judicial proceeding or
                 interferes with, or obstructs the administration of justice in
                 any other manner.
27. We cannot therefore approve the view that merely
                 undergoing the penalty imposed on a contemnor is
                 sufficient to complete the process of purging himself of the
                 contempt, particularly in a case where the contemnor is
                 convicted of criminal contempt. The danger in giving
                 accord to the said view of the learned Single Judge in the
                 aforecited decision is that if a contemnor is sentenced to a
                 fine he can immediately pay it and continue to commit
                 contempt in the same court, and then again pay the fine and
                 persist with his contemptuous conduct. There must be
                 something more to be done to get oneself purged of the
                 contempt when it is a case of criminal contempt.”
11.   Similarly, following observations were made and directions were issued

      by this Court in
Noorali Babul Thanewala v. K.M.M. Shetty & Ors.3
:
“11. ……..It is settled law that breach of an injunction or
                 breach of an undertaking given to a court by a person in a
                 civil proceeding on the faith of which the court sanctions a
                 particular course of action is misconduct amounting to
                 contempt. The remedy in such circumstances may be in the
                 form of a direction to the contemnor to purge the contempt
                 or a sentence of imprisonment or fine or all of them. On the
                 facts and circumstances of this case in the light of our
                 finding that there was a breach of the undertaking we think
                 that mere imposition of imprisonment or fine will not meet
                 the ends of justice. There will have to be an order to purge
                 the contempt by directing respondent 1-contemnor to
                 deliver vacant possession immediately and issuing
                 necessary further and consequential directions for
                 enforcing the same.
12. In the foregoing circumstances, we find respondent 1
                 guilty of committing contempt by wilful disobedience of
                 the undertaking given by him in this Court and accordingly
                 we convict him and sentence him to pay a fine of Rs 500
                 within the period of four weeks, failing which he shall
                 suffer simple imprisonment for one month, and also direct
                 him to deliver vacant possession of the premises forthwith
                 to the petitioner to the extent possible by him. We further
                 direct the District Magistrate, Thane, to evict all those who
                 are in physical possession of the property including
                 respondent 2 and his men and if necessary, with police help
15
and give vacant possession of the premises to the petitioner
                    forthwith.”
12.   The importance of passing appropriate directions, apart from imposing

      punishment upon the contemnor, was stressed by the Constitution Bench

      of this Court in Supreme Court
Bar Association v. Union of India & Anr.2
as follows:
“33. Thus, the recognised and accepted punishments for
                    civil or criminal contempt of court in English law, which
                    have been followed and accepted by the courts in this
                    country and incorporated in the Indian law insofar as, civil
                    contempt, is concerned are:
(i) sequestration of assets;
(ii) fine;
(iii) committal to prison.
34. The object of punishment being both curative and
                    corrective, these coercions are meant to assist an individual
                    complainant to enforce his remedy and there is also an
                    element of public policy for punishing civil contempt,
                    since the administration of justice would be undermined if
                    the order of any court of law is to be disregarded with
                    impunity. Under some circumstances, compliance of the
                    order may be secured without resort to coercion, through
                    the contempt power. For example, disobedience of an order
                    to pay a sum of money may be effectively countered by
                    attaching the earnings of the contemner. In the same
                    manner, committing the person of the defaulter to prison
                    for failure to comply with an order of specific performance
                    of conveyance of property, may be met also by the court
                    directing that the conveyance be completed by an
                    appointed person. Disobedience of an undertaking may in
                    the like manner be enforced through process other than
                    committal to prison as for example where the breach of
                    undertaking is to deliver possession of property in a
                    landlord-tenant dispute. Apart from punishing the
                    contemner, the court to maintain the majesty of law may
                    direct the police force to be utilised for recovery of
                    possession and burden the contemner with costs,
                    exemplary or otherwise.”
16
13.   It is, thus, well settled that apart from punishing the contemnor for his

      contumacious conduct, the majesty of law may demand that appropriate

      directions be issued by the court so that any advantage secured as a result

      of such contumacious conduct is completely nullified. The approach may

      require the court to pass directions either for reversal of the transactions

      in question by declaring said transactions to be void or passing

      appropriate directions to the concerned authorities to see that the

      contumacious conduct on the part of the contemnor does not continue to

      enure to the advantage of the contemnor or any one claiming under him.
It is precisely for these reasons that the direction to have vacant

      possession delivered to the rightful claimant was passed by this Court in
Noorali Babul Thanewala v. K.M.M. Shetty & Ors.
3 Mere passing of an

      order of punishment as stated by this Court in
Pravin C. Shah v. K.A.

      Mohd. Ali & Anr.5
would not be enough or sufficient. In a given case, to

      meet the ends of justice, the concept of purging of the contempt would

      call for complete disgorging of all the benefits secured as a result of

      actions which are found by the court to be contumacious.
14.   In its Judgment and Order dated 09.05.2017, this Court had found that the

      action on part of the Contemnor in disbursing the amount of US$ 40

      million was against the text and tenor of orders passed by the High Court

      of Karnataka and that the Contemnor was guilty of contempt.
17
15.   In the circumstances, in order to maintain the majesty of law, we must

      impose adequate punishment upon the Contemnor and must also pass

      necessary directions so that the advantages secured by the Contemnor or

      anyone claiming under him are set at naught and the amounts in question

      are available in execution of the decrees passed in the concerned

      Recovery Proceedings.
16.   Considering the facts and circumstances on record and the facts that the

      Contemnor never showed any remorse nor tendered any apology for his

      conduct, we impose sentence of four months and fine in the sum of

      Rs.2,000/- (Rupees Two Thousand Only) upon the Contemnor. The fine

      shall be deposited in the Registry of this Court within four weeks and

      upon such deposit, the amount shall be made over to the Supreme Court

      Legal Services Committee. In case the amount of fine is not deposited

      within the time stipulated, the Contemnor shall undergo further sentence

      of two months.
We direct the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, New

      Delhi to secure the presence of the Contemnor to undergo the

      imprisonment imposed upon him. Needless to say, Government of India

      including the Ministry of External Affairs and all other agencies or

      instrumentalities shall carry out the directions issued by this Court with
18
due diligence and utmost expediency. A Compliance Report shall

      thereafter be filed in the Registry of this Court.
17.   We also direct:
A. The transactions referred to in the Judgment and Order dated

         09.05.2017 in terms of which the amount of US$ 40 million was

         disbursed to the beneficiaries detailed in paragraph 16 of
the said

         judgment
and order is held to be void and inoperative;
B. The Contemnor and the beneficiaries under said transactions referred to

         in the said Paragraph 16 shall be bound to deposit the amount received

         by such beneficiaries along with interest at the rate of 8 per cent per

         annum with the concerned Recovery Officer within four weeks.
C. In case the amounts are not so deposited, the concerned Recovery

         Officer shall be entitled to take appropriate proceedings for recovery of

         said amounts; and Government of India and all the concerned agencies

         shall extend assistance and complete cooperation. It shall be open to

         take such appropriate steps including the appointment of Forensic

         Auditor(s).
18.   In the end, we must express our sincere gratitude and appreciation for the

      efforts put in by Mr. Jaideep Gupta, learned Senior Advocate who assisted

      this Court very ably as Amicus Curiae.
19
19.   These contempt petitions, thus, stand disposed of.
………………………………..J.
                                                    [Uday Umesh Lalit]



                                               ………………………………..J.
                                                     [S. Ravindra Bhat]


                                               ………………………………..J.
                                               [Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha]
New Delhi;
July 11, 2022.