[Cites
22
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Ajmal vs The State Of Kerala on 12 July, 2022
Author:
Vikram Nath
Bench:
Vikram Nath
,
Ajay Rastogi
1

     ITEM NO.1503                                    COURT NO.9                        SECTION II-B

                                    S U P R E M E C O U R T O F                 I N D I A
                                            RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                                         Criminal Appeal      No(s).      1838/2019

     AJMAL                                                                            Appellant(s)

                                                           VERSUS

     THE STATE OF KERALA                                                              Respondent(s)

     (IA No. 138723/2019 -                    EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)
     (IA No. 111141/2019 -                    EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)
     (IA No. 181777/2019                      - PERMISSION TO FILE ADDITIONAL                DOCUMENTS/
     FACTS/ANNEXURES)
     (IA No. 138721/2019                      -    PERMISSION      TO    FILE   ADDITIONAL   DOCUMENTS/
     FACTS/ANNEXURES)

     WITH

     Crl.A. No. 1839/2019 (II-B)
     (IA No. 149320/2019 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)

     (Crl.A. No. 1840/2019 (II-B)
     (IA No. 153460/2019 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)

     Date : 12-07-2022 These matters were called on for pronouncement of
     Judgment today.

     For Appellant(s)                      Mr. P. V. Dinesh, AOR
                                           Mr. Ashwini Kumar Singh, Adv.
                                           Mr. Bineesh K., Adv.

                                           Mr.    Harikumar V., AOR
                                           Mr.    Anupam Mishra, Adv.
                                           Mr.    Jenis V. Francis, Adv.
                                           Ms.    P. S. Chandralekha, Adv.

                                            Mr. N. Hariharan, Sr. Adv.
                                            Mr. Shinoj K. Narayanan, Adv.
                                           Mr. K. Rajeev, AOR

     For Respondent(s)                     Mr. Harshad V. Hameed, AOR
                                           Mr. Dileep Poolakkot, Adv.
Signature Not Verified
                                           Ms. Ashly Harshad, Adv.
Digitally signed by
Jayant Kumar Arora
Date: 2022.07.12
17:33:34 IST
Reason:                  Hon’ble   Mr.    Justice    Vikram       Nath   pronounced    the   reportable

     Judgment of the Bench comprising Hon’ble Mr. Justice Ajay Rastogi
                                              2

and His Lordship.

    The     operative         portion        of     the      Judgment       is    reproduced

hereunder:-

       “23. Thus, for all the reasons stated above, we

       are of the view that the appellants would be

       entitled for acquittal under
section 302
IPC but

       would be liable to be convicted under
section

       304
Part-II
IPC
. Rest of the conviction upheld

       by     the    High     Court    and        the    sentence    for    the

       charges under
sections 341
,
323
,
324
and
427
read with
section 34
IPC is maintained.                            It is

       ordered accordingly.



       24. Now coming to the question of sentence upon

       conviction       under
section          304
Part-II
IPC
,    we

       find that all the three appellants are in jail

       and      have          undergone            several        years      of

       incarceration. We accordingly award the sentence

       for    the     period    already           undergone    by    all    the

       three        appellants.        The        appellants        would    be

       released forthwith unless they are required in

       any other case.



       25.          Appeals    stand    partly          allowed   as    above.

       The impugned judgment of the High Court stands

       modified to the aforesaid extent.”
                                 3



      Pending interlocutory application(s), if any, is/are disposed

of.


(JAYANT KUMAR ARORA)                           (RENU BALA GAMBHIR)
ASST. REGISTRAR-CUM-PS                           COURT MASTER

         (Signed reportable Judgment is placed on the file)
                                 4

                                                   REPORTABLE

            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

            Criminal Appeal No. 1838 of 2019



AJMAL                                   APPELLANT(S)

                          VERSUS

THE STATE OF KERALA                   RESPONDENT(S)

                            WITH

            Criminal Appeal No. 1839 of 2019

                          AND WITH

            Criminal Appeal No. 1840 of 2019



                         JUDGMENT
Vikram Nath, J.
1.   The present set of three appeals filed by accused­

appellants namely, Biju (accused no.1), Ashique Salam

(accused   no.2)   and   Ajmal       (accused   no.3)   assail   the

correctness of the judgment and order dated 30th May, 2019

passed by the High Court of Kerala in Criminal Appeal Nos.
5
91, 238 and 564 of 2014, whereby the aforesaid appeals were

partly allowed. The conviction of these three appellants under
sections 143
,
147
,
148
IPC1 read with
section 149
IPC was set

aside, however, their conviction and sentence under
sections

341
,
323
,
324
,
427
and
302
read with
section 34
IPC as

awarded by the Trial Court was confirmed.
2.      At the outset, it may be pointed out that there were 10

(ten)       accused,              who   were   charge­sheeted.   The   present

appellants are accused nos. A1, A2 and A3. Four accused

namely accused nos. 4, 5, 7 and 10 were acquitted of all the

charges by the Trial Court. Further High Court acquitted

three accused namely accused nos. 6, 8 and 9 of all the

charges. Thus, out of 10 (ten) accused, the present three

accused­appellants A1, A2 and A3 stand convicted by the

High Court and, as such, are before this Court.
3.      According to the prosecution case the entire transaction

was in three parts. It is briefly stated as under:
1
IPC
–
Indian Penal Code
, 1860
6
3.1. In the last week of January, 2008, there were

festivals going on in the Church located at Thidanadu and

Variyanikkadu.     The   deceased­Varkeychen   @   George

Thomas along with his friends initially went to Thidanadu

Church in a Scorpio Car, which was driven by Saji Joseph

(P.W.­1) to attend a musical festival (gana mela). The

deceased along with his friends watched the programme

for about half an hour and, thereafter, proceeded towards

another Church at Variyanikkadu to enjoy the festival

going on there. At about 9:00 p.m., they were returning to

Thidanadu Church, when two motor­bikes driven by

accused no.9 (Sabeer) and accused no.3, Ajmal were

moving in front of their Car and blocked their way.
Accused no.6 (Razique Jalal @ Razee) was sitting as a

pillion on the motor­cycle, driven by A3 (Ajmal). At that

time, a verbal altercation took place between Saji Joseph

(PW­1) and A3 (Ajmal) regarding the bikes not giving way

to their vehicle (four wheeler).
7
3.2. At around 10:45 p.m., deceased along with his

friends were returning, when their Car reached the place

called Veyilukanampara Junction in Thidanadu Kara,

they saw accused no.9 (Sabeer) waiting for them by the

side of the road and soon thereafter the other accused

also joined him on different bikes. All the ten accused­

persons formed an unlawful assembly and in prosecution

of a common object wrongfully restrained the deceased

and his friends and compelled them to alight from their

vehicle. Once, they were out of the vehicle, they were

attacked by the accused­appellants. The accused no.1

(Biju) hit the deceased with a stick of casuarina tree

(marked as MO­2).      Whereas accused no.2 (Ashique

Salam) hit on the back of his neck with a brick (marked

as MO­3), as a result of these two injuries, deceased fell

on the road. Accused no. 3 (Ajmal) assaulted Saji Joseph

(PW­1) with a stick of casuarina tree (marked as MO­1)

causing injuries on his head and other parts of the body.
8
As by this time, public had started gathering, the accused

     left the place of occurrence.
3.3. Further, when the deceased was being taken in the

     car by his friends towards the hospital, once again, the

     vehicle   was    stopped   by   the   accused­persons   near

     Chennadu Junction, where accused no.3, Ajmal threw

     stones at the car causing damage to the wind screen and

     other glasses.
3.4. The injured­deceased was taken to IHM Hospital,

     Bharananganam and from there, he was referred to the

     Medical College Hospital at Kottayam. His condition was

     deteriorating, as such, he was shifted to Medical Trust

     Hospital, Ernakulam, where he succumbed to the injuries

     on the following day at about 4:45 a.m. The First

     Information Report was lodged by Peter (PW­2) on his

     statement, which was registered as FIR (Ext.P.­1).
4.   The investigation was taken over by the Circle Inspector

(PW­20), who prepared the inquest report (Ext.­P2). The dead
9
body was sent for post­mortem, which was conducted by

Assistant Professor of Forensic Medicine and Deputy Police

Surgeon, Medical College Hospital, Kottayam (PW­13) at

about 2:05 p.m. on 28.01.2008.                     He prepared the post­

mortem report (Ext.P­10) mentioning the following ante­

mortem injuries:
“(1) Contusion of scalp 10 X 8 c.m. involving the full thickness
    of left occipital region, its lower extent 3 c.m., above root of neck
    and 2 c.m. outer to midline.
(2) Contusion of right cheek 5 X 4 c.m. X 0.5 c.m.
    (3) Abraded contusion 8 X 1 c.m.­2 c.m. X 1 c.m. horizontally
    oblique involving right side of neck and fact, its lower outer
    extent 7 c.m. above root of neck and 10 c.m. outer to midline.
The skull showed fissured fracture 8 c.m. long involving the
    occipital bone of left side of posterior cranial fossa, 1­1.5 c.m.
    outer to midline, corresponding to injury No.1. Dura was intact
    had a bluish tint and tense, subdural clots were seen overlying
    right   frontal   and   temporal   lobe   of    brain   with   bilateral
    subarachnoid haemorrhage. The pons on sectioning showed
    haemorrhagic area 1.5 c.m. x 1 c.m. The right frontal pole of
    brain had contusion 3 x 2 x 0.5 c.m. Brain showed fattened gyri
    and narrow sulci. The anterior cranial fossa a right side showed
    fissured fracture 4 c.m. long.
(4) Contusion 5 x 4 x 0.5 c.m. long.
(5) Abrasion 2 x 1 c.m. on front of left knee.”
10
5.      After completing the investigations, the police report

under
section 173(2)
Cr.P.C.2 was submitted, whereupon,

cognizance was taken by the Magistrate and the matter

committed to the Sessions Court for trial. The Trial Court

framed charges under
sections 143
,
147
,
148
,
341
,
323
,
324
,
427
and
302
read with
section 149
IPC. The charges were

read over to the accused, who pleaded not guilty and, as

such, were put to trial.
6.      The prosecution examined 21 witnesses as PW­1 to PW­

21 and exhibited as many as 74 documentary evidence

marked as Exts:P­1 to P­74 and further produced 19 material

objects marked as MO­1 to MO­19. After the close of the

prosecution evidence, the accused were examined under
section 313
Cr.P.C. and the incriminating material was put to

them. They denied all such circumstances and reiterated

their innocence. The Investigating Officer also conducted a

test identification parade.
2
Cr.P.C
. –
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973
11
7.   After considering the material evidence on record and

after hearing the learned counsel for the parties, the Trial

Court acquitted four accused namely, accused nos.4, 5, 7

and 10 namely, Nijas, Naseebulla @ Nazeeb, Seenaj and

Shihab. It further convicted the rest of the 6 (six) accused

nos. 1, 2, 3, 6, 8 and 9, namely, Biju, Ashique Salam, Ajmal,

Razique Jalal @ Razee, Salim Basheer @ Saly and Sabeer

respectively.
8.   Aggrieved by the conviction, all the 6 (six) accused

preferred appeals before the High Court. Criminal Appeal

No.87 of 2014 was filed by the accused nos.6 and 8 namely,

Razique Jalal @ Razee and Salim Basheer @ Saly, whereas

Criminal Appeal No.132 of 2014 was filed by accused no.9­

Sabeer. As already recorded above, the other three appeals

bearing nos.564, 238 and 91 of 2014 were filed by the

accused nos.1, 2 and 3 respectively namely, Biju, Ashique

Salam and Ajmal. As already recorded above, the High Court

allowed Appeal Nos.87 and 132 of 2014 acquitting the three

accused nos.6, 8 and 9 of all the charges, whereas it partly
12
allowed the appeal nos.564, 238 and 91 of 2014 of the

present three appellants. Aggrieved by the judgment of the

High Court, the three appellants are before this Court.
9.          The prosecution has established:
(i)         that the death of deceased­Varkeychen @ George

                Thomas was homicidal;
(ii)        that PW­1, PW­2 and PW­4 suffered simple and

                grievous hurt which took place at the date, time and

                place stated in the FIR.
(iii)       that the FIR was promptly lodged;

     (iv)       the ante­mortem injuries suffered by the deceased is
in consonance with the report registered by PW­2

                and also established from the statements of PW­1,

                PW­2 and PW­4, who are the injured eye­witnesses.
(v)        The recovery of the material objects (MO nos.1, 2

                and 3) used by the three appellants in causing the

                fatal injuries to the deceased as also the injuries to

                PW­1, PW­2 and PW­4.
13
10. Insofar as the test identification parade is concerned, the

same has not been found to be very reliable by the courts

below, however, as the witnesses and the injured knew the

accused, their identification in Court has been found to be

sufficient by the Courts below. They were all residents of

neighbourhood and knew each other.
11.   We are, thus, satisfied that the occurrence in the manner

as set up by the prosecution has been duly established. The

deceased died due to the injuries caused by accused nos.1

and 2 by using a stick (MO­2) and a brick (MO­3), whereas,

the injuries caused to the PW­1, PW­2 and PW­4 is on

account of the assault by accused no.3 by using a stick (MO­
1). The only question which requires consideration is whether

it was a culpable homicide amounting to murder punishable

under
section 302
IPC as has been held by the courts below

or it was a culpable homicide not amounting to murder

punishable under
section 304
of IPC as submitted by the

Counsel for the appellants.
14
12. Learned counsel for the appellants have led great

emphasis on the manner, in which the incident occurred.

According to them,
(i) there was no pre­meditation of committing murder.
(ii) the accused, admittedly, when they accosted the

    vehicle and compelled the deceased and the injured to

    come out of the vehicle, were not armed with any

    weapons.
(iii) It was only when they alighted from the vehicle and

    some heated arguments took place as a result of the

    earlier verbal altercation in not giving a pass to the

    Scorpio vehicle to overtake the motor­bikes, that the

    accused­appellants picked up the stick of casuarina tree

    from the decorations, which had been made at that place

    and also the brick from the side of the road and

    assaulted with it.
(iv) both these weapons used could not be said to be

    deadly   weapons     but   could   have   definitely   caused
15
grievous hurt and may be injuries, which could result

into death.
(v) it is true that the injuries noted in the post­mortem

report of the deceased were on the vital part i.e. the head

and neck and which, according to the medical evidence,

was sufficient in ordinary course to cause death, but the

same was unintentional.
(vi) only one blow each was given by accused nos. 1 and

2 to the deceased. There was no repeated assault.
(vii) there was no mens rea to commit murder, therefore,

the same would fall within the exception of
section 300
IPC.
(viii) On the own findings of the High Court, it was not a

case of culpable homicide amounting to murder.
(ix) Our attention has been drawn to paragraph nos.27

and 28 of the judgment of the High Court, which took

into consideration the evidence led by the eye­witnesses

and injured namely, PW­1, PW­2 and PW­4, according to

which, the charge under
section 302
ought to have been
16
converted to
section 304
IPC. The appellants ought to

have been acquitted under
section 302
IPC and at best

could have been convicted under
section 304
IPC.
(x) Paragraph Nos.27 and 28 of the judgment of the High

Court are reproduced below:
“27. We have no dispute with the proposition that common
  object may be formed at the spur of the moment, and that
  prior meeting of minds or a formal assembly consisting of
  the members of the unlawful assembly to commit a
  particular crime may not be essential. The precedent on the
  point referred to earlier would indicate that the knowledge
  of the members of the assembly that the act which actually
  occurred was very likely to be caused by their acts, is
  sufficient to make them vicariously liable for the ultimate
  consequences. But, in the instant case, wheat we see from
  the evidence is that the first part of the occurrence at
  Chemmalamattom was only an altercation between P.W.­1
  and A3 in the presence of A6 and A9 with regard to the
  bikers not giving way and passage to the car driven by
  P.W.­1 for overtaking. The altercation also did not last long
  enough so as to form a vengeance in the mind of A3, A6
  and A9 so as to garner support of the remaining accused to
  form an unlawful assembly with the common object of
  committing murder, particularly of the deceased, because
  the altercation was only with A3 and P.W.­1 and the
  deceased had nothing to do with the altercation. Under the
  circumstances, we are of the opinion that the accused
17
definitely did not have a common object of murdering the
deceased. It is also relevant to note that had the accused
entertained the common object to commit murder or even
previous act, they would have been lying in wait for the
Scorpio car armed with deadly weapons.. None of the
prosecution witness has a case that the accused had
accosted them at the scene of occurrence armed with
deadly weapons. It is only after the witnesses alighted from
the car, P.W.­1 had a conversation with A9 and accused
nos.1, 2 and 3 picked up the weapons which were available
there and attacked the passengers in the car, including the
deceased. Even if A3 had called for others to kill, it could
not have been the deceased because he only had a
vengeance     against   P.W.­1,     and,   therefore,   the   entire
occurrence as appeared to us from the oral testimony of
witnesses would indicate that it is only a chance encounter
without any premeditated motive in prosecution of common
object.
28.       It is also pertinent to note that P.W.­1 had testified
that he had a friendly conversation with A9 in the
beginning after he alighted from the car at the scene of
occurrence. It is also testified that when the accused went
to attack the passengers of the car, including the P.W.­1,
A9 had prevented others from causing injuries. This
particular statement in the testimony of P.W.­1 clearly
exonerated A9 of the allegations of having acted in
prosecution of common object of committing murder. He
was not even wielding any weapon in his hands. In fact,
except A1, A2 and A3, none of the other accused had picked
up any weapon from the scene of occurrence. Even A1 and
A3 had picked up sticks, which were hanging at the scene
18
of occurrence as part of the decoration done in connection
       with the Church festival. MO3 brick was picked up by A2
       from the side of the road abruptly during the scuffle that
       ensued in consequence of the passengers of the car
       alighting.   Under   the   circumstances,   we   are   of   the
       considered opinion that apart from A1, A2 and A3, none of
       the other accused could be guilty for attacking the
       deceased, P.W.­1 and P.W.­2. The prosecution has not
       succeeded in establishing that there was formation of an
       unlawful assembly acting in furtherance of common object.
The finding of the learned Sessions Judge roping in all the
       appellants resorting to
section 149
is therefore not held
       good. It is also pertinent to note that none of the accused
       were earlier armed with deadly weapons and therefore it
       cannot be said that they were guilty of committing riot
       armed with deadly weapons, an offence punishable under
section 148
of the IPC.”
(xi) As there was no intention to commit murder or a pre­

    planned attempt to commit murder,
section 302
IPC,

    charge could not have been sustained.
(xii) that appellants are in jail and have suffered

    incarceration of several years.
13. On behalf of the State of Kerala, it is submitted that the

entire transaction took place in three parts. The first incident

took place when a verbal altercation took place in overtaking
19
the vehicles. The second incident took place, in which the

physical assault occurred causing fatal injuries to the

deceased and causing simple and grievous hurt to the three

witnesses namely, PW­1, PW­2 and PW­4. The third incident

took place when the injured was being taken to the hospital;

stones were pelted by accused no.3 causing damage to the

vehicle.
14. Learned counsel for the State further submitted that

there was clear motive to commit murder as after the first

episode of verbal altercation took place, it was only with an

intention to commit murder that all the accused joined

together by forming an unlawful assembly accosting the

vehicle in which the deceased was travelling with his friends

compelling them to come out of the vehicle and thereafter it

was an open assault with sticks and bricks, which were used

with such force causing fatal injuries to the deceased and,

therefore, it was nothing short of committing a pre­planned

murder. Even after having caused the fatal injuries, the

accused further tried to prevent the deceased from being
20
taken to the hospital and the intention was to stop the vehicle

and cause enough delay so that the deceased, who was still

alive may ultimately die. The judgment of the High Court does

not suffer from any infirmity and the appeal, accordingly

deserves to be dismissed. Learned counsel has placed

reliance upon a judgment of this Court in
Gulab vs. State of

U.P.3
15. Having considered the submissions and having perused

the material on record, we do not find any infirmity in the

prosecution establishing the incident as set up in the First

Information Report. For the said conclusion, we have taken

note of the following:
(i)     First Information Report was promptly lodged.
(ii) The prosecution story as set up in the FIR appears

        to be probable.
(iii) The     medical   evidence   fully   corroborates   the

        prosecution story.
3 2021(12) JT 134
21
(iv) PW­1, PW­2 and PW­4, the three eye­witnesses have

    fully supported the prosecution story and have narrated

    the same incident as it occurred.
(v) Formal witnesses have discharged their burden by

    proving the police papers and other documentary

    evidence placed on record by the prosecution.
(vi) The material objects recovered have also been duly

    proved.
(vii) According to the medical evidence, the material

    objects alleged to have been used in the commission of

    crime could have been actually used in causing the

    injuries.
16. The only question which falls for our consideration is as

to whether the manner in which the entire transaction took

place in particular relating to the physical assault, would

amount to culpable homicide amounting to murder or

culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
17. The distinctive features and the considerations relevant

for determining a culpable homicide amounting to murder
22
and distinguishing it from the culpable homicide not

amounting to murder has been a matter of debate in large

number of cases.
Instead of referring to several decisions on

the point reference is being made to a recent decision in the

case of
Mohd. Rafiq vs. State of M.P.4
, wherein Justice

Ravindra Bhatt, speaking for the Bench, relied upon two

previous judgments dealing with the issue as narrated in

paragraph nos.11, 12 and 13 of the report which are

reproduced below: ­

         “11. The question of whether in a given case, a homicide is
         murder 3, punishable under
section 302
IPC, or culpable
         homicide, of either description, punishable under
section 304
IPC has engaged the attention of courts in this country for
         over one and a half century, since the enactment of the
IPC
; a
         welter of case law, on this aspect exists, including perhaps
         several hundred rulings by this court. The use of the term
         “likely” in several places in respect of culpable homicide,
         highlights the element of uncertainty that the act of the
         accused may or may not have killed the person.
Section 300
IPC which defines murder, however refrains from the use of
         the term likely, which reveals absence of ambiguity left on
         behalf of the accused. The accused is for sure that his act will
         definitely cause death. It is often difficult to distinguish
         between culpable homicide and murder as both involve death.
         Yet, there is a subtle distinction of intention and knowledge
         involved in both the crimes. This difference lies in the degree
         of the act. There is a very wide variance of degree of intention
         and knowledge among both the crimes.
4 (2021) 10 SCC 706
23
12. The decision in
State of Andhra Pradesh v Rayavarapu
         Punnayya & Anr5
notes the important distinction between the
         two provisions, and their differing, but subtle distinction. The
         court pertinently pointed out that: "12. In the scheme of the
         Penal Code, "culpable homicide" is genus and "murder" its
         specie. All "murder" is "culpable homicide" but not vice­ versa.
         Speaking generally, "culpable homicide" sans "special
         characteristics of murder", is "culpable homicide not
         amounting to murder". For the purpose of fixing punishment,
         proportionate to the gravity of this generic offence, the Code
         practically recognises three degrees of culpable homicide. The
         first is, what may be called, "culpable homicide of the first
         degree". This is the greatest form of culpable homicide, which
         is defined in
section 300
as "murder". The second may be
         termed as "culpable homicide of the second degree". This is
         punishable under the first part of
section 304
. Then, there is
         "culpable homicide of the third degree". This is the lowest type
         of culpable homicide and the punishment provided for it is,
         also, the lowest among the punishments provided for the three
         grades. Culpable homicide of this degree is punishable under
         the second part of
section 304
.. 13. The academic distinction
         between "murder" and "culpable homicide not amounting to
         murder" has vexed the courts for more than a century. The
         confusion is caused, if courts losing sight of the true scope
         and meaning of the terms used by the legislature in these
         sections, allow themselves to be drawn into minute
         abstractions. The safest way of approach to the interpretation
         and application of these provisions seems to be to keep in
         focus the keywords used in the various clauses of
sections 299
and
300
."
13. The considerations that should weigh with courts, in
         discerning whether an act is punishable as murder, or
         culpable homicide, not amounting to murder, were outlined in
Pulicherla Nagaraju @ Nagaraja Reddy v State of Andhra
         Pradesh6
. This court observed that: "29. Therefore, the Court
         should proceed to decide the pivotal question of intention, with
         care and caution, as that will decide whether the case falls
         under
section 302
or 304 Part I or 304 Part II. Many petty or
         insignificant matters ­ plucking of a fruit, straying of cattle,
         quarrel of children, utterance of a rude word or even an
         objectionable glance, may lead to altercations and group
         clashes culminating in deaths. Usual motives like revenge,

5 1976 (4) SCC 382
6 (2006) 11 SCC 444
24
greed, jealousy or suspicion may be totally absent in such
     cases. There may be no intention. There may be no
     premeditation. In fact, there may not even be criminality. At
     the other end of the spectrum, there may be cases of murder
     where the accused attempts to avoid the penalty for murder by
     attempting to put forth a case that there was no intention to
     cause death. It is for the courts to ensure that the cases of
     murder punishable under
section 302
, are not converted into
     offences punishable under
section 304
Part I/II, or cases of
     culpable homicide not amounting to murder are treated as
     murder punishable under
section 302
. The intention to cause
     death can be gathered generally from a combination of a few or
     several of the following, among other, circumstances; (i) nature
     of the weapon used; (ii) whether the weapon was carried by the
     accused or was picked up from the spot; (iii) whether the blow
     is aimed at a vital part of the body;(iv) the amount of force
     employed in causing injury; (v) whether the act was in the
     course of sudden quarrel or sudden fight or free for all fight;
(vi) whether the incident occurs by chance or whether there
     was any premeditation; (vii) whether there was any prior
     enmity or whether the deceased was a stranger;(viii) whether
     there was any grave and sudden provocation, and if so, the
     cause for such provocation; (ix) whether it was in the heat of
     passion; (x) whether the person inflicting the injury has taken
     undue advantage or has acted in a cruel and unusual manner;
(xi) whether the accused dealt a single blow or several blows.
     The above list of circumstances is, of course, not exhaustive
     and there may be several other special circumstances with
     reference to individual cases which may throw light on the
     question of intention.””
18. For the said purpose, we examined the evidence on record

as   narrated    in   the    First        Information   Report,    during

investigation    as    per    the     evidence      collected     by    the

Investigating Officer and also the evidence led during the

course of trial in particular by the injured eye­witnesses.
25
19. From the perusal of all the above material, the

prosecution story as set up and as established in brief can be

summarized as under:
(i) On the fateful evening of 27th January, 2008, the first

    incident took place around 9:00 p.m. regarding the

    overtaking of the vehicles of one party and the other

    resulting into a verbal altercation at that stage between

    PW­1 and A9.
(ii) Both the parties went in separate directions after the

    verbal altercation.
(iii) Later on, at about 10:45 p.m., when the deceased

    along with his other friends PW­1, PW­2 and PW­4 were

    returning, they were stopped by the accused 10 (ten) in

    number, they were wrongfully restrained, compelled to

    alight from their vehicle.
(iv) Again, a verbal altercation took place whereafter

    accused nos. 1 and 3 picked up a stick of casuarina tree

    from the decoration set up on the road side and accused

    No.2 picked up a brick from the road side. Accused No.1
26
hit the deceased with a stick on his head, whereas

    accused No.2 hit the deceased with the brick, as a result

    of which, the deceased fell on the ground. Accused No.3

    attacked the others with a stick and caused them simple

    and grievous hurt.
(v) Accused Nos.1 and 2 had caused only one injury each

    on the deceased. It was not a repeat or a multiple assault

    by them.
(vi) Although, role of exhortation to kill the deceased was

    assigned to accused No.3, but during trial and in the

    cross­examination, all the three witnesses PW­1, PW­2

    and PW­4 stated that they were not sure whether they

    have said so in their statements under
section 161
Cr.P.C. Thus, apparently, there was no role assigned to

    exhortation to any of the accused to kill the deceased.
20. The Trial Court had acquitted 4 (four) accused namely

accused nos.4, 5, 7 and 10 and the High Court acquitted
27
three other accused namely accused nos.6, 8 and 9 of all the

charges.
21. Considering the statutory provisions
laid down in
IPC
and

the law on the point, we find that the present case falls into

the category of a culpable homicide not amounting to murder

falling under
section 304
Part­II
IPC
for the following reasons:
(i)    There was no pre­meditation of mind to commit

    murder.
(ii) All the accused were admittedly not armed when

    they stopped the vehicle of the deceased and his friends

    and compelled them to alight from the same.
(iii) It was during the verbal altercation at that stage

    that the three accused picked up the weapon of assault

    namely, sticks of casuarina tree and a brick from the

    road side.
(iv) Single blow was given to the deceased by the accused

    nos.1 and 2.
28
(v) The case set up for exhortation to kill the deceased

       has not been found to be proved.
(vi) Both the groups consisted of young men.
(vii) The High Court found that there was no unlawful

       assembly formed with a common object and accordingly

       had acquitted three other accused and also the present

       appellants from the charge of unlawful assembly under
section 149
IPC.
(viii) The appellants have been convicted with the aid of
section 34
IPC.
22. The reference to the judgment in the case of
Gulab Singh
(supra) by the learned counsel for the State of Kerala, in our

opinion, is of no relevance to the facts and circumstances of

the present case. There was no issue involved relating to the

distinction between culpable homicide amounting to murder

or not amounting to murder. The issue involved in the case of

Gulab Singh was relating to the applicability of
section 34
IPC.
29
23. Thus, for all the reasons stated above, we are of the view

that the appellants would be entitled for acquittal under
section 302
IPC but would be liable to be convicted under
section 304
Part­II
IPC
. Rest of the conviction upheld by the

High Court and the sentence for the charges under
sections

341
,
323
,
324
and
427
read with
section 34
IPC is

maintained. It is ordered accordingly.
24. Now coming to the question of sentence upon conviction

under
section 304
Part­II
IPC
, we find that all the three

appellants are in jail and have undergone several years of

incarceration. We accordingly award the sentence for the

period already undergone by all the three appellants. The

appellants would be released forthwith unless they are

required in any other case.
30
25. Appeals stand partly allowed as above.      The impugned

judgment of the High Court stands modified to the aforesaid

extent.
…………..........................J.
                                             [AJAY RASTOGI]


                                 ………….........................J.
                                             [VIKRAM NATH]
NEW DELHI
JULY 12, 2022.