[Cites
2
, Cited by
4
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Continental India Private Limited vs General Manager Northern Railway on 27 July, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M.R. Shah
NON­REPORTABLE


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4829 OF 2022


         M/s Continental India Private Limited                        …Appellant(s)


                                                Versus


         General Manager Northern Railway                           …Respondent(s)


                                             JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 15.09.2021 passed by the High

                         Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Arbitration Application

                         No. 15 of 2021, by which, while allowing the application

                         under
Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,

                         1996 (hereinafter referred to as the “Act”) filed by the

                         appellant herein – original applicant, the High Court has
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.07.27
17:20:01 IST
Reason:
directed respondent herein to send a fresh panel of four
1
retired officers in terms of clause 64(3)(b) of the General

     Conditions of Contract (hereinafter referred to as the

     “GCC”) and thereafter, the appellant herein – original

     applicant shall select two from the four suggested names

     and thereafter the respondent shall constitute the Arbitral

     Tribunal in terms of clause 64(3)(b) of the GCC, the original

     applicant has preferred the present appeal.
2.   That the appellant and respondent herein entered into a

     contract/agreement which contains the arbitration clause.

     As per clause 32 of the agreement, in the event of any

     question,   dispute   or   difference   arising   under   or   in

     connection with agreement, the same shall be referred to

     the sole arbitration of a person appointed to be the

     arbitrator, by the General Manager of the Railway. A

     request/prayer was made by the appellant herein – original

     applicant to appoint an arbitrator in terms of clause 32 of

     the agreement. However, the General Manager/Railway

     failed to appoint an arbitrator as provided under clause 32

     of the agreement. Therefore, the appellant herein – original

     applicant filed the application before the High Court under
Section 11(6)
of the Act and requested to appoint a sole
2
arbitrator. Though, the High Court has observed that the

      respondent has failed to appoint an arbitrator despite

      raising the demand of appointing an arbitrator, the

      application   was    hence     liable   to   succeed.   However,

      thereafter instead of appointing the sole arbitrator in

      exercise of powers under
Section 11(6)
of the Act, the High

      Court has directed to appoint an arbitrator in terms of

      clause   64(3)(b)   of   the   GCC.     Feeling   aggrieved   and

      dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order passed

      by the High Court in not appointing the sole arbitrator and

      instead directing the parties to appoint the arbitrator as

      per the GCC, the original applicant before the High Court

      has preferred the present appeal.
3.    Shri Ramesh Singh, learned Senior Advocate appearing on

      behalf of the appellant herein has vehemently submitted

      that the High Court has committed a serious error in not

      appointing the sole arbitrator in exercise of powers vested

      under
Section 11(6)
of the Act.
3.1   It is submitted that the parties to the agreement are

      governed by the arbitration agreement/clause in terms of

      the clause 32 of the agreement. It is submitted that despite
3
invocation of the arbitration clause in terms of the

      agreement the respondent failed to appoint an arbitrator. It

      is contended that therefore the respondent forfeited its right

      to appoint an arbitrator under the agreement and therefore,

      the High Court was required to appoint a sole arbitrator in

      exercise of powers under
Section 11(6)
of the Act. Reliance

      is placed on the decision of this Court in the case of
Deep

      Trading Company vs. Indian Oil Corporation and Others
;

      (2013) 4 SCC 35.
3.2   It is further submitted by Shri Ramesh Singh, learned

      Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant –

      original applicant that the High Court has seriously erred in

      directing the parties to appoint the arbitrator in terms of

      clause 64(3)(b) of the GCC.
3.3   It is contended that in the present case the General

      Conditions of Contract is not applicable at all on the

      grounds inter­alia that (i) neither the GCC has been signed

      by the parties nor the governing agreement makes any

      reference to the GCC; (ii) the parties to the original

      agreement are neither signatory to the GCC nor the GCC is
4
made part of the original agreement entered into between

     the parties; (iii) even as per the communication dated

     16.07.2020, the GCC, July 2020 shall be applicable to

     works contracts on Indian Railways with prospective effect.

     It is submitted that therefore the High Court has seriously

     erred in directing to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal as per

     clause 64(3)(b) of the GCC.
4.   Shri K.M. Nataraj, learned ASG appearing on behalf of the

     respondent is not in a position to dispute that after the

     invocation   of   the   arbitration   clause,   the   General

     Manager/Railway failed to appoint the sole arbitrator in

     terms of the agreement. He is also not in a position to

     satisfy the Court as to how the General Conditions of

     Contract shall be applicable with respect to the agreement

     between the parties which has been entered into much

     prior to the GCC coming into force i.e., July, 2020 and that

     neither is there any reference to the GCC in the original

     agreement nor the GCC has been signed by the parties.

     Therefore, he is unable to support the impugned judgment

     and order passed by the High Court directing to constitute

     an Arbitral Tribunal as per clause 64(3)(b) of the GCC.
5
5.   We have heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of

     the respective parties at length.
6.   It is not in dispute that the parties to the agreement agreed

     to resolve the dispute as per clause 32 of the original

     agreement which reads as under: ­

         “32. Arbitration.
(a)    In the event of any question, dispute or
         difference arising under or in connection with this
         Agreement (except as to matters the decision of which
         is specially provided for by this Agreement) the same
         shall be referred to the sole arbitration of a person
         appointed to be the arbitrator, by the General Manager
         or the Railway. It will be no objection if the arbitrator
         is a Government servant, that he had to deal with
         matters to which the Agreement relates or that in the
         course of his duties as a Government servant he has
         expressed views on all or any of the matters in dispute
         or difference. The Award of the arbitrator shall be final
         and binding on the parties to this Agreement.
Provided always that the decision of the General
         Manager of the Railway as to the disputes which fell
         within the “excepted matters”
referred to above
shall
         be final and binding on the parties hereto and such
         decision of the General Manager shall not be called in
         question before the arbitrator by either of the parties
         hereto.
(b)   In the event of the arbitrator dying, neglecting or
         refusing to act, or resigning or being unable to act for
         any reason, or his award being set aside by the Court
         for any reason it shall be lawful for the authority
         appointing the arbitrator to appoint another arbitrator
         in place of the outgoing arbitrator in the manner
         aforesaid.
(c)   It is further a term of this Agreement that no
         person other than the person appointed by the
         authority as aforesaid should act as arbitrator and
6
that if for any reason that is not possible, the matter is
           not be referred to arbitration at all.
………”

           The appellant and the respondent being signatories to

      the agreement are bound by the aforesaid arbitration

      clause/arbitration       agreement.        As   the   dispute          arose

      between the parties, the appellant invoked the arbitration

      clause in terms of the agreement. However, the respondent

      – General Manager/Railway failed to appoint the arbitrator

      in terms of clause 32, reproduced hereinabove. That

      thereafter, the appellant herein approached the High Court

      for appointment of the sole arbitrator in exercise of powers

      under
Section 11(6)
of the Act. Once the dispute has arisen

      between     the    parties    and    despite     invocation       of    the

      arbitration clause in terms of the agreement no arbitrator

      is appointed, it can be said that the authority has forfeited

      its right to appoint the arbitrator in terms of the arbitration

      agreement      and    thereafter     the    arbitrator    has     to     be

      appointed under
Section 11(6)
of the Act.
6.1   At this stage, the decision of this court in the case of
Deep

      Trading Company
(supra) is required to be referred to. In
7
the said decision
it is observed and held that once an

      arbitrator is not appointed as per the agreed procedure

      within stipulated time, right of the party concerned to

      appoint an arbitrator is forfeited and therefore, Chief Justice

      ought to have appointed an arbitrator under
Section 11(6)
of

      the Act. In
the said decision
the Corporation therein

      appointed the arbitrator as per the agreed procedure during

      pendency of the proceedings under
Section 11(6)
of the Act

      and to that it is observed and held that appointment of

      arbitrator by the Corporation during pendency of the

      proceedings under
Section 11(6)
of the Act was of no

      consequence, as failing to appoint an arbitrator within the

      prescribed time, the Corporation had lost its right to appoint

      an arbitrator.
6.2   In the present case also, the respondent failed to appoint an

      arbitrator as per the agreed procedure and in terms of the

      agreement. Therefore, the respondent forfeited its right to

      appoint an arbitrator in terms of the agreement and

      therefore the appellant was justified in filing the application

      before the High Court for appointment of a sole arbitrator in

      exercise of powers under
Section 11(6)
of the Act. The Chief
8
Justice or his nominee thus was required to appoint the

     arbitrator under
Section 11(6)
of the Act.
7.   By the impugned judgment and order and while allowing

     the application under
Section 11(6)
of the Act instead of

     appointing the arbitrator in exercise of powers under
Section 11(6)
of the Act, the High Court has directed to

     constitute an Arbitral Tribunal in terms of clause 64(3)(b) of

     the GCC. It is not in dispute that neither the GCC was

     signed by the parties nor the GCC was made part of the

     agreement between the parties. There is no reference to the

     GCC in the main agreement entered into between the

     parties. Even as per communication dated 16.07.2020, the

     GCC, July 2020 shall be applicable to works contract of

     Indian Railways with prospective effect. Therefore, the

     parties are not governed by the GCC at all. Therefore, the

     High Court has committed a serious error in directing to

     constitute an Arbitral Tribunal in terms of the provisions of

     the GCC, which are not binding to the parties.
8.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the

     impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court to

     the extent directing to constitute an Arbitral Tribunal in
9
terms of clause 64(3)(b) of the GCC is unsustainable and

    deserves to be quashed and set aside and is accordingly

    quashed and set aside. The Chief Justice or his nominee

    was required to appoint a sole arbitrator/arbitrator in

    exercise of powers under
Section 11(6)
of the Act. The High

    Court has failed to appoint the sole arbitrator in exercise of

    powers under
Section 11(6)
of the Act. Therefore, as such

    the matter is required to be remanded to the High Court for

    appointment of a sole arbitrator. However, instead of

    remanding the matter to the High Court and to avoid any

    further delay, with the consent of the learned counsel

    appearing on behalf of the respective parties, we appoint

    Smt. Justice R. Banumathi, Former Judge of this Court, as

    a sole arbitrator to adjudicate and resolve the dispute

    between the parties. The present appeal is accordingly

    allowed. No costs.
………………………………….J.
                                    [M.R. SHAH]


NEW DELHI;                          ………………………………….J.
July 27, 2022                       [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
10