[Cites
14
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
Prahalad vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 July, 2022
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
B.R. Gavai
REPORTABLE


            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2043 OF 2009


PRAHLAD                                    ...APPELLANT(S)

                    VERSUS
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH & ANR.            ...RESPONDENT(S)


                            WITH


            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.983 OF 2010


                          JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.   Both these appeals challenge the judgment and order

dated 11th May, 2009, passed by the Division Bench of the High

Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur in Criminal Appeal
1
No.247 of 1993, thereby allowing the appeal filed by the

respondent­State of Madhya Pradesh in part and reversing the

order of acquittal dated 9th November, 1992, as recorded by the

learned   Additional   District       &   Sessions   Judge,   Harda

(hereinafter referred to as “the learned Sessions Judge”) in

Sessions Trial No. 207 of 1991 in respect of the appellants

herein.
2.    Shorn of details, the facts leading to the present appeals

are as under:
2.1   On 22nd June, 1991, Police Station, Harda received a

      written information (Exhibit P­10) at 4.25 p.m. from Dr.

      Kailash Narayan Singhal (P.W.10), to the effect that one

      Ramesh son of Ramgopal Jat, aged about 38 years,

      resident of Chhoti Harda had been brought to the Hospital

      in a serious condition.     In the said written information

      (Exhibit P­10), it was stated that Ramesh was attacked by

      a Katta shot. On the basis of the said written information,
2
Police Station Harda registered a First Information Report

      (“FIR” for short) vide Crime No.153 of 1991 for the offence

      punishable under
Section 307
of the Indian Penal Code,

      1860 (hereinafter referred to as “
IPC
”). On registration of

      the FIR, Shri M.K. Shrivastava, City Inspector, Police

      Station Incharge (P.W.17) visited the spot of occurrence.
Dr. Kailash Narayan Singhal (P.W.10) and Dr. Rajendra

      Kumar Patel (P.W.14) provided first aid to the injured

      Ramesh and referred him to Indore Medical College for

      further treatment. However, Ramesh died on the way to

      Indore and his dead­body was brought back to Harda,

      where, on 23rd June, 1991, Merg No. 18 of 1991 was

      registered   and   postmortem    of   the   deceased   was

      conducted.   As per the postmortem report, the cause of

      death of the deceased Ramesh was heavy bleeding due to

      injury caused by firearm.
2.2   The prosecution case, in a nutshell, is that the deceased

      Ramesh had political enmity with the three accused, i.e.,
3
Mohan (Accused No.1), Prahlad (Accused No.2) and

      Jagdish (Accused No.3).   It was further the case of the

      prosecution   that all three accused had         hatched a

      conspiracy to do away with the deceased.            Mohan

      (Accused No.1) and Prahlad (Accused No.2) had used the

      motorcycle of Jagdish (Accused No.3) to arrive near

      Handia Bus Stand, where a gun­shot was fired at the

      deceased from a short distance.
2.3   At the conclusion of the investigation, a charge­sheet

      came to be filed in the Court of learned Judicial

      Magistrate First Class, Harda.      Since the case was

      exclusively triable by the Sessions Court, the same came

      to be committed to the learned Sessions Judge.

2.4   Charges came to be framed by the learned Sessions Judge

      for the offences punishable under
Section 120
­B and 302

      of the
IPC
and in the alternative, for offences punishable
4
under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of the IPC and
Sections 25
and
27
of the Arms Act, 1959.
2.5   The accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
The prosecution examined 17 witnesses to bring home the

      guilt of the accused.   Their defence was that they were

      falsely implicated on account of party politics in village.

      At the conclusion of the trial, the learned Sessions Judge

      found that the prosecution had failed to prove the case

      against the accused beyond reasonable doubt and as

      such, acquitted all the three accused.
2.6   Being aggrieved thereby, the respondent­State of Madhya

      Pradesh preferred an appeal before the High Court. The

      High Court by the impugned judgment, though affirmed

      the order of acquittal of Jagdish (Accused No.3), however,

      reversed the order of acquittal insofar as the present

      appellants, viz., Mohan (Accused No.1) and Prahlad

      (Accused No.2) are concerned. The High Court convicted
5
them for the offences punishable under Section 302 read

     with
Section 34
of the IPC and sentenced them to undergo

     life imprisonment. Insofar as the acquittal of the present

     appellants for other charges under the
Arms Act, 1959
is

     concerned, the same was confirmed.
3.   Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeals.
4.   We have heard Mr. Vivek K. Tankha, learned Senior

Counsel appearing for the appellant­Prahlad in Criminal Appeal

No.2043 of 2009, Ms. Anisha Upadhyay, learned counsel

appearing for the appellant­Mohan in Criminal Appeal No.983

of 2010 and Mr. Abhinav         Shrivastava, learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the respondent­State of Madhya

Pradesh.
5.   Mr. Vivek K. Tankha, learned Senior Counsel would

submit that the High Court has grossly erred in reversing a

well­reasoned order of acquittal passed by the learned Sessions

Judge. He submitted that there are glaring contradictions and
6
lacunae in the prosecution case. It is submitted that even the

High Court has found that the prosecution was conducted in a

very shoddy manner.          However, in spite of there being no

evidence, the High Court converted the well­reasoned order of

acquittal into conviction.
6.   Mr. Tankha submitted that the High Court has relied on

the evidence of P.W.2­ Mahesh, an alleged eye­witness, to

record an order of conviction.        It is submitted that the High

Court has erroneously held that the testimony of P.W.2­Mahesh

was corroborated by recovery of the motorcycle and the Katta

from the accused persons. It is further submitted that both the

seizures/recoveries of the motorcycle as well as the Katta are

not sustainable in law.
7.   Mr. Tankha submitted that the perusal of evidence of

prosecution   witnesses       would    itself   reveal   that   though

statements of witnesses were recorded on 23 rd June, 1991, the

same have been withheld by the prosecution.              He submitted
7
that from the perusal of the case diary, it will be clear that

three different versions of the story have been set up by the

prosecution.   He further submitted that the requisition for

Postmortem of the deceased Ramesh would show that in the

requisition, it is mentioned that Jagdish (Accused No.3) had

assaulted the deceased Ramesh with a Katta.
8.   Mr. Tankha, learned Senior Counsel, submitted that by

noticing all these discrepancies, the learned Sessions Judge

had acquitted all the accused persons. The High Court has

totally erred in reversing the well­reasoned order of acquittal

and that too, without recording any reasons.
9.   Ms. Anisha Upadhyay, learned counsel adopted the

submissions made by Mr. Vivek K. Tankha, learned Senior

Counsel and submitted that both the appeals deserve to be

allowed.
10. Mr. Abhinav Shrivastava, learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the respondent­State of Madhya Pradesh submitted
8
that the High Court has found that the learned Sessions Judge

had failed to take into consideration the evidence of various

eye­witnesses. He submits that the learned Sessions Judge had

discarded the testimony of various eye­witnesses only on the

ground that they are related to the deceased and that they are

on inimical terms with the accused persons. He submitted that

merely because the witnesses are interested witnesses, being

related to the deceased, it cannot be a ground to discard their

testimony, which     is otherwise trustworthy.     He further

submitted that the ocular testimonies of the eye­witnesses are

duly corroborated by the recoveries made at the instance of the

accused persons.
11. Mr.    Abhinav    Shrivastava,   learned   counsel   further

submitted that merely because there are lacunae in the

investigation, it cannot be a ground to acquit the accused when

the evidence on record points the finger of guilt towards the

accused. Learned counsel therefore submits that the judgment
9
and order of conviction, passed by the High Court warrants no

interference and the appeals are liable to be dismissed.
12. We are aware that the scope of interference in an appeal

against acquittal is very limited.     Unless the appellate court

comes to a finding that the view taken by the Sessions Judge is

either perverse or impossible, it will not be permissible to

interfere with the finding of acquittal. Equally, if two views are

possible and the appellate Court finds another view to be more

probable, it cannot interfere with the order of acquittal unless it

finds that the view taken by the learned Sessions Judge is an

impossible view. Reference in this respect could be made to a

recent judgment of this Court in the case of
Guru Dutt Pathak

vs.   State     of   Uttar   Pradesh1
, wherein this Court has

considered various earlier judgments of this Court on the issue.
13. In the backdrop of this legal position, we will have to

examine the correctness of the view taken by the High Court.



1 (2021) 6 SCC 116
10
14. At the outset, it may be mentioned that the accused

persons are not disputing the factum of the death of the

deceased being homicidal. However, it is the contention of the

accused that they have been falsely implicated on account of

political enmity.
15. The factors which weighed with the learned Sessions

Judge for acquitting the accused persons have been culled out

by the High Court in its judgment. They read thus:
“(i)   The eyewitnesses were not only
                  related witnesses but were also
                  chance witnesses. There were
                  material       omissions         and
                  contradictions in the statements of
                  alleged eyewitnesses. Even after
                  asserting in their case diary
                  statement that Ramesh was fired
                  from a distance of 4 to 5 paces, the
                  eyewitnesses changed the version in
                  their sworn testimony apparently in
                  the light of the ballistic report by
                  deposing that the shot was fired
                  from a distance of nearly 18 inches.
No explanation was given by the
                  eyewitnesses      as      to     why
                  corresponding information was not
11
given to police or to Dr. Kailash
        Narayan (PW10) by any one of them.
(ii)    Although, Sitabai (PW3) had stated
        that she had narrated the incident
        to a police officer in the hospital yet,
        in the corresponding letter of
        request for postmortem, name of
        Jagdish was written as the author of
        gunshot injury.
(iii)   The    statements   of   witnesses
        recorded by ASI P.N. Bharti (PW16)
        during marg enquiry were not
        placed on record.
(iv)    Occupiers of the hotel and shops
        situated at the bus stand could have
        been the natural and probable
        witnesses to the incident but they
        were not produced in evidence and
        handcart puller was not examined.
(v)     Though     declared    hostile,  the
        statement of Narayan (PW4) and
        Chheetar (PW7) contradicting the
        evidence of other eyewitnesses could
        be taken into account to discard the
        prosecution version.
(vi)    The evidence as to involvement of
        A3 in the conspiracy leading to
12
murder of Ramesh given by Ram
               Avtar (PW13), a near relative of the
               deceased,     did     not     inspire
               confidence. The motorcycle was not
               proved to be belonging to Jagdish.
(vii) The investigation was tainted with
                soft peddling and indifferent attitude
                of    the     investigating    officer.
Although, he claimed to have visited
                the     spot     immediately      after
                registering the case under
Section
                307
of the IPC against unknown
                persons but nonseizure of blood and
                other articles from the spot coupled
                with non­preparation of spot map
                completely belies his statement.
There were material interpolations
                in the corresponding entries in the
                Roznamcha. These entries as well as
                the      admissions      made       by
                Investigating       Officer       M.K.
                Shrivastava (PW17) reflect that some
                other persons were also involved in
                the incident.”
16. The High Court, after making the aforesaid observations,

goes on to discuss the evidence of the witnesses. The High

Court in paragraph 31 observed that a defective investigation

cannot, by itself, be a ground for acquittal, if the prosecution
13
case is established by other cogent evidence.      Relying on the

judgment of this Court in the case of Dhanaj Singh alias
Shera & Ors. vs. State of Punjab
2, the High Court observed

that the only requirement in such a case is that the Court has

to be circumspect in evaluating the evidence.
17. Thereafter, the High Court in paragraph 34 observed thus:
“34. The panch witnesses selected for
             proving the recovery of Katta and
             motorcycle as per disclosure statement
             given by A1 were also not independent in
             the real sense of term. Ramdin (PW8) is
             the cousin of A3, the maternal uncle of
             A1, who happens to be the real uncle of
             A2. Hari Ram (PW9) also had a grudge
             against Ramesh as, admittedly, he was
             convicted under
Section 326
of the IPC
             for causing grievous hurt to Ramdin, the
             brother    of     Ramesh.      In    these
             circumstances, it was not possible to
             reject testimony of M.K. Shrivastava
             (PW17) as to recovery of Katta and the
             motorcycle. According to him, he
             prepared the memorandum (Ex.P­4) as
             per information given by A1 and
             recovered one deshi katta and a
             motorcycle at the instance of A1 only. The
             katta thus, seized was sent for forensic
2 (2004) 3 SCC 654
14
examination along with the pellets and
          clothes of the deceased preserved by the
          autopsy surgeon Dr. Rajendra Kumar
          Patel (PW14). The ballistic expert Dr.
          J.K.Agrawal opined with certainty that
          the gunshot injury causing holes in the
          shirt and vest of the deceased could be
          caused by fire through katta. It was also
          observed that the pellets were compatible
          to a 12­bore cartridge capable of being
          fired through the katta.
35. To sum up, none of the reasons
          assigned by learned trial Judge to discard
          the overwhelming incriminating evidence
          against A1 and A2. regarding their
          respective overt acts in causing death of
          Ramesh, is worthy of acceptance.”
18. Thereafter, in paragraphs 36 to 40 of the impugned

judgment and order, the High Court considered the case of the

respondent­State against the complicity of the accused No.3­

Jagdish and observed thus in paragraph 41:
“41. Thus, although complicity of A3 in
               the murder of Ramesh could not be
               established beyond a reasonable
               doubt yet, acquittal of A1 and A2 for
               the offence was not justified. The
               obvious reasoning is ­ even if it is
15
concluded     that    the   interested
               witnesses were not able to view the
               incident as being standing at a
               considerable distance, the ocular
               testimony of Mahesh coupled with
               the medical and forensic evidence
               concerning the firearm seized from
               A1 and the recovery of the
               motorcycle from his possession was
               sufficient to prove complicity of A1
               and A2 and the benefit of certain
               inconsistencies in the prosecution
               case caused due to apparent laxity
               of investigating officer could not be
               given to them. Nevertheless, their
               acquittal in respect of the offences
               under the
Arms Act
does not call for
               any interference in view of the fact
               that the prosecution sanction given
               by DM was not proved.”
19. It could thus clearly be seen that the High Court has

converted the order of acquittal into an order of conviction as

against the accused appellants herein based on the testimony

of P.W.2­Mahesh, corroborated by the seizure of the Katta and

the Motorcycle. The High Court observed that the same have

been seized/recovered on the disclosure statement made by the

accused No.1­Mohan. The High Court observed that the Panch
16
witnesses were not independent, and yet it believed those

recoveries on the testimony of P.W.17­M.K. Shrivastava (the

I.O.).
20. The High Court in paragraph 35 specifically observed that,

none of the reasons assigned by the learned Sessions Judge to

discard the overwhelming incriminating evidence against the

accused No.1­Mohan and accused No.2­Prahlad regarding their

respective overt acts in causing the death of Ramesh, is worthy

of acceptance.
21. To examine the correctness of the findings of the High

Court, it will be apposite to scrutinize the evidence on record.
22. Insofar as the evidence of P.W.1­Har Narayan, P.W.3­Sita

Bai, the brother and the sister­in­law of the deceased Ramesh

respectively, and P.W.5­Hari Prasad, the brother of Sita Bai

(P.W.3) is concerned, the High Court itself has observed that it

is not probable that they could have witnessed the incident
17
from the place where they were allegedly standing.    As such, it

will not be necessary to discuss their ocular testimony.
23. The High Court mainly relied on the testimony of P.W.2­

Mahesh. P.W.2­Mahesh states that on the date of the incident,

he, Har Narayan (P.W.1), Ramesh and Narayan went to Harda

for purchasing fertilizers. He stated that, thereafter, Sita Bai

(P.W.3) also joined them and from Naya Bazar, all of them

started going towards Handia Bus Stand.         He states that,

thereafter, he and the deceased Ramesh went to Mama Hotel to

have a cup of tea. The remaining people waited on the other

side of the road across the said Hotel. After taking tea, when

they were coming out from the Hotel, he saw accused No.2

Prahlad coming from Handia side on Motorcycle.             Accused

No.1­Mohan was the pillion rider. Accused No.1­Mohan gave a

gun­shot at the stomach of the deceased Ramesh from a

distance of about one feet.    After that accused No.2­Prahlad

and accused No.1­Mohan fled towards Handia on the said

Motorcycle. He stated that, thereafter, the injured Ramesh was
18
put on a hand­pulled thela and brought to the Government

Hospital. Injured Ramesh was taken to the Operation Theatre.

After half an hour, the injured Ramesh was taken out from the

Operation Room.     Thereafter, on the doctors’ advice, Ramesh

was taken to Indore Hospital, accompanied by him. There are

material contradictions and improvements in his evidence.
24. It will be relevant to note that it was P.W.2­Mahesh who

had brought the deceased Ramesh to the Hospital, who had

accompanied him when he was being taken to Indore as well as

while returning to Harda after the deceased Ramesh had died

on the way.
25. At this juncture, it will be relevant to refer to Exhibit P­15,

which is the requisition for conducting Postmortem. In the said

requisition, the following endorsement is made:
“Sir, due to fire by Katta by Shri Jagdish s/o
           Shiv Ram Jat, R/o Chhoti Harda, Ramesh
           s/o Ram Gopal Jat, R/o Chhoti Harda died.”
19
26. In this background, it will be relevant to refer to the

following   depositions   of   P.W.2­    Mahesh      in   his   cross­

examination:
“14. The day on which my statement was
            recorded it was only mine. It is wrong to say
            that my statement was recorded on 26.
            Stated himself that it was recorded on 23 rd in
            the morning. My statement was recorded at
            7’o clock at the police station.”
27. It could thus clearly be seen that he has denied that his

statement was recorded on 26th. He has further admitted that

his statement was recorded on 23rd in the morning at 7’O clock

in the police station.
28. P.W.17­M.K.       Shrivastava     (the   I.O.)   in   his   cross­

examination has admitted thus:
“47. In Roz Namch dated 23.06.1991 there
                 is no mention of the statements of
                 witness Narayan, Mahesh, Harinaraya,
                 Sitabai and Kailash taken during
                 investigation. On 23.06.1991 there is
                 no investigation report in regard to this
                 case. on 24.06.1991 in Roznamcha
                 there is no mention about the entries of
20
recording statement of witness Chhitar,
                Ramavatar, and Babulal. In this regard
                no reason has been stated. Roznamcha
                entry started at 6'0 clock in the
                morning and continued till 6'0 clock on
                2nd day. And whatever proceedings are
                being carried out in 24 hours those are
                being mentioned in that. During
                investigation I recorded the statements
                of witness only once. I have brought
                Roznamcha entry number 1490, dated
                26.06.91 with me. On this Roznamcha
                entry there is mention about the report
                of this case that is Ex.D­8. The copy of
                the same is Ex. D­8 (C).”
29. It is thus clear from his evidence that in the Roznamcha

dated 23rd June, 1991, there is no mention of the statements of

the witnesses taken during investigation. It is further admitted

that, on the said date, there is no investigation report in regard

to this case. He further admitted that on 24 th June, 1991, in

Roznamcha, there is no mention about the entries of recording

statement of witnesses.      He stated that Roznamcha entry

started at 6’o clock in the morning of 26 th June, 1991 and
21
continued till 6’o clock in the morning on 2 nd day, i.e., 27th

June, 1991.
30. A perusal of the Roznamcha entries would make for an

interesting reading.   The relevant portion of the Roznamcha

entry No.1480 (Crime No.153/1991) dated 26 th/27th         June,

1991 reads thus:
“It has also been stated in the statement that
          at Handia Bus Stand, in front of shop of
          Badri Jat, they met Ram Narayan, his son
          Kailash, Jagdish Sarpanch, Prem Narayan
          S/o Jagdish, Mohan, Revaram, Badri, Ram
          Bharose, Laxmi Narayan, Prem Narayan and
          Prahlad of their Village standing there. All
          these people caught Ramesh. It has been
          stated in the statement that Mohan fired at
          Ramesh with Katta. These witnesses were
          called    earlier  also    for   making    the
          statements.”
31. In this background, it will be relevant to refer to the

evidence of P.W.16­P.N. Bharti, Assistant Sub­Inspector, Police

Station, Harda. In his deposition, he clearly admitted that he

had recorded the statement of witnesses on 23 rd June, 1991.

However, the same were not produced with the Challan.        He
22
further stated that he does not have any information as to

where those statements are kept.
32. It will also be relevant to refer once again to the deposition

of P.W.17­M.K. Shrivastava (the I.O.), which reads thus:
“61. On 22.06.1991 in regard to present
               case one Dehati Naalis was prepared
               by Thanedaar Rethia in Hospital.
Thanedaar      Rethia     upon    my
               instructions      participating    in
               investigation    in   present   case.
               Thanedaar Barathia was not doing
independent investigation. Dehati
               Naalis was prepared on the same
               day by Thanedaar Barathia in the
               Harda Hospital after making enquiry
               from Hari Prasad. This I am stating
               on the basis of entry no. 1290 dated
               22.06.1991 in Roznamcha. The said
               Dehati    Naalis    has    not  been
               produced with the case.
62.   In regard to marg ASI Bharti
                recorded    the    statements       of
                witnesses but the same has not
                been produced with the chalan and
                has not been enclosed with the case
                diary also. Where these statements
                are today I cannot tell. It is correct
                that in Marg investigation/enquiry
                the statements of witnesses were
23
recorded those statements and
                 statement of witness Harnarayan
                 and     Mahesh      recorded     on
                 26.06.1991 and the statements of
                 witness   Sitabai    and    Kailash
                 recorded on 27.06.1991 are against
                 the prosecution therefore the same
                 have not been produced in the
                 court.”
33. It is thus clear that the prosecution has come out with

three different versions. As per the Postmortem requisition, it

is the accused No.3­Jagdish who had shot the deceased

Ramesh. As per the ocular testimony of P.W.2­Mahesh, which

is relied on by the High Court, it is the accused No.1­Mohan,

sitting as pillion rider with accused No.2­Prahlad, who had shot

the deceased; and the third version as per the Roznamcha, 11

persons had caught deceased Ramesh and accused No.1­

Mohan had fired at him with Katta.            It is a case full of

mysteries. According to P.W.2­Mahesh, his statement was only

recorded on 23rd June, 1991, which is corroborated by P.W.16­

P.N.   Bharti,   Assistant   Sub­Inspector,    Harda.    Whereas
24
according to P.W.17­M.K. Shrivastava (the I.O.), the statements

were recorded only on 26th and 27th June, 1991.              The

Postmortem requisition states that it is accused No.3­Jagdish,

who had assaulted the deceased Ramesh with Katta. P.W.16­

P.N. Bharti states that he is not aware as to where the

statements recorded by him on 23 rd June, 1991 are kept.

P.W.17­M.K. Shrivastava (the I.O.), admits that Dehati Naalis

was prepared by Thanedar Bharti. However, the same was not

produced with the case. He further          admitted that the

statements of some of the witnesses were against the

prosecution and therefore the same have not been produced in

the Court.
34. It is thus clear that the prosecution has failed to bring out

the true genesis of the incident. The prosecution has not come

to the Court with clean hands. As such, the High Court has

rightly held that the investigation conducted by the P.W.17­

M.K. Shrivastava (the I.O.) was not done in a fair and impartial

manner. However, in spite of that, though the High Court has
25
refused to rely on the testimony of the Panch witnesses, it has

relied on the recovery of the Motorcycle and the Katta, allegedly

at the instance of the accused No.1­Mohan only, on the basis of

the testimony of the very same P.W.17­M.K. Shrivastava (the

I.O.).
35. Mr. Abhinav Shrivastava, learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the respondent­State of Madhya Pradesh is right in

contending that the conviction could be based on the sole

testimony of a single eye­witness and therefore the High Court

was justified in convicting the accused on the basis of the

testimony of P.W.2­Mahesh.
In this respect, it will be relevant

to refer to the judgment of this Court in the case of
Anil

Phukan vs. State of Assam3
, wherein this Court has observed

thus:
“3. …….Indeed, conviction can be based
             on the testimony of a single eyewitness
             and there is no rule of law or evidence
             which says to the contrary provided the
             sole witness passes the test of reliability.
3 (1993) 3 SCC 282
26
So long as the single eyewitness is a
             wholly reliable witness the courts have no
             difficulty in basing conviction on his
             testimony alone. However, where the
             single eyewitness is not found to be a
             wholly reliable witness, in the sense that
             there are some circumstances which may
             show that he could have an interest in
             the prosecution, then the courts generally
             insist     upon       some    independent
             corroboration of his testimony, in
             material particulars, before recording
             conviction. It is only when the courts find
             that the single eyewitness is a wholly
             unreliable witness that his testimony is
             discarded in toto and no amount of
             corroboration can cure that defect….”
36. It is also equally well settled that previous enmity is a

double­edged sword. Though, it can provide a motive for the

crime, it can also be a ground for false implication. Reliance in

this respect, could be made on the judgment of this Court in

the case of
Ramashish Rai vs. Jagdish Singh4
, wherein this

Court has observed thus:
7. …………..By now, it is well­settled
         principle of law that enmity is a double­
4 (2005) 10 SCC 498
27
edged sword. It can be a ground for false
         implication. It also can be a ground for
         assault. Therefore, a duty is cast upon the
         court to examine the testimony of inimical
         witnesses with due caution and diligence.
……….”.
37. It is further contended by Shri Shrivastava, learned

counsel, that merely because there are lacunae in the

investigation, it cannot be a ground to acquit the accused, if

there is other evidence available on record.
In this respect, we

may gainfully refer to the observations of this Court in the case

of
Sunil Kundu and another vs. State of Jharkhand5
:
“29.    We began by commenting on the
                unhappy conduct of the investigating
                agency. We conclude by reaffirming our
                view. We are distressed at the way in
                which the investigation of this case was
                carried out. It is true that acquitting the
                accused merely on the ground of lapses
                or irregularities in the investigation of a
                case would amount to putting premium
                on the deprecable conduct of an
                incompetent investigating agency at the
                cost of the victims which may lead to
                encouraging perpetrators of crimes. This
5 (2013) 4 SCC 422
28
Court has laid down that the lapses or
             irregularities in the investigation could
             be ignored subject to a rider. They can
             be ignored only if despite their
             existence, the evidence on record bears
             out the case of the prosecution and the
             evidence is of sterling quality. If the
             lapses or irregularities do not go to the
             root of the matter, if they do not
             dislodge     the   substratum     of  the
             prosecution case, they can be ignored.
In this case, the lapses are very
             serious…….”
38. The present case too is full of inconsistencies.          The

evidence of the witnesses is contradictory to each others’. The

investigation is carried out in a totally irregular manner.   As

already discussed herein above, the testimony of P.W.2­Mahesh

itself cannot be said to be of sterling quality. The so­called

recoveries are also totally untenable.
39. In this view of the matter, the conviction of the appellants

on the sole testimony of P.W.2­Mahesh would not be tenable.

The Division Bench of the High Court has relied on the recovery

of the Motorcycle and the Katta, allegedly at the instance of the
29
disclosure statement given by the accused No.1­Mohan.

Insofar as the recovery of Motorcycle is concerned, the said

Motorcycle has been recovered at the instance of one Mahesh,

son of Jagdish Jat, i.e., son of the accused No.3, and that too

on 25th June, 1991. As such, the finding of the High Court that

it is recovered at the instance of the accused No.1­Mohan is

inconsistent with the record.
40. Insofar as the recovery of the Katta at the instance of the

accused No.1­Mohan is concerned, it would reveal that both the

arrest as well as the recovery are shown to be made

approximately at the same time on 26 th June, 1991. The

distance between the Police Station and the place from where

the alleged recovery is made is about 5 km. Apart from that,

the recovery of Katta is from an open place, accessible to one

and all.   Furthermore, there is no Panchnama on record to

show as to in what manner the said recovery was made. As

such, the said recovery is also not free from doubt and could

not have been relied on by the High Court.
30
41. We are therefore of the considered view that the High

Court has totally erred in reversing the well­reasoned order

passed by the learned Sessions Judge acquitting the accused.

The High Court has travelled much beyond the scope of

interference in an appeal against acquittal.        The present

appeals therefore deserve to be allowed.          It is ordered

accordingly.
…….........................J.
                                              [B.R. GAVAI]




                      ………………....…….........................J.
                     [PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA]

NEW DELHI;
JULY 27, 2022
31
1
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2043 OF 2009


PRAHALAD                                                     APPELLANT(S)

                               VERSUS

STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                                      RESPONDENT(S)

                                WITH

                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 983 Of 2010


                              O R D E R
Applications for impleadment in both the matters

are allowed.
For the reasons recorded separately, the appeals

are allowed. The judgment and order of the High Court dated

11.05.2009     convicting    the     appellants        for   the    offences

punishable under Section 302 read with
Section 34
of the

Indian Penal Code, 1860 is quashed and set aside.                        The

judgment     and    order   passed       by   the   learned        Additional

District   &   Sessions     Judge,       Hoshangabad    (Madhya     Pradesh)

acquitting the appellants for all the charges is confirmed.

The bail bonds shall stand discharged.
....................J
                                                        (B.R. GAVAI)


                                   .............................J
                                    (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)
NEW DELHI;
27th JULY, 2022