[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Topline Shoes Ltd. And Anr. vs Punjab National Bank on 20 July, 2022
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
B.R. Gavai
NON­REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.2125 OF 2009


                          TOPLINE SHOES LIMITED
                          AND ANOTHER                                  APPELLANT(S)

                                                   VERSUS

                          PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK                      RESPONDENT(S)




                                               JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.   The appeal challenges the judgment dated 7th July 2008

                          passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Bombay

                          thereby dismissing the Writ Petition Nos.207 and 1490 of

                          2005, filed by the present appellants arising out of the

                          concurrent orders passed by the learned Mumbai Debts

                          Recovery Tribunal­1 (for short “DRT”) in O.A. No.948 of 2000
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by Dr.
dated 31st October 2002 and the learned Debts Recovery
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2022.07.28
17:10:44 IST
Appellate Tribunal at Mumbai (for short “DRAT”) in Appeal
Reason:
1
Nos.152 of 2002 and 43 of 2004 dated 24 th November 2004.
2.   The respondent–Bank had filed an O.A. No.948 of 2000

against the present appellants raising certain claims. In the

said proceedings, the appellants filed a counter­claim

claiming therein that certain amount deposited in the

current account opened by them with the respondent­Bank,

was illegally withheld by the respondent–Bank. The learned

DRT vide order dated 31st October 2002 dismissed both, the

claim of the bank as well as the counter­claim of the

appellants. Being aggrieved thereby, both the respondent­

Bank as well as the appellants had preferred appeals before

the learned DRAT. Both the appeals were dismissed. Being

aggrieved thereby, two writ petitions were filed, one by the

respondent­Bank and the other by the appellants. As far as

the writ petition of the respondent­Bank is concerned, the

same was disposed of as withdrawn since the respondent­

Bank did not press the same. The writ petition of the

appellants was, however, dismissed vide the impugned

judgment. Being aggrieved thereby, the present appeal.
3.  Mr. S. N. Bhat, learned Senior Counsel appearing on

behalf of the appellants submitted that both the DRT and the
2
DRAT as well as the High Court have grossly erred in arriving

at the conclusion that the claim of the present appellants

was covered under
Article 113
and not by
Article 22
of the
Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963
(for short “the
Limitation Act
”).
3.1. Mr. Bhat further submitted that though the amount

deposited by the appellants was not a security or a fixed

deposit, still it was an amount which belonged to the

appellants and was illegally withheld by the respondent­

Bank. He therefore submitted that in view of
Article 22
of the
Limitation Act
, the cause of action to file a counter­claim

would begin from the date on which a notice was sent by the

appellants to the respondent­Bank, i.e., from September,

1999. He has submitted that since the counter­claim was

filed in the year 2000, i.e., within a period of three years from

the date of issuance of notice, the same was within

limitation.
3.2. Mr. Bhat submitted that in the present case, a clear

question of law has arisen as to whether in the facts of the

present case,
Article 22
or
Article 113
of the
Limitation Act
3
would be applicable for consideration. He submitted that the

High Court, the DRT as well as the DRAT have erroneously

held that in the present case
Article 113
of the
Limitation Act
would be applicable and not
Article 22
of the
Limitation Act
.
4.    Mr. S. N. Bhat relies on the judgment of this Court in

the case of
Jammu and Kashmir Bank Ltd. v. Attar­Ul­

Nissa & Others1
.
5.  Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gautam, learned counsel appearing

on behalf of the respondent–Bank has submitted that no

error could be noticed in the concurrent orders passed by the

DRT, the DRAT and the High Court. He submitted that in the

facts of the present case, the DRT, the DRAT as well as the

High Court have rightly held that the counter­claim would be

governed by
Article 113
of the
Limitation Act
.
6.   By now, it is a settled principle of law that the issue of

limitation is a mixed question of law and fact. The issue of

limitation cannot be decided by ignoring the factual scenario.
7.    It will be relevant to refer to paragraph 41 of the order

dated 31st October 2002 in O.A. No.948 of 2000 passed by

the learned DRT:
“41. It is not the case of the Defendants that they

1 [1967] 1 SCR 792
4
had paid the amount to the Applicants by way of
     deposit as securities till the account was finally
     settled. On the contrary it is their case that the
     Applicant Bank had extracted the amount from
     them by exerting undue influence etc. While
     narrating their case the Defendants have specifically
     pleaded that in the Board Meeting, the possibility of
     approaching the Court against the Applicant Bank
     was also contemplated and considered. However,
     they thought it better not to drag the Applicant
     Bank to the court to avoid adverse publicity and
     mar their chance of receiving the loan even from
     other Banks. It is thus obvious that a conscious
     decision was taken by Defendant No.1 Company to
     pay off whatever demanded by Applicant Bank
     without joining the issue and they had accordingly
     paid the amount maybe much against their wishes.
Subsequently if the Defendants wanted to recover
     the said amount they ought to have taken out
     proper proceedings before proper forum within the
     statutory period of three years. This was admittedly
     not done. The said amount cannot be recovered by
     filing a counter claim after the period of six years.”
8.   It could thus clearly be seen that in the factual position

as apparent in the present matter, the specific case of the

defendants­appellants was that the respondent­Bank had

extracted   the   amount      from   them         by   exerting   undue

influence. It could further be seen that the Board of Directors

of the Appellant had contemplated and considered the

possibility of approaching the Court against the respondent–

Bank.   However,   it   was    thought      fit    not   to   drag   the
5
respondent­Bank to the Court to avoid adverse publicity and

mar their chances of receiving loans from other banks. It

could thus be seen that the learned DRT has come to a

finding of fact that it was the conscious decision of the

appellants to pay off whatever amount was demanded by the

respondent–Bank without joining the issue and they had

accordingly paid the amount, may be much against their

wishes.
9.   Admittedly, the said amount, which according to the

appellants, was paid under undue influence in the year

1994.
10. It appears that after waiting for a period of five years,

the appellants woke up from their deep slumber and issued a

notice on 22nd September 1999.
11. The DRT, the DRAT as well as the High Court have

concurrently held that the counter­claim of the appellants

was based upon the amount deposited in the year 1994,

which according to the appellants was paid under undue

influence. If that be so, no error could be noticed in the

finding of the fact as recorded by the DRT, the DRAT and the

High Court that the counter­claim was squarely covered

under
Article 113
and not under
Article 22
of the Limitation
6
Act.
12. We, therefore, find no merit in the appeal. The appeal is

dismissed.
...................J.
                                                (B.R. GAVAI)



                     ………………………………...................J.
                     (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)


NEW DELHI;
JULY 20, 2022.
7