[Cites
4
, Cited by
13
]
Supreme Court of India
The Chief Executive Officer Bhilai ... vs Mahesh Kumar Gonnade on 11 July, 2022
Author:
Hrishikesh Roy
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
[REPORTABLE]

                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO._4990 OF 2021


         THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER,
         BHILAI STEEL PLANT, BHILAI                                   APPELLANT(S)

                                                  VERSUS


         MAHESH KUMAR GONNADE & ORS.                              RESPONDENT(S)



                                            J U D G M E N T
Hrishikesh Roy, J.
1. Heard Mr. Maninder Singh, the learned Senior Counsel

         appearing on behalf of the appellant.                          Also heard Mr.

         Anupam Lal Das, the learned Senior Counsel representing

         the             respondent   no.   1.    The    State   of    Chhattisgarh   is

         represented by Mr. Sumir Sodhi, the learned counsel.
2. The challenge in this appeal is to the judgment and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
order dated 09.01.2017 in the WP No. 675/2016 whereby
JAGDISH KUMAR
Date: 2022.07.11
15:07:13 IST
Reason:
the Division Bench has interfered with the order passed
Page 1 of 15
by     the    Central    Administrative          Tribunal        (for    short

“CAT”)       and   granted     relief      to    the    writ      petitioner

(respondent        no.   1)    whose      termination        order       dated

24.10.2015 was set aside with the declaration that he

would be entitled to all the consequential benefits,

including seniority and back wages.
RELEVANT FACTS
3.     On 11.09.1987, the respondent no.1 obtained a Caste

Certificate showing him to be “Halba” Scheduled Tribe

(hereinafter “ST”) from the Deputy Collector, Durg and

on the basis of the said certificate, the respondent

no.1    on    18.09.1995,      joined     service      as    a    Management

Trainee      (Technical)       against     a    Schedule         Tribe   quota

vacancy      at    the   Bhillai     Steel      Plant       of    the    Steel

Authority of India Limited (SAIL). In 2008, questions

were raised on the caste status of the respondent no.1,

and    his    entitlement      to   the    benefits      meant       for    the

Scheduled Tribe category, and accordingly, his caste

certificate        was   forwarded        to    the    High-Level        Caste

Scrutiny      Committee,       Raipur     to    determine         whether    he
Page 2 of 15
belonged     to      Halba       Scheduled            Tribe     community         or

“Halba/Koshti”       the     Other     Backward         Class    (hereinafter

“OBC”) community. The Committee, after due inquiry, on

15.07.2015 submitted a report stating that respondent

no.1    belongs      to     Halba/Koshti          community,             which    is

categorized as OBC in the State of Chhattisgarh, and

thus,   he   does     not    belong        to    Halba        Scheduled      Tribe

community. Accordingly, the respondent no.1’s Halba ST

Certificate       dated     11.09.1987          was    cancelled         with    the

observation that the respondent no.1 failed to produce

documents prior to the year 1950 showing him as Halba.

Following the cancellation of the ST Certificate, the

Vigilance Department of the State of Chhattisgarh, on

23.07.2015, issued communication to the employer i.e.,

Bhillai      Steel        Plant      for        necessary        action.          In

consequence       thereof, and        the adverse             finding of         the

Committee,      order      for    termination           of    the    respondent

no.1’s service was issued on 24.10.2015.                            The Bhillai

Steel   Plant     also     ordered     for       forfeiture         of    all    the
Page 3 of 15
service benefits of the respondent no.1 such as CPF,

Gratuity, Pension, Leave Encashment etc.
4.    The          respondent         no.1          moved         the       Central

Administrative          Tribunal          (CAT),       to     challenge          the

termination but his OA 1115/2015 came to be dismissed

in limine because he had not challenged the adverse

finding (15.07.2015) of the High-Level Caste Scrutiny

Committee, Raipur.
5.    Thereafter,        the        respondent        no.1        filed    a    writ

petition       before         the     High      Court        of     Chhattisgarh

challenging the CAT’s decision and seeking protection

of his service. The Division Bench of the High Court by

placing reliance on
State of Maharashtra Vs. Milind and

Ors.1
(hereinafter          “Milind”)           through        the     impugned

judgment granted relief to the writ petitioner. In the

process,      the      High     Court      overlooked         that        the   writ

petitioner opted to abstain from the proceedings of the

High-Level Caste Scrutiny Committee. Moreover, by this

time it was made clear that Halba/Koshti is not a sub-


1 (2001) 1 SCC 4
Page 4 of 15
caste of Halba. Therefore, the respondent no.1 being an

OBC (Halba/Koshti) could not have claimed recognition

and   employment benefits         reserved for             members of     the

Halba ST community under the Milind’s ratio.
ARGUMENTS BY THE COUNSELS

6.1 Assailing         the   impugned    judgment,           Mr.   Maninder

Singh, the learned Senior Counsel firstly argues that

the   High    Court     erroneously    relied         on    the   ratio   in
Milind
(supra) and also conspicuously missed the point

that the relief in the cited case was restricted to the

concerned litigant and the ratio was not intended to be

of universal application.
Placing strong reliance on
Union    of    India    vs.   Dattatray      &    Ors.2
(hereinafter

“Dattatray”), the appellant’s counsel then argues that

the Milind’s judgment was made applicable only for the

doctor litigant in the larger interest of the society

and     the   ratio    thereof,    cannot        be    indiscriminately

applied in cases of persons who undeservingly secure

public appointments to reserved category jobs.
2 (2008) 4 SCC 612
Page 5 of 15
6.2 It is the submission of the Senior Counsel for the

appellant       that    the       judgment      in
Milind
(supra)     was

clarified       by    this       Court     in
Dattatray
(supra)     that

Milind does not propound retention of any person in

service       who    secured         employment          in   a     ST    category

vacancy, on the basis of a false caste certificate. For

this    reason,       the       earlier     Government         Circular      dated

1.10.2011       (which       on      account        of     Milind’s        judgment

granted       protection        to   the    pre      28.11.2000          appointees

recruited wrongly under the ST category), was cancelled

by the latter circular dated 11.1.2016 issued by the

Secretary,          GAD,        Chhattisgarh         with         the     specific

observation that the judgment in Milind was clarified

by     this    Court       in     Dattatray.         Mr.      Maninder       Singh,

therefore, argues that consequential action was rightly

taken in view of the cancellation of earlier circular

(1.10.2011).
6.3     The    High        Court      according          to   the        appellant,

erroneously granted relief to the respondent no.1 as he

neither challenged the circular dated 11.1.2016 nor the
Page 6 of 15
adverse    conclusion    of    the    Caste      Scrutiny      Committee.

Therefore, in view of the undisturbed finding that he

does not belong to the ST category and the unchallenged

Circular    (11.1.2016),        relief        could    not     have    been

granted by the High Court. Furthermore, the respondent

no.1 never tried to establish the validity of his caste

certificate    before     the        High-Power        Caste       Scrutiny

Committee, although, opportunity was afforded to him

through a notice, to project his version.

7.1 Per contra, Mr. Anupam Lal Das, the learned Senior

Counsel    would   contend     that     the     respondent      no.1   had

obtained his caste certificate on 11.09.1987 and joined

service as far back as on 18.09.1995 and as such, his

service could not have been terminated without issuing

him a show cause notice.
7.2 Adverting next to the adverse finding as given by

the High-Power Caste Scrutiny Committee to the effect

that the respondent no.1 does not belong to the Halba

ST   community,    Mr.   Das    would     argue       that   the   adverse

conclusion was drawn mainly because the respondent no.1
Page 7 of 15
failed to produce any pre 1950 document, showing his

caste   as   Halba.        But    since         the    respondent     no.1’s

appointment became final prior to 28.11.2000 i.e., the

date on which this Court decided the C.A. No.2294/1986

(
State of Maharashtra vs. Milind
), the appointed person

even with the adverse finding of the Caste Scrutiny

Committee against him, is entitled to retain his job.

Furthermore, the Central Government vide its circular

dated   10.8.2010      had         ordered        for      protection       of

employment   of     those        belonging        to    the    Halba/Koshti

community.   Thus,     according           to     the      learned    Senior

Counsel, the High Court, rightly granted relief to the

respondent   no.1     in    his     Writ        Petition      and   the   same

should not be disturbed in this appeal.
8.   The stand of the State of Chhattisgarh (respondent

nos.2 and 3) as pleaded in their counter affidavit is

that respondent no.1 (not being a ST category person)

is disentitled to continue in service, as he secured

employment to a post earmarked for the ST category.

Moreover, since the respondent no.1 does not belong to
Page 8 of 15
the   reserved category           and secured         employment on      the

basis of a false caste certificate, he was disentitled

to any relief in view of the law
laid down in
Chairman

and Managing Director, Food Corporation of India & Ors.

vs.    Jagdish         Balaram    Bahira        &    Ors.3
(hereinafter

“Jagdish”).
THE DISCUSSION AND THE DECISION
9.    At the outset, given that the
Jagdish
(supra) as

relied on by respondent nos.2 & 3 was pronounced on

06.07.2017, almost 6 months after the impugned judgment

on 09.01.2017, the same could not have been considered

by the High Court.
With this prefatory clarification,

the issue to be answered in this matter is whether the

High Court had correctly relied on the ratio in
Milind
(supra)     in       granting    relief    to       the    writ   petitioner

(respondent no.1), and whether the impugned decision of

the    High      Court     is    sustainable          in     view   of   the

clarification of the Milind by the subsequent judgment

in
Dattatray
(supra).
3 (2017) 8 SCC 670
Page 9 of 15
10. As can be seen, the High Court granted relief to

the respondent no.1 by referring to the decision in
Milind
(supra) with the following words: -
“15. For the aforesaid, we are of the considered
         view that the impugned judgment rendered by the
         Central Administrative Tribunal, refusing to extend
         benefit of Milind’s judgment to the petitioners
         deserves   to    be  and   is   hereby   set-aside.
Consequently, the petitioner’s termination vide
         order dated 24.10.2015 is also set-aside.       The
         petitioner    would  be   entitled   to   all   the
         consequential benefits on or after 24.10.2015
         including seniority and back wages.    However, the
         petitioner shall not be entitled to any interest on
         the arrears of salary nor any further benefit on
         the basis of certificate which has been cancelled
         by the High Power Caste Scrutiny Committee.”
11. While applying the ratio of Milind as above, the

High     Court,   however,    failed     to       take   note   of   the

following     clarification     given        in
Dattatray
(supra),

regarding the ratio in Milind: -
“5. ………But
the said decision
has no application to
       a case which does not relate to an admission to an
       educational institution, but relates to securing
       employment   by  wrongly  claiming  the   benefit  of
       reservation meant for Scheduled Tribes. When a person
       secures employment by making a false claim regarding
       caste/tribe, he deprives a legitimate candidate
       belonging to Scheduled Caste/Tribe, of employment. In
       such a situation, the proper course is to cancel the
       employment obtained on the basis of the false
       certificate so that the post may be filled up by a
Page 10 of 15
candidate   who        is   entitled      to     the    benefit     of
    reservation.”
12. The      pronouncement       in    Dattatray           clearly    suggests

that the High Court misapplied the ratio in Milind,

since   the    appointment        of    the        respondent     no.    1   as

Management Trainee (Technical), cannot be compared to

the education and appointment of a medical doctor.
13. It must also be borne in mind that the Division

Bench   of    the    Chhattisgarh       High       Court     in   the   common

judgment     in     Writ   Appeal      No.531       of     2016   (
State     of

Chhattisgarh & Ors. vs. Dinesh Kumar Sonkusre
) had made

the following observations: -
“40. It would be pertinent to mention that the State
    of Chhattisgarh was formed w.e.f. 01.11.2000 and the
    judgment in
Milind
(supra) was rendered on 28.11.2000
    and the protection can only be given to those who were
    actually “Halba-Koshti” or “Koshti” for the State of
    Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh prior to 28.11.2000
    and were therefore treated as “Halbas”.
41. Having held so, we want to clarify that the
    notification dated 11.1.2016 is not bad in law. It
    will however have to be read in the context of the law
laid down by
the Apex Court in various judgements as
    explained by us above. This notification may not apply
    to those petitioners who have obtained jobs prior to
    28.11.2000 provided they have obtained Scheduled Tribe
Page 11 of 15
certificate “bona fide” and without suppression or
    misrepresentation of any facts. In case, a person is
    not a “Halba Koshti” in relation to State of Madhya
    Pradesh, then that person is not entitled to any
    protection of law.   If a person has obtained a false
    certificate by misrepresentation of facts or providing
    wrong information, then that the person is also not
    entitled to any protection. It is only those who were
    actually “Halba Koshti” or “Koshti” believed that they
    were members of “Halba”, a Scheduled Tribe and who got
    jobs prior to 28.11.2000, are entitled to such
    protection. This protection cannot be extended to all
    and sundry. To give an example if “Halba Koshti” from
    the State of Maharashtra had shifted to State of
    Madhya Pradesh, then he would not be “Halba Koshti”
    belonging   to  Madhya   Pradesh  and   as  such,  his
    certificate would be totally false and such a person
    would not be entitled to any protection.”
14. As     we    notice,    the     High       Court   disregarded    the

Government’s       circular     dated      11.01.2016     whereby      the

previous circular (01.10.2011) was cancelled with the

specific        observation       that     Milind’s      judgment      was

clarified subsequently in Dattatray, by declaring that

when a person secures appointment on the basis of a

false certificate, he cannot be permitted to retain the

benefit    of    wrongful     appointment.        In   fact,   necessary

actions were expected to be taken against those who

secured    unmerited appointment           on the      basis of      false

caste    certificate.       Pertinently,         the   respondent     no.1
Page 12 of 15
could    have    (but      never     did)     challenge,         the    circular

dated      11.01.2016       which      required      the       Government        to

cancel such unmerited appointment.
15.   As    noted      earlier,       the    respondent         no.1     secured

employment       to    a    post      earmarked          for    the     reserved

category, and there is a clear finding by the Caste

Scrutiny Committee that the respondent no.1 does not

belong      to   the       Halba     ST     category.          The     Halba     ST

certificate        (11.09.1987)        on    the    basis       of    which     the

respondent No.1 secured employment was cancelled by the

Committee on 15.07.2015, and such finding of the Caste

Scrutiny Committee remain unchallenged till date.                              As a

consequence,        the    respondent        no.1    is        disentitled       to

claim    any     equitable     relief        by    virtue        of    his     long

service,     particularly          when     he,    despite        the    notice,

avoided      the      proceedings           of     the     Caste        Scrutiny

Committee. Also conspicuously, he does not challenge

the adverse finding against him. Moreover, it is not

the claim of the Respondent no.1 that he belongs to the

ST category nor did he ever challenge the clarificatory
Page 13 of 15
circular     (11.01.2016)            which        cancels        the    earlier

circular     (01.10.2011).           In        such     circumstances,        an

opportunity       to     the   respondent         no.1    would    be    futile

because he could not have claimed that he belongs to

the   ST    category       since     his       Halba     caste    certificate

(issued      on     11.09.1987)           stood        cancelled        by    the

Committee.        Consequently,           as      an     OBC     person,      the

respondent        no.1    could     not        have    been    permitted      to

continue in a post meant for the ST category. The High

Court,     therefore, should           not have          granted relief       by

invoking     the    principles        of       natural    justice,      and   by

adverting to the ratio in
Milind
(supra) which was not

applicable to the respondent no.1, and which eventually

was clarified in
Dattatray
(supra).
16. The above would show that the High Court clearly

fell into an error by granting relief to the respondent

no.1 who is disentitled to claim any right to continue

in a post earmarked for the ST category. The ratio in
Milind
(supra) was incorrectly applied in the impugned

judgment since it is not the case of the respondent
Page 14 of 15
no.1 that he belongs to the ST category. According to

our understanding of the circumstances, the High Court

instead of granting equitable relief to the Respondent

no. 1, should have held that he cannot continue to

usurp   the   benefits       meant    for      a   ST   category    person.

Indeed the Division Bench should have said “the game is

up”   as   was    pronounced      by    Shakespeare         in    the   play

Cymbeline when the character stood exposed for what he

actually was. Consequently we are of the opinion that

the Respondent no. 1 being an OBC cannot be retained in

a ST category post. However the emoluments paid to him

should not be recovered. It is further held that the

respondent       no.1   is    disentitled          to     any    pensionary

benefit by virtue of his wrongful appointment. It is

ordered    accordingly.         The     appeal          therefore    stands

allowed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
………………………………………………………J.
                                               [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]


                                               ………………………………………………………J.
                                               [HRISHIKESH ROY]
NEW DELHI
JULY 11, 2022
Page 15 of 15