[Cites
5
, Cited by
14
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Rajasthan vs Kistoora Ram on 28 July, 2022
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
B.R. Gavai
NON­REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 2119 OF 2010

                          STATE OF RAJASTHAN                                  APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS
                          KISTOORA RAM                                      RESPONDENT(S)

                                                 JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.    The present appeal challenges the judgment dated 15 th

                          September 2009 passed by the High Court of Judicature for

                          Rajasthan at Jodhpur in D.B. Criminal Appeal No. 25 of

                          1986, thereby acquitting the respondent­accused herein and

                          reversing the judgment dated 10th January 1986 passed by

                          the   learned    District   and       Sessions    Judge,   Jodhpur

                          (hereinafter referred to as the “trial court”) in Original

                          Criminal Case No.114 of 1984, thereby convicting the

                          respondent­accused herein under
Section 302
of the Indian

                          Penal Code, 1860 (for short “
IPC
”) and sentencing him to
Signature Not Verified
undergo life imprisonment. The respondent­accused was also
Digitally signed by Dr.
Mukesh Nasa
Date: 2022.08.08
16:23:20 IST
Reason:
convicted under
Section 201
of the IPC and sentenced to
1
undergo three years’ rigorous imprisonment.
2. The respondent–accused was charged for an offence

punishable under
Sections 302
and
201
of the IPC. It is the

prosecution case that the accused had killed his wife with a

lathi, dragged her 100 feet away from the house and set her

on fire in order to destroy the evidence.
3. The trial court, after appreciating          the    evidence,

convicted the respondent–accused for the offence punishable

under
Section 302
of the IPC and sentenced him to suffer life

imprisonment with a fine of Rs.100/­.         The respondent­

accused was also convicted for the offence punishable under
Section 201
of the IPC and sentenced to undergo three years’

rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs.100/­.
4. Being aggrieved thereby, the respondent­accused

preferred an appeal before the High Court. The High Court,

vide   impugned   judgment,   allowed   the   appeal    thereby

reversing the order of conviction and acquitted the accused

for the offences charged. Being aggrieved thereby, the State

of Rajasthan has preferred an appeal before this Court.
5. We have heard Mr. Vishal Meghwal, learned counsel

appearing on behalf of the appellant–State of Rajasthan.
6. Mr. Meghwal, learned counsel for the appellant­State

has submitted that when the trial court, upon appreciation of
2
evidence   of   Guman    Singh       (PW­4),   had   convicted   the

respondent–accused, there was no reason for the High Court

to interfere with the same. He has submitted that the extra­

judicial confession made by the respondent–accused before

Guman      Singh   (PW­4)   is   such,     which     would   inspire

confidence in the judicial mind. It is submitted that Guman

Singh (PW­4) was an independent witness inasmuch as he

had served in the police department and there was no reason

to disbelief his testimony. It is further submitted that Hamira

Ram (PW­7) though has been declared hostile, part of his

testimony related to extra­judicial confession is trustworthy

and the same corroborates the testimony of Guman Singh

(PW­4). He has, therefore, submitted that the impugned

judgment passed by the High Court needs to be set aside and

the judgment of the trial court needs to be confirmed.
7. We have perused the judgment of the trial court dated

10th January 1986 as well as the High Court dated 15th

September 2009.
8. The scope of interference in an appeal against acquittal

is very limited. Unless it is found that the view taken by the

Court is impossible or perverse, it is not permissible to

interfere with the finding of acquittal. Equally if two views are
3
possible, it is not permissible to set aside an order of

acquittal, merely because the Appellate Court finds the way

of conviction to be more probable. The interference would be

warranted only if the view taken is not possible at all.
9. The High Court has elaborately discussed the evidence.

Undisputedly, Hamira Ram (PW­7) has turned hostile. The

trial court itself had disbelief the alleged recovery of the

incriminating material allegedly recovered at the instance of

the respondent–accused.
10. That only leaves with the extra­judicial confession

allegedly made by Guman Singh (PW­4). The High Court,

relying on the judgment of this Court in the case of
State of

Punjab v. Bhajan Singh and Others1
, so also in the case of
Gopal Sah v. State of Bihar2
has held that extra­judicial

confession was a weak piece of evidence and unless there

was some corroboration, the conviction solely on the basis of

extra­judicial confession could not be sustained. The view

taken by the High Court cannot be said to be either

impossible or perverse meriting our interference.
11. In that view of the matter, we are not inclined to

interfere with the impugned judgment. We find no merit in

1 (1975) 4 SCC 472
2 (2008) 17 SCC 128
4
the appeal. The appeal is dismissed.
12. Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of

accordingly.
...................J.
                                                        (B.R. GAVAI)


                   .......................................................J.
                     (PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)


New Delhi;
28th July, 2022.
5