[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
In Re Problems And Miseries Of Migrant ... vs Unknown on 21 July, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                            MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO. 94 OF 2022
                                                IN
                            SUO MOTU WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 6 OF 2020

         In Re: Problems and Miseries of Migrant Labourers

                                                ORDER
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.              That while disposing of Suo Motu Writ Petition (Civil) No. 6 of 2020

         – In Re: Problems and Miseries of Migrant Labourers, this Court issued

         the following directions:-
(i)   It is directed that the Central Government to develop
                     the Portal in consultation with National Informatics
                     Centre (NIC) for registration of the unorganized
                     labourers/migrant workers. We also impress upon
                     and direct that the Central Government as well as the
                     respective States and the Union Territories to
                     complete the process of Portal for registration under
                     National Data Base for Unorganised Workers (NDUW
                     Project) as well as implement the same, which by all
                     means may commence not later than 31.07.2021. We
                     also impress upon and direct that the process of
                     registration of the unorganized labourers/migrant
                     workers is completed at the earliest, but not later than
                     31.12.2021. All the concerned States/Union
                     Territories and the Licence Holders/Contractors and
                     others to cooperate with the Central Government to
                     complete the process of registration of migrant
                     workers and unorganized labourers so that the
                     benefits of the welfare schemes declared by the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan            Central Government/State Governments/ Union
                     Territories be available to migrant workers and
Date: 2022.08.10
17:35:54 IST
Reason:
unorganized labourers for whose benefits the welfare
                     schemes are declared.
1
(ii)    The Central Government having undertaken to
        distribute additional quantity of foodgrains as
        demanded by the States/Union Territories for
        distribution to migrant labourers under some Scheme
        framed by the States, we direct the Central
        Government, Department of Food and Public
        Distribution (Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and
        Public Distribution) to allocate and distribute
        foodgrains as per demand of additional food-grains
        from the States for disbursement of dry foodgrains to
        migrant labourers.
(iii)   We direct the States to bring in place an appropriate
        scheme for distribution of dry ration to migrant
        labourers for which it shall be open for States to ask
        for allocation of additional foodgrains from the Central
        Government, which, as directed above, shall provide
        the additional foodgrains to the State. The State shall
        consider and bring an appropriate Scheme, which
        may be implemented on or before 31.07.2021. Such
        scheme may be continued and operated till the
        current pandemic (Covid-19) continues.
(iv)    The States, who have not yet implemented “One
        Nation One Ration Card” scheme are directed to
        implement the same by not later than 31.07.2021.
(v)     The Central Government may undertake exercise
        under
Section 9
of the National Food Security Act,
        2013 to re-determine the total number of persons to
        be covered under the Rural and Urban areas of the
        State.
(vi)    We direct all the States/Union Territories to register
        all establishments and license all contractors under
        the Act, 1979 and ensure that statutory duty imposed
        on the contractors to give particulars of migrant
        workers is fully complied with.
(vii) The State/Union Territories are directed to run
      community kitchens at prominent places where large
      number of migrant labourers are found for feeding
      those migrant labourers who does not have sufficient
      means to procure two meals a day. The running of
2
the community kitchen should be continued at-least
           till pandemic (Covid-19) continues.
2.   Thereafter, the matter was again heard on 18.05.2022 and this

Court passed the following order:-
“Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG, appearing for the
     Central Government prays for some time to place on record
     the compliance report. She has stated at the Bar that, as
     such, the Central Government has already developed the
     Portal in consultation with the National Informatics Centre
     for registration of the unorganized labourers/migrant
     workers pan-India. She has stated at the Bar that
     approximately 27.45 Crores are registered in the portal on
     the basis of the information given by the respective
     concerned States. How the Central Government and the
     concerned States are going to take the advantage and/or
     the benefit of the registration of the unorganized
     labourers/migrant workers to protect the interest of the
     unorganized labourers/migrant workers? One of the object
     and purpose of the registration is to ensure that the
     benevolent schemes which are declared by the
     Government/Governments          reach     the    concerned
     unorganized labourers/migrant workers.
We had also directed all the States/Union Territories
     to register all establishments and license of all contractors
     under the Act of 1979 and ensure that the statutory duty
     imposed on the contractors to give particulars of the
     migrant workers is fully complied with. Many of the States
     have not complied with the said direction.
The Central Government to obtain all the required
     information from all the States so that a further order can
     be passed to protect the interest of the unorganized
     labourers/migrant workers. All concerned States/Union
     Territories are directed to furnish all the required particulars
     which are needed by the Central Government so that the
     Central Government may file a composite report before this
     Court on the next date of hearing.
3
Now our endeavor should be to consider the larger
       issue to protect the interest of the unorganized
       labourers/migrant workers and how their rights are to be
       protected.
The Central Government to file a composite report in
       compliance of all the directions issued by this Court in the
       order dated 29.06.2021. All the States shall cooperate and
       submit all the particulars which are called for.
Learned counsel for the respective States to give
       copy of their counters to Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG
       so that she can 7 file a composite report.
Put up on 20.07.2022.”
3.     Pursuant to our earlier orders, an affidavit has been filed on behalf

of Union of India dated 18.07.2022 affirmed by the Deputy Director

General, in the Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of

India. Various steps taken by the Union of India has been stated in the

affidavit. It is stated in the affidavit/compliance report that in compliance

of the directions issued by this Court, Ministry of Labour and Employment

has developed a “National Database of Unorganised Workers (NDUW)

portal” and “eShram portal” for registration of unorganised workers

including migrant workers spread over 400 occupations such as Building

and other Construction workers, Agricultural workers, Self-Employed

workers, Asha workers, Anganwadi workers, Fisherman, Dairy workers

etc.
4
4.    It is stated that vide DO letter dated 13.08.2021 to all the States

and Union Territories, the Ministry provided the comprehensive

guidelines for mobilisation of the workers through District Level

Implementation Committee and State Level Monitoring Committee,

registration targets to be achieved by the States by 31.12.2021 alongwith

the one-time financial assistance for setting up of required IT

infrastructure, call centres etc.   In order to mobilize the unorganised

workers for registration on eShram portal, States/UTS have been

provided with funds of Rs.19.07 crores and information, education and

communication materials. It is pointed out that the eShram portal formally

commenced the registration on 26.08.2021 in all the States/UTs and the

same was conveyed to all the States by Ministry’s letter dated

31.08.2021. Various further steps have also been taken by the Union of

India so that the maximum unorganised workers/migrants are registered

with the eShram portal. Ms. Bhati, learned ASG has pointed out the

Statewise targets and registrations.    On going through the Statewise

targets and registration, it appears that many States have failed to

achieve the target. Many of the States have achieved less than fifty per

cent target.   For example, State of Maharashtra has achieved only

36.97% target, State of Tamil Nadu has achieved 34.84% target, State of

Telangana has achieved only 34.90% target, State of Gujarat has

achieved 48.40% target, State of Karnataka has achieved 36.19% target.
5
5.   In our earlier directions/orders, we have emphasised the need for

registration of the migrants/unorganised workers in different fields and

one of the objects is to see that all benevolent schemes announced by

the Union of India and/or the concerned States, the benefits of which

should reach to such unorganised workers.       We appreciate the work

undertaken by the Union of India – Ministry of Labour and Employment.

However, as observed hereinabove, still some States such as State of

Maharashtra, State of Tamil Nadu, State of Telangana, State of Gujarat

and State of Karnataka have to achieve the target. Therefore, we direct

those States, who have not been able to achieve the target for

registration of the unorganised workers, to do so and cooperate with the

Union of India – Ministry of labour and Employment and to ensure to it

that those unorganised labourers/ workers in different sectors are

registered in the eShram portal. The said exercise shall be completed

within a period of six weeks from today. The concerned States /Union

Territories are directed to submit the report to the Union of India –

Ministry of Labour and Employment on completion of six weeks so that

the Union of India – Ministry of Labour and Employment can file a further

Status Report on the aforesaid.
6.   So far as, one another direction issued was additional allocation of

foodgrains as demanded by the States/Union Territories for distribution to

migrant labourers.   It is pointed out in the affidavit that the required
6
quantity of foodgrains as per the locally assessed need has been

provided through Food Corporation of India under the “Open Market

Sales Scheme”. It is further pointed out that facility of “One Nation One

Ration Card” has been enabled in all the States/ Union Territories

covering about 80 crores NFSA beneficiaries.
7.   Now, so far as re-determining the coverage under the
National

Food Security Act
(NFSA), 2013 and to undertake an exercise under
Section 9
of NFSA, 2013 and to re-determine the total number of

persons to be covered under the Rural and Urban areas of the State, it

appears that at present the total number of persons to be covered in the

Rural and Urban areas of the State is calculated on the basis of

population estimates as per the 2011 census. It appears that at the time

of implementation of the NFSA, latest published figures of census

pertained to the year 2011 and it is used to determine the coverage of all

States /Union Territories considering
Section 9
of the NFSA.
Shri Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

petitioner has pointed out that after 2011, the population has increased

and therefore the beneficiaries under the NFSA also have increased. It

is submitted that therefore many eligible and/or needy beneficiary in the

Rural and Urban areas will be deprived of the benefit under the NFSA. It

is also pointed out that in some of the cases, because of not having the
7
ration cards, the migrants/unorganised labourers/workers are deprived of

the benefit of the food/foodgrains under the NFSA.
8.   The aforesaid grievance seems to be genuine and justified. The

Union of India to look into the same and come out with a formula and/or

appropriate policy/scheme, if any, so that the benefits under NFSA are

not restricted as per the census 2011 and more and more needy

persons/citizens get the benefit under the
National Food Security Act
,

keeping in mind what has been observed and held by this Court in a

catena of decisions that “Right to Food” is a fundamental right available

under
Article 21
of the Constitution of India. The Union Government may

look into the same by considering the figures/projection of population

increase during the decade 2011-2021, which would be on an

assessment of increase in population and file their response on the next

date of hearing.
Put up on 27.09.2022.
…………………………………..J.
                                        [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                              …………………………………..J.
JULY 21, 2022.                          [B.V. NAGARATHNA]
8