[Cites
56
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
S. Udaya Shankar vs State Of Karnataka And Ors Etc. Etc. on 28 July, 2022
Author:
C.T.Ravikumar
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
Dinesh Maheshwari
,
A.M. Khanwilkar
1


                                                             REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.     OF 2021
                             (Arising out of SLP(C)No.1361 OF 2021)



          The Karnataka Housing Board & Anr.                Appellant(s)
                                              VERSUS

          State Of Karnataka & Ors.                        Respondent(s)


                                            WITH


                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS.7011-7013, 9002-9003
                                    AND 7017-7019 OF 2013




                                       J U D G M E N T
C.T.RAVIKUMAR, J.
1.             Leave granted in SLP(C) No.1361 of 2021 and on
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
consent taken up for hearing along with connected Civil
Date: 2022.07.29
17:51:36 IST
Reason:
2
Appeals. In all these Appeals a common question arises


for   consideration     viz.,   “whether    initiation   of


proceedings for acquisition of land for the purposes


of the Karnataka Housing Board, invoking the power


under
Section 33(2)
of the Karnataka Housing Board Act,


1962, without the housing scheme being in existence or


the housing scheme not having been sanctioned under
Section 24(2)
thereof, would render such acquisition


proceedings void and non-est”. Certain allied questions


may also call for consideration. We may hasten to state


that we do not propose to dispose of the appeals on


merits under this judgment and it would only resolve


the   stated   common   question   and     cognate   issues.


Nonetheless, if nothing survives for consideration in


any appeal, upon answering the moot question and allied
3
issues, then its fate would depend upon the nature of


their answers.
2.
The Karnataka Housing Board Act
, (hereinafter for


short “the
KHB Act
”) was enacted with an object to


provide for measures to be taken to deal with and


satisfy     the    need   for   housing    accommodation.      For


effectuating the said object, under
Section 3
thereof,


the Karnataka Housing Board (for short “KHB”), was


constituted.       Different    modes     for    acquisition    of


properties for the purposes of KHB are provided under


the
KHB   Act
,    including    the    power    for   compulsory


acquisition       under
Section   33(2)
.      With   this   short


prelude we will proceed to consider the moot question


and the allied issues, for which it is proper and


profitable to state succinctly the situation occurring
4
in the appeals from which they stem for consideration.


We refer to the rival contentions raised in the appeals


solely for the said purpose.
Civil Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition
(Civil) No. 1361 of 2021
3.   This appeal is preferred by ‘KHB’ and its Special


Land Acquisition Officer against the judgment and final


order dated 01.12.2020 of a Division Bench of the High


Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru in WA No. 5712 of 2012


(LA-KHB) filed against the order in WP No.25184 of 2011


dated 29.05.2012.   The Government of Karnataka as per


Annexure ‘A’ Notification dated 15.12.1998, (marked


thus in the appeal) issued under Clause(c) of
Section


3
of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (for short “
L.A.


Act
”), appointed the Housing Commissioner of KHB to


perform the functions of Deputy Commissioner under
5
Section 4
of the L.A. Act in respect of the lands to


be acquired for the purposes of KHB in Bengaluru and


Mysore Revenue Divisions, namely, Bengaluru Urban and


Bengaluru Rural, etc.
S.3(c)
itself makes it clear


that the appropriate Government is empowered to appoint


any officer to perform the functions of a collector


under the
L.A. Act
. In exercise of the powers thus


conferred,   the   Housing    Commissioner,   KHB,   issued


Annexure ‘B’ Preliminary Notification dated 18.4.2007


under
Section 4(1)
of the L.A. Act in respect of two


places, namely, Kowdenahalli village and K.R. Puram


village in Bengaluru District for acquisition of a


total extent of 56 acres and 37 guntas of land, for the


housing projects of KHB. The said Notification was


published in the official Gazette on 12.07.2007 and
6
thereafter, in two daily newspapers on 18.08.2007 and


local offices during the period from 13.08.2007 to


24.08.2007. Subsequently, the State Government issued


the declaration and final Notification Annexure ‘C’


under
Section 6(1)
of the L.A. Act, dated 26.3.2009


declaring that the notified properties are required for


public purpose, i.e., for construction of different


categories of houses by KHB. It was also duly published


in the official Gazette and in two local newspapers.


Mrs. Dawn D’souza, the mother of Respondents 2 and 3


in this Appeal, filed WP No.25184/2011 challenging the


afore-mentioned   preliminary   and   final   Notifications


before the High Court of Karnataka. An interim order


was granted in the said petition on 28.7.2011.
Earlier,


three other writ petitions, viz., WP Nos.25435/2010,
7
23002/2010 and 23083/2010, were filed by some other


land owners challenging the very same Notifications.


Obviously, only one point was raised in all the four


cases, viz., ‘whether acquisition Notifications could


be issued until and unless scheme is finalized as per


the   provisions   of   the
KHB   Act
’.   They   were   heard


together and allowed by a Learned Single Judge as per


the order dated 29.05.2012, upholding the contention


of the petitioners therein that sanction of the housing


scheme concerned is sine qua non for initiation of


acquisition proceedings therefor, following his own


judgment in WP No.9593/2007 in respect of acquisitions


of the year 1991 for a different area. As a matter of


fact, the said relied upon judgment in WP No.9593/2007


was rendered, relying mainly on the decision of this
8
Court in
State of Tamil Nadu & Anr. Vs. Mohammed Yousef


& Ors.
(AIR 1992 SC 1827). Later, on 29.06.2012, a


proposal for 53 housing schemes, including for the


aforesaid two places, namely, Kowdenahalli village and


K.R. Puram village, were submitted to the Government


for   approval    by    KHB.     On     04.09.2012,     the        State


Government   accorded        sanction    for    all   the   said     53


housing schemes as per Annexure ‘H’ dated 4.9.2012. In


respect of 30 acres and 3½ guntas out of 56 acres and


37 guntas in the said villages, awards were passed and


according    to   the    appellants,       in    respect      of     the


remaining extent, awards were not passed in view of the


interim orders of the High Court. KHB filed four writ


appeals   against      the    aforesaid    common     order        dated


29.05.2012. The Division Bench vide judgment dated
9
01.12.2020      dismissed       Writ    Appeal      No.5712/2012


rejecting the contention that initiation of process for


acquiring land for the purposes of KHB prior to the


framing   and   sanctioning      of    the   scheme   for     which


acquisition     is   required    will    not     invalidate    the


acquisition proceedings and holding thus:-
“In the circumstances, we are of the view that
     the sanction of a scheme by the State
     Government under sub-Section (2) of
Section 24
of the Act is a condition precedent and a
     mandatory requirement before the Housing Board
     would   execute   any  housing   scheme,   land
     development scheme or labour housing scheme.
     This is irrespective of whether any housing
     scheme would entail acquisition of land or not
     as opposed to a scheme entrusted by Board under
Section 32
of the Act.”


     It is
the said judgment
that is impugned in this


appeal arising out of SLP(C)No.1361/2021.
4.   It is contended by the appellants that the power


of acquisition conferred under
Section 33(2)
of the KHB
10
Act   is    an        independent        power    and   it    could   not   be


conditioned on prior approval of the scheme by the


Government. According to them, schemes could be framed


simultaneously or even subsequently and acquisition


could      be    initiated         for    a   contemplated      scheme.      It


confers         the    power       to     acquire     land    required      for


execution of a housing scheme. The expression ‘required


for     execution        of    a        housing     scheme’    denotes      the


‘purpose’ for which the land could be acquired and not


the ‘stage’ at which it could be acquired, it is also


contended on their behalf. The further contentions


raised on their behalf are as follows: -
It is illogical to infer that a scheme of KHB should


obtain two successive sanctions; one under
Section 20
and the other under
Section 24(2)
of the KHB Act. Such
11
an interpretation would be nothing but misconstruction


of the provisions of the
KHB Act
. In exercise of the


delegated powers, if Notification is issued by the


Commissioner,   it   could   only   be   construed   that


acquisition is by the Government. The fact that the


acquisition is for the KHB and that the acquired land


would be handed over to KHB for its purpose(s) would


not and could not invalidate the said acquisition.
KHB


Act
received the assent of the President of India on


the ninth day of March, 1993 and
Section 33(2)
of the


KHB Act modifies
L.A. Act
and declares that acquisition


for the purposes of
KHB Act
be deemed to be for ‘public


purpose’ within the meaning of
L.A. Act
. The decision


of this Court in Mohammed Yousef’s case (supra) is not


applicable to the cases on hand falling within the
12
purview of
KHB Act
as
the said decision
dealt only with


the provisions under the Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act


(TNHB Act) and further that the provisions and scheme


of both the said Acts are different and distinct.        The


provisions under Section 49(1)(b) of the TNHB Act,


virtually, persuaded this Court in Mohammed Yousef’s


case (supra) to hold that acquisition of land is part


of the housing scheme and therefore, Notification for


the   acquisition    of   land   for   the   housing   scheme


concerned could be issued only on finalization of the


scheme and its sanction by the Government. However, a


provision pari materia to the same is conspicuously


absent in
KHB Act
.
5. Respondents 2 and 3 in this appeal filed a synopsis,


pursuant to the permission granted to the parties to
13
file    written    submissions     along      with   relevant


documents/compilation,     whereunder      they   have   raised


various    contentions    to     resist    the    claims   and


contentions of KHB. We may hasten to add here that we


will not advert to all the contentions advanced by them


and in view of the nature of the order we propose to


pass, as stated hereinbefore, we need only to deal with


those     contentions    which    are     relevant   for    the


consideration of the stated common question posed for


resolution and also to the allied issues.         In that view


of the matter, it is relevant to refer to the following


contentions: -
When
Section 4(1)
Notification under the
L.A. Act
was issued prior to the finalization of the scheme


concerned it would be vague and, in such circumstances,
14
the land owners would be deprived of the benefit of


filing effective objections under
Section 5A
of the


L.A. Act. (As a matter of fact the impugned judgment


itself would reveal that their deceased mother had


filed objections on 17.09.2007 and later, an enquiry


under
Section 5A
of the L.A. Act was held). If the


housing scheme involves acquisition of land, prior


sanction   under
Section    24(2)
of   the   KHB   Act   is


mandatory and framing and finalizing the scheme is a


pre-requisite for acquiring land for the purpose of KHB


under
Section    33(2)
of   KHB    Act.      Issuance    of


Notification under
Section 6 (1)
of the L.A. Act by the


State Government could not be construed as sanction as


contemplated under
Section 24(2)
of the KHB Act. Any


such construction, as canvassed by the appellants, if
15
accepted would offend the language of
Sections 24(2)
and
33(2)
of the KHB Act. In terms of sub-Section (4)


of
Section 3
of the KHB Act, KHB shall be deemed to be


a local authority for its purpose and also for the


purpose of
L.A. Act
. Ergo, by virtue of
Section 3(f)
of L.A. Act, prior approval of the Government for the


housing scheme concerned is necessary in order to make


acquisition as the one for ‘public purpose’. They have


also referred to
sections 17
to
24
of the KHB Act to


buttress the contention that without prior sanction


under
section 24(2)
of the KHB Act, KHB could not


execute any scheme by acquiring land. To drive home the


point, they rely on the decisions of this Court in


Mohammed Yousef’s case(supra) and in
State of T.N. &
16
others Vs. L.
Krishnan’s & Others reported in (1996) 1


SCC 250.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7011-7013 of 2013, 7017-7019 of 2013
& 9002-9003 of 2013
6.   These companion appeals are filed by persons whose


properties are sought to be acquired for the purposes


of KHB under Notifications prior to the one involved


in   the   appeal   arising   from    SLP(C)    No.1361/2021,


substantially raising contentions similar to that of


the party respondents in the said appeal. Their core


contention is that absence of sanction for the building


scheme concerned prior to the initiation of acquisition


proceedings   would   vitiate   the    entire     acquisition


proceedings and would render it null and void.
17
6.1 The relevant details, as regards the companion


appeals, are stated infra in a tabulated form for


convenience.
Relevant        B.N. Byregowda     M. Nagaraju &      S. Udaya Shankar
Dates           & Ors. Vs.         Anr. Vs. Govt.     Vs. State of
                State of           of Karnataka &     Karnataka and
                Karnataka &        Ors. (CA Nos.      Ors. (CA Nos.
Ors. (CA Nos.      9002-9003 of       7011-7013 of
                7017-7019 of       2013)              2013)
                2013)
Name of the     100 housing        225 housing        100 housing
scheme          scheme             scheme             scheme

Framing of      06.10.2000         2009               06.10.2000
the scheme by                      (modified
KHB                                scheme)

Sanctioning     25.01.2001         18.05.2010         25.01.2001
of the scheme                      (modified
by the Govt.                       scheme)
S.4(1)
31
.03.2001         12.04.2005         31.03.2001
Notification
S.6
10
.05.2002         02.11.2006         10.05.2002
declaration

Date of         17.05.2002         09.11.2006         17.05.2002
publication
of final
notification
in the
official
gazette
6.2 The tabulated details would go to show that in


these   cases    either      the    framing      or   sanctioning        or


publication or all           such processes relating               to the
18
Housing     Scheme       concerned      was/were     effected    only


subsequent to the initiation of acquisition proceedings


therefor. The Appellant in C.A. Nos.7011-7013 of 2013


(S. Udaya Shankar) filed W.P.No.46250/2004 and the


Appellants in C.A.Nos.7017-7019 of 2013 (B.N. Byregowda


&   Ors.)    filed       W.P.No.47616/2004         challenging      the


selfsame Notifications, viz., preliminary Notification


under
Section    4
dated   31.03.2001        and
Section    6
declaration and final Notification dated 10.5.2002 of


the
L.A. Act
. During the pendency of the said Writ


Petitions the Appellants in C.A. Nos. 9002-9003 of 2013


approached     the       High   Court     by   filing     W.P.   Nos.


18596/2006 and 11568/2008 respectively challenging a


subsequent preliminary Notification under
Section 4
dated   01.04.2005        and
Section    6
declaration       dated
19
02.11.2006 in respect of another area for the purpose


of KHB. A Learned Single Judge of the High Court, as


per judgment dated 06.02.2009, dismissed them holding


that prior sanction of the housing scheme concerned is


not   necessary      for   initiating    acquisition     for   the


purposes of the KHB under the
KHB Act
by placing


reliance on the decision of this Court in L. Krishnan’s


case (supra). The said common judgment dated 06.02.2009


was taken in appeal as W.A. Nos. 1244-45/2009 (LB-KHB).


During its pendency, another learned Single Judge of


the   High   Court    vide   judgment    dated    28.06.2012    in


W.P.No.9593/2007       and   connected    cases   held   that   a


sanctioned housing scheme is condition precedent, for


initiation of acquisition proceedings under the
KHB Act
for its purpose. When W.P No.46250/2004 filed by the
20
Appellant in Civil Appeal Nos.7011-7013 of 2013 came


up for consideration, taking note of the pendency of


Writ   Appeal   Nos.1244-45   of   2009   and   also   of   the


conflicting decisions of two learned Single Judges in


WP No.18596/2006 and WP No.9593/2007 and connected


matters, it was referred to a Division Bench. On the


same grounds    the learned Single Judge referred WP


No.47616/2004 also to a Division Bench.
7. In the judgment in Writ Appeal Nos.1244-45 of 2009


the Division Bench took note of the fact that the land


involved   therein   was   notified   for   acquisition     by


invoking
Section 33
of the Act read with
Section 4(2)
of the L.A. Act and identified the point to be answered,


as can be seen from paragraph 6 of the judgment passed


thereon dated 26.04.2013, thus: -
21
“6. The only point to be answered by us in
   these appeals is whether the Housing Board is
   required to obtain sanction of a Housing Scheme
   u/s 24 of the Act before initiation of the
   acquisition of the land or not in order to
   implement the Housing Scheme.”



    Paragraph 7 therein also assumes relevance, in this

regard. It reads thus:-
“7. It is the contention of the appellants that
   without their being a Scheme sanctioned as
   required
u/s 24
of the Act, lands of the
   appellants could not have been acquired.”
8. After referring to
Sections 18
to
24
of the Act,


vide paragraphs 14, 15 and 18 the Division Bench held


thus: -
“14. A reading of Sections-18 to 24, it is
   clear that there is no necessity for obtaining
   the sanction of the Housing scheme or the Land
   Development scheme in order to acquire the
   property for the aforesaid projects. But
   without their being a sanction from the
   Government under
Section 24
, no scheme shall
   be executed by the Housing Board. Therefore,
   it is clear that obtaining of sanction under
   the Housing Scheme or Land Development Scheme
   would arise only after preparation of all
   preliminary   preparation   of   the   scheme,
   preparation of the Housing project, Land
   Development   Project,  Budgetary   provision,
   identifying the lands or acquiring the lands
22
and the staff required and estimation and other
     things as contemplated under sections-18 to 23.
     Only after strict compliances of Sections-18
     to 23, before actual execution of the Housing
     Scheme or Land Development Scheme, obtaining
     of the sanction
u/s 24
would arise.
15. In this background, after considering the
     Judgment of the Learned Single Judge, we cannot
     find fault with his order because he has
     clearly ruled that no prior permission is
     required
u/s 24
of the Act, in order to
     identify the lands or to acquire the lands.
Accordingly, we answer the said point, agreeing
     with the findings of the Learned Single Judge.

     16…

     17…
18. With the above observations, the appeals
     are allowed confirming the finding of the
     Learned Single Judge on the question of
     section-24 of the
Housing Board Act
, the matter
     is remanded to the Learned Single Judge with a
     request to reconsider the matter afresh as
     observed above.”
9.   Thus,      obviously,     the    Division   Bench,    as   per


judgment dated 26.04.2013 in Writ Appeal Nos.1244-


45/2009 affirmed the decision of the learned Single


Judge      in   W.P.     Nos.18596/2006   and    11568/2008     that


existence       of   a   sanctioned    housing    scheme   is   not
23
required for initiation of compulsory acquisition under


the
KHB Act
. Civil Appeal Nos.9002-9003/2013 were filed


challenging     the     judgment       and    final      order        dated


26.04.2013 in Writ Appeal Nos.1244-45 of 2009. It is a


fact   that    on   the    same      day,    the    Division      Bench,


obviously     relying     on   the    decision      in   Writ     Appeal


Nos.1244-45/2009, dismissed W.P. Nos.46250 and 47616


of 2004 vide separate judgments. Civil Appeal Nos.7011-


7013/2013     and     7017-7019/2013         were     filed      in     the


circumstances challenging the judgment and final Order


dated 26.04.2013 in the respective writ petitions and


also against the relied upon judgment and final Order


in Writ Appeal Nos.1244-45/2009, dated 26.04.2013.
10. The pleadings in the captioned Civil Appeals and


the submissions made by the respective learned counsel
24
for the appellants would reveal the common contention


of the parties in C.A.Nos.7011-7013, 9002-9003 and


7017-7019 of 2013 that acquisition of land for the


purposes of KHB under the
KHB Act
is part of the housing


scheme to be prepared in terms of
Sections 18-23
of the


KHB Act and, therefore, acquisition proceedings could


not have been initiated before the sanctioning of the


housing    scheme    concerned.     Since,        acquisition


proceedings   preceded   the   sanction    of    the   housing


scheme(s) concerned, they are to be deemed as null and


void and as such, liable to be set aside, they would


further contend. It is to support the said contentions


that they are relying on the decision in Mohammed


Yousef’s case (supra). The KHB, which is the appellant


in   the   appeal   by   Special   Leave        arising   from
25
SLP(C)No.1361/2021      would   contend   that    acquisition


proceedings for its purposes invoking the power under
Section 33(2)
of the KHB Act could not be said to be


part of the housing scheme to be prepared in terms of
Sections 18-23
of the Act by the KHB and the only


condition for executing the scheme would be that prior


to    its   execution   Governmental   sanction    should   be


obtained therefor.
11.    On perusal of the relevant provisions and hearing


the rival contentions in all the above appeals we think


that construction of
Section 33 (2)
of the KHB Act


would be a pointer to answer the stated common question


involved in the appeals. In that pursuit, it is also


to be ascertained, with reference to             the relevant


provisions under the Act, as to whether acquisition
26
proceedings by KHB invoking the power thereunder would


form part of a housing scheme, as defined under the
KHB


Act
.   Subject   to   its    answer,      the    question    whether


‘acquisition forming part of housing scheme’ by itself


is decisive as to the validity of the initiation of


acquisition proceeding prior to the sanction of the


scheme concerned, may also have to be considered in


this pursuit.
12. The case of the Appellants, (other than the KHB


and its co-appellant) who canvass the position that


sanctioning   of   the      scheme   is   a     pre-condition    for


compulsory acquisition for KHB under
Section 33 (2)
of


the Act, is founded on the decision of this Court in


Mohammed   Yousef’s    case    (supra)        and   other   judicial


pronouncements rendered relying on/referring to the
27
said decision. In that regard they also contend that


the provisions in the TNHB Act (then referred to as


Madras State Housing Board Act, 1961), that persuaded


this Court to lay down law as mentioned hereinbefore


have pari materia provisions in the
KHB Act
. We may


hasten to state at this juncture that the learned


counsel for KHB resisted the contention. He submitted


that the claim of existence of provisions in the
KHB


Act
pari materia to the provisions under the TNHB Act,


1961 that formed the ground for laying the law in the


decision     in   Mohammed    Yousef’s    case      (supra),   is


absolutely    incorrect      and   baseless.   It    is   further


submitted on behalf of KHB that the said decision is


inapplicable to the instant cases.        Still, the learned


counsel for KHB relied on L. Krishnan’s case, which
28
again was rendered with reference to acquisition for


the   purpose   of    Tamil    Nadu   Housing   Board.   In   that


context learned counsel          for KHB   would   submit that


reliance is placed on the decision in L. Krishnan’s


case solely to fortify the contention that the decision


in Mohammed Yousef’s case is not applicable to the


appeals on hand. Furthermore, it is contended on behalf


of KHB that the embargo under
Section 24 (2)
of the KHB


Act would not stand against initiation of acquisition


proceedings under
Section 33(2)
of the KHB Act without


waiting for formation, sanctioning or publication of a


housing scheme. According to the learned counsel what


is legally required in terms of the provisions under
Section 33 (2)
of the KHB Act is that before execution


of the scheme        viz.,    implementation of the scheme,
29
sanction should be obtained.
13. In the light of the rival contentions referred to


hereinbefore it is apropos to consider, at first, the


applicability of decision of this Court in Mohammed


Yousef’s case (supra) in the matter of resolution of


the stated question and the allied issues. In view of


the   scanned    analysis     of    the    decision     in   Mohammed


Yousef’s case by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in


the   decision   in    L.    Krishnan’s      case   (supra),     from


paragraphs 23 onwards, we need only to refer to the


relevant recitals and conclusions/findings from the


decision in L. Krishnan’s case in our pursuit to answer


the applicability of the decision in Mohammed Yousef’s


case. The three-Judge Bench was called upon to consider


the   correctness     of    the    law    laid   down   in   Mohammed
30
Yousef’s case while considering the questions that


arose in Civil Appeal Nos.1865-66 and 1868-70 of 1992.
Those appeals were directed against a judgment of the


Madras    High   Court   in   a   batch    of   Writ   Petitions


whereunder it quashed three Notifications issued under
Section 4(1)
of the L.A. Act for the implementation of


housing schemes, relying mainly on the decisions of


this court in Mohammed Yousef’s case (supra) and in
Munshi Singh Vs. Union of India
[(1973) 2 SCC 337]. In


paragraph 22 of L. Krishnan’s case this Court observed:
“But before we refer to them, it would be
         appropriate to deal with the decision of a
         two-Judge Bench of this Court in
State of
         T.N. Vs. A Mohd. Yusuf
, affirming the
         decision of the Madras High Court, upon
         which strong reliance is placed by the
         respondents. In this decision, it has been
         held that a proceeding under the
Land
         Acquisition Act
read with
Section 70
of the
         Housing Board Act can be commenced only
         after the framing of the scheme for which
         the land is required, but not before.”

                                          (Emphasis added)
31
In this context, it is also worthy to note the


first   question   posed   for   consideration   before   the


three-Judge Bench in L. Krishnan’s case (supra), which


was mentioned in paragraph 7 thereof thus:-
“The first question that arises in
        these appeals is whether a final and
        effective scheme prepared and published
        under the provisions of the
Housing Board
        Act
is a precondition to the issuance of
        notification under
Section 4
. This question
        has to be answered with reference to the
        provisions of the Land Acquisition act as
        well as the
Housing Board Act
.”

                                 (Underline supplied)
14.     The three-Judge Bench in L. Krishnan’s case

further mentioned thus:-
“We may mention, at the outset, that these
        appeals have been referred to a three-Judge
        Bench by a Bench of two learned judges
        because they doubted the correctness of the
        decision in Mohd. Yusuf, vide order dated
        16.09.1993.”
15.      Paragraphs 24 to 33 of the decision in L.

Krishnan’s case are worthy to be extracted to decide
32
on   the   applicability   of   the   decision   in   Mohammed

Yousef’s case to decide the stated mooted question

involved in these appeals. Paragraphs 24 to 28 read

thus:-
“24. The facts in Mohammed Yousef are
         these: the notification under
Section 4
of
         the Land Acquisition Act was issued stating
         the public purpose as construction of
         houses by the Tamil Nadu Housing Board.
         Admittedly not even a draft scheme was
         framed by the Housing Board by the date of
         the said notification. On the contrary, the
         contention of the State was that only after
         the acquisition proceedings are completed
         and possession of the land taken, would
         they frame a scheme. Alternately, it was
         contended by the State that framing of a
         scheme is not a precondition for issuance
         of a valid notification under
Section 4
of
         the Land Acquisition Act proposing to
         acquire the land for construction of houses
         by the Housing Board. The High Court had
         struck down the notification on the ground
         that the public purpose mentioned therein
         was too vague in the absence of details
         relating to the scheme for which the
         acquisition was sought to be made. The High
         Court opined that in the absence of such a
         scheme with necessary particulars the land-
         owners cannot effectively avail of the
         opportunity given by Section 5-A. In this
         Court, however, the main contention of the
         respondents-land-owners    was   that   the
         framing of a scheme by the Housing Board
         under the provisions of the
Housing Board
         Act
is   a  precondition    to  a   valid
         notification under
Section 4
where the land
         is proposed to be acquired for the purpose
         of the Housing Board. In view of the said
33
contention, this Court examined the scheme
of the Act and held that inasmuch as
acquisition of the land is a part and parcel
of the execution of a scheme framed by the
Board under the Act, the acquisition must
follow the scheme and cannot precede it.
The Bench further observed that unless such
a scheme with requisite particulars is duly
published, it may not be possible for the
land-owners to object to the proposed
acquisition on the ground that the land is
not suitable for the scheme at all and/or
that it does not serve the stated public
purpose. The Bench observed that the power
of the Board to frame a scheme is regulated
by the provisions of the Act which, inter
alia, provide a full opportunity to the
affected persons to object to the scheme.
Even after the final publication of the
scheme and after its coming into force, it
was pointed out, the scheme can yet be
altered or cancelled as provided under
Section 56
of the Act. For all these
reasons, the Bench held that: (SCC p. 229,
para 11)

  "a proceeding under the
Land Acquisition
Act
read with Section 70 of the Madras
Housing Board Act, can be commenced only
after framing the scheme for which the land
is required".
25. Unfortunately, the provisions in sub-
Sections (2) and (3) of
Section 35
and
Section 36
were not brought to the notice
of   the  Bench   nor  were   the  earlier
Constitution Bench decisions of this Court
brought to its notice, to which decisions
we may now turn. But one more relevant
aspect before we refer to them.
26. After, and in the light of, the impugned
judgment, the Tamil Nadu Legislature has
amended   the
Housing   Board   Act
with
34
retrospective effect with a view to remove
the basis of
the said judgment
and
providing expressly that existence of a
scheme framed by the Housing Board is not
a pre-condition for acquiring land for the
purpose of the Board. The validity of the
said Amendment Act has also been questioned
in the connected matters but the necessity
to go into that question will arise only if
we agree with the reasoning and conclusions
in the decision under appeal. Indeed, Shri
Salve's argument was that the decision of
the High Court is unsustainable even
without reference to the said Amendment Act
and it is on that basis that he made his
submissions.
27.
In
Arnold Rodricks v. State of
Maharashtra
, the Constitution Bench dealt
with the question whether the statement in
the notification under
Section 4
that the
land was required for "development and
utilisation of the said lands as an
industrial and residential area" cannot be
said to be a public purpose within the
meaning   of
Section  4
of   the   Land
Acquisition Act.
The Court held, relying
upon the decisions of this Court in Babu
Barkya Thakur v. State of Bombay (SCR at p.
137) and Pandit Jhandu Lai v. State of
Punjab
— as well as the statement in the
counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the
State Government — that the purpose stated
in the notification is indeed a public
purpose.
The Constitution Bench pointed out
that in Babu Barkya Thakur, this Court had
relied upon the decision in
State of Bombay
v. Bhanji Munji
to the effect that
"providing housing accommodation to the
homeless is a public purpose (and that)
where a larger section of the community is
concerned, its welfare is a matter of
public concern".
35
The counter-affidavit filed on behalf of
      the Government explained that the pressure
      of housing in Bombay is acute and that there
      was any amount of need for fresh housing.
      The Court (majority) observed:
"In our view the welfare of a large
      proportion of persons living in Bombay is
      a matter of public concern and the
      notifications served to enhance the welfare
      of this section of the community and this
      is public purpose."
28. Another contention urged for the
      petitioners was that the Government had not
      prepared any scheme before issuing the
      notification under
Section 4
. This argument
      was also negatived in the following words:
"This is true that the Government has not
      uptil now prepared any scheme for the
      utilisation of the developed sites. But the
      notification itself shows that the sites
      would be used as residential and industrial
      sites. There is no law that requires a
      scheme to be prepared before issuing a
      notification under
Section 4
or
Section 6
of the Act. We have, however, no doubt that
      the Government will, before disposing of
      the sites, have a scheme for their
      disposal."
(Emphasis added)
16.     After     making   such   reference   in   L.

Krishnan’s case it was further held in paragraphs

29 to 33 thus:-
“29. We have held hereinbefore that merely
      because the
Housing Board Act
contemplates
      acquisition of land as part of a housing or
      improvement scheme, it does not follow that
      no land needed for the purpose of the
36
Housing Board Act
can be acquired until and
unless a scheme is prepared and finalised
by the Board and becomes effective under
the provisions contained in Chapter VII.
30.
In
Aflatoon v. Lt. Governor of Delhi,
another
Constitution Bench dealt with a
similar contention, viz., that before
publishing the notification under
Section
4
, the Government had not declared any area
in Delhi as a development area under
Section 12(1) of the Delhi Development Act
nor was there a master plan drawn up in
accordance with
Section 7
of that Act. The
notification under
Section 4
was attacked
on that basis. It was argued that under
Section 12(3) of the Delhi Development Act,
no development of land can be undertaken or
carried out except as provided in that sub-
Section. This argument was negatived by the
Constitution Bench holding that: (SCC pp.
294-95, para 23)
  "The planned development of Delhi had
been decided upon by the Government before
1959,   viz.,   even   before    the   Delhi
Development Act came into force.
It is true
that there could be no planned development
of Delhi except in accordance with the
provisions of Delhi Development Act after
that Act came into force, but there was no
inhibition in acquiring land for planned
development of Delhi under the Act before
the Master Plan was ready (See the decision
in
Patna Improvement Trust v. Lakshmi
Devi
). In other words, the fact that actual
development is permissible in an area other
than a development area with the approval
or sanction of the local authority did not
preclude   the   Central   Government   from
acquiring the land for planned development
under the Act.
Section 12
is concerned only
with the planned development. It has
nothing to do with acquisition of property;
acquisition        generally        precedes
37
development. For planned development in an
area other than a development area, it is
only necessary to obtain the sanction or
approval of the local authority as provided
in
Section 12(3)
. The Central Government
could acquire any property under the Act
and develop it after obtaining the approval
of the local authority."
(emphasis added)
31. It is significant to notice that
Section 12
of the Delhi Development Act,
1957 provided for declaration of any area
as   development   area   by  the   Central
Government and it further provided that
except as otherwise provided by the said
Act, the Delhi Development Authority shall
not undertake or carry out any development
of land in any area which is not a
development   area.   Sub-Section  (3)   of
Section 12
, however, provided that after
the commencement of the said Act, no
development of land shall be undertaken or
carried out in any area by anyone unless
(i) where that area is a development area,
permission for such development has been
obtained in writing from the Authority in
accordance with the provisions of the Act
and (ii) where the area is an area other
than a development area, approval of the
local   authority    or   other   authority
concerned is obtained according to law.
Section 15
of the said Act provided for
acquisition of any land required for the
purpose of development under the Act.
32. In our opinion, the observations quoted
and emphasised hereinabove, and the broad
similarity between the provisions of the
Delhi Act and the Tamil Nadu Housing Board
Act, establish that the acquisition of the
land is not dependent upon the preparation
and approval of a scheme under
Sections 37
to
56
and that the Government's power of
38
acquisition extends to other purposes of
the
Board and the Housing Board Act
referred to in
Sections 35
and
36
.
Moreover, under Tamil Nadu Housing Board
too, there is no inhibition against
acquisition of land for the purpose of the
Board except in accordance with and as a
part of the scheme.
33. For all the above reasons, we find it
difficult to read the holding in Mohammed
Yousef as saying that in no event can the
land be acquired for the purpose of the
Act/Board unless a final and effective
scheme is framed by the Housing Board under
the provisions of
Sections 37
to
56
. The
said limitation applies only where the land
is sought to be acquired avowedly for the
purpose of execution of a housing or
improvement scheme prepared by the Housing
Board under Chapter VII of the Tamil Nadu
Housing Board Act. In other words, unless
the notification under
Section 4
of the
Land Acquisition Act expressly states that
land proposed to be acquired is required
for executing a housing or improvement
scheme (i.e., a final and effective scheme)
framed by the Housing Board under the
provisions of the Tamil Nadu Housing Board
Act, the principle and ratio of Mohammed
Yousef is not attracted. Mere statement in
the notification that land is required for
the purpose of the Housing Board would not
by itself attract the said principle and
ratio.   In   the  instant   appeals,   the
notifications do not even state that the
land proposed to be acquired is meant for
the purpose of the Housing Board.”

                          (Emphasis added)
39
17. Thus,    a    perusal   of    the   decisions   in   Mohammed

Yousef’s case and L. Krishnan’s case (supra) would

disclose that both the decisions were rendered with

reference to the provisions under the L.A. Act and the

TNHB Act. It is true that a two-Judge Bench of this

Court in Mohammed Yousef’s case, after referring to the

provisions under the Madras State Housing Board Act,

1961, which was later renamed as ‘TNHB Act’, held that

a proceeding under the
Land Acquisition Act
read with
Section 70
of the Housing Board Act could be commenced

only after the framing of the scheme for which the land

is required, and not before. But then, upon doubting

the correctness of the decision in Mohammed Yousef’s

case, two learned judges of this Court referred the

appeals (decided under L. Krishnan’s case) to a three-

Judge Bench. It is in those appeals that the three-

Judge   Bench     in   L.   Krishnan’s    case   observed    that

unfortunately neither the provisions in sub-Sections

(2) and (3) of
Section 25
and
Section 36
of Act 17 of

1961 nor earlier Constitution Bench decisions of this

Court, were brought to the notice of the Bench which

rendered    the    decision      in   Mohammed   Yousef’s   case.
40
Thereafter,   upon   considering     all   the   relevant

provisions under Act 17 of 1961, the provisions of the

very Act which were dealt with or not dealt with in the

decision in Mohammed Yousef’s case and also various

decisions of this Court the three-Judge Bench in L.

Krishnan’s case held :-
“For all the above reasons, we find it
      difficult to read the holding in Mohd.
      Yusuf as saying that in no event can the
      land be acquired for the purposes of the
      Act/Board unless a final and effective
      scheme is framed by the Housing Board under
      the provisions of
Sections 37
to
56
.”
18. The afore-extracted recitals in L. Krishnan’s case

would reveal that the position held as above holding

in Mohammed Yousef’s case was held applicable only

where the land is sought to be acquired avowedly for

the purpose of execution of a housing or improvement

scheme prepared by the Housing Board under Chapter VII

of the Tamil Nadu Housing Board Act. Further it was

clarified in paragraph 33 itself thus:-
“In other words unless       the notification
      under
Section 4
of the       Land Acquisition
      Act expressly states          that the land
      proposed to be acquired       is required for
41
executing a housing or improvement scheme
      (i.e., a final and effective scheme)
      framed by the Housing Board under the Tamil
      Nadu Housing Board Act, the principle and
      ratio of Mohd. Yusuf is not attracted.”
19. The contention of vagueness in the matter of public

purpose   in   the   Notifications   and   its   impact   was

considered and negated in view of the Constitution

Bench decisions of this Court in
Aflatoon Vs. Lt.

Governor of Delhi
[(1975) 4 SCC 285] and in
Arnold

Rodricks Vs. State of Maharashtra
[AIR 1966 SC 1788].
The decision in
Pt. Lila Ram Vs. Union of India
[(1975)

2 SCC 547] was also referred to in that regard. It was

observed that the decision      in Munshi Singh’s case

(supra) would not come to the rescue of the Writ

Petitioners – Respondents. Based on such conclusions

and findings and those made in paragraphs 24-33 this

Court allowed Civil Appeal Nos.1865-66, 1868-70 of 1992

and set aside the judgment of the Madras High Court

under Appeal and dismissed the Writ Petitions from

which those appeals arose. It is also relevant to note

that the Civil Appeals filed against the judgments of

the Madras High Court upholding the validity of the
42
Tamil Nadu Housing Board Amendment Act 5 of 1992 were

also dismissed by the three-Judge Bench following the

judgment in Civil Appeal Nos.1865-66, 1868-70 of 1992.
20. Decision in L. Krishnan’s case would thus reveal

that the three-Judge Bench after careful consideration

held that merely because the TNHB Act contemplates

acquisition of land as part of a housing or improvement

scheme, it could not be said that no land needed for

the purpose of the Housing Board could be acquired

until and unless the scheme was prepared and finalized

by the board and became effective under the provisions

contained in chapter VII of the TNHB Act that deals

with acquisition and disposal of land. The three-Judge

Bench further found it difficult to read the dictum in

Mohammed Yousef’s case (supra) as saying that in no

event land could be acquired for the purpose of the

Act/Board unless a final and effective scheme is framed

by the Housing Board under the provisions of
Sections

37
to
56
. We have already noted the further conclusions

and findings of the three-Judge Bench in L. Krishnan’s
43
case and the outcome of such consideration, conclusions

and findings.
21.     The long and short of the above discussion is

that the contention that initiation of acquisition for

the purposes of KHB/the
KHB Act
, prior to the sanction

and/or the publication of housing scheme concerned/land

development scheme concerned, is null and void in view

of the decision in Mohammed Yousef’s case is untenable.

So also, the contention that in view of the decision

in Mohammed Yousef’s case acquisition proceedings form

part of housing scheme/land development scheme and

hence, acquisition for the purposes of KHB/the
KHB Act
prior to the sanction and/or the publication of housing

scheme concerned/land acquisition scheme concerned, is

null and void cannot be countenanced. Suffice it to say

that the moot question and allied issues are to be

considered      and   answered   independently   without

reference to the decision in Mohammed Yousef’s case,

but with reference to the
L.A. Act
as well as
KHB Act
.

In that view of the matter, we will now proceed to
44
consider them with reference to the L.A. Act and the

KHB Act and not with reference to other authorities

pronounced under different enactments. We are fortified

in that view by a Constitution Bench decision of this

Court in
Offshore Holdings Pvt. Ltd. vs. Bangalore

Development Authority & Ors.
(2011) 3 SCC 139. It, in

so far as relevant, reads thus:-
“85…… the dictum stated in every
           judgment   should    be   applied   with
           reference to the facts of the case as
           well   as    its   cumulative    impact.
Similarly, a statute should be construed
           with reference to the context and its
           provisions    to  make    a   consistent
           enactment i.e. ex visceribus actus.”
22.   We may also add that a judgment rendered with

respect to the position obtained under a particular

provision(s) in one enactment cannot be applied while

dealing    with   a   similar   situation   falling   under   a

different enactment, unless pari materia provision(s)

exist in that enactment, without looking into the facts

and law.
45
23.     Now,   we   will   refer   to   the   various   relevant

provisions to have panorama on the scheme of the
KHB

Act
for answering the moot question.
Section 2
of KHB

Act carries such definitions and the relevant among

them are extracted hereunder:-
“
S.2
DEFINTIONS:- In this Act, unless the
        context otherwise requires.-
(a) “Board”   means  the   Housing           Board
            constituted under
Section 3
’
(f) “Competent Authority” means any person
        authorized by the State Government, by
        notification to perform the functions of
        the Competent Authority under Chapter VI
        for such area as may be specified in the
        notification;
(h) “Housing Scheme” means a housing scheme
        under this Act;
(i) “Land” includes benefits to arise out
        of land and things attached to the earth or
        permanently fastened to anything attached
        to the earth;
(i-1) “Land Development Scheme” means a
        scheme framed under this Act for the
        purpose of providing house sites in any
        Area;
(n) “Programme” means the annual housing
        programme and land development programme
        prepared by the Board under
Section 19
;
24. Chapter III (
Sections 17
to
32A
) provides for and

deals   with   housing     schemes      and   land   development
46
schemes. The relevant provisions for the purpose of

these cases are extracted infra:-
“17. Duty of Board to undertake housing
      schemes and land development schemes.-
      Subject to the provisions of this Act and
      subject to the control of the state
      Government, the Board may incur expenditure
      and undertake works in any area for the
      framing and execution of such housing
      schemes and land development schemes as it
      may consider necessary from time to time,
      or as may be entrusted to it by the State
      Government.
18. Matter to be provided for by housing
      schemes.-     Notwithstanding   anything
      contained in any other law for the time
      being in force, a housing scheme may
      provide for all or any of the following
      matters, namely.-
(a) the acquisition by purchase, exchange
          or otherwise of any property necessary
          for or affected by the execution of the
          scheme;
(b) the laying or relaying out of any land
          comprised in the scheme;
(c) the distribution or redistribution of
          sites belonging to owners of property
          comprised in the scheme;
(d) the closure or demolition of dwellings
          unfit for human habitation;
(e) the demolition of obstructive buildings
          or portions of buildings;
(f) the construction and reconstruction of
          buildings,    their  maintenance   and
          preservation;
(g) the sale, letting or exchange of any
          property comprised in the scheme;
47
(h) the construction and alteration      of
    streets and back lanes;
(i) provision for the draining, water-
supply and lighting of the area included
    in the scheme and carrying out by the
    Board in such area, drainage, sewerage
    and water supply works;
(j) the provision of parks, playing-fields
    and open spaces for the benefit of any
    area comprised in the scheme and the
    enlargement of existing parks, playing
    fields, open spaces and approaches;
(k) the provision of sanitary arrangements
    required for the area comprised in the
    scheme, including the conservation and
    prevention    of    any     injury    or
    contamination to rivers or other sources
    and means of water-supply;
(l) the provision of accommodation for any
    class of inhabitants;
(m) the advance of money for the purpose of
    the scheme;
(n) the   provision   of   facilities   for
    communication and transport;
(o) the collection of such information and
    statistics as may be necessary for the
    purposes of this Act;
(p) any other matter for which, in the
    opinion of the State Government, it is
    expedient to make provision with a view
    to provide housing accommodation and to
    the improvement or development of any
    area comprised in the scheme or the
    general efficiency of the scheme.
18-A. Matters to be provided for by Land
Development    Schemes.-    Notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the
48
time being in force, a land development
scheme may within the limits of the area
comprised in the scheme, provide for all or
any of the following matters, namely:-
(a) the acquisition by purchase, exchange
    or otherwise, of any land which in the
    opinion of the Board will be necessary
    for or affected by the execution of
    scheme;
(b) laying or re-laying of all or any land
    comprised in the scheme and formation
    and alteration of streets;
(c) drainage, water supply and electricity
    and carrying out by the Board in the
    area included in the scheme, drainage
    sewerage and water supply works;
(d) the distribution or redistribution of
    sites comprised in the scheme;
(e) raising the level of any land which the
    Board may consider expedient to raise
    to facilitate better drainage;
(f) forming open space for the better
    ventilation of the area comprised in the
    scheme or any adjoining area;
(g) sanitary arrangements required;
(h) sites for Parks, Playgrounds, Stadium,
    recreation grounds, School buildings,
    Markets,    Motor    Vehicle    Stands,
    Theaters,    Police   Stations,    Post
    Offices, Co-operative Societies, Public
    Urinals and Latrines, Petrol Service
    Stations,   Hospitals,    Dispensaries,
    Banks, Burial and Cremation Grounds and
    Sites for public purposes of other
    kinds.
19. Preparation and submission of annual
housing programme and land development
49
programme    budget   and establishment
schedule.- (1) Before the first day of
December in each year, the Board shall
prepare and forward,-
(i)    a programme,
(ii)   a budget for the next year,
(iii) a schedule of the staff of Officers
and servants already employed and to be
employed during the next year;
To the State Government in such form as may
be prescribed.
(2) The programme shall contain.-
(a) such particulars of housing schemes,
    land development schemes and labour
    housing   schemes  which   the   Board
    proposes to execute whether in part or
    whole during the next year as may be
    prescribed;
(b) the particulars of any undertaking
    which the Board proposes to organize
    or execute during the next year for
    the purpose of the production of
    building materials; and
(c) such other        particulars   as   may   be
    prescribed.
(3) The budget shall contain a statement
showing   the   estimated    receipts   and
expenditure on capital and revenue accounts
for the next year.
20. Sanction to programme, budget and
establishment    schedule.-   The    State
Government may sanction the programme, the
budget and the schedule of the staff of
Officers and servants forwarded to it with
such modifications as it deems fit.
50
21. Publication of sanctioned programme.-
The State Government shall publish the
programme sanctioned by it under
Section 20
in the official Gazette.
22. Supplementary programme and budget.-
The Board may, at any time, during the year,
in respect of which a programme has been
sanctioned under
Section 20
submit a
supplementary programme and budget and the
additional schedule of the staff, if any,
to the State Government and the provisions
of
Sections 20
and
21
shall apply to such
supplementary programme.
23. Variation of programme by Board after
it is sanctioned.- The Board may, at any
time, vary any programme or any part
thereof   included    in   the   programme
sanctioned by the State Government;
Provided that no such variation shall be
made if it involves an expenditure in
excess of twenty per cent of the amount as
originally sanctioned for the execution of
any housing scheme or land development
scheme included in such programme or
affects its scope or purpose.
24. Sanctioned housing schemes and land
development schemes to be executed.—(1)
After the programme has been sanctioned and
published by the State Government under
sections 20
and
21
, the Board shall,
subject to the provisions of
Section 23
,
proceed to execute the housing scheme, land
development scheme or labour housing scheme
included in the programme.
(2) The Board shall not execute any
housing scheme, land development scheme or
labour housing scheme unless the same has
been sanctioned by the State Government.
32. Schemes   entrusted  to  Board       by
Government, etc.—(1) The provisions      of
51
sections 18
to
24
(both inclusive) shall
        not be applicable to any housing scheme,
        land development scheme or labour housing
        scheme entrusted to the Board by the State
        Government except to such extent and
        subject to such modifications as may be
        specified in any general or special order
        made by the State Government, and every
        such order shall be published in the
        Official Gazette.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
        this Act, the Board shall not be competent
        to carry on any trading or financing
        activity for profit, whether in the
        execution of any scheme undertaken by, or
        entrusted to it, or otherwise.”
25. A     conjoint   reading    of        the    afore-extracted

provisions of
KHB Act
will unfold the duties of the KHB

as to undertake housing schemes and land development

schemes as it may consider necessary from time to time

or as may be entrusted to it by the State Government.

What are the matters to be provided for by housing

schemes and land development schemes are mentioned

respectively     under
Sections    18
and
18A
.   Going   by
Section   2(n)
‘programme’   means       the   annual   housing

programme and land development programme prepared by

KHB under
Section 19
.
Section 19
mandates that before

the first day of December in each year, KHB shall
52
prepare and forward a programme, a budget for the next

year and a schedule of the staff of officers and

servants already employed and to be employed during the

next year, to the State Government. As per the said

section,    the    said   programme    shall    contain     such

particulars of the housing schemes, land development

schemes and labour housing schemes which it proposes to

execute whether in part or whole during the next year

as   may   be   prescribed.   Under
Section   20
the   State

Government may sanction the programme, the budget and

the schedule of the staff of officers and servants

forwarded to it with such modifications as it deems

fit. As per
Section 21
, the State Government shall

publish the programme sanctioned by it under
Section 20
in the official Gazette.
Section 22
permits submission

of supplementary programme and budget in respect of

which a programme and budget had been sanctioned under
Section 20
and in the eventuality of submission of such

a supplementary programme and budget the provisions of
Sections 20
and
21
would apply.
53
26.
Section 23
confers power on the board to vary any

programme or any part thereof included in the programme

sanctioned by the State Government, at any time. The

bare perusal of the proviso thereunder would reveal

that it is not an unfettered power. Going by the

proviso, no such variation shall be made if it involves

an expenditure in excess of 20 per cent of the amount

as   originally   sanctioned   for    the   execution   of   any

housing scheme or land development scheme included in

such programme or affects its scope or purpose. Thus a

bare perusal of the provisions under
Sections 17
to
23
,

contained in Chapter-III of the KBH Act, would reveal

that they deal with duties of KHB to undertake housing

schemes and land development schemes, matters to be

included in such schemes, preparation and submission of

annual    housing    programme       and    land   development

programme, budget and establishment schedule and such

other procedures to be followed ultimately unto the

sanctioning of the programme and also the power of KHB

to make variance of sanctioned programme and its limit.
54
27. Going by the scheme of the
KHB Act
, it deals with

the    subject   of    execution    of    housing    schemes,    land

development schemes and labour housing schemes under
Section    24
.    Bearing   in     mind    the   provisions     under

Sections 18-23 we will consider the scope and purport

of
Section 24
of the KHB Act. A careful scrutiny of

sub-Sections (1) and (2) of
Section 24
would bring forth

their distinct differences.
Section 24(1)
prescribes

that    after    the   programme    has    been     sanctioned   and

published by the State Government the board shall,

subject to the provisions of
Section 23
, proceed to

execute the housing scheme, land development scheme and

labour housing scheme included in the programme. Thus,
Section 24(1)
states in unequivocal terms as to when

the KHB shall proceed to execute the housing schemes,

land development schemes and labour housing schemes

included in the programme. Indisputably, in terms of

the said statutory mandate KHB could proceed to execute

any of the aforesaid schemes included in the programme

only    after    the    sanction     and    publication    of     the

programme wherein the scheme concerned is included.
55
28. Now, we will consider the question of executability

or   otherwise   of    housing      schemes,   land    development

schemes and labour housing schemes other than those

included in a programme, by the KHB.                    As noticed

earlier, the unambiguous terms in
Section 24(1)
would

reveal that it speaks only of such schemes included in a

programme and thereby make such ‘housing schemes, land

development   schemes       and   labour     housing    schemes’   a

definite category. The further question is whether any

other category containing such schemes is contemplated

in the
KHB Act
and if so, when such scheme(s) would

become executable? The word ‘any’ that qualifies the

words ‘housing scheme, land development scheme and

labour housing scheme’ employed in sub-Section (2)

thereof in contradistinction to the words ‘included in

the programme’ employed under sub-Section, positively

indicates the executability of scheme(s) other than

those included in the sanctioned programme. Indeed it

is couched in a negative form, as can be seen from sub-

Section (2) thereof, extracted hereinbefore. As per the

said   provision      KHB   shall    not   execute     any   housing

scheme,   land   development        scheme   or   labour     housing
56
scheme unless the same has been sanctioned by the State

Government.
29. As noted earlier, what sub-Section (2) proscribes

is execution of such a scheme, be it a housing scheme

or land development scheme or labour housing scheme,

evidently    not    included   in   the    programme    for   any

particular year unless the same has been sanctioned by

the State Government. Pithily put, the schemes falling

under sub-Sections (1) and (2) are different. If they

are one and the same in view of the positive mandate

under sub-Section (1) of
Section 24
with respect to the

time of executability of such schemes included in the

programme,    viz.,     only   after      their   sanction    and

publication    by     the   State   Government,      there    was

absolutely no necessity for incorporating sub-Section

(2) under
Section 24
in the negative form.             Certainly,

the legislative intention under sub-Section (2) can be

taken only as one to enable KHB to undertake such

schemes which were not included in the programme, as

exception, but subject to the condition of obtainment

of sanction of the State Government before execution.
57
In short, as a whole, the purport of
Section 24
is that

no housing scheme or land development scheme or labour

housing scheme, undertaken by the KHB shall be executed

sans sanction from the State Government. Sub-Section

(2) of
Section 24
cannot be interpreted as one requiring

obtainment of a second sanction for executing such

schemes included in the programme.        On the contrary,

the provision under
Section 24(2)
has to be interpreted

as one enabling KHB to undertake such schemes which

were   not    included   in   the   programme,   but   became

necessary to undertake, subject to sanction from the

Government.    According to us, such a construction will

only sub-serve the purpose of constitution of KHB.
30. There can be no doubt that for executing a housing

scheme, land development scheme and labour housing

scheme, be it included or not included in the programme,

necessary extent of land has to be acquired. For,

without the required extent of land, construction of

houses under housing and labour housing schemes or

development of land under land development schemes

could not be effected. It is a fact that, the expression
58
‘execution’ is not defined in the
KHB Act
.            Therefore,

the question is how the expressions ‘execute/execution’

employed in sub-Sections (1) and (2) of
Section 24
and
Section 33(2)
are to be understood. In that regard

bearing in mind the object and purpose of Constitution

of KHB and its duties the dictionary meaning of the

said expression has to be looked into.            Accordingly,

the following meanings given for the word ‘execution’

in   the    Black’s   Law   Dictionary,   Tenth   Edition,   are

ascribable to the expressions ‘execution’ or ‘execute’

employed in
Sections 24(2)
and
33(2)
of the KHB Act:
(1) To perform or complete (a contract or duty);
(2) The performance or completion of a thing;
(3) The final process of an action.
31.
Chapter-IV        of    the   KHB   Act
deals   with   the

acquisition and disposal of land.
Section 33
reads

thus:-
“
S.33
. Power to purchase or lease by
           agreement.- (1) The Board may enter into an
           agreement   with   any   person   for   the
           acquisition form him by purchase, lease or
59
exchange, or any land which is needed for
      the purposes of a housing scheme or land
      development scheme or any interest in such
      land or for compensating the owners of any
      such right in respect of any deprivation
      thereof or interference therewith:
Provided that the previous approval
      of the State Government shall be obtained
      in case of purchase or exchange involving
      land worth more than rupees ten lakhs or
      lease for more than five years.
(2) The Board may also take steps for the
      compulsory acquisition of any land or any
      interest therein required for the execution
      of a housing scheme or land development
      scheme in the manner provided in the
Land
      Acquisition Act, 1894
, as modified by this
      Act and the acquisition of any land or any
      interest therein for the purposes of this
      Act shall be deemed to be acquisition for
      a public purpose within the meaning of the
Land Acquisition Act,1894
,"
Section 33
was subsequently substituted in the year

2016 as per Act 24 of 2016. Taking into account the

fact that the substitution took place subsequent to the

notifications   impugned   in   these   proceedings   it   is

unnecessary for us to look into the said substituted

provision. In fact, no serious argument was advanced by

any one with reference to the said provision.
60
32.
Section 33
in Chapter-IV actually deals with the

power of KHB to acquire land. Sub-sections (1) and (2)

thereof envisage different modes of acquisition which

are different in nature. To put it succinctly, in the

matter of acquisition under
Section 33(1)
, ‘consent’ is

required and in respect of unwilling owners acquisition

may be effected under sub-Section (2) thereof. What is

relevant to be noted is that
Section 33
deals with

acquisition of land or interest thereon and it is not

dealing with sanction of the schemes. Obviously, for

acquiring land or interest thereon, upon entering into

an agreement with any person, by following anyone of

the three modes prescribed under
Section 33(1)
prior

approval of the State Government is mandatory, subject

to its proviso.
33. Under sub-section (1) of
Section 33
, the KHB may

enter   into   agreement    with     any   person   for    the

acquisition from him by purchase, lease or exchange of

any land which is needed for the purposes of housing

scheme or land development scheme or any interest in

such land or for compensating the owners of any such

right   in   respect   of   any    deprivation   thereof   or
61
interference therewith. The proviso to sub-section (1)

makes it mandatory to obtain previous approval of the

State   Government   in   case   of   purchase   or   exchange,

involving land worth more than Rs.10 lakhs. For lease

such previous approval is mandatory if it is for more

than 5 years. The necessary corollary is that even in

respect of acquisition of land needed for the purposes

of such schemes either by purchase, lease or exchange

previous approval of the State Government need not be

obtained in case purchase or exchange, involved land

worth Rs.10 lakhs or less and in the case of lease if

it is for 5 years or lesser period.
34. Sub-section (2) of
Section 33
permits KHB to take

steps for compulsory acquisition of any land or any

interest   therein   required    for   the   execution    of   a

housing scheme or land development scheme.
35. In the case of        compulsory acquisition of land

required for the execution of a housing scheme or land

development scheme obtainment of no such prior approval

is prescribed under sub-Section (2) thereof. The reason

is obvious. A perusal of the sub-Section (2) would
62
reveal   that   what   is   permissible   thereunder   is

compulsory acquisition of any land or interest thereon

in the manner provided in the
L.A. Act
as modified by

the
KHB Act
.
Section 4(1)
of the L.A. Act is worthy for

reference in this context and it reads thus:-
“S.4    Publication of       preliminary
         notification and power      of officers
         thereupon.-
             (1) Whenever it appears to the
[appropriate Government] the land in
         any locality [is needed or] is likely
         to be needed for any public purpose [or
         for a company], a notification to that
         effect shall be published in the
         Official Gazette [and in two daily
         newspapers circulating in that locality
         of which at least one shall be in the
         regional language], and the Collector
         shall cause public notice of the
         substance of such notification to be
         given at convenient places in the said
         locality [(the last of the dates of such
         publication and the giving of such
         public   notice,    being    hereinafter
         referred to as the date of the
         publication of the notification)].”
36.   But then,
Section 4 (1)
in its application to the

State of Karnataka reads as hereunder:-
In
Section 4
of the principal Act,-
(1) In sub-section (1),-
63
(a)     after the words “the appropriate
             Government”, the words “or the Deputy
             Commissioner” shall be inserted;
(b) for the words “notification to that
          effect”, the words “notification
          stating the purpose for which the
          land is needed, or likely to be
          needed, and describing the land by
          its survey number, if any, and also
          by its boundaries and its approximate
          area” shall be substituted;
(c) after the words “the said locality”,
          the    following     sentence    and
          explanation shall be added, namely,-
“the Deputy Commissioner may also cause a
      copy of such notification to be served on
      the owner, or where the owner is not the
      occupier, of the land.”
      Explanation. - The expression “convenient
      places” includes, in the case of land
      situated in a village, the office of the
      Panchayat within whose jurisdiction the
      land lies.
This    State   amendment   was    brought   vide   Land

Acquisition (Mysore Extension and Amendment Act) Act 17

of 1961.    We have already noted that the Government of

Karnataka    as   per   Annexure-‘A’   Notification     dated

15.12.1998 (marked thus in the appeal arising from SLP
64
(C)No.1361 of 2021), which was issued under Clause
(c)of
Section 3
of the L.A. Act, appointed the Housing

Commissioner of KHB to perform the functions of Deputy

Commissioner under
Section 4
of the L.A. Act in respect

of lands to be acquired for the purpose of KHB in

Bengaluru    and    Mysore     Revenue   Divisions.      In    such

circumstances, no error or defect can be attributed

against    his   issuing     preliminary   notification       under
Section 4(1)
of the L.A. Act.
37. A bare perusal of
L.A. Act
would reveal that the

acquisition      proceedings     begin   with    issuance     of    a

notification under
Section 4(1)
thereof that land in

any locality is needed or is likely to be needed for

any public purpose.          The Notification under
Section

4(1)
is a formal expression of the decision to start

acquisition proceedings for a public purpose.            The said

notification     takes   the    concrete   shape   and   form      by

publication in the official Gazette of the appropriate

Government, when that be mandatory procedures and when

they are strictly complied with it would be without

rhyme or reason to prescribe obtainment of a further

approval    of     the   Government      for    such   compulsory
65
acquisition by KHB.      It is also to be noted that in the

cases    on   hand   subsequently,    Government   had   issued

declaration and final Notification as prescribed under
Section 6
of the L.A. Act.
38. As noted earlier in L. Krishnan’s case a three-

Judge Bench of this Court clearly found that there is

nothing in
Section 4(1)
of the L.A. Act which insists

for     availability/existence       of   a   sanctioned   and

published scheme for initiation of land acquisition

under
L.A. Act
.         In paragraph 9 of L. Krishnan’s

decision this Court held and observed thus:
“
Section 4
of the Land Acquisition Act
         does not state expressly or by necessary
         intendment that before a Notification is
         issued/published thereunder proposing to
         acquire land for the purposes of a body
         like the Tamil Nadu Housing Board, a duly
         published   final   scheme  prepared   in
         accordance with the relevant Act should
         be in force.       The respondents/writ
         petitioners, however, seek to deduce such
         a requirement from the provisions of the
         TNHB Act.”




      In view of the provisions under
Section 4
of the

L.A. Act and the decision in L. Krishnan’s case as
66
extracted above, it cannot be said that for initiation

of land acquisition proceedings under
Section 4(1)
of

the L.A. Act proposing to acquire any particular land

for the purpose of KHB a duly published final scheme

prepared in accordance with the provisions of
KHB Act
should be in force.   Despite the said position obtained

from
Section 4
of the L.A. Act and the decision in L.

Krishnan’s case the attempt herein is to deduce such a

mandate from the provisions under the
KHB Act
.      The

scanning of
Section 33(2)
of the KHB Act, as above would

clearly show that it contains no condition, either

expressly or by necessary implication, that before a

Notification under
Section 4(1)
of the L.A. Act is

issued proposing to acquire land or interest therein,

for the purpose of KHB, a sanctioned and published

housing scheme/land development scheme/labour housing

scheme should be in force.   In the said circumstances,

the said contention cannot be sustained.
39. Unlike the provisions under TNHB Act, which mandate

for acquisition of land for the purpose of TNHB Act and

Tamil Nadu Housing Board only in accordance with the

provisions of
L.A. Act
,
Section 33(2)
of the KHB Act
67
empowers    the     KHB     to    take   steps    for    compulsory

acquisition    of     any   land    or   any    interest    therein,

required for the execution of a housing scheme in the

manner provided in the
L.A. Act
, as modified by
KHB

Act
.
40. Therefore,      the     next    question     is   whether
L.A.

Act
stands modified in any manner by the
KHB Act
in

respect any particular aspect or procedure.                  A bare

perusal of sub-Section (2) of
Section 33
itself would

answer this question.             Its latter limb contains ‘a

deeming provision’.         Certainly, that is attracted only

on     establishing       the    foundational     fact     that   the

acquisition of land or interest therein is for the

purposes of
KHB Act
.             The said provision, extracted

hereinbefore, would go to show that upon establishing

the same the acquisition of land concerned or interest

therein, as the case may be, shall have to be deemed as

an acquisition for the purpose within the meaning of
L.A. Act
, viz.,
Section 3(f)
of the L.A. Act that

defines “public purpose”.           Therefore, in terms of the

same
L.A. Act
stands modified by
KHB Act
to the extent

mentioned above.          Hence, it would be suffice if the
68
Notification specifies that the acquisition is for the

purpose of KHB.     It is a fact that in the TNHB Act no

provision pari materia to
Section 33(2)
of the KHB Act

enabling the Housing Board to take steps for compulsory

acquisition for the purposes of the Act/the Board as

also a deeming provision relating ‘public purpose’, as

mentioned hereinbefore, is available.
41. Another allied question arises for consideration

is   whether    non-particularisation          with      sufficient

specificity of the land to be acquired can be a reason

for annulling acquisition proceedings initiated under

the
L.A. Act
as modified by
KHB Act
for the purpose of
KHB Act
.     The contention raised is to the effect that

owing   to   such   vagueness     in    the    Notification        the

holders/land     owners    would       be     deprived      of     the

opportunity    to   file   an   effective       objection        under
Section 5A
of the L.A. Act.            In that context, it is

worthy to refer to the Constitution Bench decision of

this Court in Aflatoon’s case (supra).              That was a case

where the question was whether before publishing the

Notification    under
Section    4
of    the    L.A.   Act   the

Government had not declared any area in Delhi as a
69
development    area   under    Section   12(1)    of    the   Delhi

Development Act nor was there a Master Plan drawn up in

accordance with
Section 7
of the Act.             On that basis

Notification    under
Section   4
was   attacked.        The

contention    that    no   development    of     land   could    be

undertaken or carried out in such circumstances in

terms of
Section 12(3)
of the said Act was negatived by

the Constitution Bench.        In the said case, it was held

that the wording of
Section 5A
of the L.A. Act would

make it clear that all that is necessary to be specified

in a Notification under
Section 4
is that the land is

needed for a public purpose.             It is true that the

specific purpose is         also to be mentioned.             In L.

Krishnan’s case the decision in Aflatoon was referred

to.   It was held that whether a particular Notification

is vague or not is a question of fact to be decided in

the facts and circumstances of each case.           In the cases

falling under the provisions of
KHB Act
mentioning of

the fact that the acquisition is required for the

purposes of the KHB would make it one for public purpose

within the meaning of
L.A. Act
and a further mentioning

of the locality in which acquisition would be effected,
70
would save it from the attack based on Section 5A.         At

the stage of
Section 4
Notification to enable persons

interested to file objection, especially in the light

of the provisions under
Section 33(2)
carrying the

aforesaid deeming provision, a mention on the aforesaid

lines would be sufficient.        As already noted that in

the   appeal    arising    from   SLP(C)No.1361/2021,     the

deceased mother of Respondent Nos.2 and 3 had filed

objections under Section 5A.       It is also relevant to

note that the High Court had also noted the fact that

in some of the cases acquisition based on the selfsame

Notification were effected and awards were also passed.
42. We have already noted the provisions under
Section

24
of the KHB Act and held that
Section 24(1)
speaks of

the question as to when KHB could proceed to execute

the   housing   schemes,   land   development   schemes   and

labour housing schemes included in the programme.         That

apart, we have also held that
Section 24(2)
pertains to

executability of such a scheme not included in the

programme and in respect of such a scheme falling within
71
the sweep of
Section 24(2)
the mandate thereunder is

that it shall not be executed unless the same has been

sanctioned    by    the   State   Government.         In    such

circumstances, a conjoint reading of
Section 33(2)
and
Section 24(2)
, of the KHB Act would make it clear that

prior approval or sanction of any scheme is not required

for compulsory acquisition invoking the power under
Section 33(2)
.     This is because in terms of the State

amendment    of
Section   4(1)
,   notification      marking

initiation of acquisition proceedings under
L.A. Act
,

is issued by the appropriate Government or by the Deputy

Commissioner and thereafter, the said formal expression

of the decision to start acquisition proceedings gets

into concrete shape and form by publication in the

Official Gazette of Government of Karnataka.           In such

circumstances, if it is for the purposes of KHB, in

other words, for implementation of a scheme of the KHB,

what   is   statutorily   required   is   to   wait   for    its

execution till the same is sanctioned by the State

Government. In other words, the mere factum of non-

existence of a sanctioned and published scheme prior to

the initiation of acquisition proceedings, by itself,
72
will   not   make    the   notifications      and   the   initiated

acquisition proceedings null and void.
43. One another aspect also requires reference in the

context of the rival contentions and situation.                  The

scheme of the Act reveals that KHB has also a duty to

undertake the schemes entrusted to it by the State

Government.
Section 32(1)
of the KHB Act exclusively

make it clear that in respect of scheme entrusted to

KHB by Government, provisions under Sections 18-24

(both inclusive) shall not be applicable, except to

such an extent and subject to such modifications as may

be specified in general or special order made by the

State Government.          It is also to be noted that in

respect of housing schemes, land development schemes or

labour housing schemes entrusted to the Board by the

Government, sometimes such entrustment takes place only

after acquisition of the necessary extent of land by

the    State   Government.      All     the    above      mentioned

provisions     and    situations      would    reveal     that   the

contention of the appellants other than the appellants
73
in   the   appeal   arising   from     SLP(C)No.1361/2021      and

Respondent Nos.2 and 3 therein that existence of a

finally    sanctioned    scheme   is    a     pre-condition    for

initiation of acquisition of any land or any interest

therein is a pre-condition and its non-existence must

invariably make the acquisition proceedings null and

void, are unsustainable and liable to be rejected.

Hence, on a careful perusal of
Sections 18
to
24
(both

inclusive) and
Section 33(2)
we have no hesitation to

hold that
KHB Act
carry no statutory insistence that

for initiation of acquisition invoking the power under
Section 33(2)
, for the purposes of the
KHB Act
/KHB,

framing, finalization      and publication of a          housing

scheme or land development scheme or labour housing

scheme, is a pre-condition.
44. For all the above reasons we answer the mooted

question    in   the   negative   and    to    the   effect   that

initiation of proceedings for acquisition invoking the

power under
Section 33(2)
of the KHB Act without the

housing scheme being in existence or the housing scheme

not having been sanctioned under
Section 24(2)
thereof,
74
would not render such proceedings null and void. We

also hold that unless sanction is obtained from the

State Government for execution of any scheme therein,

in terms of
Section 24(2)
of KHB Act, the actual act to

complete the process, viz., execution shall not be

effected thereon.
45. In view of the answers to the moot question and the

other allied issues we pass the following orders:
(i) In the appeal arising from SLP(C) No.1361/2021

no question other than the moot question (decided as

per this judgment) was considered. In view of our clear

conclusions and findings the judgment and order dated

01.12.2020 in Writ Appeal No.5712/2012, where the law

on the question was exposited to the contrary, is liable

to be set aside. Accordingly, it is set aside.     Nothing

further survives for consideration in this appeal.
Consequently, Writ Petition No.25184/2011 from which

Writ Appeal No.5712/2012 arose, stands dismissed.
(ii) In   Civil   Appeal   Nos.7011-13/2013,    9002-

9003/2013 and 7017-19/2013 the position is that as per
75
the common judgment and orders respectively in Writ

Petition    Nos.4625/2004,        18596/2006,          11568/2008     and

47616/2004 dated 26.4.2013 and also the judgment in

Writ   Appeal     Nos.1244-45/2009,              the   Division      Bench

virtually decided that for initiation of acquisition

proceedings for the purposes of KHB, existence of a

sanctioned and published scheme is not a pre-condition.

Consequently, the Division Bench confirmed the decision

of   the   leaned   Single       Judge      on    that   question      and

thereupon, the Writ Petitions concerned/Writ Appeals

were disposed of with request to the learned Single

Judge to decide whether
Sections 18-23
of the KHB Act

were   complied     with    or    not.      Obviously,       those   Writ

Petitions are now pending. The issue is whether in view

of the facts involved in those cases, the question of

scrupulous adherence of
Sections 18-23
of the KHB Act

survives     or     needs        to    be        followed,     requires

consideration depending upon the nature of acquisition

and other relevant facts.             Hence, Civil Appeals shall

be listed before appropriate Bench for consideration on

their own merits, subject to this judgment.
76
....................,J.
(A.M. KHANWILKAR)


                ....................,J.
(DINESH MAHESHWARI)


                ....................,J.
(C.T. RAVIKUMAR)
NEW DELHI;
28 July, 2022