[Cites
12
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Shiv Kumar Sharma vs The State Of Rajasthan on 28 July, 2022
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
Pamidighantam Sri Narasimha
,
B.R. Gavai
1

                                                      REPORTABLE
              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1050 OF 2022
[Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.2403 of 2017]


    SHIV KUMAR SHARMA                              APPELLANT(S)

                             VERSUS

    STATE OF RAJASTHAN                            RESPONDENT(S)

                           JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   The appeal challenges the judgment and order dated

    06.01.2017 passed by the learned Single Judge of the High

    Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jaipur thereby

    dismissing the appeal filed by the appellant/accused, which

    was in turn filed thereby challenging the judgment and order

    dated 24.10.2013 passed by the learned Special Judge,

    Prevention of Corruption Act No. 1, Jaipur (hereinafter

    referred to as “the Special Judge”), convicting the appellant

    for the offences punishable under Section 13(1)(d)(ii) read

    with
Section 15
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988

    (‘
PC Act
’ for short) and under Section 477A of Indian Penal
2
Code, 1860 (“
IPC
” for short) and sentencing him to suffer

rigorous imprisonment for one year and a fine of Rs. 5000/­

each for both the offences.
3.   The Special Judge, vide order dated 03.06.2004, framed

the following charges against the appellant:
“Firstly in the year 1994, on 25.04.1994
          and around the same time, while working
          as public servant, you had conspired with
          the co­accused Bhagwan Sahai and in
          furtherance of that criminal conspiracy, you
          had received an advance of Rs. 15,000/­
          out of the approved amount of Rs. 91,500/­
          with regard to construction of rooms and
          varandha in the Primary School, Mankot
          and Bhagwan Sahai had submitted the
          work of Rs. 14,508/­ in three muster rolls
          and the voucher of construction material of
          Rs.    18,994/­    thereby   informed    the
          expenditure as Rs. 33,502/­ which was
          accepted at page No. 71 and 72 of M.B. No.
          51 and mentioned as Rs. 34,580.13 by Shiv
          Kumar Sharma but later on, on complaint,
          the said amount of Rs. 34,580/­ was
          modified to Rs. 25,911/­.
In the same manner, in furtherance of
          the aforesaid criminal conspiracy, an
          advance of Rs. 28,000/­ was received out of
          the approved amount of Rs. 80,000/­ for
          construction of rooms and varandha in
          Primary    School    Surjanpur    and   Sh.
Bhagwan Sahai had shown the expenditure
          of Rs. 61,843.40 including the expenses of 7
          muster rolls amounting to Rs. 36,552/­ and
          the voucher of construction amounting to
          Rs. 25,291.40. The said amount was
          entered by Sh. Shiv Kumar Sharma at page
          No. 71­72 of M.B. No. 51 as Rs. 68,776/­
          but on complaint, the said amount of Rs.
3
68,776/­ was reduced to 45,582/­ by
          cutting. In the enquiry, only work worth Rs.
28,264.42 was found at Surjanpur and
          work worth Rs. 25,911/­ was found at
          Mankot and thus, you have shown the
          excess     expenditure    of   labour    and
          construction which was excess of Rs.
7,698/­ at Mankot and Rs. 16,644/­ at
          Surjanpur, totalling Rs. 22,353/­ for which
          the excess payment was made and wrongful
          loss was caused to the State Government
          and wrongful gain was received by you. You
          also created false record by cutting in the
          records. The said act of you being the public
          servant is a criminal offence. Thus, you
          have committed a punishable offence under
          section 417, 477A read with
section 120B
IPC and offence under
section 13(1)(d)(2)
of
          the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, for
          which I have taken cognizance.”
4.   It appears that a complaint was made to the authorities

regarding malpractices in the construction of rooms and

varandha in Primary School, Mankot and Surjanpur. It was

the prosecution case that, in the Measurement Book with

regard to Mankot, the amount was reduced from Rs.

34,580/­ to Rs. 25,911/­ by the appellant after the

complaint was made. With regard to the construction work

at Surjanpur, after the complaint was made, the amount

was reduced to Rs.45,582/­ from Rs.68,776/­.
5.   After the receipt of the complaint, Mr. Mahesh Prasad

Mathur   was   appointed   as    an   Inquiry   Officer.   After

completion of inquiry, he submitted an inquiry report. On
4
the basis of the inquiry report, the crime came to be

registered. The chargesheet was filed. The appellant pleaded

not guilty and claimed to be tried. The learned Special

Judge, at the conclusion of the trial, convicted the appellant

as aforesaid. The appellant filed an appeal before the High

Court and the High Court confirmed the order of the learned

Special Judge. Hence the present appeal.
6.   Mr. Ritesh Agrawal, the learned counsel appearing on

behalf of the appellant submits that both the High Court and

the learned Trial Court have grossly erred in not giving due

weightage to the evidence of PW­8 Mr. Mahesh Prasad

Mathur as well as PW14­Jai Bhagwan, the Investigating

Officer.
7.   The learned counsel further submits that there is no

material to show that the appellant either had made any

demand or by abusing his position as a public servant, had

obtained for himself or any other person any valuable thing

or pecuniary advantage. It is submitted that in the absence

of any material to show that the appellant attempted to

obtain for himself or any other person any valuable thing or

pecuniary advantage, the conviction under
Section 13(1)(d)(ii)
read with
Section 15
of the PC Act was not tenable.         He
5
further submits that for an offence punishable under
Section

477A
of the IPC, the prosecution is required to establish that

the alleged act was willful with an intent to defraud. It is his

submission that no such evidence has come up on record.
8.   Learned counsel therefore, submits that the concurrent

orders of conviction are liable to be set aside and the accused

is entitled to be acquitted.
9.   Dr.   Manish    Singhvi,       learned   Additional     Advocate

General for the State of Rajasthan vehemently opposes the

appeal. He submits that the scope of interference in

concurrent findings of fact is very limited. He submits that

the learned Trial Court and the High Court, upon correct

appreciation of evidence, have found that the appellant had

manipulated    the   record     with    dishonest   intention.     He

submitted that only after the complaint was made to the

higher authorities, the appellant, in order to save his skin,

had manipulated the record and as such, the case clearly

falls under
Section 477A
of the IPC.
10. No     doubt   that   the   scope    of   interference    in   the

concurrent findings of the fact is very limited.           Unless the

findings are found to be perverse or impossible, the Court

would refrain from interfering with the concurrent findings of
6
fact. However, it is settled that when the findings recorded by

the courts below are found to be recorded by ignoring the

material   evidence   or   the       appreciation   of   evidence   is

manifestly erroneous, they would not come in the way of this

Court in interfering with the same.
11. For an offence punishable under
Section 13(1)(d)(ii)
read

with
Section 15
of the PC Act, it is necessary to establish

that a public servant has attempted to obtain for himself or

for any other person any valuable thing or pecuniary

advantage. In the present case, no such material has come

on record.    On the contrary, the evidence of PW14­Jai

Bhagwan, the Investigating Officer would clearly show that

the payment of the construction material was directly made

to the Gram Sewak by the Panchayat Samiti. It would further

reveal that the bill of the material was also directly sent to

Gram Sewak by the Panchayat Samiti. There was no

verification done by the appellant. It is clearly admitted that

the appellant was not aware of the amount paid to the Gram

Sewak with respect to the construction material. It is further

admitted that at the relevant time, there were around 100 to

125 panchayat works going on under the supervision of the

present appellant. It is further admitted that there was no
7
material placed on record to show that the corrections in Ex­

article­2 from Ex­P­22 to Ex­27 was made by the appellant

after the complaint. It will be relevant to refer to the following

part of deposition of PW14­Jai Bhagwan, the I.O.:
“I had not found any criminal charges
           against Shiv Kumar in my investigation
           report sent to the Headquarter and had only
           recommended for Departmental Enquiry.
           However, on the decision of the higher
           officials, charge sheet was filed.”
12. PW14 further admits that the amount paid by the

Panchayat Samiti was as per the amount corrected by the

appellant. It is further admitted that there was no evidence

to show that the accused Bhagwan Sahai and the appellant

had made corrections together. He further admits that Shiv

Kumar Sharma, that is the present appellant, had made a

complaint to the District Magistrate about the irregularity in

the construction work by Bhagwan Sahai, Gram Sewak.
13. These vital aspects that the appellant did not have any

role to play in either the sanctioning of the money or making

of payment, have been totally ignored by both the Courts.
The evidence that in the investigation, the Investigating

Officer had not found any criminal intent has also been

ignored.   In that view of the matter, the conviction under
8
Section 13(1)(d)(ii)
read with
Section 15
of the PC Act is

totally unsustainable.
14. That leaves us with conviction under
Section 477A
of

the IPC. For a conviction under
Section 477A
of the IPC, it

is necessary for the prosecution to establish that the

making of false entry or omission or alternation of such

entries has been done willfully with an intent to defraud. No

such    material   has   been       placed   on   record   by   the

prosecution. On the contrary, the evidence of PW8­Mahesh

Prasad Mathur, who was appointed as an Inquiry Officer,

would show that the allegations made against the appellant

were not sustainable. It will be relevant to refer to the

deposition of PW8­Mahesh Prasad Mathur, which reads

thus:
“When I went on the spot to conduct
          enquiry then M.B. of Mankot and Surjpur
          was given to me. On the basis of which on
          dated 4.10 and 19.10.94 I had conducted
          enquiry after visiting the spot. On the
          instructions of C.O. I had prepared the
          difference detail on 17.2.95. At page No.
          71,72 of the MB No. 51 (Article­2) the
          measurement have been recorded by the Jr.
          Eng. That was found correct upon my
          examination. Against this work of Rs.
          25911/­ payment of Rs. 13422/­ was made
          as labour charges, which is entered in the
          MB from X to Y. I did not find any
          irregularity in the work of village Mankot. In
          case by mistake if any mistake is done in
9
the total of MB, then at the time of
         preparing bill on the basis of MB, this
         mistake can be corrected by the account
         branch. I had gone there three months after
         ending of the famine relief works. At that
         place (Surjanpur) for the supervision of the
         material of work, there was no person
         appointed. On the spot there was not
         watchman, in the absence of which if
         anyone would take the material lying there,
         I cannot say. The Patties which have been
         shown in the MB, the same were not found
         on the spot, therefore, I had noted about it
         in the Report. It is the responsibility of the
         Gram Sewak to get conducted the
         construction work. If the costs of Patties of
         Rs. 6914/­ would be included in my
         evaluation of Rs. 40267/­, then the
         valuation amount becomes Rs. 47181/­. Rs.
         6914/­ the cost of patties is written
         according to BSR. When MB­51 (Article­2)
         was received to me, at that time due to
         mistake in total by J. En by cutting the
         amount of Rs. 59273/­ the amount 47183/­
         has been marked, whereupon the J. En put
         his signatures. The payment of construction
         material was made to the Sarpanch of the
         Gram Panchayat, the agency which get
         conducted the work while the muster roll’s
         payment is made by the tehsil employees.
         The payment of construction material was
         made by the Panchayat.”
15. The above deposition would clearly show that the

measurements recorded by the appellant were found to be

correct by the Inquiry Officer. He clearly admits that he did

not find any irregularity in the work of village Mankot. He

further admits that if any mistake was done in the total of
10
Measurement Book at the time of preparing the bill, the

mistake could be corrected by the accounts branch.
16. PW8­Mahesh Prasad Mathur further admitted that in

so far as Surjanpur is concerned, no person was appointed

as a watchman or a supervisor. He admits that in the

absence of a watchman, it is possible that the material lying

at the site could be taken by anybody. He admits that even

the patties were not found on the spot and has noted about

the same in the report. He further admits that if the cost of

patties of Rs. 6914/­ were included in the valuation of Rs.

40,677/­ then the valuation comes to Rs.47,181/­.
17. PW8­Mahesh Prasad Mathur has further admitted that

the payment for the construction material was made directly

to the Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat by the agency while

the   muster   roll’s   payment    was   made   by   the   tehsil

employees. Payment of the construction material was made

by the Panchayat. Thus, it could clearly be seen that the

appellant had no role whatsoever in either approving the

payment or making the payment.
18. The evidence of PW8­Mahesh Prasad Mathur would

clearly show that at the most, the act of the appellant could

be termed as irregular. However, there was nothing on
11
record to show that such irregularities were committed

        willfully with an intent to defraud.
19. In that view of the matter, we find that even the

        conviction in so far as
Section 477A
of the IPC is concerned,

        is not sustainable in law.
20. Dr.       Manish    Singhvi,    learned    Additional    Advocate

        General for the State of Rajasthan has submitted that since

        the findings of fact are concurrent, the Court should be slow

        in interfering with the same.
21. It is settled principle of law that concurrent findings of

        fact cannot be interfered with unless shown to be perverse.

        Concurrency, after all, is no answer to perversity.
22. This       Court    in   the   case   of
Mahesh       Dattatray

        Thirthkar vs State of Maharashtra1
had laid down

        certain principles when this Court is entitled to exercise

        powers under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India and

        interfere with the findings of fact. One of the principles laid

        down is thus:
“Where findings of subordinate courts are
                      shown to be perverse or based on no evi­
                      dence or irrelevant evidence or there are ma­
                      terial irregularities affecting the said findings
                      or where the court feels that justice has


1 (2009) 11 SCC 141
12
failed and the findings are likely to result in
         unduly excessive hardship.”
23. This Court in the aforesaid case has referred to some of

the earlier judgments of this Court on the issue. It will be

apposite to refer to the same, which are as under:
“29. Again          in H.P.        Admn. v. Om
        Prakash [(1972) 1 SCC 249 : 1972 SCC (Cri)
        88] this Court while considering its power
        under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India
        on the question of interference with the find­
        ings of fact, observed as follows: (SCC p. 256,
        para 4)
           “4. In appeals against acquittal by special
        leave under
Article 136
, this Court has un­
        doubted power to interfere with the findings
        of fact, no distinction being made between
        judgments of acquittal and conviction,
        though in the case of acquittals it will not or­
        dinarily interfere with the appreciation of evi­
        dence or on findings of fact unless the High
        Court ‘acts perversely or otherwise improp­
        erly’.”
30.
In
Arunachalam v. P.S.R. Sadhanantham
[(1979) 2 SCC 297 : 1979 SCC (Cri) 454] this
        Court while agreeing with the views ex­
        pressed in the aforementioned decisions of
        this Court stated thus: (SCC p. 300, para 4)
           “4. … The power is plenary in the sense
        that there are no words in
Article 136
itself
        qualifying that power. But, the very nature of
        the power has led the court to set limits to it­
        self within which to exercise such power. It is
        now the well­established practice of this
        Court to permit the invocation of the power
        under
Article 136
only in very exceptional
        circumstances, as when a question of law of
        general public importance arises or a deci­
13
sion shocks the conscience of the court. But,
within the restrictions imposed by itself, this
Court has the undoubted power to interfere
even with findings of fact, making no distinc­
tion between judgments of acquittal and con­
viction, if the High Court, in arriving at those
findings, has acted ‘perversely or otherwise
improperly’.”
                           (emphasis supplied)
31. Again      in
State    of     U.P. v. Babul
Nath
[(1994) 6 SCC 29 : 1994 SCC (Cri)
1585] this Court observed as follows: (SCC p.
33, para 5)
   “5. At the very outset we may mention that
in an appeal under
Article 136
of the Consti­
tution this Court does not normally reap­
praise the evidence by itself and go into the
question of credibility of the witnesses and
the assessment of the evidence by the High
Court is accepted by the Supreme Court as
final unless, of course, the appreciation of
evidence and finding is vitiated by any error
of law of procedure or found contrary to the
principles of natural justice, errors of record
and misreading of the evidence, or where the
conclusions of the High Court are manifestly
perverse and unsupportable from the evi­
dence on record.”
32. In Pattakkal Kunhikoya v. Thoopiyakkal
Koya [(2000) 2 SCC 185] it was held (SCC p.
186c­d) that when an appeal arises under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India,
“[i]t is not the practice of the Supreme Court
to reappreciate the evidence for the purpose
of examining whether the finding of fact ar­
rived at by the High Court and the subordi­
nate court is correct or not. Exception can be
taken only in the event of serious miscarriage
14
of justice or manifest illegality but not other­
                     wise”.
(emphasis supplied)
33.
In
Mithilesh   Kumari v. Prem    Behari
                     Khare
[(1989) 2 SCC 95] this Court has held
                     (SCC p. 99) that where findings of subordi­
                     nate courts are shown to be
                     “perverse or based on no evidence or irrele­
                     vant evidence or there are material irregulari­
                     ties affecting the said findings or where the
                     court feels that justice has failed and the find­
                     ings are likely to result in unduly excessive
                     hardship, the Supreme Court could not de­
                     cline to interfere merely on the ground that
                     findings in question are findings of fact”.
(emphasis supplied)”
24. Recently,       this   Court   in   the   case   of
Ashoksinh

        Jayendrasinh vs. State of Gujarat2
had also held that

        when the High Court has failed to appreciate the oral

        evidence in correct perspective, this Court would certainly

        be entitled to re­appreciate the evidence. In the said case

        also, this Court, finding that the conviction was recorded

        after ignoring the vital evidence, has set aside the order of

        conviction and acquitted the accused.
25. In the present case, as discussed hereinabove, both the

        Trial Court and the High Court have failed to take into

        consideration the relevant and vital admissions in the


2 (2019) 6 SCC 535
15
evidence of PW8­Mr. Mahesh Prasad Mathur and PW 14­Jai

Bhagwan.      In our view, the said admissions were vital.

Basing the order of conviction by ignoring the said vital

admissions, in our view, would bring the impugned

judgments in the realm of perversity.
26. As such, the appeal is allowed. The order of conviction

and sentence as recorded by the learned Special Judge,

Prevention of Corruption Act No.1, Jaipur and confirmed by

the High Court are quashed and set aside. The appellant is

acquitted of    all    the charges.   The bail bonds stand

discharged.
27. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
……............... J.
(B.R. GAVAI)



                      …………..………………………............. J.
(PAMIDIGHANTAM SRI NARASIMHA)
NEW DELHI
28th JULY, 2022