[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kasabai Tukaram Karvar vs Nivruti (Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 20 July, 2022
Author:
K. M. Joseph
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
K.M. Joseph
‘REPORTABLE’

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.6076 OF 2010



                      KASABAI TUKARAM KARVAR & ORS.                  APPELLANT(S)



                                                VERSUS



                      NIVRUTI (DEAD) THROUGH LEGAL HEIRS & ORS.      RESPONDENT(S)




                                            J U D G M E N T
K. M. JOSEPH, J.
By the impugned judgment, the High Court has allowed

                      the Second Appeal No.299 of 2000 filed by defendant No.1.

                      The Second Appeal arose out of R.C.S No.91 of 1986 filed

                      by the first appellant (Kasabai since deceased).    The said

                      Suit was filed seeking partition of the plaint schedule

                      properties.   The genealogy of the parties is admitted and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by   is as follows:-
JAGDISH KUMAR
Date: 2022.07.27
16:58:16 IST
Reason:
1
CA No.6076/ 2010
Kushaba (Died in 1948)

                               '
                               '
--------------------------------------
'                   '              '
               '                   '              '
           Taibai        Dhondabai Bhagubai Bhagubai
          (Ist Wife)          (IInd wife)    (IIIrd wife)
       (Died issueless)        '                  '
                               '                  '
                               '                  '    -------
--------------------          ---------------------
     '         '               '        '                   '
     '         '               '        '                   '
Sakhubai       Thakubai       Muktabai    Kasabai     Nivrutti
(Daughter)     (Daughter)    (Daughter) (Daughter)   (adopted son)
2.      The first appellant (Kasabai since deceased) was the

    plaintiff. Nivrutti, in other words is the adopted son and

    referred to as the first defendant. The father of the

    plaintiff and the first defendant and other family members

    passed away on 16th March, 1948.           We have already noticed

    that the father had married on three occasions.              The first

    marriage did not produce any issues.           The second marriage

    produced defendant Nos. 4 to 6 in the present suit.                 The

    third marriage entered by the father with Bhagubai (third

    wife) produced one issue, namely, Kasabai.               The plaintiff

    was born, in fact, after 10 days of passing away of her

    father. It is again not in dispute that the first defendant

    was adopted by the widow on 17.11.1949 by a registered

    deed.   There   is   also   no   dispute    that   the    adopted   son

    instituted a suit claiming right over the plaint schedule

    properties impleading defendant Nos.4 to 6. Defendant Nos.
2
CA No.6076/ 2010
4 to 6 are step sisters born to the second wife (Dhondabai)

    and their father Kushaba.     The said suit was decreed.   In

    the appeal, there was a compromise.      On the strength of

    the said compromise, the step sisters instituted a suit -

    R.C.S. No. 53 of 1984.      The said suit has been decreed

    finally as we can notice by the dismissal of the Second

    Appeal No.233 of 2000, as can be discerned from the common

    judgment which is the impugned judgment in this case also.
3.     The present civil appeal arises, however, from the

    common judgment by which the High Court has allowed the

    Second Appeal No.299 of 2000. The Second Appeal No.299 of

    2000 arises from the suit for partition which we have

    noticed was filed by the plaintiff. As far as the lis

    between the step-sisters (defendant Nos. 4 to 6) and the

    plaintiff is concerned, it has been given a quietus by the

    common judgment.
4.     As far as the cause of action relevant to the present

    civil appeal is concerned, the plaintiff proceeded on the

    basis that the plaint schedule properties are joint family

    properties. It is the further case of the plaintiff that

    the plaintiff being the daughter was entitled to share

    along with the adopted son.    Their mother also got a share

    and remarried.   The result of the remarriage has been found

    by the Trial Court in favour of the plaintiff that her

    share would vest in the legal heirs. Resultantly, both the

    plaintiff and the first defendant (adopted son) would get
3
CA No.6076/ 2010
1/2 share.      This view also found acceptance in the hands

    of the First Appellate Court. It is this concurrent finding

    which has been reversed by the High Court in the Second

    Appeal by the impugned judgment.
5.     The High Court has found that in view of the adoption

    made of a son by the widow, namely, the mother of the

    plaintiff and the first defendant, the adoption would

    relate back to the time of the death of the father-Kushaba

    on 16.03.1948.     The further consequence of the doctrine of

    relation back being applied was that the adopted son would

    emerge as the sole and exclusive heir and he would divest

    the plaintiff of her rights.
6.     It is also found by the High Court that the case of

    the plaintiff that she was in joint possession of the plaint

    schedule properties, did not inspire the confidence of the

    Court.    The   said   version   was   also   disbelieved.   This

    necessarily resulted in the dismissal of the suit filed by

    the plaintiff after reversing the concurrent findings.
7.     We have heard learned counsel for the plaintiff and

    learned counsel for the first defendant.
8.     Learned counsel for the plaintiff would raise a

    controversy as to the applicability of the doctrine of

    relation back.     He would further contend that the impugned

    judgment results in the exclusion of the daughter who was

    in the womb even when the father was alive and born
4
CA No.6076/ 2010
immediately after the death of the father. She is entitled

    to her rightful share.       It is further pointed out with

    reference to what is stated in Mulla on Hindu Law, 23rd

    Edition Section 72 of Part I, that the daughter in the

    region from which the parties hailed (the Bombay region)

    would get the right as a heir.        It is further contended

    that upon remarriage of her mother, the plaintiff, as a

    legal heir, would get, at any rate, a part of her right

    and would be entitled to a share out of the estate of the

    mother along with the adopted son.
9.     Per-contra, the learned counsel for the adopted son

    (first defendant) supports the impugned judgment. He would

    submit that the High Court is right in applying the doctrine

    of relation back. With reference to the discussion to be

    found in Mulla on Hindu Law 23rd Edition relied upon by

    the appellant, he would contend that the son would exclude

    the daughter once it is found that there is valid adoption

    and doctrine of relation back applies. Even the subsequent

    divesting of the right of the mother would not enure to

    the benefit of the plaintiff who is a daughter in view of

    the subsequent adoption which relates back to the date of

    death of the father.
10.    As far as the doctrine of relation back goes, we need

    only notice decisions of this Court in
Govind Hanumantha

    Rao   Desai    versus   Nagappa
alias
Narahari   Laxman   Rao

    Deshpande and Sever Others, (1972) 1 SCC 515 and Shripad
5
CA No.6076/ 2010
Gajanan Suthankar versus Dattaram Kashinath Suthankar and

    Others
, (1974) 2 SCC 156.
We may only further expatiate

    by referring to paragraphs 6, 7 and 9 of
Shripad Gajanan

    Suthankar and Others
(Supra).
"6. It is established law that the adoption by
         a widow relates back to the date of the death of
         the adoptive father, which, in this case, took
         place in 1921.
Indeed, the complexity of the
         present case arises from the application of this
         legal   fiction   of   “relation-back”    and   the
         limitations on the amplitude of that fiction vis-
         a-vis the partition of 1944, in the light of the
         rulings of the various High Courts and of the
         Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, and of
         this Court, the last of which is
Govind v. Nagappa
.
         According to the appellant, the rights of the
         adopted son, armed as he is with the theory of
         “relation-back”, have to be effectuated retro-
         actively, the guidelines wherefor are available
         from the decided cases. It is no doubt true that
          “when a member of a joint family governed by
         Mitakshara law dies and the widow validly adopts
         a son to him, a coparcenary interest in the joint
         property is immediately created by the adoption
         co-extensive   with   that   which   the   deceased
         coparcener had, and it vests at once in the adopted
         son”. (See Mulla on Hindu Law, 13th Edn.p. 516.)


     The same author, however, points out that:
“the rights of an adopted son arise for the first
         time on his adoption. He may, by virtue of his
         rights as adopted son, divest other persons in whom
         the property vested after the death of the adoptive
         father, but all lawful alienations made by previous
         holder would be binding on him. His right to
         impeach previous alienations would depend upon the
         capacity of the holder who made the alienation as
         well as on the nature of the action of alienation.
         When the holder was a male, who had unfettered
         right of transfer, e.g., the last surviving member
         of a joint family, the adopted son could not
         impeach the transfer. In case of females who had
6
CA No.6076/ 2010
restricted rights of transfer even apart from any
         adoption, the transfers would be valid only when
         they are supported by legal necessity”. (ibid, pp.
         516-517; para 507.)


           “An adopted son is bound by alienations made by
         his adoptive father prior to the adoption to the
         same extent as a natural-born son would be. (ibid;
         p. 517: para 508.)
7.     It is settled law that the rights of an
         adopted son spring into existence only from the
         moment of the adoption and all alienations made by
         the widow before the adoption, if they are made for
         legal necessity or otherwise lawfully, such as with
         the consent of the next reversioners, are binding
         on the adopted son. The narrow but important
         question that arises here is as to whether the
         adoption made in 1956 can upset the partition of
         1944, validly made under the then conditions, and
         the gift by Mahadev of properties exclusively set
         apart to him and, therefore, alienable by him, could
         be retro-actively invalidated by the plaintiff on
         the application of the legal fiction of “relation-
back”. It is unlikely that a similar question will
         arise hereinafter since
Section 4
of the Hindu
         Succession Act, 1956 has practically swept off
         texts, rules and the like in Hindu Law, which were
         part of that law in force immediately before the
         commencement of the Act, if provisions have been
         made for such matters in the Act. Since on the
         husband's death the widow takes an absolute estate,
         questions of the type which engage us in this appeal
         will be stilled for ever. Of course, we need not
         investigate this aspect of the matter as the present
         case relates to a pre-statutory adoption. Even
Section 12
of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance
         Act, 1956, makes it plain that an adopted child
         shall be deemed to be the child of his or her
         adoptive father or mother for all purposes with
         effect from the date of the adoption.
9.     The plaintiff, as the adopted son, for
         secular and spiritual purposes continues the line
         of the adoptive father and when the widow adopts,
7
CA No.6076/ 2010
the doctrine of “relation-back” makes sonship
          retroactive from the moment of death of the late
          husband. The new entrant is deemed to have been born
          on the date of death of the adoptive father.
          Supposing there was an undivided family in existence
          when the adoptive father died, how far can the legal
          fiction of anterior sonship disrupt the doings
          between notional birth and actual adoption? Mulla
          sums up the result of the rulings thus: (p. 496)


            “If, therefore, there was a coparcenary in
          existence when the adoptive father died, then
          whether it came to an end by the death of the last
          surviving coparcener or by subsequent partition
          among the remaining members, an adoption validly
          made by the widow of the deceased coparcener would
          have the effect of divesting the estate in the hands
          of the heir to the last surviving coparcener in the
          first case and of putting an end to the partition
          in the second and enabling the adopted son to claim
          a share in the family properties as if they were
          still joint.”
11.     In this case, there is no dispute about the adoption

    or about the validity of the adoption.      It is, in fact,

    the case of the plaintiff that the first defendant was the

    adopted son.    On the said basis, the further conclusion is

    inevitable that on applying the doctrine of relation back,

    it would be deemed that as on the date of the death of

    their father, the first defendant was very much notionally

    alive and he would become the sole coparcener.         It is

    indisputable that there can be no vacuum or break in vesting

    of title on the death of a person.     We must further bear

    in mind that this is a case where succession opened up

    admittedly prior to the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956
coming

    into force.
8
CA No.6076/ 2010
12.     The learned counsel for the plaintiff, no doubt,

    relied upon Section-72 of Part-I, Chapter VI-Order of

    Succession to Males in the Bombay State in Mulla on Hindu

    Law, 23rd Edition which is reproduced below:-
72. Order of succession in cases governed by
          Mitakshara- The following is the order of succession
          to males among sapindas in the Bombay State in cases
          governed by Mitakshara:
(1-6)     Son, son's son (whose father is dead) and
          son's son's son (whose father and grandfather are both
          dead). These inherit simultaneously.
Under Act
XVIII
          of 1937, the widow, the predeceased son's widow, and
          the widow of a predeceased son of a predeceased son,
          are also recognised as heirs.
xxxxxx
            (7)    Daughter
                                 xxxxx
In the Bombay State, daughter do not take as joint
          tenants with benefit of survivorship, but they take as
          tenants-in-common. Further, a daughter in that State
          does not take a limited estate in her father's
          property, but takes the property absolutely. Thus, if
          Hindu governed by the Bombay School dies leaving two
          daughters, each daughter takes an absolute interest in
          a moiety of her father's estate, and holds it as her
          separate property, and on her death her share will pass
          to her own heirs as her stridhana.
xxxxx
13.     There are other heirs but they are not being referred

    to. We must, in the facts of this case, proceed on the

    basis that the adopted son (first defendant), being a son

    on applying the doctrine of relation back, would exclude

    the daughter.      This result flows from the statement that

    the persons in serial Nos.1 to 6, namely, son, son's son
9
CA No.6076/ 2010
(whose father is dead) and son's son's son (whose father

    and grandfather are both dead) inherit simultaneously.
14.            We would hold that if there is a son, the

    daughter would not be entitled to share along with the son.

    The daughter, in other words, would not be a legal heir

    who would take simultaneously with the son. The example

    which, in fact, has been set out and which we have extracted

    would only be applicable in a situation where there were

    only daughters and no son.
15.            It is, undoubtedly, true that in view of the
Hindu Women's Rights to Property Act, 1937
(XVIII of 1937),

    the widow, inter-alia, is also recognized as an heir. There

    was, as on the date when the succession opened, in this

    case in the year 1948, the daughter (the appellant) who

    would not have any right. The daughter would not be a

    coparcener which she, undoubtedly, is under the present

    dispensation in view of the sweeping developments which

    took place in the matter of succession which have been

    ushered in as a result of the
Hindu Succession Act
and the

    changes that have been engrafted therein.        The plaintiff

    daughter would not be an heir, in view of the notional

    existence of the adopted son by virtue of the doctrine of

    relation back.
16.            As far as the effect of remarriage of the mother

    of the plaintiff and the first defendant is concerned,
10
CA No.6076/ 2010
again, in view of the fact that in the presence of the son,

    the daughter may stand excluded, it would again result in

    no right accruing to the plaintiff-daughter as a result of

    the remarriage.     In other words, the first defendant, as

    son, would become the sole owner of the property.
17.      Aid is sought to be drawn from the terms of the

    compromise entered into between the adopted son (first

    defendant) and the step-sisters in a proceeding to which

    the plaintiff was admittedly not a party. We are not even

    called upon to decide a case that estoppel, as such, would

    arise in favour of the plaintiff.
18.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, the appellants

    have not made out a case for any interference. The appeal

    stands dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
………………………………………………………………J.
                                    [K.M. JOSEPH]




                                    ………………………………………………………………J.
                                   [HRISHIKESH ROY]


    New Delhi;
July 20, 2022.
11