[Cites
15
, Cited by
5
]
Supreme Court of India
Shishpal @ Shishu vs State Of Nct Of Delhi on 11 July, 2022
Author:
M. M. Sundresh
Bench:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
,
M.M. Sundresh
1

     ITEM NO.1502                                    COURT NO.5                      SECTION II-C

                                     S U P R E M E C O U R T O F             I N D I A
                                             RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

     Criminal Appeal                     No(s).    1053/2015

     SHISHPAL @ SHISHU                                                              Appellant(s)

                                                           VERSUS

     STATE OF NCT OF DELHI                              Respondent(s)
     ([HEARD BY: HON. ABHAY S. OKA AND HON. M.M. SUNDRESH, JJ.]
     IA    No.   35488/2018    -    PERMISSION   TO    FILE   ADDITIONAL
     DOCUMENTS/FACTS/ANNEXURES)

     WITH
     Crl.A. No. 81/2018 (II-C)

     Date : 11-07-2022 These appeals were called on for pronouncement of
     judgment today.

     For Appellant(s)
                                           Mrs. K. Sarada Devi, AOR
                                           Mr. Avinash Sharma, AOR

     For Respondent(s)
                                           Mr. B. V. Balaram Das, AOR


                                     The Court pronounced the following
                                               J U D G M E N T
Hon'ble Mr. Justice M.M. Sundresh pronounced the judgment for

     the Bench comprising Hon'ble Mr. Justice Abhay S. Oka and His

     Lordship.
The   Bench     allowed    the   appeals    in     terms    of   the    signed

     reportable judgment observing inter alia as under:
“15.On the above analysis, we are inclined to set aside
                           the     conviction      rendered    by   the   learned     Additional
Signature Not Verified
Sessions Judge (East) FTC: E-Court, Karkardooma Court,
Digitally signed by
ASHA SUNDRIYAL
Date: 2022.07.11
17:05:16 IST
Reason:
Delhi as confirmed by the Division Bench of the High
                           Court    of    Delhi.    The   appeals   stand    allowed      and   the
                           appellants are directed to be set at liberty.”
2
Pending application stands disposed of.
(ASHA SUNDRIYAL)                                (POONAM VAID)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                        COURT MASTER (NSH)
[Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file]
                                                                 REPORTABLE
                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1053 OF 2015

Shishpal @ Shishu                                                     ...Appellant

                                     Versus

The State (NCT of Delhi)                                            ...Respondent

                                WITH
                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 81 OF 2018
Roshan                                                                ...Appellant

                                     Versus

The State (NCT of Delhi)                                            ...Respondent

                               JUDGMENT

M. M. Sundresh, J.
1. These two appeals have been filed by A1 and A3 respectively to overturn the

      conviction sentencing them for life for the offence punishable under Section

      302 read with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short ‘
IPC
’) by

      the learned Additional Sessions Judge (East) FTC: E-Court, Karkardooma

      Court, Delhi, as confirmed by the Division Bench of the High Court of

      Delhi. Of the three accused convicted, only two are before us. The overt act
1
attributed as against these two accused on the basis of
Section 34
IPC being

   identical, we deem it appropriate to pass a common order.
2. On 10.01.2010 at about 8.00 pm, the deceased and PW4 were standing in the

   queue before a liquor shop. A-2 (not before us) attacked the deceased by

   causing a single injury with a knife while the appellants caught hold of him.

   All the accused reportedly dragged the deceased from the queue of the liquor

   shop and committed the offence they were charged with.
3. Before the trial Court, the prosecution examined 22 witnesses as against 8

   by the defence. PW1 is stated to be the wife of the deceased, though there

   was a candid admission that her first marriage was not dissolved legally. It is

   her version that all the accused came to the house of the deceased, one of

   them, namely, the appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 1053 of 2015 (A-1),

   went inside the house and made inquiries about the whereabouts of the

   deceased in an agitated manner. A-1 told her that he was Amit (A-2).

   Thereafter, they left the place, found the accused, and committed the

   offence. She identified A-1 as A-2. It is her further deposition that she did

   see A-1 and A-2 in the police station on 12.01.2010 when her statement was

   recorded. Though she went to the place of occurrence on being informed,

   she was not seen in the hospital by P.W.11, the Investigation Officer, who
2
initiated the investigation, despite his presence in the hospital till 9.15 pm. It

   is her further evidence that she did make a call to the police station by using

   the cellphone owned by PW5, who incidentally turned hostile.
4. Though the evidence of PW1 was taken note of in favour of the prosecution

   by the trial court, the High Court raised serious doubts, especially with

   respect to the identification made with respect to A1 and A2. The High Court

   further held that there was no reason for the accused to go into the house of

   the deceased, in which case motive has not been established.
5. PW2 is the member of the family of the deceased. He denied recording of

   his statement and stated that his thumb impression was taken on a blank

   paper by the police.     With the permission of the Court, he was cross-

   examined by the prosecution. However, his statement that Nitin (PW4) was

   with him from 7.00 pm to 10.00 pm on the date of occurrence i.e.

   10.01.2010 was not impeached and so also his further statement that both of

   them went to sleep thereafter.
6. PW3 is the sterling witness of the prosecution upon whom much reliance has

   been made by both the Courts. He was cross-examined by the prosecution on

   the only issue qua A-1, on his presence. This witness is a seasoned one as he

   has deposed at least on seven occasions in favour of the police and also
3
admitted to have received a certain amount of money. Obviously, he is well-

known to the police having a shop just opposite the police station. This part

of the evidence was also not questioned by the prosecution. It is the evidence

of PW3 that he saw A-2 and A-3 dragging the deceased, while A-2 has

stabbed him. Thus, there was a categorical denial of the presence of A-1.

Contrary to the case of the prosecution, he has stated that both the accused

ran away on foot. The further testimony of this witness is that the deceased

is a known pick pocket and the occurrence happened because he picked the

pocket of the accused. This is also in variance with the theory projected by

the prosecution.
Certainly, we do not find the evidence of this witness

trustworthy. He is obviously a stock witness, and therefore cannot be relied

upon, particularly when “reputation is a fact” under
Section 3
of the Indian

Evidence Act. We believe, both the Courts ought not to have placed reliance

on the testimony of PW3 who happens to be the sole eye-witness. We wish

to place reliance upon the judgment of this court in
Tarseem Kumar v. Delhi

Admn.
, 1994 Supp (3) SCC 367:
“18. The only remaining circumstance to be dealt with is the alleged
   disclosure made by the appellant and recovery of bloodstained clothes
   belonging to the appellant at his instance. In view of
Section 27
of the
   Evidence Act, there was no difficulty in accepting this evidence and to
   consider the same along with other circumstances if proved beyond all
   reasonable doubt. But the unfortunate feature of the present case, which has
   also been noticed by the trial court, is that many witnesses who can be said
   to be the stock witnesses of the police, have been produced on behalf of the
   prosecution to prove important circumstances. In this background the court
4
has to be very cautious about the investigation done by the police in this
      case. The circumstance regarding the recovery of the bloodstained clothes
      belonging to the appellant, on the disclosure made by him, has to be
      examined in the background of the witnesses like PW 9, PWs 8 and 30,
      PWs 2 and 3, on whom it is difficult to place any reliance for the reasons
      mentioned above. It is not possible to hold that the vital links of the
      prosecution case which are necessary to be proved before a finding can be
      recorded, that the chain of evidence is complete, have been proved beyond
      reasonable doubt. If the evidence of PWs 2 and 3 are rejected, then the main
      circumstantial evidence that the appellant was in exclusive possession of the
      room in question and he had got the pit dug by PWs 2 and 3 in which the
      dead body of the victim was found in the night of 18-10-1974, shall be
      deemed to have not been proved.”
7. Even assuming that the testimony of PW3 can be relied upon in part, in the

   absence of any corroboration with any other evidence, it will be unwise to

   convict the appellants on that basis alone.
In this connection, a reference can

   be made to the decision of this Court in
Rajesh Yadav and Anr. v. State of

   Uttar Pradesh
, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 150, wherein the classical decision

   rendered by this Court in the case of
Vadivelu Thevar v. State of Madras
,

   1957 SCR 981 on the appreciation of evidence under such circumstances has

   been taken note of,

      “Appreciation of Evidence:
20. We have already indicated different classification of evidence. While
      appreciating the evidence as aforesaid along with the matters attached to it,
      evidence can be divided into three categories broadly namely, (i) wholly
      reliable, (ii) wholly unreliable and (iii) neither wholly reliable nor wholly
      unreliable. If evidence, along with matters surrounding it, makes the court
      believe it is wholly reliable qua an issue, it can decide its existence on a
      degree of probability. Similar is the case where evidence is not believable.
When evidence produced is neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable, it
      might require corroboration, and in such a case, court can also take note of
      the contradictions available in other matters. The aforesaid principle of law
5
has been enunciated in the celebrated decision of this Court in
Vadivelu
Thevar v. State of Madras
, 1957 SCR 981:
“In view of these considerations, we have no hesitation in holding that
     the contention that in a murder case, the court should insist upon
     plurality of witnesses, is much too broadly stated.
Section 134
of the
     Indian Evidence Act has categorically laid it down that “no particular
     number of witnesses shall in any case, be required for the proof of any
     fact”. The legislature determined, as long ago as 1872, presumably
     after due consideration of the pros and cons, that it shall not be
     necessary for proof or disproof of a fact to call any particular number
     of witnesses. In England, both before and after the passing of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872
, there have been a number of statutes as set
     out in Sarkar's Law of Evidence — 9 th Edn., at pp. 1100 and 1101,
     forbidding convictions on the testimony of a single witness. The
     Indian Legislature has not insisted on laying down any such
     exceptions to the general rule recognized in
s.134
quoted above. The
     section enshrines the well -recognized maxim that “Evidence has to be
     weighed and not counted”. Our Legislature has given statutory
     recognition to the fact that administration of justice may be hampered
     if a particular number of witnesses were to be insisted upon. It is not
     seldom that a crime has been committed in the presence of only one
     witness, leaving aside those cases which are not of uncommon
     occurrence, where determination of guilt depends entirely on
     circumstantial evidence. If the Legislature were to insist upon plurality
     of witnesses, cases where the testimony of a single witness only could
     be available in proof of the crime, would go unpunished. It is here that
     the discretion of the presiding judge comes into play. The matter thus
     must depend upon the circumstances of each case and the quality of
     the evidence of the single witness whose testimony has to be either
     accepted or rejected. If such a testimony is found by the court to be
     entirely reliable, there is no legal impediment to the conviction of the
     accused person on such proof. Even as the guilt of an accused person
     may be proved by the testimony of a single witness, the innocence of
     an accused person may be established on the testimony of a single
     witness, even though a considerable number of witnesses may be
     forthcoming to testify to the truth of the case for the prosecution.
     Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound and well-established rule of law
     that the court is concerned with the quality and not with the quantity
     of the evidence necessary for proving or disproving a fact. Generally
     speaking, oral testimony in this context may be classified into three
     categories, namely:
(1) Wholly reliable.
(2) Wholly unreliable.
(3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.
6
In the first category of proof, the court should have no difficulty in
          coming to its conclusion either way — it may convict or may acquit
          on the testimony of a single witness, if it is found to be above
          reproach or suspicion of interestedness, incompetence or subornation.
          In the second category, the court, equally has no difficulty in coming
          to its conclusion. It is in the third category of cases, that the court has
          to be circumspect and has to look for corroboration in material
          particulars by reliable testimony, direct or circumstantial. There is
          another danger in insisting on plurality of witnesses. Irrespective of
          the quality of the oral evidence of a single witness, if courts were to
          insist on plurality of witnesses in proof of any fact, they will be
          indirectly encouraging subornation of witnesses. Situations may arise
          and do arise where only a single person is available to give evidence
          in support of a disputed fact. The court naturally has to weigh
          carefully such a testimony and if it is satisfied that the evidence is
          reliable and free from all taints which tend to render oral testimony
          open to suspicion, it becomes its duty to act upon such testimony. The
          law reports contain many precedents where the court had to depend
          and act upon the testimony of a single witness in support of the
          prosecution. There are exceptions to this rule, for example, in cases of
          sexual offences or of the testimony of an approver; both these are
          cases in which the oral testimony is, by its very nature, suspect, being
          that of a participator in crime. But, where there are no such
          exceptional reasons operating, it becomes the duty of the court to
          convict, if it is satisfied that the testimony of a single witness is
          entirely reliable. We have, therefore, no reasons to refuse to act upon
          the testimony of the first witness, which is the only reliable evidence
          in support of the prosecution.”
8. PW4 is the minor brother of the deceased. The evidence of PW2, as

  discussed by us, is in stark contrast to the present witness. Even otherwise,

  this witness is not an eye-witness. His presence is also doubtful for the

  reason that even he was not seen in the hospital by PW11, the police officer

  who started the investigation. There is no material to substantiate the

  evidence that he has been threatened subsequently. This witness goes to the

  extent of saying that Vipin, who is produced before the Court and shown to

  him, is not his real brother, though his mother admits it. We may also note
7
that he has stated in his cross-examination that he did see A1 and A2 in the

   police station either on 11.01.2010 or 12.01.2010 and the police told him

   that it is they who killed his brother. Suffice it to state that the evidence of

   this witness does not inspire confidence.
9. PW5 is the witness whose cellphone was used to make a call to the police

   station. He has deposed that after two to three months, his signatures were

   obtained on a blank paper and thus, he was declared hostile. It is to be noted

   that PW5 also denies the presence of PW1 at the place of occurrence and so

   also PW4.
10.PW6 is the brother of A1. It is his car which is stated to have been used by

   the accused, who fled away by travelling in the said vehicle after the

   occurrence. He too turned hostile and in any case, the evidence of PW3 itself

   is contrary to the case of the prosecution, as it is his evidence that they ran

   away on foot.
11.PW11 is the Investigating Officer who began the investigation. This witness,

   as stated earlier, has not seen any of the relatives of the deceased, including

   PWs 1, 2 and 4 in the hospital, despite his presence in the hospital from 8.50

   pm to 9.15 pm. Not only that, he has initially deposed even in his chief-

   examination, that the eye-witness was one Tirath Ram, father of PW3.
8
Though this witness is part of the investigation, the evidence rendered

   actually helps the case of the defence, notwithstanding his re-examination by

   the prosecution through which he changed his version that it was PW3 who

   was the eye-witness.
12.PW20 is the Investigating Officer, who took up the investigation from

   PW11. He along with PW9 speaks about the recovery made in pursuance of

   the arrest of A1 and A2. No independent witness was made to sign the

   recovery mahazar. We are conscious of the fact that law does not require

   such a procedure to be adopted at all times. However, the strong suspicion is

   due to the fact that the knife used by A2 was recovered from the place of A1

   and both of them were taken to the place on their statement made under
Section 27
of the Indian Evidence Act. Thus, the so called recovery raises a

   serious doubt, inuring to the benefit of the defence.
13.Both the appellants have been charged only based upon the rule of evidence

   available under
Section 34
of the IPC.
Section 34
does not constitute an

   offence by itself, but creates a constructive liability. The foundational facts

   will have to be proved by the prosecution. Not only the occurrence, but the

   common intention, has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt.
In Jasdeep
9
Singh alias
Jassu v. State of Punjab
, (2022) 2 SCC 545 this Court

considered the scope of
Section 34
IPC as follows:
“17. We shall first go back into the history to understand
Section 34
IPC as
   it stood at the inception and as it exists now.
Old
Section 34
IPC                New
Section 34
IPC

          “34. Each of several persons      “34. Acts done by several
          liable for an act done by all,    persons in furtherance of
          in like manner as if done by      common intention.—When
          him alone.—When a criminal        a criminal act is done by
          act is done by several persons,   several             persons, in
          each of such persons is liable    furtherance of the common
          for that act in the same          intention of all, each of such
          manner as if the act were         persons is liable for that act
          done by him alone”                in the same manner as if it
                                            were     done       by     him
                                            alone.”
18. On a comparison, one could decipher that the phrase “in furtherance of
   the common intention” was added into the statute book subsequently. It was
   first coined by Barnes Peacock, C.J. presiding over a Bench of the Calcutta
   High Court, while delivering its decision in
R. v. Gorachand
   Gope [R.
v. Gorachand Gope, 1866 SCC OnLine Cal 16] which would have
   probably inspired and hastened the amendment to
Section 34
IPC, made in
   1870. The following passage may lend credence to the aforesaid possible
   view : (SCC OnLine Cal)
        “It does not follow that, because they were present with the intention
        of taking him away, that they assisted by their presence in the beating
        of him to such an extent as to cause death. If the object and design of
        those who seized Amordi was merely to take him to the thannah on a
        charge of theft, and it was no part of the common design to beat him,
        they would not all be liable for the consequence of the beating merely
        because they were present. It is laid down that, when several persons
        are in company together engaged in one common purpose, lawful or
        unlawful, and one of them, without the knowledge or consent of the
        others, commits an offence, the others will not be involved in the guilt,
        unless the act done was in some manner in furtherance of the common
10
intention. It is also said, although a man is present when a felony is
      committed, if he take no part in it, and do not act in concert with those
      who commit it, he will not be a principal merely because he did not
      endeavour to prevent it or to apprehend the felon. But if several
      persons go out together for the purpose of apprehending a man and
      taking him to the thannah on a charge of theft, and some of the party
      in the presence of the others beat and ill-treat the man in a cruel and
      violent manner, and the others stand by and look on without
      endeavouring to dissuade them from their cruel and violent conduct, it
      appears to me that those who have to deal with the facts might very
      properly infer that they were all assenting parties and acting in
      concert, and that the beating was in furtherance of a common design. I
      do not know what the evidence was, all that I wish to point out is, that
      all who are present do not necessarily assist by their presence every
      act that is done in their presence, nor are consequently liable to be
      punished as principals.”
19. Before we deal further with
Section 34
IPC, a peep at
Section 33
IPC
may give a better understanding.
Section 33
IPC brings into its fold a series
of acts as that of a single one. Therefore, in order to attract
Sections 34
to
39
IPC, a series of acts done by several persons would be related to a single act
which constitutes a criminal offence. A similar meaning is also given to the
word “omission”, meaning thereby, a series of omissions would also mean a
single omission. This provision would thus make it clear that an act would
mean and include other acts along with it.
20.
Section 34
IPC creates a deeming fiction by infusing and importing a
criminal act constituting an offence committed by one, into others, in
pursuance to a common intention. Onus is on the prosecution to prove the
common intention to the satisfaction of the court. The quality of evidence
will have to be substantial, concrete, definite and clear. When a part of
evidence produced by the prosecution to bring the accused within the fold of
Section 34
IPC is disbelieved, the remaining part will have to be examined
with adequate care and caution, as we are dealing with a case of vicarious
liability fastened on the accused by treating him on a par with the one who
actually committed the offence.
21. What is required is the proof of common intention. Thus, there may be
an offence without common intention, in which case
Section 34
IPC does
not get attracted.
22. It is a team effort akin to a game of football involving several positions
manned by many, such as defender, mid-fielder, striker, and a keeper. A
striker may hit the target, while a keeper may stop an attack. The
consequence of the match, either a win or a loss, is borne by all the players,
though they may have their distinct roles. A goal scored or saved may be the
final act, but the result is what matters. As against the specific individuals
who had impacted more, the result is shared between the players. The same
11
logic is the foundation of
Section 34
IPC which creates shared liability on
those who shared the common intention to commit the crime.
23. The intendment of
Section 34
IPC is to remove the difficulties in
distinguishing the acts of individual members of a party, acting in
furtherance of a common intention. There has to be a simultaneous
conscious mind of the persons participating in the criminal action of
bringing about a particular result. A common intention qua its existence is a
question of fact and also requires an act “in furtherance of the said
intention”. One need not search for a concrete evidence, as it is for the court
to come to a conclusion on a cumulative assessment. It is only a rule of
evidence and thus does not create any substantive offence.
24. Normally, in an offence committed physically, the presence of an
accused charged under
Section 34
IPC is required, especially in a case
where the act attributed to the accused is one of instigation/exhortation.
However, there are exceptions, in particular, when an offence consists of
diverse acts done at different times and places. Therefore, it has to be seen
on a case-to-case basis.
25. The word “furtherance” indicates the existence of aid or assistance in
producing an effect in future. Thus, it has to be construed as an
advancement or promotion.
26. There may be cases where all acts, in general, would not come under the
purview of
Section 34
IPC, but only those done in furtherance of the
common intention having adequate connectivity. When we speak of
intention it has to be one of criminality with adequacy of knowledge of any
existing fact necessary for the proposed offence. Such an intention is meant
to assist, encourage, promote and facilitate the commission of a crime with
the requisite knowledge as aforesaid.
27. The existence of common intention is obviously the duty of the
prosecution to prove. However, a court has to analyse and assess the
evidence before implicating a person under
Section 34
IPC. A mere
common intention per se may not attract
Section 34
IPC, sans an action in
furtherance. There may also be cases where a person despite being an active
participant in forming a common intention to commit a crime, may actually
withdraw from it later. Of course, this is also one of the facts for the
consideration of the court. Further, the fact that all accused charged with an
offence read with
Section 34
IPC are present at the commission of the
crime, without dissuading themselves or others might well be a relevant
circumstance, provided a prior common intention is duly proved. Once
again, this is an aspect which is required to be looked into by the court on
the evidence placed before it. It may not be required on the part of the
defence to specifically raise such a plea in a case where adequate evidence
is available before the court.”
12
14.Applying the said principles, we are unable to come to the conclusion that

   the conviction rendered by both the Courts can be sustained in the eye of

   law. Both the Courts made reliance upon the non-cooperation on the part of

   the accused to undergo the test identification parade by drawing an adverse

   inference. Unfortunately, the evidence available on record was not looked

   into as the witnesses had already been exposed to the accused in the police

   station.   After all, the test identification parade is only a part of an

   investigation, and therefore, nothing more can be attached to it. It is the duty

   of the prosecution to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. Both the

   Courts have fixed the onus on the accused. The High Court after seriously

   doubting the evidence of PW1 should have extended the benefit of doubt as

   the evidence of PW3 ought not to have been accepted for the reasons stated

   above. The evidence as deposed by the prosecution witnesses itself would

   demonstrate that the version of the prosecution may not be correct. If the

   reasoning of the High Court is accepted, even then, the offence under
Section 302
IPC may not be made out. However, we do not wish to go into

   the said issue as we believe that the prosecution has not been able to sustain

   the charge as against these appellants, framed under Section 302 read with
Section 34
IPC. There has to be adequate material to fasten the appellants on
13
the basis of constructive liability as
Section 34
IPC is nothing but a rule of

   evidence.
15.On the above analysis, we are inclined to set aside the conviction rendered

   by the learned Additional Sessions Judge (East) FTC: E-Court,

   Karkardooma Court, Delhi as confirmed by the Division Bench of the High

   Court of Delhi. The appeals stand allowed and the appellants are directed to

   be set at liberty.
…….………………………J.
                                                       (ABHAY S. OKA)


                                                  .……………………………J.
                                                      (M.M. SUNDRESH)
New Delhi,
July 11, 2022
14