[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Hcmi Education vs Narendra Pal Singh on 11 July, 2022
Author:
M. M. Sundresh
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
Abhay S. Oka
REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2481 OF 2016

         HCMI Education                                                                  …Appellant

                                                         Versus

         Narendra Pal Singh                                                            …Respondent



                                                   JUDGMENT
M. M. Sundresh, J.
1. Heard learned counsel appearing for the parties. When the matter was taken

                         up for hearing on 28.06.2022, there was no representation on behalf of the

                         respondent. So, after hearing the counsel for the appellant, we adjourned the

                         matter to 01.07.2022 in order to extend an opportunity to the respondent. As

                         we find the same situation continues to prevail by the absence of the

                         respondent, we are inclined to dispose of this appeal upon once again
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHA SUNDRIYAL
Date: 2022.07.11
hearing counsel for the appellant.
18:39:01 IST
Reason:
1
FACTS IN BRIEF:
2. The respondent before us approached the appellant for seeking admission in

     Philippines to the Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS)

     course. Accordingly, an admission was secured with M/s Emilio Aguinaldo

     (for short ‘College’) for the academic year 2007-2008. Fees were paid by

     the respondent through the appellant.              The appellant gave sufficient

     indication that it was acting on behalf of not only the College, but also the

     Government vide an advertisement by inviting Respondent through

     Pamphlet, Brochure supplied accordingly:-
a. “The Republic of Philippines and the Commission on Higher Education
        has appointed Healthcare Management International (HCMI) as their sole
        authorized representative of India.
b. HCMI Mission is to provide students with an opportunity to attain
        quality education overseas by introducing them to reputable universities,
        thus, allowing them to make apt choices. HCMI do this by partnering with
        reputable universities that deliver relevant, up-to-date knowledge.
        c. Access to quality medical education
        d. Information packages on courses and fee structures.
        e. Guidance for loans through trusted banks, if required.
        f. Information on eligibility requirements.
        g. Guidance in processing student visa.
        h. Counselling in making an apt decision.
        i. Step by step guidance through the application process.”
3. The respondent joined the College upon receiving the offer letter dated

     31.08.2007.     Vide Resolution No. 583 of 2007 of the Commission on
2
Higher Education (CHED), the College got the application for approval to

   offer MBBS programme effective from 2007-2008.
4. The respondent joined the College, which was arrayed as respondent No. 2,

   and set ex-parte before the Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum, U.T.

   Chandigarh. By the resolution dated 22.09.2008, the Republic of Philippines

   approved to abolish the MBBS programme from the School Year (S.Y.)

   2008-2009 making it applicable to the students who got admitted for the

   year 2007-2008. The following is the resolution passed:
Republic of the Philippines
                           OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
                     COMMISSION ON HIGHER EDUCATION


             EXCERPTS FROM THE MINUTES OF 321TH REGULAR
             COMMISSION MEETING HELD ON THE 22ND DAY OF
            SEPTEMBER 2008 AT HEDC CONFERENCE ROOM, HEDC
             BUILDING, C.P. GARCIA AVE. U.P. DILIMAN, QUEZON
                                        CITY
                           RESOLUTION NO. 491 – 2008


      “WHEREAS Republic Act No. 2382 otherwise known as the medical Act of
      1959 prescribes among other things the minimum required curriculum for
      the degree Doctor of Medicine (MD) which is a bachelors degree in science
      or arts;
WHEREAS, the primary medical degree to practice medicine in the
      Philippines is the degree Doctor of Medicine (MD);
      WHEREAS, the Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) is a
      medical degree offered in countries like Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan
3
and Sri Lanka, which requires completion of Grade XI and XII as minimum
      requirement for entry into this program;
      WHEREAS, a number of medical schools in the Philippines have offered the
      MBBS program in spite of the absence of a CHED Memorandum Order
      prescribing the curriculum of such program;
      WHEREAS, the offering of such degree without the corresponding CHED-
      approved curriculum has led to concern and confusion regarding the
      capability to practice medicine in the Philippines and abroad;
      WHEREFORE, upon motion duly made, seconded and unanimously
      carried, the Commission En Banc adopted to resolve as follows:
RESOLVE, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, that the Commission approves
      the abolition of Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS)
      Program effective S.Y. 2008-2009.
RESOLVED FURTHER, that with regard to the existing students of the said
      program, the Technical Panel for Health Professions Education is requested
      to study, review and submit recommendation to the Commission En Banc
      for further decision, and that all medical schools be furnished copies of this
      resolution.”
5. Consequent thereon, an alternative course was offered and the MBBS

  students were re-directed to the BS Biology, pursuant to the CEB Resolution

  No. 491-2008, with reference to such students who already got

  admitted/accepted under MBBS Course. For better appreciation, the

  aforesaid order is also placed on record:
Republic of the Philippines
                            OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
                       COMMISSION ON HIGHER EDUCATION
      CHED MEMORANDUM ORDER
      No.46
      Series of 2008
4
SUBJECT: ABOLITION OF THE BACHELOR OF MEDICINE,
        BACHELOR OF SURGERY (MBBS) PROGRAM EFFECTIVE
        ACADEMIC YEAR 2008-2009.
“In accordance with pertinent provisions of Republic Act 7722, otherwise
        known as the Higher Education Act of 1994 and pursuant to CEB
        Resolution No. 491-2008 dated September 22, 2008 the abolition of the
        Bachelor of - Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) proqram is hereby
        made effective School Year 2008-2009.
Colleges and universities which accepted MBBS students are instructed to
        comply with the following:
1. MBBS students shall be re-directed to the BS Biology Program.
2. HEIs that have no BS Biology and M.D. programs shall transfer their
        MBBS students to other HEIs that have recognized BS Biology and M.D.
        programs, listed in either WHO Directory or FAIMER and are willing to
        accept said students.
3. The abovementioned HEIs shall assess the subjects taken in Grades 11
        and 12 as well as some subjects already taken in MBBS for credit towards
        BS Biology. In excess of the BS Biology requirements, some MBBS subjects
        may be credited towards the M.D. program after this group of students have
        passed in validating examination administered by the concerned HEIs.
4. There shall be no double crediting of subjects. Subjects in Grades 11 and
        12 and those taken in the MBBS that were credited towards BS Biology
        shall no longer be credited to the M.D. program.
5. NMAT shall be required of students-in this group as it is required of other
        students for admission to the MD program.
6. The duration of the BS Biology program for this group of students should
        not be less than three (3) semesters and one (1) summer or a minimum total
        of ninety-two (92) units.
For strict and immediate compliance.
Quezon City, Philippines
                                                                  October 20, 2008”
6.   On the incipient view, the respondent did not take the aforesaid offer, but

     instead has chosen to come back to India with immediate action by filing his

     representation to the appellant. Thereafter, he lodged the complaint,
5
notwithstanding the offer made by the appellant to mitigate the loss with

     respect to the additional one year, as offered by the Republic of Philippines

     for the bridge course after the abolition of the MBBS programme.
7.   All the Forums below, including the National Consumer Disputes Redressal

     Commission (hereinafter referred to as the ‘National Commission’), rejected

     the appellant’s response and accordingly it was asked to pay a sum of

     $12000, apart from compensation and costs.           Aggrieved thereby, the

     appellant is before us.
8. The counsel for the appellant contends that though the complaint per se is

     not maintainable against the educational institution, apart from lack of

     territorial jurisdiction, the issue can be decided on merits as the matter is

     seized of by a larger Bench in Civil Appeal Diary No. 12901 of 2020 dated

     15.10.2020 as to whether the educational institution is amenable or not, to be

     decided by a Consumer Forum.
9. It is submitted that the appellant is only a facilitator and, in any case, it has

     no control over the decision of the Republic of Philippines. It is a policy

     decision taken by the said country and the fact that the respondent got

     admitted with the concerned College and completed one year is not in
6
dispute. The decision of the Republic of Philippines (Office of CHED) being

   a subsequent one, there cannot be any liability fasten upon the appellant.
10. Before venturing into the above contentions raised, the scope of the appeal

   invoking
Section 27A
of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 which was

   invoked at the time of filing of the appeal, requires consideration.
Section

   27A
facilitates a further appeal to this Court against the order passed by the

   National Commission. Such an appeal can be adjudicated upon by this

   Court both on facts and law. Since the appeal provides for adjudication on

   the aforesaid two aspects, this Court can decide the matter not only on the

   law but facts as well.
11. On merit, we find considerable force in the submission made by the learned

   counsel for the appellant. Though the documents would indicate that the

   appellant was acting on behalf of CHED also, it played no role in the policy

   decision made. The said documents are to be understood contextually. The

   role of the appellant stops with the admission being secured, which it did.

   The policy decision of the Republic of Philippines cannot be questioned

   before the Consumer Forum.
12. In any case, such a policy decision cannot be the basis for seeking redressal

   against the appellant. The appellant cannot be considered to be a part of the
7
Republic of Philippines or the Office of CHED for the policy decision

   changes made, which was made not pertaining to a single institution, but the

   whole Republic.
13. On facts, the respondent did complete one year. At the time of admission

   and continuation in the year 2007-2008 there was no problem with the

   MBBS course. It was only in pursuance to the decision as aforesaid made

   by the Republic of Philippines, the students were offered to continue with

   the alternative course, which the appellant has not chosen whatsoever. This

   is an aspect that the Forums have failed to take note of in the correct

   perspective.
14. On the said analysis, we are inclined to set aside the orders passed and

   dismiss the complaint. As there is no vicarious liability that can be fastened

   on the appellant and the appellant’s role cannot be stretched to the policy

   decision of the Republic of Philippines, the appeal stands allowed.
…….………………………J.
                                                    (ABHAY S. OKA)


                                                  .……………………………J.
                                                    (M.M. SUNDRESH)
New Delhi,
July 11, 2022
8