[Cites
22
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Kshetrimayum Maheshkumar Singh vs The Manipur University on 5 January, 2022
Author:
Hima Kohli
Bench:
Hima Kohli
,
L. Nageswara Rao
CIVIL APPEAL NO    OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




                                                                                    REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 163 OF 2022
                                   [Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 34681 of 2017]


           SHRI KSHETRIMAYUM MAHESHKUMAR
           SINGH AND ANR.                                                   …..    APPELLANTS

                                                                 VERSUS

           THE MANIPUR UNIVERSITY AND ORS.                                  …..   RESPONDENTS



                                                     JUDGMENT
Hima Kohli, J.
Leave granted.
1.            The appellants are aggrieved by the judgment dated 21 st August,

           2017 passed by the High Court of Manipur at Imphal in Writ Petition (C) No.

           753 of 2014 whereunder, amongst others, it has been held that after the

           amendment of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in

           Admission) Act, 20061, in the year 2012, on introduction of the
Central

           Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment Act, 2012
2,

           respondent No. 1 - Manipur University3 is required to follow the reservation
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV
Date: 2022.01.05
norms of 2% for the candidates belonging to Scheduled Caste [SC], 31%
16:57:15 IST
Reason:
1 For short “the Reservation Act”
           2 For short ‘the Amendment Act”
           3 ‘University’
Page 1 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO      OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




for the Scheduled Tribes [ST] and 17% for the Other Backward Classes

[OBC] for purposes of admission in the University.
2.       To contextualize the issue raised in the present appeal, it is necessary

to briefly refer to the relevant facts of the case.                             Respondent no. 1-
University was initially established as a ‘State University’ under the
Manipur

University Act, 1980
that came into force on 05 th June, 1980. In the year

2005, the
Manipur University Act
was legislated, whereafter respondent No.

1 – University was converted from a ‘State University’ to a ‘Central

University’ w.e.f. 13th October, 2005.                             On 04th January, 2007, the

Reservation Act was notified.
Section 3
of the said Act prescribed

reservation of seats in the Central Educational Institutions and laid down as

follows:
“3. Reservation of seats in Central Educational Institutions. –
              The reservation of seats in admission and its extent in a Central
              Educational Institution shall be provided in the following manner, namely:-
i          out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or
                         faculty, fifteen per cent. seats shall be reserved for the
                         Scheduled Castes;
ii         out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or
                         faculty, seven and one-half per cent. seats shall be reserved
                         for the Scheduled Tribes;
iii.       out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of study or
                         faculty, twenty-seven per cent. seats shall be reserved for the
                         Other Backward Classes.”
                                                                     [emphasis supplied]
3.       The expression “out of the annual permitted strength” referred to in
Section 3
above, has been defined in
Section 2(b)
in the following words:
Page 2 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




              “2. Definitions:-
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
xxx    xxx     xxx

                    b.     "annual permitted strength" means the number of seats, in
a course or programme for teaching or instruction in each
                           branch of study or faculty authorised by an appropriate
                           authority for admission of students to a Central Educational
                           Institution;
xxx    xxx     xxx”
4.       From the academic year 2009-10 onwards, respondent No. 1 –

University started following the reservation norms as prescribed in the

Reservation Act. On 20th June, 2012, the aforesaid Statute was amended

by virtue of the Amendment Act and as a result of the said amendment,

Clauses (ia) and (ib) were inserted in
Section 2
, i.e. the definition clause

and two provisos were inserted in
Section 3
. Further, Clause (a) of
Section

4
was omitted and sub-sections (1) and (2) of
Section 5
were amended.
The aforesaid
Amendment Act, 2012
that forms the bedrock of the

grievance raised in the present appeal, is extracted below for ready

reference:
“THE CENTRAL EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS
                           (RESERVATION IN ADMISSION) AMENDMENT
                                           ACT,2012
                                NO. 31 OF 2012 [19th June, 2012]

              PREAMBLE
                    An Act to amend the
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation
              in Admission) Act, 2006
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third
              Year of the Republic of India as follows: -
SECTION - 1. Short title.-
This Act
may be called the Central Educational
              institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment Act, 2012.
SECTION - 2. Amendment of
section 2
-In
section 2
of the Central
              Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006 (5 of 2007)
              (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after clause (i), the following
              clauses shall be inserted, namely:-
Page 3 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




              (ia) "Specified north-eastern region" means the area comprising of
              the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
              Nagaland, Sikkim, Tripura and the tribal areas of Assam referred to
              in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution;
(ib) "State seats", in relation to a Central Educational Institution, means
              such seats, if any, out of the annual permitted strength in each branch of
              study or faculty as are earmarked to be filled from amongst the eligible
              students of the State in which such institution is situated;
SECTION -3. Amendment of
section 3
.- In
section 3
of the principal Act,
              the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:-"Provided that the State
              seats, if any, in a Central Educational Institution situated in the tribal
              areas referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution shall be
              governed by such reservation policy for the Scheduled Castes, the
              Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes, as may be specified,
              by notification in the Official Gazette, by the Government of the State
              where such institution is situated:
Provided further that if there are no State seats in a Central
              Educational Institution and the seats reserved for the Scheduled
              castes exceed the percentage specified under clause (i) or the seats
              reserved for the Scheduled Tribes exceed the percentage specified
              under clause (ii) or the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes and
              the Scheduled Tribes taken together exceed the sum of percentages
              specified under clauses (i) and (ii), but such seats are-
(a) less than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the
              date immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act,
              the total percentage of the seats required to be reserved for the
              Other Backward Classes under clause (iii) shall be restricted to the
              extent such sum of percentages specified under clauses (i) and (ii)
              falls short of fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength,;
(b) more than fifty per cent. of the annual permitted strength on the date
              immediately preceding the date of commencement of this Act, in that
              case no seat shall be reserved for the Other Backward Classes under
              clause (iii) but the extent of the reservation of seats for the Scheduled
              Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall not be reduced in respect of
              Central Educational Institutions in the specified north-eastern region.".
SECTION - 4. Amendment of
section 4
.-In
section 4
of the principal Act,
              clause (a) shall be omitted.
SECTION - 5. Amendment of
section 5
.-In
section 5
of the principal Act,
- (a) in sub-section (1), for the words "number of such seats available",
              the words "number of such seats available or actually filled, wherever be
              less, shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words "three years", the words "six years"
shall be substituted.”
                                                                     [emphasis supplied]
5.       Relying on the provision of reservation made under Section 3 of the

Reservation Act, Respondent No. 1 – University promulgated Ordinance

5.2, that prescribes rules relating to admission to the University and
Page 4 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO      OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




Ordinance 5.4 deals with reservation of seats and other special provisions

for admission to the University, both in the year 2014. Rule 18 of Ordinance

5.2 reads as below:
“18.     15% of the seats in the academic programmes offered by the
                       University shall be reserved for students belonging to
                       Scheduled Caste, 7-1/2 % for students belonging to Scheduled
                       Tribe and 27% for students belonging to Other Backward
                       Classes.
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent
                       the University from making special provisions for admission of
                       women, persons with disabilities or of persons belonging to the
                       weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled
                       Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the other socially and
                       educationally backward classes of citizens.
Provided further that no such special provision shall be made on
                       the ground of domicile.”
                                                                      [emphasis supplied]
6.       While Rule 1 of Ordinance 5.4 deals with reservation of seats, Rule 2

deals with reservation of seats for students belonging to SC & ST

categories.            Respondent No. 1 – University has stipulated in Rule 2.1 of

Ordinance 5.4 as below:
“2.      Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
                       22.5% of seats in all Courses will be reserved for Scheduled
                       Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates in the following
                       order:
2.1    15% of seats will be reserved for Scheduled Castes
                              and 7.5% Scheduled Tribes. 27% of seats will be
                              reserved for OBC. “
7.       For the academic year 2014-15, respondent No. 1- University issued

a prospectus, stating inter alia that seats shall be reserved as per the

Government of India norms. In the Press Release dated 24 th July, 2014,

respondent No. 1 – University clarified that for conducting admissions for
Page 5 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




the academic year 2014-15, reservation will be provided to the extent of 2%

for SC category, 31% for ST category and 17% for OBC category.
8.       Aggrieved by the denial of admission to them, the appellants, who are

candidates belonging to the SC category and had applied for admission in

various Post Graduate courses, questioned the purported reduction of the

quota for SC category candidates from 15%, as prescribed in Section 3 of

the Reservation Act to 2% and filed a writ petition in the High Court of

Manipur which was disposed of by the learned Single Judge vide order

dated 01st September, 2015, holding inter alia that the percentage of

reservation for SC and ST candidates, as was applied to the respondent

No. 1 – University prior to the commencement of the Reservation Act,

would be adopted for determination of percentage of reservation for the

reserved categories in question.                      It was specifically directed that the

percentage of reservation for the students belonging to the SC, ST and

OBC categories in the University, would be 2%, 31% and 17% respectively

for admission to various courses.                    However, the Court declined to go into

the actual calculation of the seats notified as reserved by the respondent

No. 1 – University and confined itself to the principles to be adopted for

determination of percentage of reservation of seats on which basis,

calculation of the seats had to be made.
9.       Dissatisfied by the aforesaid judgment dated 01 st September, 2015,

the appellants filed Writ Appeal No. 40 of 2015 before the High Court of
Page 6 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




Manipur at Imphal.              As no Division Bench was available due to paucity of

Judges in the said Court, recourse was taken to filing a Transfer Petition

before this Court, which was allowed and the captioned writ appeal was

transferred to the High Court of Meghalaya at Shillong for adjudication by a

Division Bench and was re-numbered as Writ Appeal No. 83 of 2016.
10.      Vide judgment dated 20th April, 2017, the Division Bench of the High

Court of Meghalaya remanded the matter back to the learned Single Judge

of the Manipur High Court for consideration afresh and called upon the said

Court to examine and decide the percentage of reservation for SC, ST and

OBC categories in the light of the second proviso to Section 3 of the

Reservation Act [as amended vide Amendment Act] and the effect of

Ordinance 5.2 and Ordinance 5.4, promulgated by the respondent No. 1 –

University. It is on remand that the impugned judgment dated 21 st August,

2017 has been passed by the High Court of Manipur, the concluding para

whereof is extracted below for ready reference:
“[71] This Court accordingly, concludes and directs as follows:
(i) This Court holds, as also held by Hon'ble Division Bench, that
                    the Second Proviso provides the formulae for working out the
                    percentage of reservation for the OBCs in the Institutions located in
                    the States within the specified north eastern region which is to be
                    worked out on the basis of the figures of percentages for the SCs
                    and STs existing on the date immediately preceding the date of
                    commencement of the Act of 2006.
(ii) It is this set of figures of percentages for the SCs and STs
                    existing on the date immediately preceding the date of
                    commencement of the Act of 2006 ascertained and used for
                    working out the percentage of reservation for the OBCs, which
                    would also be the percentages of reservation for admission for the
                    SCs and STs after the amendment of the
Central Educational
                    Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006
by the
Central
                    Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment
                    Act, 2012
, and the Institute or the Manipur University cannot
Page 7 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




                    anymore invoke Clause (i) and (ii) of
Section 3
to determine the
                    reservation for the SCs and STs separately.
(iii)
The Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission)
                    Act, 2006
as amended in the year 2012, does not provide nor the
                    Hon'ble Division Bench had held that, once the aforesaid set of
                    figures of percentages for SCs and STs existing on the date
                    immediately preceding the date of commencement of the Act of
                    2006 have been ascertained and used for working out the
                    percentage of reservation for the OBCs, this set has to be
                    jettisoned and ignored and the Institute. (Manipur University in this
                    case) can go back to Clauses (i) and (ii) of
Section 3
to determine
                    the reservation of reservation for the SCs and STs independent of
                    the figures used under the Second Proviso after the amendment of
                    the
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act,
                    2006
in 2012.
Neither the Act, nor the Hon'ble Division Bench has stated
                    that irrespective of the formula for ascertaining the percentage of
                    reservation for the OBCs as provided under the Second Proviso to
Section 3
of the Act after the amendment in 2012, the Institute has
                    to apply Clauses (i) and (ii) of
Section 3
of the Act to fix the
                    percentage of reservation for the SCs and STs.
(iv) Second Proviso was specifically inserted for the Central
                    Educational Institutions located in the specified North Eastern
                    Region for protecting the interest of STs, particularly as evident
                    from the Clause (b) of the Second Proviso. It protects the interest
                    of the STs wherever, their percentage of reservation is more than
                    what is prescribed under Clause (ii) of
Section 3
of the Act.
The Act
specifically provides that even if the extent of reservation of seats
                    of the STs & SCs exceed 50% of the annual permitted strength on
                    the date immediately preceding the date of commencement of the
                    Act, there shall not be reservation for the OBCs under Clause (3)
                    but, the extent of reservation of seats for STs & SCs shall not be
                    reduced.
(v) The Institute has to determine the percentages of reservation
                    for admission for the SCs, STs and OBCs on the basis of the
                    Central Educational institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act,
                    2006 as amended in 2012 and not on the basis of any other
                    statute. In the present case, the Manipur University has to fix the
                    percentages of reservation for the SCs, STs and OBCs on the
                    basis of the
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in
                    Admission) Act, 2006
as amended in 2012 and not on the basis of
                    Section 31(1)(a) or any other provision of the
Manipur University
                    Act, 2005
as the
Manipur University Act
is no more the source of
                    authority for determining the percentages of reservation after the
                    implementation of the
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation
                    in Admission) Act, 2006
.
(vi) The reservation norm has to be adopted by the Manipur
                    University by referring to the
Central Educational Institutions
                    (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006
as amended by the
Central
                    Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment
                    Act, 2012
only and by not referring to any provision of the
Manipur
                    University Act, 2005
.
(vii) Accordingly, any Statute or Ordinance or any rule or
                    notification fixing the percentage of reservation for admission
                    framed/issued by the Manipur University has to conform to the
                    aforesaid norm of 2% for the Scheduled Castes, 31 % for the
                    Scheduled Tribes and 17% for the Other Backward Classes
                    worked out and ascertained in terms of the Second Proviso to
Page 8 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017
Section 3
of the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in
                    Admission) Act, 2006 as amended in 2012. Any other norm not
                    conforming to the above will be invalid being in contravention of the
Central Education Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006
as amended in 2012.
(viii) Ordinances 5.2 and 5.4 made by the Manipur University as far
                    as determining the percentages of reservation for the SCs, STs
                    and OBCs are concerned, are not valid. Hence, these have no
                    value, worth or effect as far as the issue of determination of the
                    percentages of reservation for the SCs, STs and OBCs in Manipur
                    University is concerned.
(ix) In any event, it has not been shown by these Ordinances, how
                    the Manipur University had fixed the percentage of reservation for
                    the OBCs at 27% in the face of the formulae specifically provided
                    under the Second Proviso for working out the percentage of
                    reservation for the OBCs and also for the SCs and STs. To that
                    extent, these Ordinances also suffer from the vice of arbitrariness.
(x) The validity of these Ordinances relating to other matters, other
                    than fixation of percentage of reservation for admission of
                    students, not being an issue in this petition, is left open to be
                    decided in appropriate case.
(xi) Before the implementation of the
Central Educational
                    Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006
, Manipur
                    University was following the reservation norm of 2% for the
                    Scheduled Castes, 31 % for the Scheduled Tribes and 17% for
                    the Other Backward Classes.
(xii) After the implementation of the
Central Educational
                    Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006
, Manipur
                    University started following the reservation norm as per
                    Clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of
Section 3
of the Act to the extent of
                    15% for the Scheduled Castes, 7.5% for the Scheduled Tribes,
                    and 27% for the Other Backward Classes from the academic
                    year 2009-2010.
(xiii) After the amendment of the
Central Educational
                    Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006
in 2012
                    introduced by the
Central Educational Institutions
                    (Reservation in Admission) Amendment Act, 2012
, Manipur
                    University has to follow the reservation norm of 2% for the
                    Scheduled castes, 31 % for the Scheduled Tribes and 17% for
                    the Other Backward Classes.”
                                                                    [emphasis supplied]
11.      Ms. Punam Kumari, learned counsel for the appellants has assailed

the impugned judgment contending that the High Court has erred in taking

a view that the proviso inserted vide the Amendment Act, would be

applicable to a Central Educational Institution 4 located in States falling


4 For short “the CEI”
Page 9 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




within the          “Specified north eastern region”            and that the extent of

reservation would have to be worked out on the basis of the figures of

percentage for the SCs and STs, as was existing on the date immediately

preceding the date of commencement of the Reservation Act. It is her

submission that the amendments brought about by the Amendment Act are

only in respect of tribal States falling under the purview of the Sixth

Schedule to the Constitution of India 5 and not in respect of other States

including a State like Manipur falling under “Specified north eastern region”,

defined in the amended
Section 2 (ia)
of the Parent Act [ Reservation Act].
12.      Learned counsel for the appellants sought to draw a distinction

between the amended
Section 2 (ia)
that defines “Specified north eastern

region” and the amended
Section 3
by virtue of the Amendment Act by

urging that clause (ia) of
Section 2
has been inserted only to group together

all North Eastern States, irrespective of whether they fall under the Sixth

Schedule to the Constitution or not, whereas
Section 3
makes a separate

provision for a tribal State. She submitted that the second proviso was

inserted in
Section 3
only to ensure that the percentage of reservation

provided for in
Section 3 (i)
and (ii) of the Reservation Act that laid down the

percentage of reservation of seats for SC and ST candidates as 15% and

7.5% respectively, were to be maintained and not that the same could be

increased or decreased by the CEI in a “Specified north eastern region”. It

was canvassed that the group of States defined in
Section 2 (ia)
as
5 For short “the Constitution”
Page 10 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




“Specified north eastern region”, have been created by the Amendment Act

with the specific purpose of protecting the interest of SC and ST candidates

belonging to other North Eastern States that are not tribal States and

contrary to the said provision, respondent No. 1 – University has reduced

the quota of seats for SC candidates, which is impermissible.
13.      It was further sought to be pointed out on behalf of the appellants that

amendment to Section 3 of the Reservation Act was necessitated only

because Section 4(a) of the Reservation Act, stood omitted by the

Amendment Act. Pertinently, Section 4(a) of the Reservation Act as it stood

prior to the amendment, stated that the provision of
Section 3
of the Act

would not apply to a CEI established in tribal areas, referred to in the Sixth

Schedule to the Constitution. It was submitted that the intention of the

Legislature in amending the Reservation Act by introducing the Amendment

Act was not to make the amendments applicable to CEIs situated in non-

tribal States like the State of Manipur and the expression “on the date

immediately preceding the date of commencement of the Reservation Act”,

as used in the second proviso to
Section 3
of the Act, qualifies the

expression “annual permitted strength” as used in
Section 3
and defined in
Section 2(b)
of the Parent Act and not the extent of reservation.
14.      To sum up, it is the contention of learned counsel for the appellants

that the Amendment Act was legislated to ensure that reservation for SC

and ST candidates as prescribed in
Section 3
of the Parent Act, should not
Page 11 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




be reduced from the benchmark of 15% and 7.5% respectively. Rather, the

Amendment Act contemplates that the percentage of reservation for SC and

ST candidates earmarked in
Section 3
of the Parent Act could be increased

even to the detriment of the earmarked percentage of reservation for OBC

candidates, to ensure that the overall limit of 50% reservation for SC and

ST candidates taken collectively, is not disturbed in any manner.
15.      Mr. Sanjay Jain, learned Additional Solicitor General appeared for the

respondent No. 5 - Union of India that has filed a counter affidavit through

the Ministry of Human Resource Development. In its counter affidavit, Union

of India has supported the findings returned in the impugned judgment to

the effect that the percentage of reservation for SC and ST candidates was

existing and being applied by the respondent No. 1 – University when it was

a ‘State University’, before the commencement of the Reservation Act, viz.

31% for STs             and 2% for SCs which was required to be adopted for

determination of the percentage of reservation for ST and SC candidates in

the University and that the percentage of reservation for OBC candidates

was to be restricted to the extent of the percentages of reservation for the

ST and SC candidates taken collectively, provided it falls short of 50% of

the annual permitted strength, as provided under clause (a) of the second

proviso to the amended Section 3 of the Reservation Act. It is the stand of

the Union of India that the percentage of reservation for SC, ST and OBC

candidates has been correctly pegged at 2%, 31% and 17% respectively for
Page 12 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




admission to various courses in the respondent No. 1 – University, since the

same percentage was applicable immediately preceding the date of

commencement of the Reservation Act.
16.      Mr. Ashutosh Dubey, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

respondent No. 7, an ST category candidate has supported the stand taken

by the respondent No. 5 - Union of India and submitted that the plea of the

appellants for restoration of minimum 15% reservation for SC students is

impermissible. He argued that the respondent No. 1 – University is a

‘Central University’ and is governed by the Rules and Regulations of the

Central Government which in this case, translates into the Reservation Act.

He clarified that the respondent No. 1 – University had the status of a ‘State

University’ only till the year 2005 and at that point in time, it was following

the then prevalent rules of reservation in the State of Manipur viz. 2% for

SC candidates and 31% for ST candidates for admission in courses offered

by the University. However, the said position changed when the respondent

No. 1 – University was granted the status of a ‘Central University’ in the

year 2005 and was thereafter governed under the Reservation Act which

came into force w.e.f. 03rd January, 2007. On being designated as a Central

University, respondent No. 1 – University discontinued the reservation

norms of the State Government and started following the reservation norms

provided under Section 3 of the Reservation Act i.e., 15% for SCs, 7.5% for

STs and 27% for OBCs. Learned counsel clarified that the respondent No.
Page 13 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




1 – University was not covered under the exemption clause provided under
Section 4 (a)
of the Parent Act that was subsequently repealed since the

University is not an “institution established in tribal areas”, referred to in the

Sixth Schedule to the Constitution. Only after enactment of the Amendment

Act did the respondent No. 1 – University make changes in its reservation

policy and in compliance to the proviso of
Section 3
, inserted post

amendment, the University restored the earlier norms of reservation by

reserving 2% seats for SCs, 31% seats for STs and 17% seats for OBCs.

Learned counsel for the respondent No. 7 concluded by submitting that the

impugned judgment projects the correction position and does not warrant

any interference by this Court.
17.      Mr. Shivendra Dwivedi, learned counsel appearing for the respondent

Nos. 8, 9 and 10 has also supported the findings returned in the impugned

judgment and submitted that in compliance to the Amendment Act,

respondent No. 1 - University has rightly calculated the ratio of reservation

of seats in admission to 31% for ST, 2% for SC and 17% for OBC

candidates. He submitted that a plain reading of the last part of clause (a) of

the second proviso to
Section 3
of the Parent Act, as amended vide

Amendment Act makes it amply clear that in view of the substantial tribal

population in the State of Manipur and the other States mentioned in
Section 2(ia)
that defines “Specified north eastern region”, the ratio of

reservation for SC and ST candidates prevailing immediately before the
Page 14 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




enactment of the Reservation Act would not be reduced. At the same time,

the said ratio of reservation would not be controlled by the general rule of

the ratio of reservation as provided under Clause (i), (ii) and (iii) of
Section 3
of the Parent Act.              Learned counsel sought to urge that Amendment Act

was necessitated only to rectify the anomaly in Section 3 of the Reservation

Act that provided a blanket reservation for SC, ST and OBC candidates

while overlooking the fact that in the case of the State of Manipur, over 42%

of the population is tribal as against only 3.4% of the population that falls

under the SC category. He sought to explain that the second proviso was

inserted in
Section 3
of the Parent Act to carve out an exception to the

general rule of reservation as provided in Clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of
Section

3
and that respondent No. 1 - University is squarely covered under the said

proviso since there is no State seat reserved in the said University for

purposes of allocation which is the first requirement prescribed for

application of the second proviso inserted in
Section 3
of the Act.
18.      Learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 6 – the UGC has,

however, subscribed to the arguments advanced by learned counsel for the

appellants and submitted that reduction of the number of seats reserved for

SC candidates in the respondent No. 1 – University runs contrary to the

mandate of the Reservation Act. It is his submission that the Amendment

Act provides for reduction of reservation to the OBC category candidates to

the extent that there need not be any reservation at all for the said category
Page 15 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




only to ensure that there is no reduction in the overall seats reserved for the

SC and ST candidates. Referring to the provisos incorporated in
Section 3
of the Parent Act by virtue of the amendments, learned counsel submitted

that the requirement that “the extent of reservation of seats for Scheduled

Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall not be reduced in respect of Central

Education Institutions in specified North Eastern Regions” applies not only

to the situation contemplated in Clause (a) to the second proviso appended

to
Section 3
of the Parent Act, but also to Clause (b) to the second proviso.

In other words, reservation made for SC and ST candidates should not be

reduced to the extent below what was prevailing before the Reservation

Act, 2006 came into force or after the said enactment thereby meaning that

reservation for SC candidates could not be less than 15% and for ST

candidates could not be less than 7.5%. Therefore, provision of only 2%

reservation to SC candidates by the respondent No. 1 – University violates

the mandates of
Section 3
of the Parent Act.
19.      We have perused the impugned judgment and given our thoughtful

consideration to the multifaceted arguments advanced by learned counsel

for the parties.
20.      It is not in dispute that respondent No. 1 – University was originally

established as a ‘State University’ in the year 1980 under the
Manipur

University Act
No. 8 of 1980. As a State University, respondent No. 1 –

University was following the Manipur Sate reservation policy by reserving
Page 16 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




2% seats for SC candidates and 31% for ST candidates for admission into

various courses. On 13th October, 2005, the respondent No. 1 – University

was converted into a ‘Central University’ under the
Manipur University Act
No. 54 of 2005.               After conversion too, respondent No. 1 - University

continued following the Manipur State Reservation Policy, i.e., 2% for SC

and 31% for ST for admission upto the academic session 2008-2009. On

3rd January, 2007, the Reservation Act came into force. Pursuant thereto,

the respondent No. 1 – University started following the reservation policy as

prescribed in Section 3 of the Reservation Act i.e. 15% for SCs, 7.5% for

STs and 27% for OBCs for the academic session 2009-2010 onwards. A

shift in reservation came on amendment of the Reservation Act by virtue of

the Amendment Act w.e.f. 19th June, 2012.
21.      The necessity to amend the Reservation Act can be gleaned from a

glance at the Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Central

Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Amendment Bill, 2010 6

which is extracted hereinbelow for ready reference:
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
                    The Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission)
              Act, 2006
provides, inter alia, for the reservation in admission of students
              belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the Other
              Backward Classes of citizens to the extent of fifteen per cent., seven and
              one-half per cent. and twenty-seven per cent. respectively to certain
              Central Educational Institutions established, maintained or aided by the
              Central Government. It also provides for mandatory increase of seats in
              such institutions over a maximum period of three years from the
              academic session commencing on and from the calendar year, 2007.
Section 4
of the aforesaid Act further provides that the provisions of the

6 For short ‘the Amendment Bill’
Page 17 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




              Act are not applicable to certain Central Educational Institutions including
              those established in the tribal areas referred to in the Sixth Schedule to
              the Constitution.
2. It is noted that some of the Central Educational Institutions
              particularly those situated in the North-Eastern States including
              Sikkim (but excluding the non-tribal areas of Assam) inhabited
              significantly, and in some cases predominantly by tribal population
              and Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow, which has
              been reserving fifty per cent. seats for the Scheduled Castes and
              the Scheduled Tribes in keeping with the objects specified in the Act
              establishing that University, have been showing their inability to
              reduce the extent of reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes
              and the Scheduled Tribes prevailing therein, in order to give way for
              reservation of twenty-seven per cent. of seats for the Other
              Backward Classes as stipulated under the Act. Further, the existing
              provisions of the Act exempt the Central Educational Institutions
              situated in the tribal areas referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the
              Constitution from reservation for the Scheduled Castes and the
              Scheduled Tribes, if any, but this was not intended while enacting
              the aforesaid Act, except in case of Minority Educational Institutions
              which are exempt in terms of clause (5) of
article 15
of the
              Constitution. Moreover, some of the Central Educational Institutions
              have been finding it difficult to adhere to the time-limit of three
              years for creation of the requisite physical and academic
              infrastructure owing to various reasons beyond their control.
3. In order to remove the aforesaid practical difficulties being faced
              by the various Central Educational Institutions in giving effect to the
              provisions of the
Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in
              Admission) Act, 2006
, it has become necessary to amend certain
              provisions of the Act. It is also proposed to clarify that implementation of
              the Act has, in fact, taken effect from the calendar year 2008 and not from
              the year 2007 as specified in
section 6
of the Act.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.”
                                                                    [emphasis supplied]
22.      The aforesaid Bill was placed before the Parliamentary Standing Committee on

Human Resources Development7, that submitted its 234th Report, which was tabled

before both the Houses of the Parliament on 26 th February, 2011.                             The Standing

Committee took note of the Statement of Objects and Reasons for amending the

Reservation Act as reproduced hereinabove and also noticed the practical difficulties

faced by some of the CEIs in implementing the provisions of the Reservation Act as

expressed by the Department of Higher Education. The clarifications given by the

Department of Higher Education for proposing amendment to
Section 3
of the Parent

Act have been summarized in paras 3.4 and 3.5 of the Report as below: -
7 For short ‘ the Standing Committee’
Page 18 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




                    “3.4 The Committee takes note of the following clarification given
              by the Department for bringing the proposed amendments in
Section 3
: -
(i) State Seats, if any, in a Central Educational Institution (CEI)
              situated in the tribal areas referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the
              Constitution shall be governed by the reservation policy of the concerned
              State Government in the matter of admissions of SCs, STs and OBCs to
              that CEI.
(ii) In a CEI with no State seats, if the seats reserved for the SCs
              exceed 15 per cent or the seats reserved for the STs exceed 7 .5 per cent
              or the seats reserved for the SCs and the STs taken together in a CEI
              exceed 22.5 per cent but fall short of 50 per cent of the annual permitted
              strength, the percentage of seats reserved for the OBCs shall be
              restricted to such shortfall.
(iii) In a CEI with no State Seats, if the seats reserved for SCs or
              the STS or both taken together in a CEI exceed 50 per cent of the annual
              permitted strength, that CEI shall be exempt from making any reservation
              for the OBCs. Further, if such a CEI is situated in the north-eastern
              States, including Sikkim but excluding the non-tribal areas of Assam, the
              percentage of seats reserved for the SCs or the STs shall not be reduced
              from the level obtaining on the date immediately preceding the date of the
              commencement of the Act; while in case of a CEI situated in other areas
              the percentage of seats reserved for the SCs and STs in that CEI shall
              stand reduced to 50 per cent.
3.5 While the Committee is convinced with the proposed
              amendment in
Section 3
, it would like to point out that there are
              conceptual difficulties in determining the 13 OBC reservation in the
              States. While the SC/ST reservation may be definite, it is the OBC
              reservation which may differ from State to State. The Committee is
              also aware of the fact that reconciliation has to be made between 50
              per cent cap on reservation and 27 per cent OBC quota. The
              Committee is of the view that OBC percentage is to be decided by
              taking SC and ST reservation as a compulsory component. Since
              the extent of reservation is 50 per cent whatever remaining after
              fulfilling the SC/ST reservation may go to OBCs.”
23.      The reasons for omitting Clause (a) of
Section 4
, which exempted

application of
Section 3
of the Parent Act to a CEI established in tribal areas

referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, was discussed in paras

3.7 and 3.8 of the Report in the following manner: -
“3.7 This clause seeks to omit clause (a) of
section 4
, thereby
              withdrawing the exemption erroneously given to the CEIs established in
              the tribal areas referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution from
              implementing the reservation policy for SCs and STs, if any, in force
              immediately preceding the date of the coming into force of the principal
              Act.
3.8 On a specific query about the factors necessitating the
              proposed amendment, the Committee was informed that as per the
              existing provision, reservation policy for SCs, STs and OBCs could not be
Page 19 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




              considered to be applicable to CEIs established in the tribal areas. While
              the intention of the Government was to exempt such CEIs from
              implementing 27 per cent reservation introduced for the OBCs only, these
              institutions were inadvertently exempted from reservation for SCs/STs as
              well, if any, in force, immediately preceding the date of coming into force
              of the Act. In view of the clarification given by the Department, the
              Committee accepts the proposed amendment so as to remove any
              ambiguity with regard to specific ground realities governing the
              CEls established in the Sixth Schedule States.”
24.      It is noteworthy that the Division Bench of the High Court of

Meghalaya did discuss the 234th Report at page 24 of the judgment dated

20th April, 2017, in the context of the reasons offered by the learned Single

Judge in the earlier judgment dated 1 st September, 2015 wherein it was

held that by an inference drawn from the said Report, one could determine

the percentage of reservation for SC and ST candidates for purposes of

applying the second proviso inserted in
Section 3
of the Parent Act post-
amendment, but the appellate court was not persuaded by the said logic.
25.      It is no longer res integra that Reports and recommendations made by

the Parliamentary Committees/Commissions that precede enactment of a

Statute can be used as external aids to interpret the meaning of ambiguous

words in a statutory provision wherever considered necessary. It can also

be taken note of as to the existence of a historical fact. At the same time, it

must be borne in mind that such Reports are not decisive and a Court is

free to arrive at a different conclusion based on its own findings and other

evidence produced by the parties. [
Refer State of Mysore v. R.V. Bidap
8,
R.S. Nayak v. A.R. Antulay9 and Kalpana Mehta and Others
. v. Union of
8 (1974) 3 SCC 337
9 (1984) 2 SCC 183
Page 20 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




India and Others10]. For our purpose, we do not intend to take notice of

the said Report with an idea of determining the extent of reservation for SC

and ST candidates in the light of the amendment by way of insertion to
Section 3
of the Parent Act. However, the said Report can be treated as a

useful tool to fathom the background in which the Amendment Act was

introduced and throw light on what had weighed with the legislating

authorities in proposing the amendments to the Reservation Act.
26.      It can be discerned from the Statement of Objects and Reasons

appended to the Amendment Bill, the background notes submitted to the

Standing Committee by the Department of Higher Education and the 234 th

Report tabled by the Standing Committee in the Parliament that some of the

CEIs, in particular those situated in North Eastern States having a pre-

dominant tribal population, expressed their inability to reduce the extent of

reservation of seats for SCs and STs for ensuring reservation of 27% of the

seats for the OBC category, as stipulated in the Reservation Act. It can also

be seen that the provisions of the Reservation Act as they stood, exempted

CEIs situated in tribal areas referred to in the Sixth Schedule to the

Constitution, from making any reservation for SCs and STs, which as a

matter of fact, was not the object behind introducing the enactment.

Recognising the fact that the composition of the population in the North

Eastern States ought to be given precedence, the Standing Committee

stated in its Report that while the extent of reservation of seats for SCs/STs
10 (2018) 7 SCC 1
Page 21 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




may be definite, OBC reservation may differ from State to State. It was with

the idea of reconciliating 50% cap on reservation for SCs/STs and 27% for

the OBC quota, that the Amendment Bill was introduced primarily to remove

the existing ambiguities and to overcome the difficulties that were being

faced by the CEIs established in the Sixth Schedule States, to

accommodate the aspirations of a large tribal population in that region.
27.      In the aforesaid backdrop, learned counsel for the appellants cannot

be heard to state that the amendments brought about in the Reservation

Act by legislating the Amendment Act were only directed towards tribal

States covered by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution and cannot be

made applicable to the State of Manipur, even though the definition of the

expression “Specified north eastern region” introduced by virtue of the

amended
Section 2(ia)
encompasses the State of Manipur. Nor is this Court

persuaded by the submission made on behalf of the appellants that the

second proviso was inserted in
Section 3
only to make sure that the

percentage of reservation provided for in
Section 3(i)
and (ii) of the
Parent

Act
would remain untouched.                          Accepting such a submission would

tantamount to negating the very aim and object of the Amendment Act,

which was enacted only to resolve the difficulties that were being faced by

the CEIs in implementing the Reservation Act when it came to the North

Eastern States, including the State of Manipur. The two provisos inserted in
Section 3
of the Parent Act are nothing but a recognition of the demography
Page 22 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO     OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




of the North Eastern States covered under the umbrella of “Specified north

eastern region” which have a substantial tribal population.
28.      It is in the light of the aforesaid factors that it has been held in the

impugned judgment that the respondent No. 1 – University was correct in

calculating the extent of reservation of seats in making admissions to

different courses, viz., 31% for ST candidates, 2% for SC candidates and

17% for OBC candidates which is in line with the mandate of the

Amendment Act. The aforesaid understanding of the respondent No. 1 –

University is also reflected from the affidavit filed by it in opposition to the

writ petition filed by the appellants, in particular, paras 5 and 9 thereof,

which are extracted below for ready reference :
“5.    That, in reply to the contents of the paragraph No. 4 of the writ
                      petition under reply, it is submitted that in view of the
                      provisions of the
Central Educational Institutions
                      (Reservation in Admission) Amendment Act, 2012
reservation of seats in respect of reserved categories,
                      candidates have to be 31%, 2% and 17% in respect of ST, SC
                      and OBC candidates respectively. Thus, the seats reserved
                      for SC have to be recalculated in accordance with the said
                      Amendment Act, and it was the same percentage of
                      reservation prevalent in the University prior to the
                      commencement of the Principal Act i.e. the
Central
                      Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act,
                      2006
. The distribution of seats/break-up for SC/ST/OBC/UR
                      based on the said proportion for reservation was intimated to the
                      Secretary to His Excellency the Governor of Manipur vide the
                      letter    dated     23-    07-2014,     after   obtaining     the
                      approval/concurrence of the Heads i and Deans of all subjects of
                      the Manipur University.
XXX            XXX      XXX
9.        That, in reply to the contents of para No. 1O of the writ
                      petition under-reply, it is submitted, as stated in the
                      foregoing paragraphs that the Central Educational
                      'Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act; 2006 has been
                      adopted by the Manipur University from the Academic
                      Session 2009-2010 by providing the quota of seats to the
                      candidates belonging to the reserved categories in
                      accordance with the said Act. It is to state that after the
                      enactment of the
Amendment Act, 2012
the provision of
Page 23 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




                    Ordinance 5.2 ceased to exist and the provision of the Act is
                    to be implemented/acted upon, as per the law.”
                                                                [emphasis supplied]
29.      It can be understood from the aforesaid averments made in the

affidavit that on the date immediately preceding the date of commencement

of the Reservation Act, the respondent No. 1 – University had been

reserving 2% seats for SC and 31% for ST candidates for purposes of

admission.         It has been strenuously argued by learned counsel for the

appellants that the meaning ascribed to the words “date immediately

preceding the date of commencement of the 2006 Act”, used in Clause (a)

of the second proviso to
Section 3
should be taken to mean the date just

before enactment of the Amendment Act, i.e., a roll back to the situation as

was prevalent when the Reservation Act had come into force viz. 15% for

SCs, 7.5% for STs and 27% for OBC candidates. In our opinion, any such

interpretation would strike at the root of the Amendment Act which was

legislated with the sole object of overcoming the ambiguities that had come

to the fore on working out the warp and woof of the Reservation Act,

namely, the inability to meet the aspirations of a large number of ST

candidates looking for opportunities to gain entry in CEIs located in the

areas subsequently defined as the “Specified north eastern region” in the

Amendment Act.
30.      Once the two provisos were inserted in
Section 3
of the Parent Act by

virtue of the Amendment Act, the general norms of reservation as laid down
Page 24 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




in Clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of
Section 3
of the Parent Act had to be restricted

in terms of the said provisos.                       While the first proviso deals with “State

seats”, if any, in a CEI situated in tribal areas referred to in the Sixth

Schedule to the Constitution, the second proviso addresses a situation

where there are no State seats in a CEI and the seats reserved for the

SC/ST candidates exceeds the percentage specified under Clauses (i) and
(ii) of
Section 3
(viz., 15% seats for SCs plus 7.5% for STs, totalling to

22.5% seats) or if the combined seats reserved for the SC and ST

candidates exceeds the sum total of the percentage as specified under

Clauses (i) and (ii). Two riders have also been dovetailed in the second

proviso to
Section 3
, namely Clauses (a) and (b). Clause (a) of the second

proviso, contemplates a situation where seats referred to in the second

proviso are less than 50% of the annual permitted strength on the date

immediately preceding the date of commencement of the Amendment Act.

Clause (b) provides for a situation where such seats are over 50% of the

annual permitted strength on the date immediately preceding the date of

commencement of the Amendment Act.                              In a situation contemplated in

Clause (a) of the second proviso, a restriction has been imposed on the

total percentage of seats required to be reserved for OBC candidates under
Section 3(iii)
of the Parent Act by limiting them to the balance seats

available after factoring in the combined percentage of seats specified in

Clauses (i) and (ii) of
Section 3
of the Parent Act, falling short of 50% of the

annual permitted strength. But in circumstances contemplated in Clause
Page 25 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017
(b), the Act recognizes the fact that no seats need be reserved for the OBC

candidates under Clause (iii) of
Section 3
of the Parent Act. However, this

is subject to the condition that the extent of reservation of seats for SC and

ST candidates shall not be reduced when it comes to CEIs established in

“Specified north eastern region”.                      This goes to demonstrate that the

underlying intent of the Amendment Act was to secure a particular

percentage of seats through reservation for a set of candidates and leave

some space for capping of seats for OBC candidates, depending on the

circumstances contemplated in Clauses (a) and (b) of the second proviso to

the amended
Section 3
.
31.      In the instant case, the respondent No.1 – University has clarified in

its affidavit that prior to commencement of the Reservation Act, the

prevalent percentage of reservation for ST and SC candidates was 31%

and 2% respectively. Nothing to the contrary has been brought forth by the

appellant. That being the position, we are in complete agreement with the

findings returned in the impugned judgment that the respondent No. 1 –

University was right in reverting back to the position obtaining immediately

before the commencement of the Reservation Act by reserving seats in

respect of ST, SC and OBC candidates, pegged at 31%, 2% and 17%

respectively which was in consonance with the Manipur State Reservation

Policy.
Page 26 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017
32.      The submission made by learned counsel for the appellants that the

respondent No. 1 – University was under a mandate to follow the norms

provided under Clauses (i) and (ii) of
Section 3
of the Parent Act while

giving a complete go by to the provisos inserted in the said provision by

virtue of the Amendment Act which, as per the learned counsel, could be

applied only to determine the percentage of seats required to be reserved

for OBC candidates, is devoid of merits and turned down. To our mind, the

learned Single Judge is perfectly right in making the observation that the

formulae for fixing the percentage of reservation for the SC and ST

candidates and for determining the percentage of seats to be reserved for

OBC candidates under the second proviso of
Section 3
, ought to be

gathered from the same source and any other interpretation would lead to

uncertainty.
33.      To put it differently, the reference point of the period for determining

the reservation quota for OBC candidates must be the same as that of the

SC and ST candidates for the simple reason that for working out the

reservation quota for OBC candidates would necessarily require one to find

out in the first instance, as to what would be the difference between 50% of

the annual permitted strength and the combined existing percentage for the

SC and ST candidates, as obtained on the date immediately preceding the

date of commencement of the Reservation Act. Both the issues are so

interlaced that to determine the percentage of reservation for OBC
Page 27 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017




candidates, one would have to undertake an exercise of determining the

percentage of seats to be reserved for SC and ST candidates, all within the

four corners of the second proviso inserted in
Section 3
of the Parent Act.

Any other interpretation sought to be assigned to the second proviso to
Section 3
inserted post-amendment, would make the proviso itself

unworkable and redundant and is, therefore, impermissible. Thus, we make

it clear that the general rules of reservation have been encapsulated in

Clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of
Section 3
of the Parent Act. But when it comes to

CEIs established in States falling under the definition of “Specified north

eastern region”, categorized in
Section 2(ia)
introduced by the Amendment

Act, the two new provisos appended to
Section 3
would govern the norms

of reservation which prescribes a different criteria, vis-à-vis the main

provision and would apply irrespective of whether they are situated in areas

covered by the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution or not.
34.      For the aforesaid reasons, the present appeal fails and the impugned

judgment is upheld. We endorse the view taken by the learned Single

Judge that after amendment of the Reservation Act, the respondent No. 1 –

University had to follow the reservation norms of 2% for SC candidates,

31% for ST candidates and 17% for OBC candidates which is in

consonance with the second proviso to Section 3 of the Reservation Act

inserted by virtue of the Amendment Act.
Page 28 of 29
CIVIL APPEAL NO   OF 2021 @ SLP© No. 34681 of 2017
35.      The appeal is accordingly dismissed while leaving the parties to bear

their own costs.
.................................J.
                                                                [L. NAGESWARA RAO]



                                                                ...................................J.
                                                                              [HIMA KOHLI]
New Delhi,
January 05, 2022.
Page 29 of 29