[Cites
22
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Sunil Kumar vs The State Of Bihar on 25 January, 2022
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                   CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 95 OF 2022


         Sunil Kumar                                                 ...Appellant(s)

                                                 Versus

         The State of Bihar and Anr.                           ...Respondent(s)


                                            JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.              Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

         and order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Patna dated

         17.08.2021 passed in Criminal Miscellaneous Application No. 13149 of

         2021 by which the High Court has released the respondent No.2 –

         original accused on bail in connection with alleged case No.328 of 2020

         – Vaishali Police Station for the offence under
Sections 147
,
148
,
149
,
341
,
323
,
324
,
427
,
504
,
506
,
307
and
302
IPC and
Section 27
of the

         Arms Act, the original informant – younger brother of the deceased has

         preferred the present appeal.
2.
Signature Not Verified
That the appellant herein – informant – younger brother of the
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.01.25
16:45:10 IST
Reason:
deceased Shardanand Bhagat lodged F.I.R. with the Vaishali, Bihar

         Police Station against all the accused named in the F.I.R. for the offence
1
under
Sections 147
,
148
,
149
,
341
,
323
,
324
,
427
,
504
,
506
,
307
and
302
IPC and
Section 27
of the Arms Act for having assaulted them and

killed his elder brother Shardanand Bhagat, who succumbed to the bullet

injury. As per the case of the prosecution, on fateful date of occurrence

accused Ramawatar Bhagat (respondent No.2 herein) and other

accused named in F.I.R. having armed with lethal weapons came to the

Bamboo Clumps of the informant and they started cutting the bamboos.

So, his brother - Shardanand Bhagat went to forbade them. On this

accused Ramawatar Bhagat ordered to kill Shardanand Bhagat and then

Shardanand Bhagat started fleeing away but he was chased and

surrounded by all the accused persons. After that the co-accused

Manish Kumar fired upon him from his rifle due to which Shardanand

Bhagat got injured and fell down and when the informant went to save

him, the co-accused namely Rambabu Kumar fired twice upon the

informant due to which the informant also got injured to some extent.

After that all the accused persons brutally assaulted the informant by

means of Lathi, Danda. When co-villagers started assembling there then

all the accused persons fled away. Later on, both the injured persons

were brought to the Sadar Hajipur and thereafter they were referred to

P.M.C.H. for treatment.
2.1   That during the course of treatment, Shardanand Bhagat

succumbed to the bullet injury.    So, later on,
Section 302
IPC was
2
added. All the accused persons were arrested including the respondent

No.2 - Ramawatar Bhagat. The bail application filed by the respondent

No.2 - Ramawatar Bhagat came to be rejected by the Sessions Court by

giving cogent reasons and by observing that the respondent No.2 -

accused Ramawatar Bhagat and other accused persons named in the

F.I.R. formed an unlawful assembly and thereafter killed Shardanand

Bhagat. The Sessions Court also observed that so far as respondent

No.2 - Ramawatar Bhagat is concerned, he has actively participated in

such heinous offence and therefore having considered the gravity of the

case, no case for bail is made out. That thereafter the respondent No.2

approached the High Court by way of present application under
Section

439
Cr.P.C. and by the impugned judgment and order without assigning

any cogent reasons and without even considering the gravity and nature

of the offence committed in which one of the persons got killed and after

narrating the submissions made on behalf of the accused and the State

and after observing “Considering the rival submissions as also the facts

and circumstances of the case, this Court for the purposes of grant of

bail is inclined to accept the submissions advanced by the petitioner’s

counsel. Prayer for bail of the petitioner is allowed.”

2.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment

and order passed by the High Court releasing the respondent No.2 on
3
bail, the original informant - younger brother of the deceased, who

himself is an injured eye witness has preferred the present appeal.
3.    Shri Rituraj Choudhary, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

appellant has vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances

of the case, the High Court has committed a grave error in releasing the

respondent No.2 accused on bail in a case where one person is killed.

3.1   It is vehemently submitted that while releasing the respondent

No.2 on bail as such no reasons have been assigned by the High Court

except after narrating the submissions observing that considering the

rival submissions as also the facts and circumstances of the case, the

Court is inclined to grant the bail. It is submitted that as held by this

Court in a catena of decisions, the aforesaid can hardly be said to be

sufficient reasons assigned while releasing the accused on bail.

Reliance is placed on the decisions of this Court in the case of
Ramesh

Bhavan Rathod Vs. Vishanbhai Hirabhai Makwana (Koli) and others
,

(2021) 6 SCC 230, as well as in the case of
Mahipal Vs. Rajesh Kumar
,

(2020) 2 SCC 118.
3.2   It is submitted that therefore the impugned order passed by the

High Court releasing the respondent No.2 on bail is just contrary to law
laid down by
this Court in the aforesaid decisions as well as the recent

decision of this Court in the case of
Bhoopendra Singh Vs. State of
4
Rajasthan & another
(Criminal Appeal No. 1279 of 2021, decided on

29.10.2021).
3.3    It is further submitted that even otherwise while releasing the

respondent No.2 accused on bail, the High Court has not at all adverted

to the relevant considerations while granting bail as laid down by this

Court in a catena of decisions, including the decision of this Court in the

case of Anil Kumar Yadav Vs. State (NCT of Delhi), (2018) 12 SCC
129.

3.4    It is further submitted that the High Court has even totally ignored

the antecedents of the accused. It is submitted that what is weighed

with the High Court seems to be a parity as one other co-accused

Shashi Bhushan Bhagat has been allowed bail.          It is submitted that

however, the High Court has not at all appreciated the distinct and

distinguished features so far as the case of co-accused Shashi Bhushan

Bhagat is concerned. It is submitted that the High Court ought to have

appreciated that the case of co-accused Shashi Bhushan Bhagat is

different from the respondent No.2 accused. It is further submitted that

the High Court has also not at all considered the fact that earlier the

respondent No.2 is also an accused in double murder case.            He is

involved in murder of the informant’s father and younger brother and for

which the cases are pending against him and the trial is at the stage of

recording of evidence. It is submitted that the High Court has not at all
5
noted and/or appreciated the fact that the respondent accused is

threatening and building pressure upon the informant either to withdraw

the aforesaid Session trial or to turn hostile in the aforesaid case as the

trial is at the evidence stage. It is submitted that the High Court has not

at all considered the aforesaid relevant aspects, which are very material

while considering the grant of bail while releasing the respondent No.2

on bail.
4.    Shri Devashish Bharuka, learned counsel appearing on behalf of

the State has supported the appellant and submitted that after

conclusion of the investigation, the respondent No.2 has been charge

sheeted for the offence under
Sections 147
,
148
,
149
,
302
,
34
and
447
IPC having murdered/killed Shardanand Bhagat – the elder brother of

the appellant. It is submitted that therefore the High Court ought not to

have released the respondent No.2 on bail in such a serious case for the

offence under
Section 302
IPC.
5.    Present appeal is vehemently opposed by Shri Atul Kumar, learned

counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No.2 accused.           It is

vehemently submitted that having accepted the submissions on behalf of

the accused and after considering all the facts of the case, the High

Court has released the accused – respondent No.2 on bail and the same

is not required to be interfered with by this Court in exercise of the

powers under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India.
6
5.1     It is submitted that the respondent No.2 is a 70 years old senior

citizen suffering from various ailments and has nothing to do with the

alleged offences. It is submitted that the alleged involvement in two

previous cases has not been concealed from the Hon’ble Court while

making application or submission of arguments and has also been

discussed by the High Court in the impugned order.

5.2     It is further submitted that even otherwise the evidence in other

cases is almost complete and only the doctor and the investigating

officer are remained to be examined. It is submitted that in the earlier

case, the respondent accused is enlarged on bail and that there is no

allegation of misuse of liberty granted by the High Court for 30 years.

5.3     Making the above submissions, it is prayed not to cancel the bail

and/or interfere with the impugned judgment and order passed by the

High Court releasing the respondent No.2 on bail.
6.      We have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at

length. We have also gone through the impugned judgment and order

passed by the High Court releasing the respondent No.2 accused on

bail.
7.      From the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court,

it can be seen that no reasons whatsoever have been assigned by the

High Court while releasing the respondent No.2 on bail. After recording

the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
7
accused and the State thereafter the High Court has only observed that

“considering the rival submissions as also the facts and circumstances of

the case, this Court for the purposes of grant of bail is inclined to accept

the submissions advanced by the petitioner’s counsel. Prayer for the

bail of the petitioner is allowed.” There is no further reasoning given at

all.   Neither the High Court has considered the gravity, nature and

seriousness of the offences alleged against the accused.
In the case of
Mahipal
(supra) while emphasizing to give brief reasons while granting

the bail to an accused in paragraphs 24 to 27, it is observed and held as

under:-
“24. There is another reason why the judgment of the
       learned Single Judge has fallen into error. It is a sound
       exercise of judicial discipline for an order granting or
       rejecting bail to record the reasons which have weighed
       with the court for the exercise of its discretionary power.
       In the present case, the assessment by the High Court is
       essentially contained in a single para which reads:
(
Rajesh    Kumar
case [
Rajesh     Kumar v. State   of
       Rajasthan
, 2019 SCC Online Raj 5197], SCC Online Raj
       para 4)

            “4. Considering the contentions put forth by
            the counsel for the petitioner and taking into
            account the facts and circumstances of the
            case and without expressing opinion on the
            merits of the case, this Court deems it just and
            proper to enlarge the petitioner on bail.”
25. Merely recording “having perused the record” and “on
       the facts and circumstances of the case” does not
       subserve the purpose of a reasoned judicial order. It is a
8
fundamental premise of open justice, to which our judicial
system is committed, that factors which have weighed in
the mind of the Judge in the rejection or the grant of bail
are recorded in the order passed. Open justice is
premised on the notion that justice should not only be
done, but should manifestly and undoubtedly be seen to
be done. The duty of Judges to give reasoned decisions
lies at the heart of this commitment. Questions of the
grant of bail concern both liberty of individuals undergoing
criminal prosecution as well as the interests of the
criminal justice system in ensuring that those who commit
crimes are not afforded the opportunity to obstruct justice.
Judges are duty-bound to explain the basis on which they
have arrived at a conclusion.
26.
In
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan [Kalyan
Chandra Sarkar
v. Rajesh Ranjan, (2004) 7 SCC 528], a
two-Judge Bench of this Court was required to assess the
correctness of a decision [Rajesh Ranjan v. State of
Bihar, Criminal Misc. No. 28179 of 2002, order dated 23-
5-2003 (Pat)] of a High Court enlarging the accused on
bail. Santosh Hegde, J. speaking for the Court, discussed
the law on the grant of bail in non-bailable offences and
held : (SCC p. 535, para 11)

      “11. The law in regard to grant or refusal of
      bail is very well settled. The court granting bail
      should exercise its discretion in a judicious
      manner and not as a matter of course.
Though at the stage of granting bail a detailed
      examination of evidence and elaborate
      documentation of the merit of the case need
      not be undertaken, there is a need to indicate
      in such orders reasons for prima facie
      concluding why bail was being granted
      particularly where the accused is charged of
      having committed a serious offence. Any
      order devoid of such reasons would suffer
      from non-application of mind.”
9
(emphasis supplied)
27. Where an order refusing or granting bail does not
      furnish the reasons that inform the decision, there is a
      presumption of the non-application of mind which may
      require the intervention of this Court. Where an earlier
      application for bail has been rejected, there is a higher
      burden on the appellate court to furnish specific reasons
      as to why bail should be granted.”
8.    A similar view has been expressed by this Court in the recent

decision    in   the   case    of
Ramesh       Bhavan     Rathod
(supra).

Emphasizing on giving brief reasons while granting bail, it is observed by

this Court
in
the above case
that though it is a well settled principle that

in determining as to whether bail should be granted, the High Court, or

for that matter, the Sessions Court deciding an application under
Section

439
Cr.P.C. would not launch upon a detailed evaluation of the facts on

merits since a criminal trial is still to take place. It is further observed that

however the Court granting bail cannot obviate its duty to apply a judicial

mind and to record reasons, brief as they may be, for the purpose of

deciding whether or not to grant bail. It is observed that the outcome of

the application has a significant bearing on the liberty of the accused on

one hand as well as the public interest in the due enforcement of

criminal justice on the other and the rights of the victims and their

families are at stake as well and therefore while granting bail, the Court

has to apply a judicial mind and record brief reasons for the purpose of
10
deciding whether or not to grant bail. It is further observed by this Court

in the aforesaid decision in paragraph 36 as under:
“36. Grant of bail Under
Section 439
of the Code of
      Criminal Procedure is a matter involving the exercise of
      judicial discretion. Judicial discretion in granting or
      refusing bail-as in the case of any other discretion which
      is vested in a court as a judicial institution-is not
      unstructured. The duty to record reasons is a significant
      safeguard which ensures that the discretion which is
      entrusted to the court is exercised in a judicious manner.
      The recording of reasons in a judicial order ensures that
      the thought process underlying the order is subject to
      scrutiny and that it meets objective standards of reason
      and justice.”
9.    Even otherwise the High Court has erred in not considering the

material relevant to the determination of whether the accused was to be

enlarged on bail. The High Court has not at all adverted to the relevant

considerations for grant of bail.
In the case of
Anil Kumar Yadav
(supra), it is observed and held by this Court that while granting bail, the

relevant considerations are, (i) nature of seriousness of the offence; (ii)

character of the evidence and circumstances which are peculiar to the

accused; and (iii) likelihood of the accused fleeing from justice; (iv) the

impact that his release may make on the prosecution witnesses, its

impact on the society; and (v) likelihood of his tampering.
10.   Even the High Court has also not at all considered the criminal

antecedents of the respondent No.2 - accused. Though it was pointed

out on behalf of the informant that the accused is involved in two cases
11
and that the appellant (informant) was restrained from proceeding further

in earlier cases pending against the accused, the High Court has simply

brushed aside the same and has not considered the same at all. The

High Court has noted the submission on behalf of the accused that one

other accused – Shashi Bhushan Bhagat has been released on bail.
However, the High Court has not at all considered whether the case of

Shashi Bhushan Bhagat is similar to that of the respondent No.2 –

accused - Ramawatar Bhagat or not. It appears that the High Court has

passed the order mechanically and in a most perfunctory manner.
In the

case of In
Neeru Yadav Vs. State of UP & Anr.
, (2016) 15 SCC 422,

after referring to a catena of judgments of this Court on the

considerations to be placed at balance while deciding to grant bail, it is

observed in paragraphs 15 and 18 as under:
“15. This being the position of law, it is clear as cloudless
     sky that the High Court has totally ignored the criminal
     antecedents of the accused. What has weighed with the
     High Court is the doctrine of parity. A history-sheeter
     involved in the nature of crimes which we have
     reproduced hereinabove, are not minor offences so that
     he is not to be retained in custody, but the crimes are of
     heinous nature and such crimes, by no stretch of
     imagination, can be regarded as jejune. Such cases do
     create a thunder and lightening having the effect
     potentiality of torrential rain in an analytical mind. The law
     expects the judiciary to be alert while admitting these kind
     of accused persons to be at large and, therefore, the 11
     emphasis is on exercise of discretion judiciously and not
     in a whimsical manner.
xxx
12
18. Before parting with the case, we may repeat with
      profit that it is not an appeal for cancellation of bail as the
      cancellation is not sought because of supervening
      circumstances. The annulment of the order passed by the
      High Court is sought as many relevant factors have not
      been taken into consideration which includes the criminal
      antecedents of the accused and that makes the order a
      deviant one. Therefore, the inevitable result is the
      lancination of the impugned order.”
11.   Applying the law
laid down by
this Court in the aforesaid decisions

to the facts of the case on hand and more particularly considering the

fact that respondent No.2 is a history sheeter and is having a criminal

antecedent and is involved in the double murder of having killed the

father and brother of the informant and the trial of these cases is at the

crucial stage of recording evidence and there are allegations of

pressurizing the informant and the witnesses, the impugned judgment

and order passed by the High Court releasing the respondent No.2 on

bail is absolutely unsustainable and the same cannot stand. The High

Court has not at all considered the gravity, nature and seriousness of the

offences alleged.
12.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the present

appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and order passed by the

High Court releasing the respondent No.2 on bail is hereby quashed and

set aside. On quashing and setting aside the impugned judgment and

order passed by the High Court releasing the respondent No.2 on bail,

now the respondent No.2 accused to surrender before the concerned jail
13
authority / before the concerned Court forthwith.   Present appeal is

accordingly allowed.
………………………………….J.
                                         [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;                            ………………………………….J.
JANUARY 25, 2022.                       [SANJIV KHANNA]
14