[Cites
7
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Keshav vs Gian Chand on 24 January, 2022
Author:
Sanjiv Khanna
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
M.R. Shah
NON-REPORTABLE

                                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO. 364 OF 2022


                         KESHAV AND OTHERS                                .....     APPELLANT(S)

                                                     VERSUS

                         GIAN CHAND AND ANOTHER                           ..... RESPONDENT(S)




                                                     JUDGMENT
`
                         SANJIV KHANNA, J.
The judgment under challenge dated 8 th August 2018

                                passed by the Single Judge of the High Court of Himachal

                                Pradesh at Shimla allows the second appeal and decrees the suit

                                filed by the plaintiffs Gian Chand and Dhanbir, setting aside

                                concurrent findings of the trial court and the first appellate court.

                                Aggrieved, Keshav and five other defendants have preferred this

                                appeal. The dispute relates to land admeasuring 13 bighas 8

                                biswas being 7/20th share of total land measuring 38 bighas 6
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
biswas in Mouza Jakharal, and 1.17 bighas being 1/3 rd share in
Natarajan
Date: 2022.01.24
16:38:34 IST
Reason:
Civil Appeal No. 364/2022                                         Page 1 of 13
5.12 bighas in Mohalo Talai, which land was owned by Hardei,

       who died issueless in 1991. Gian Chand is the son of Hardei’s

       brother, whereas Keshav is her sister’s son.
2.     Gian Chand and Dhanbir, on 4 th/6th December 1991, instituted

       Civil Suit No. 149 of 1991 for declaration that late Hardei had

       gifted the land to them during her lifetime vide gift deed dated 23rd

       December 1985 (Ex. PW-3/A), which was registered with the Sub-

       Registrar, Salooni, on 1st January 1986. Gian Chand and Dhanbir

       were put in possession of the land by Hardei. Keshav in

       connivance with defendants No. 2 to 6 had got mutation recorded

       in his favour, which mutation was wrong and illegal and did not

       affect their rights under the gift deed. Gian Chand and Dhanbir

       had prayed for: (i) decree of declaration that they were owners in

       possession of the land; (ii) a decree of permanent injunction

       restraining Keshav and others from interfering with their

       possession of the land; and (iii) in case they are disposed from the

       land by the defendants during the pendency of the suit, a decree

       for possession.
3.     Keshav and other defendants contested the suit on several

       grounds including validity of the relied upon gift deed. Keshav
Civil Appeal No. 364/2022                                         Page 2 of 13
claimed that he was a tenant in occupancy of the land for over 15

       years, a fact admitted by Hardei before the revenue authorities.

       Keshav had therefore acquired rights over the land. Hardei, during

       her lifetime, had denied execution of the gift deed and opposed

       the request of mutation of the land in favour of Gian Chand and

       Dhanbir, which request for mutation was rejected in 1989.
4.     The Sub-Judge 1st Class, Chamba, Himachal Pradesh, vide

       judgment and decree dated 17 th December 1997, while accepting

       that the gift deed was a registered document, held that the

       document was of decrepit origin. The gift deed was not signed by

       Gian Chand. There was contradiction and lack of clarity whether

       post the execution and before registration, the gift deed was

       handed over to Hardei, the first plaintiff or to the other plaintiff.

       Hardei used to reside with Keshav, who would look after and take

       care of her. Keshav also performed her last rites. Given these

       facts, execution of a gift deed by Hardei in favour of Gian Chand

       and Dhanbir would not arise. Hardei in her life time had opposed

       and objected to the request for mutation of the land in dispute

       made by the plaintiffs. Ex. PA, Mutation No. 193 of Mouza

       Jakharal recites the statement of Hardei before the revenue

       authority, wherein she had admitted that it was Keshav who was
Civil Appeal No. 364/2022                                          Page 3 of 13
looking after her and cultivating her land for the last 15 years. She

       had denied having executed the gift deed in favour of the plaintiffs.

       The plaintiffs’ version that Keshav took possession of the land in

       dispute sometime in the early 1990s was false as Raghu (DW-2)

       and Kanth Ram (DW-3), who had land adjoining to the disputed

       land, had categorically deposed that Keshav was in possession of

       land for the last 18 to 20 years. On the question of possession of

       the land, the trial court agreed with Keshav that he was in

       possession of the land as a tenant of Hardei for the last 15 years.

       The suit preferred by the plaintiffs was, accordingly, dismissed.
5.     Civil Appeal No. 18 of 1998, preferred by the plaintiffs before the

       District Judge, Chamba Division, was also dismissed with the first

       appellate court evaluating the evidence on record to affirm that the

       execution of the gift deed by Hardei in favour of the plaintiffs was

       a delusion. The gift deed statedly executed on 23 rd December

       1985 and registered on 1st January 1986, was not produced for

       mutation till 1989, where also, Hardei had opposed the mutation

       and denied execution of gift deed in favour of the plaintiffs. She

       had stated before the revenue authority that Keshav was in

       possession of the land in dispute for about the last 15 years.

       Further, there was ample evidence to show that Keshav was
Civil Appeal No. 364/2022                                         Page 4 of 13
looking after Hardei and taking care of her needs. Therefore, there

       was no reason for Hardei to execute a gift deed favouring the

       plaintiffs. The plaintiffs were never in possession of the suit land

       even for the period after execution of gift deed in 1986, and till the

       institution of the suit in 1991. The revenue entries for the said

       period did not support the plaintiffs. As a result, the appeal was

       dismissed.
6.     The second appeal, RSA No. 236 of 1999, preferred by the

       plaintiffs was allowed by the High Court vide its decision dated

       14th June 2010, reversing the concurrent findings on the ground

       that the trial court and the first appellate court had misread and

       misinterpreted the documentary and oral evidence. We need not

       refer to the reasoning of the High Court, as this Court in Civil

       Appeal No. 11059 of 2017 vide order dated 28th August 2017 set

       aside the judgment and remitted the matter to the High Court for

       fresh hearing after framing of an appropriate substantial question

       of law. This Court observed that the substantial question of law so

       framed by the High Court was vague and not proper.
7.     By the impugned judgment dated 8 th August 2018, the High Court

       has allowed RSA No. 236 of 1999, primarily for the reasons that in
Civil Appeal No. 364/2022                                          Page 5 of 13
terms of execution, the gift deed satisfies the legal mandates of
Sections 122
and
123
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and

       being a registered document, it enjoys presumption of truth.

       Reliance has been placed on the depositions by Devia (PW-4), an

       attesting witness and by Ratan Chand (PW-3), a witness who was

       present during the proceedings at the time of the registration.

       Devia had accepted that Hardei was suffering from auditory

       impairment, but no credence should be given to that portion of the

       cross-examination, as at the time of registration Hardei was

       explained and made to understand the contents of the document

       and she had then appended her thumb impression. The fact that

       Hardei was residing and living with Keshav was not a good ground

       to doubt the execution of the gift deed. The findings as recorded

       by the trial court and the first appellate court were not based on a

       proper and mature appreciation of evidence on record. Answering

       the substantial questions of law in favour of the plaintiffs, the

       second appeal was allowed and the suit was decreed.
8.     Devia (PW-4), the witness to the gift deed at the time of its

       execution on 23rd December 1985, Ratan Chand (PW-3), who had

       signed the deed before the Sub-Registrar, Salooni, at the time of

       registration on 1st January 1986, as well as Gian Chand (PW-1),
Civil Appeal No. 364/2022                                        Page 6 of 13
have deposed as to the execution of this gift deed. Yet, there are

       several circumstances and supporting facts relied by the trial court

       and first appellate court on absence of voluntariness and animus

       and thus, the gift deed was held to be an invalid and spurious

       document. The facts highlighted by the trial court and the first

       appellate court are as under:
(i)    Hardei was an old illiterate lady who used to live in a village

              with her sister’s son Keshav. She did not have any children

              and Keshav used to take care of her daily needs and

              requirements. No reason is forthcoming as to why Hardei

              would execute the gift deed in her lifetime in favour of the

              plaintiffs, when she was living with and was dependant on

              Keshav for her day-to-day necessities. The land was her

              source of income and comfort.
(ii)   Devia (PW-4) has deposed that he knew Hardei, who was

              suffering from auditory impairment. Further, as per Devia,

              Hardei had taken him with her to Chamba to get the gift

              deed written from a scribe in favour of the plaintiffs. Gian

              Chand (PW-2) while admitting that he was present when the

              gift deed was executed by Hardei, did not sign the same as

              token of acceptance. The gift deed was registered with the
Civil Appeal No. 364/2022                                          Page 7 of 13
Sub-Registrar, Salooni, after about seven days on 1 st

               January 1986. If the gift deed was to be registered at

               Salooni, there was no need for Hardei, an old illiterate

               woman who had ailments, to go to Chamba for drafting of

               the gift deed. The scribe at Chamba was not known to her.
The trial court has rightly referred to the discrepancy in the

               statements of witnesses as to the person who had the gift

               deed between 23rd December 1985 and 1st January 1986.

               Admittedly, Keshav was not present at the time of execution

               of the gift deed nor at the time of its registration.
(iii)   The plaintiffs did not take any steps post the execution of the

               gift deed for mutation of the land in their favour from 1986 till

               1989.
(iv)    Hardei had denied execution of the gift deed before the

               revenue authority in 1989, when the plaintiffs had moved an

               application for mutation of the land in their favour.

               Application filed by the plaintiffs for mutation was rejected on

               13th May 1989 in view of the contest and objection raised by

               Hardei. The plaintiffs did not challenge and question the

               rejection during the lifetime of Hardei.
Civil Appeal No. 364/2022                                              Page 8 of 13
(v)    Hardei had accepted before the revenue authority that

              Keshav was looking after her and was cultivating her land

              for the last 15 years.
(vi)   The plaintiffs filed the suit in question in December 1991

              after Hardei had died, and two and a half years after their

              application for mutation was rejected on 13th May 1989.
9.     The concurrent findings of the lower courts delve into the context

       and factual aspects surrounding the primary evidence viz., gift

       deed, to conclude that the plaintiffs case lacks base for a bona

       fide claim for decree of declaration. Appreciation of evidence is an

       exercise      based   on   facts   and   circumstances   where    the

       preponderance of probability can take varying form and

       configurations. What facts and circumstances have to be

       established to prove the execution of a document depends on the

       pleas put forward. Ordinarily, no one is expected to sign or

       execute a document without knowing its contents, but if it is

       pleaded that the party executing the document did not know the

       contents thereof then it may, in certain circumstances, be

       necessary for the party seeking to prove the document to place

       material before the court to satisfy it that the party who executed
Civil Appeal No. 364/2022                                         Page 9 of 13
the document had the knowledge of its contents. 1 Considering that

       the very origin of the gift deed was disputed by the executant

       during her lifetime, the lower courts were right in weighing the

       evidence of the gift deed on the touchstone of its validity first,

       rather than its form and content. The fact in issue in the present

       case is the voluntariness and animus necessary for the execution

       of a valid gift deed, which is to be examined on the basis of

       evidence led by the parties who could depose for the truth of this

       fact in issue. Decision and determination of the fact in issue is by

       examination of the oral evidence of those persons who can

       vouchsafe for the truth of the facts in issue. The impugned

       judgment in the second appeal by the High Court, unfortunately,

       chose to ignore and not deal with the fact in issue in the

       background of the case, but was completely influenced by the

       evidence led to support execution and registration of the

       document, and not whether execution was voluntary and in

       exercise of unfettered will to effect gratuitous transfer of land in

       favour of the plaintiffs.       When a person obtains any benefit from

       another, the court would call upon the person who wishes to

       maintain the right to gift to discharge the burden of proving that he

       exerted no influence for the purpose of obtaining the document.

1 Rao Saheb v. Rangnath Gopalrao Kawathekar (Dead By LRs) and Others, (1972) 4 SCC 181.
Civil Appeal No. 364/2022                                                      Page 10 of 13
Corollary to this principle finds recognition in sub-section (3) to
Section 16
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 which relates to

       pardanashin ladies. The courts can apply this principle to old,

       illiterate, ailing or infirm persons who may be unable to

       comprehend the nature of document or contents thereof. Equally,

       one who bargains in the matter of advantage with a person who

       places confidence in him is bound to show that a proper and

       reasonable use has been made of that confidence. The burden of

       establishing perfect fairness, adequacy and equity is cast upon

       the person in whom the confidence has been reposed. Therefore,

       in cases of fiduciary relationships when validity of the transaction

       is in question it is relevant to see whether the person conferring

       the benefit on the other had competent and independent advice. 2
10.    The question whether a person was in a position to dominate the

       will of the other and procure a certain deed by undue influence is

       a question of fact, and a finding thereon is a finding of fact, and if

       arrived at fairly in accordance with the procedure prescribed, it is

       not liable to be reopened in second appeal. 3 In the present case,

       the plea as to invalidity of the gift deed is not to be decided on

       general presumption and assertion. Concurrent findings of facts
2 Krishna Mohan Kul alias
Nani Charan Kul and Anr. v. Pratima Maity and Ors.
, (2004) 9 SCC 468.
3
Ladli Parshad Jaiswal v. The Karnal Distillery Co. Ltd., Karnal and Others
, AIR 1963 SC 1279; and
Bellachi (D) by LRs. v. Pakeeran, (2009) 12 SCC 95.
Civil Appeal No. 364/2022                                                            Page 11 of 13
arrived at in the present case were based upon a holistic

       examination of the entire evidence relating to execution and

       validity of the gift deed. The lower courts did not adopt a legalistic

       approach but took into account not one but several factual facets

       to accept the version given by Keshav that the gift deed was not a

       valid document. These concurrent findings are not perverse but

       rather good findings based upon cogent and relevant material and

       evidence on record. These findings of the facts can be interfered

       in the second appeal only if they are perverse or some gross

       illegalities have been committed in arriving at such findings. To

       reverse the findings is not only to assess errors but also deal with

       the reasons given by the court below and record findings and

       grounds for upsetting the conclusion.4
11.    We have elaborately referred to the reasoning given by the trial

       court, which the first appellate court had independently examined

       and affirmed. The findings were recorded after                           in-depth

       consideration of the factual matrix, including the statement of

       Hardei, an illiterate and aged woman, who during her lifetime in

       1989, had staunchly refuted having executed any gift deed

       transferring the property to the plaintiffs. Hardei was residing with

4 See
Nazir Mohamed v. J. Kamala and Others
, 2020 SCC OnLine SC 676;
Hero Vinoth (Minor) v.
Seshammal
, (2006) 5 SCC 545.
Civil Appeal No. 364/2022                                                     Page 12 of 13
Keshav, who was looking after her and providing for all her needs.
Further, the plaintiffs did not take any steps to get the mutation of

       the land records for about four years from 1 st January 1986 till

       1989. The rejection by the revenue authority in 1989 remained

       unchallenged till Hardei died in 1991. The views and findings

       recorded by the lower courts are well reasoned and have taken

       into account several factors that repel and contradict the claim of a

       valid execution of the gift deed by Hardei favouring the plaintiffs.
12.    Recording       the   aforesaid,   we   allow   the     present         appeal.
Consequently, we set aside the impugned judgment and uphold

       the decision and decree passed by the trial court and affirmed by

       the first appellate court. There will be no order as to costs.
......................................J.
                                                                       (M.R. SHAH)



                                                   ......................................J.
                                                            (SANJIV KHANNA)

NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 24, 2022.
Civil Appeal No. 364/2022                                                  Page 13 of 13