[Cites
2
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Delhi Commission For Protection Of ... vs Union Of India on 25 January, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
WP(C) 572/2021
                                                             1

                                                                                                 Reportable


                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                               CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION


                                           Writ Petition (Civil) No 572 of 2021



                      Delhi Commission for Protection of Child Rights                    Petitioner(s)




                                                        Versus


                      Union of India and Another                                         Respondents




                                                       JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


                      1   These proceedings under
Article 32
of the Constitution have been instituted

                          by the Delhi Commission for Protection of Child Rights 1. The specific reliefs

                          which have been sought concern the need to provide effective access to

                          vaccination to pregnant women and lactating mothers. These reliefs can

                          broadly be summarized as follows:
(i)   Categorization of pregnant women and lactating mothers as belonging

                                to the high risk category to be given priority in vaccination;
1 “D
CPC
R”
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2022.02.02
16:44:12 IST
Reason:
WP(C) 572/2021
2
(ii)   Their inclusion in the vaccination drives and setting up of a task force to

                   operationalize a standard operating procedure 2 for monitoring of their

                   health post vaccination;
(iii) Developing educational materials and SOPs for women belonging to this

                   group to understand the effects of vaccination and ensure informed

                   consent;
(iv) Creation of a registry for vaccinated pregnant women and lactating

                   mothers to allow effective and constant monitoring of their health;
(v)    Setting up of separate vaccination centers to protect this class of

                   persons from untoward infection;
(vi) Engaging Anganwadi centres and ASHA workers for vaccination drives

                   as a method of outreach particularly for women belonging to

                   underprivileged socio economic backgrounds; and
(vii) Providing an option on the Co-WIN portal so as to allow pregnant women

                   and lactating mothers to classify and identify themselves such that they

                   can be given priority while providing slots for vaccination.


     2      Initially, a preliminary affidavit was filed on 2 October 2021 by the Additional

            Commissioner in the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 3. The

            affidavit has detailed out steps taken for (i) constituting the National



2 “SOP”
3 “MoHFW”
WP(C) 572/2021
3
Technical Advisory Group on Immunization 4 and National Expert Group on

             Vaccination Administration for Covid-195; (ii) steps taken for supporting the

             vaccination of pregnant women; (iii) steps taken for tracking Adverse Events

             Following Immunization6; and (iv) support provided through vaccination

             centres and ASHA and Anganwadi workers. The affidavit states that:
(i)    Initially, pregnant women and lactating mothers were not eligible for

                    the COVID-19 vaccination as there was no sufficient evidence regarding

                    its safety and efficacy. Subsequently, the World Health Organization and

                    other experts recommended that the benefits of the vaccine for this

                    group outweigh its potential risks;
(ii)   Based on the recommendations of experts, a national consultation was

                    held on the subject with representatives of State Governments, medical

                    colleges, Federation of Obstetric and Gynecological Societies of India

                    (FOGSI), NGOs, among others, to gain consensus on the subject of

                    vaccinating pregnant women and lactating mothers and spreading

                    awareness regarding the vaccination drive;
(iii) The MoHFW approved the vaccination of pregnant women on 2 July

                    2021 and vaccination for lactating mothers was approved on 19 May

                    2021. Operational guidelines for vaccination of pregnant women were

                    released on 2 July 2021, which recommended that all pregnant women

                    visiting for antenatal care should be informed of the risks and benefits
4 “NTAGI”
5 “NEGVAC”
6 “AEFI”
WP(C) 572/2021
4
of COVID-19 vaccines and their likely side effects;
(iv) The MoHFW has directed all States and Union Territories to engage with

                 professional bodies such as FOGSI, Indian Medical Association, Indian

                 Academy of Paediatrics, National Neonatology Forum;
(v)   Since the full impact of the vaccines on pregnancy outcomes for the

                 woman and the fetus are unclear, all AEFIs are monitored through a

                 well-structured and robust surveillance system. For this purpose,

                 National   AEFI   Surveillance   Operational   Guidelines   and   COVID-19

                 Operational Guidelines have been formulated;
(vi) A causality assessment is conducted by the designated AEFI committee

                 and AEFI amongst the beneficiaries of vaccination are reported by the

                 vaccinator or District Immunization Officer through the Co-WIN portal;
(vii) A multi-centric project to study and document the adverse events

                 occurring in pregnant women vaccinated with the COVID-19 vaccine is

                 being initiated across the country;
(viii) All pregnant women who are vaccinated are line-listed on the Co-WIN

                 portal with their demographic details and any AEFI reported is also

                 entered on the portal to ensure that a tracking mechanism is

                 maintained;
(ix) As regards the vaccination drive for pregnant women and lactating

                 mothers, States/UTs have been advised that they may prioritize
WP(C) 572/2021
5
vaccination      through   strategies   like   dedicated   time   period   for

                 vaccination of pregnant women and lactating mothers, designate

                 special days for their vaccination, and identify centres for vaccination

                 of this group;
(x)   ASHA and Anganwadi workers form a critical support system as frontline

                 workers by linking the vaccine beneficiaries and the service providers.

                 Thus, dedicated Information Education Communication material has

                 been developed for frontline workers (including ASHA and Anganwadi

                 workers and vaccinators); and
(xi) An option has been provided on the Co-WIN portal to identify a woman

                 as pregnant to ensure the woman can get vaccinated at the nearest

                 centre.
3     On 3 December 2021, this Court directed the petitioner to formulate

           concrete suggestions to strengthen the existing framework of vaccination of

           pregnant women and lactating mothers and share it with the Union

           Government. The petitioner shared these suggestions and thereafter, a

           further affidavit dated 13 January 2022 has been filed by the Union

           Government which has particularly dealt with AEFIs and the mechanism for

           identification of pregnant women and lactating mothers, in response to the

           petitioner’s suggestions. The affidavit states that:
(i)   Regarding the declaration and identification of pregnant women and

                 lactating mothers at the time of vaccination, only a verbal declaration,

                 on a purely voluntary basis, is required regarding the status of
WP(C) 572/2021
6
pregnancy/lactation, which can be verified at the time of vaccination.
Once the declaration is made, the vaccinator provides the beneficiary

                  with information about risks of COVID-19 infection in pregnancy, the

                  benefits and side-effects of vaccination;
(ii)   The guidelines issued by MoHFW require reporting of any suspected

                  AEFI irrespective of the time interval between the day of vaccination

                  and the day of onset of symptoms. Thus, there is no time limitation for

                  reporting AEFIs;
(iii) The current AEFI surveillance system collects data of all adverse events

                  related to COVID-19 vaccine beneficiaries, including pregnant women or

                  lactating mothers. Under this system, (a) the District Immunization

                  Officers have been instructed to set up a network with private hospitals

                  to report AEFIs; (b) training has been given to State officers, medical

                  officers, private practitioners and frontline health workers on their role

                  in AEFI surveillance; (c) Auxiliary Nurse Midwifes at block/planning unit

                  have been instructed to notify all AEFIs and medical officers have been

                  instructed to look for any patterns; (d) pregnant women are being given

                  antenatal care services through government or private health care

                  facilities;
(iv) Medical treatment is being provided free of cost to beneficiaries who

                  suffer AEFIs in all government health institutions. States/UTs have been

                  asked to identify at least one AEFI management centre in each block.
WP(C) 572/2021
7
Additionally, MoHFW has established a patient to doctor telemedicine

                 platform;
(v)   Regarding the publication of data, the affidavit states that once the

                 causality assessment is done, the data regarding AEFIs is made

                 available in public domain on the website of MoHFW. Since all AEFIs

                 following vaccination may not be causally linked to the vaccination,

                 publication of data without causality assessment is inappropriate as it

                 may increase vaccination hesitancy; and
(vi) Regarding the creation of the specific filter on the Co-WIN portal for

                 pregnant women and lactating mothers, the affidavit states that this

                 group has to be identified and counselled before the vaccination and

                 there is no method of verification at the time of booking of slots.


     4     We have heard Ms Vrinda Grover, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

           petitioner and Ms Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor General. An

           intervention application has been filed by Mr Ambar H Koiri, who is

           represented by Mr Nilesh Ojha.
5     During the course of her submissions, Ms Vrinda Grover, learned counsel has

           submitted that the affidavits which have been filed by the Union of India

           would substantially resolve the concerns which have been raised in the

           petition.   Learned   counsel   submitted    that   D
CPC
R      instituted   these

           proceedings with the object of ensuring that vaccination for pregnant women

           and lactating mothers is taken up on a priority.
WP(C) 572/2021
8
6     The decision to enable vaccination for lactating mothers was taken on 19

           May 2021 while the decision to permit vaccination for pregnant women was

           announced on 2 July 2021. The Court has been apprised of the fact that in

           taking these decisions, the Government has been guided by its own expert

           groups as well as by a consensus which has evolved at the international

           level through the World Health Organization.
7     Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners has highlighted three

           concerns which, according to the petitioners, remain and which may be

           addressed at a suitable level by the government. We shall outline the

           concerns which have been presented during the course of the oral

           submissions by Ms Vrinda Grover, seriatim:
Firstly, it has been submitted that the framework for vaccination of pregnant

          women and lactating mothers envisages a voluntary verbal declaration by

          the person who seeks vaccination, at the time of registration. In this context,

          it has been submitted that the woman who visits a vaccination centre may

          not necessarily be aware of the need to make such a declaration and in the

          event that she is not informed by the personnel at the vaccination centre,

          the recording of her status either as a pregnant woman or lactating mother

          may remain to be incorporated in the data set. Hence, it has been submitted

          that if the Co-WIN portal is suitably modified so as to incorporate a

          declaration at the time of registration, this would facilitate the monitoring of

          the health of the vaccinated woman or mother, as the case may be.
WP(C) 572/2021
9
Secondly, it has been suggested that in order to further support the

          surveillance measures which have been instituted by the government for

          monitoring AEFIs, targeted tracking of pregnant women and lactating

          mothers can be considered so as to bolster the process of monitoring.


          Thirdly, it has been emphasized that when adequate data sets become

          available, the publication of data will enhance the confidence in the process

          of vaccination.
8     Ms Aishwarya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor General while responding to

           the above suggestions submitted that each of the three suggestions has

           been carefully evaluated by experts within the Union Government. The

           Additional Solicitor General submits that in the ongoing process where

           decisions are being continuously evolved, the government has certain

           concerns over implementing the suggestions at the present stage but, is

           open to further deliberation with the expert bodies.


     9     On the first aspect in particular, it has been submitted that with the process

           of walk-in-registration, the registration on the Co-WIN portal has become

           subsidiary. However, it has been submitted that the reason why it was

           believed that a verbal declaration at the time of vaccination would suffice

           was to ensure that no person is dissuaded from seeking vaccination by

           introducing an additional column at the time of registration. On targeted

           tracking, it has been submitted that a robust mechanism has already been

           put into place by the Union Government. As regards the publication of data,

           it has been submitted that at this stage, such a proposal may be premature,
WP(C) 572/2021
10
but the Union Government is seized of the issue. Moreover, it has been

           submitted that the publication of raw data may not be appropriate and the

           data is published after due scrutiny and assessment by experts.


     10    This Court is cognizant that the suggestions which have been made on

           behalf of the petitioners do raise issues of policy. For instance, any mandate

           for disclosure at the stage of registration has to factor in and balance

           concerns over the privacy of the person. There may well not be one answer

           or a single acceptable solution particularly because pregnant women and

           lactating mothers belong to different social and economic strata. The

           government has to take a decision bearing mind their welfare, safety and

           dignity. Likewise, the need to further enhance the existing protocols for

           monitoring AEFIs can be carefully evaluated by the expert groups. The

           Additional Solicitor General has already stated that data is placed in the

           public domain after being scrutinized at an expert level within the

           government. The suggestions made before the Court have emanated from a

           statutory body. They can be considered with the same sense of cooperation

           which has pervaded the judicial process during the hearing of the present

           petition.
11    The three suggestions which have been made by the petitioners would

           undoubtedly involve an application of domain knowledge by experts in the

           area. The Court may not be in the best position to take a decision unaided by

           an expert determination. Hence, we are of the view that having regard to the

           inclination which has been shown by the Union Government, it would be
WP(C) 572/2021
11
appropriate if the three suggestions which have been outlined earlier are

           duly placed before the concerned expert groups as set out in the affidavit of

           the Union Government so that the suggestions can be deliberated upon at a

           policy level at an appropriate stage. This Court has constituted a National

           task Force previously comprised of eminent experts from across the country

           and the Union Government may engage with them as well to seek

           suggestions for eliciting its views and suggestions in the area. We appreciate

           the steps which have been taken by D
CPC
R in moving these proceedings

           and equally, the sense of responsibility with which suggestions have been

           made and discussed both by Ms Vrinda Grover appearing for D
CPC
R and by

           Ms Aishwarya Bhati, Additional Solicitor General appearing for the Union

           Government in the course of these proceedings.
12    Leaving it open to the Union of India to take a considered view after

           evaluating the suggestions, we dispose of the petition.




     13    We further note that Mr Nilesh Ojha, counsel appearing on behalf of the

           intervenor, has urged before this Court that the intervenor has conducted

           studies which reflect that COVID-19 vaccines pose a risk to pregnant women

           or the fetus. On this basis, the intervenor has sought a direction from this

           Court to stop the administration of vaccination to pregnant women. The

           issues raised by the intervenor clearly lie in the policy domain and this Court

           cannot take medical decisions regarding the safety of COVID-19 vaccination

           among pregnant and lactating persons. The affidavits of the Union of India
WP(C) 572/2021
12
indicate that NTAGI and NEGVAC have taken great care in recommending

           vaccination for these groups only after receiving guidance from the World

           Health Organization and other domain experts. Thus, we do not find it

           necessary to issue any directions to the Union Government as regards this

           intervention application.
14    Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
….....…...…......………………........J.
                                                    [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                                    ….....…...…......………………........J.
                                                          [Sanjiv Khanna]

     New Delhi;
January 25, 2022
     CKB
WP(C) 572/2021
13
ITEM NO.13             Court 4 (Video Conferencing)   SECTION PIL-W
                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A
                           RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

                    Writ Petition (Civil) No.572/2021


DELHI COMMISSION FOR PROTECTION OF CHILD RIGHTS            Petitioner(s)

                             VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                      Respondent(s)

(With appln.(s)     for     IA   No.63258/2021   -   EXEMPTION   FROM   FILING
AFFIDAVIT)


Date : 25-01-2022 These matters were called on for hearing today.


CORAM :
HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE D.Y. CHANDRACHUD
                 HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA


For Petitioner(s)     Ms.   Vrinda Grover, Adv.
Mr.   Kumar Shanu, Adv.
Mr.   Soutik Banerjee, Adv.
Ms.   Ayushi Rajput, Adv.
Ms.   Rangoli Seth, Adv.
Mr. Prateek K Chadha, AOR

For Respondent(s)     Ms.   Aishwarya Bhati, ASG
                      Mr.   Gurmeet Singh Makker, AOR
                      Mr.   Rajat Nair, Adv.
                      Mr.   Kanu Agrawal, Adv.
                      Ms.   Deepabali Dutta, Adv.
                      Mr.   Ketan Paul, Adv.


For Intervener        Mr. Nilesh C. Ojha, Adv.
WP(C) 572/2021
14
Mr.   Prem Sunder Jha, AOR
                           Mr.   Ishwarlal S. Agarwal, Adv.
                           Ms.   Dipali N. Ojha, Adv.
                           Mr.   Pratik Jain Saklecha, Adv.
                           Mr.   Shivam Mehra, Adv.
                           Mr.   Abhishek Mishra, Adv.
                           Ms.   Sidhi A. Dhamnaskar, Adv.
                           Ms.   Snehal S. Surve, Adv.
                           Ms.   Poonam S. Rajbhar, Adv.
                           Ms.   Deepika G. Jaiswal, Adv.
                           Mr.   Mangesh B. Dongre, Adv.
                           Mr.   Pritam Bishwas, Adv.
                           Mr.   Anant Misra, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                                 O R D E R

      1     The Petition is disposed of in terms of the signed reportable judgment.

      2     Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
(CHETAN KUMAR)                (SAROJ KUMARI GAUR)
                  A.R.-cum-P.S.                  COURT MASTER
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)