[Cites
37
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
The Employees State Insurance ... vs Union Of India on 20 January, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
A S Bopanna
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable



                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                  Civil Appeal No. 152 of 2022



          The Employees’ State Insurance Corporation              ....Appellant



                                            Versus


          Union of India & Ors.                                  .... Respondents
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2022.01.20
16:32:13 IST
Reason:
1
JUDGMENT


Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


A   Introduction ...........................................................................................................3

B   Submissions .........................................................................................................5

C   Analysis ..............................................................................................................12

D   Conclusion ..........................................................................................................26
2
PART A

A       Introduction


1       Leave granted.
2       The Employees’ State Insurance Corporation 1 is in appeal against a judgment

of a Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court dated 5 September 2019. The

Division Bench rejected the petition filed by the appellant against the promotion of

the contesting respondents - Respondent 3 to 25, to the post of “Associate

Professor” under the Dynamic Assured Career Progression 2 Scheme as opposed to

the appellant’s recruitment regulations.
3       ESIC, the appellant, is a statutory body constituted under the Employees’

State Insurance Act 1948 3. The recruitment and promotion of its teaching staff are

governed by the Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (Medical Teaching Faculty

Posts) Recruitment Regulations 2015 4 which came into effect on 5 July 2015.

Respondent 3 to 25 5 joined the appellant as Assistant Professors at ESIC Model

Hospital, Rajajinagar, Bengaluru. They joined service between 7 February 2012 and

26 June 2014. The Central Government, through the Central Health Service Division

of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, had issued the DACP Scheme through

an Office Memorandum dated 29 October 2008. The DACP Scheme contemplated

promotion as Associate Professor upon completion of two years of service in the

post of Assistant Professor as an officer under the Ministry of Health and Family
1
“ESIC” (interchangeably referred to as the appellant)
2
“DACP”
3
“
ESI Act
”
4
“ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015”
5
interchangeably referred to as “contesting respondents”
3
PART A

Welfare. After two years of service as Assistant Professor on 2 February 2017, the

contesting respondents sought promotion under the DACP Scheme and instituted

proceedings before the Central Administrative Tribunal 6, Bengaluru.


4           On 7 February 2018, the CAT relied on the submission by the Counsel for the

appellant and held that the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 were not relevant

for adjudication of the matter. The CAT also relied on a letter dated 23 September

2014 addressed by the Joint Director of ESIC to the Dean of ESIC which mentioned

the implementation of the DACP Scheme to the Medical Officer Cadres. Thus, the

CAT directed the appellant to consider the contesting respondents for promotion

under the DACP Scheme.
5           The appellant challenged the order of the CAT in a writ petition before the

High Court of Karnataka. The High Court dismissed the petition on 5 September

2019 by holding that:
(i)     Since the contesting respondents were recruited before the ESIC

                Recruitment Regulations 2015 came into effect, they would get the

                benefit of the DACP Scheme;
(ii)    The DACP Scheme has statutory effect under
Section 17
of the ESI Act.
The ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 have departed from the DACP

                Scheme without seeking the prior approval of the Central Government;

                and
6
“CAT”
4
PART B
(iii)   Counsel for the appellant conceded that the appellant would implement

                the DACP Scheme and the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 do not

                apply.
B         Submissions


6         Mr Santhosh Krishnan, appearing on behalf of the appellant has urged the

following submissions:

(i)       The appellant is an autonomous statutory corporation incorporated under the
ESI Act
. It is within the administrative control of the Ministry of Labour and

          Employment of the Government of India;
(ii)
Section 97
of the ESI Act confers power on the appellant to frame its own

          regulations. The terms and conditions of service of Assistant Professors are

          governed by the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015. These regulations

          stipulate that a minimum of five years of qualifying service as Assistant

          Professor is mandatory for promotion as Associate Professor. The ESIC

          Regulations 2015 cannot be overridden by the DACP Scheme;
(iii)     The Office Memorandum dated 29 October 2008 implementing the DACP

          Scheme is applicable to employees of the Ministries and Departments of the

          Central Government, but not a statutory body like the ESIC. The text of the

          DACP Scheme makes it clear that the Office Memorandum applies to

          employees of the Ministry of Health, subject to an appropriate amendment in
5
PART B

          the recruitment rules. Thus, the DACP Scheme does not override or

          supersede statutory regulations made under the
ESI Act
;
(iv)
Section 17(2)
permits the ESIC to depart from the conditions of service

          applicable to employees of the Central Government, subject to prior approval

          of the Central Government.
Section 97(3)
empowers the ESIC to frame

          regulations that are deemed to have the same effect as statutory provisions;
(v)       The contesting respondents joined the ESIC Medical College and PGIMSR,

          Rajajinagar, Bengaluru as Assistant Professors on different dates between 7

          February 2014 and 26 June 2016. These Respondents were governed by the

          Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (Medical Teaching Faculty Posts)

          Recruitment Regulations, 2008 7;
(vi)      The High Court incorrectly held that the conditions for promotion from

          Assistant Professor to Associate Professor were governed by the DACP

          Scheme on the ground that the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 were

          inapplicable      to   the      contesting       respondents.   The   ESIC   Recruitment

          Regulations 2008 were gazetted on 2 May 2009 and stipulated four years of

          qualifying service for promotion from Assistant Professor to Associate

          Professor. Therefore, none of the contesting respondents would have

          completed four years of service before the ESIC Recruitment Regulations

          2015 came into effect, i.e. on 3 July 2015;
7
“ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2008”
6
PART B
(vii)    Under the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2008, the contesting respondents

         became eligible for promotion after the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015

         came into effect. Thus, the operation of ESIC Regulations 2015 in regard to

         their service conditions cannot be ignored and there can be no estoppel

         against legislative action. This Court, in
C Sankarnarayanan v. State of

         Kerala
8 , has held that there is no estoppel against legislative action

         concerning service conditions;
(viii)   It is settled law that in the event of an inconsistency or conflict between a

         statutory provision and an executive instruction, the former must be given

         effect. This Court in
Union of India v. Ashok Kumar Aggarwal9
has held

         that government-issued memorandums or executive instructions can be used

         only to supplement the statutory rules but not to supplant them;
(ix)     The appellant’s counsel mistakenly made a concession before the CAT when

         they stated that the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 would not govern the

         matter. However, this incorrect concession does not amount to estoppel

         against statutory regulation. This has been held by this Court in
State of Uttar

         Pradesh v. U.P. Rajya Khanij Vikas Nigam Sangharsh Samiti
10;
(x)      The High Court has incorrectly recorded that the ESIC Recruitment

         Regulations 2015 were issued without approval from the Central Government.

         The preamble to the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 explicitly states that

         the regulations were made after approval of the Central Government;
8
(1971) 2 SCC 361
9
(2013) 16 SCC 147
10
(2008) 12 SCC 675
7
PART B
(xi)         The submission of the contesting respondents that the advertisement issued

             by the appellant contemplated the application of the DACP Scheme, is

             irrelevant to the adjudication of the matter.
It is settled law that if an

             advertisement is inconsistent with recruitment rules, the rules would prevail,

             as held by this Court in Malik Mazhar Sultan v. UPSC 11,
Ashish Kumar v.

             State of UP
12 and
Raminder Singh v. State of Punjab
13;
(xii)        The applicability of the DACP to non-teaching staff of the ESIC is irrelevant

             since the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 specifically govern “Medical

             Teaching Faculty Posts”; and
(xiii)       Except in three cases, the contesting respondents have been granted

             promotions upon completion of five years of regular service, in accordance

             with the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015.
7            Mr Yatindra Singh, Senior Counsel and Mr Anand Sanjay M Nuli, appearing

on behalf of the contesting respondents, Respondent 3 to 25, has urged the

following submissions:
(i)      The Office Memorandum dated 29 August 2008 extended the DACP

                Scheme to all Medical doctors, whether belonging to Organized Services,

                or holding isolated posts. It also directed all Ministries/Departments to

                implement the DACP Scheme. By another Office Memorandum dated 29

                October 2008, the Government of India extended the DACP Scheme to
11
(2006) 9 SCC 507, para 21
12
(2018) 3 SCC 55, para 27
13
(2016) 16 SCC 95, paras 24 and 25
8
PART B

        various sub-cadres of the Central Health Service, including the teaching

        cadre. Under
Section 17(2)(a)
of the ESI Act, the DACP Scheme is binding

        on the appellant;
(ii)    The ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2008, which stipulate four years of

        qualifying service for promotion from Assistant Professor to Associate

        Professor, were issued without the approval of the Central Government;
(iii)   The appellant has issued advertisements on 19 August 2011, 12

        December 2012 and once in 2013 for the post of Assistant Professor by

        stating “Promotional avenues in the Department are available under DACP

        guidelines of Govt. of India”. The contesting respondents joined the

        services of the appellant as Assistant Professors in Pay Band-3 with a

        grade pay of Rs. 6600/- pursuant to various recruitment advertisements of

        the appellant;
(iv)    On 23 September 2011, the appellant addressed a letter to the Dean of

        ESIC Dental College by stating that “the existing recruitment regulations

        are under active process of revision vis-à-vis provisions of the DACP

        Scheme”;
(v)     The ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 were issued without obtaining

        prior approval from the Central Government, as contemplated under
Section 17(2)(a)
of the ESI Act;
(vi)    After the contesting respondents instituted an application before the CAT,

        the Assistant Director (Med), CSIC, Headquarter Office addressed a letter

        to the Medical Superintendent of the ESIC Model Hospital, Rajaji Nagar,
9
PART B

         Bangalore on 26 December 2017 stating that “a proposal for considering

         promotion under DACP Scheme…. is under process”;
(vii)    The appellant admitted before the CAT and even in its writ petition before

         the High Court that the DACP Scheme is applicable to its employees and

         that it is willing to be bound by the DACP rules. The argument that the

         DACP Scheme is inapplicable to the contesting respondents is being

         raised for the first time before this Court;
(viii)   The DACP Scheme has statutory force under
Section 17
of the ESI Act.
The DACP Scheme was made on 29 October 2008, before the

         enforcement of the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2008 on 2 May 2009.

         Since the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2008 were issued without

         approval of the Central Government mandated under
Section 17(2)(a)
of

         the ESI Act, they do not override the DACP Scheme;
(ix)     The ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 were also issued without the

         “prior approval” mandated under
Section 17(2)(a)
of the ESI Act. The

         appellant has not furthered any evidence to indicate that prior approval

         was taken and this has been noted by the High Court;
(x)      The appellant is estopped from denying the applicability of the DACP

         Scheme to the contesting respondents since they made such a

         representation in their recruitment advertisements. The contesting

         respondents have acted on such representations to quit their existing jobs.
10
PART B

              Reliance is placed on a decision of this Court in
Y V Rangaiah v. J

              Sreenivasa Rao
14;
(xi)     Even if the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 were held to be validly

              issued, the contesting respondents had already completed two years of

              service before they came into effect, on 5 July 2015. Therefore, the

              contesting respondents should be considered for promotion in accordance

              with the DACP Scheme, in view of the decisions of this Court in
State of

              UP v. Mukesh Narain
15 and
B L Gupta v. MCD
16;
(xii)    All the contesting respondents had three or more years of teaching

              experience before they joined the appellant as Assistant Professors. The

              qualifying service of five years under the ESIC Recruitment Regulations

              2015 should be given a reasonable interpretation and the cumulative

              experience of more than five years should be held sufficient for promotion;
(xiii)   The doctors and medical teaching staff in the Central Government are

              being promoted in accordance with the DACP Scheme. The arbitrary

              denial of the DACP Scheme to the contesting respondents’ Teaching

              Cadre of the appellant violates
Article 14
, especially when they are also

              discharging functions of attending to patients and performing specialised

              clinical work; and
14
1983 (3) SCC 284, para 9
15
(2013) 4 SCC 169
16
(1998) 9 SCC 223
11
PART C
(xiv)   In other legal proceedings, the appellant has taken the stance that the

            DACP scheme is applicable to its employees with effect from 01 March

            2008 itself.
8      The rival submissions will now be analysed.
C      Analysis


9      The crux of the dispute is about determining the applicable rules/regulations
for promotion of the contesting respondents from the post of Assistant Professor to

Associate Professor namely, the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2008, the DACP

Scheme or the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015. On 29 October 2008, the Sixth

Central Pay Commission recommended the extension of the DACP Scheme to all

doctors in employment of the Central Government. The recommendations were

accepted by the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare through an Office

Memorandum dated 29 October 2008 which extended the DACP Scheme to Medical

and Dental Doctors in the Central Government. In continuation of the Office

Memorandum, the Government of India issued another Office Memorandum dated

29 October 2008 detailing promotion under DACP in various cadres under the

Ministry of Health and Welfare. The Scheme enabled promotion from the post of

Assistant Professor to Associate Professor after two years of service:
“B. Teaching Sub Cadre
               Promotions under the DACP Scheme      No. of years of
                                                     regular works
                                                     required for
                                                     promotion
               From           To
               Assistant      Associate Professor    2 years in Grade
12
PART C

             Professor       (Grade Pay Rs. 7600 in   Pay of Rs. 6600 in
             (Grade Pay      PB-3)                    PB-3 including
             Rs. 6600 in                              service rendered
             PB-3)                                    in the pre-revised
                                                      scale of Rs. 10000-
                                                      15200.
Associate       Professor (Grade Pay     4 years in Grade
             Professor       Rs.8700 in PB-4)         Pay of Rs. 7600 in
             (Grade Pay                               PB-3 including
             Rs. 7600 in                              service rendered in
             PB-3)                                    the pre-revised
                                                      scale of Rs. 12000-
                                                      16500.
             Professor       Director Professor       7 years in Grade
             (Grade Pay      (Grade Pay Rs.10000 in Pay of Rs. 8700 in
             Rs. 8700 in     PB-4)                    PB-4 including
             PB-4)                                    service rendered in
                                                      the pre-revised
                                                      scale of Rs. 14300-
                                                      18300.”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)

10    The controversy in the present appeal arises out of the interpretation of
Section 17(2)(a) of the ESIC Act 1948 and the applicability of the Office

Memorandum dated 29 October 2008 against the ESIC Recruitment Regulations

2008 and the subsequently issued ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015.
Section 17
of the ESI Act 1948 provides as follows:
“17. Staff.—(1) The Corporation may employ such other staff of
             officers and servants as may be necessary for the efficient
             transaction of its business, provided that the sanction of the
             Central Government shall be obtained for the creation of any
             post the maximum monthly salary of which exceeds such salary
             as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2)(a) The method of recruitment, salary and allowances,
             discipline and other conditions of service of the members of
             the staff of the Corporation shall be such as may be
             specified in the regulations made by the Corporation in
             accordance with the rules and orders applicable to the
             officers and employees of the Central Government drawing
             corresponding scales of pay:
Provided that where the Corporation is of the opinion that it
             is necessary to make a departure from the said rules or
             orders in respect of any of the matters aforesaid, it shall
             obtain the prior approval of the Central Government:
13
PART C

            Provided further that this sub-section shall not apply to
            appointment of consultants and specialists in various fields
            appointed on contract basis,
(b) In determining the corresponding scales of pay of the
            members of the staff under clause (a), the Corporation shall have
            regard to the educational qualifications, method of recruitment,
            duties and responsibilities of such officers and employees under
            the Central Government and in case of any doubt, the
            Corporation shall refer the matter to the Central Government
            whose decision thereon shall be final…….”
                                                         (emphasis supplied)




11
Section 97
of the ESI Act empowers the ESIC to frame regulations. The

regulations are deemed to have the same effect as statutory provisions:
“97. Power of Corporation to make regulations.—(1) The
            Corporation may, subject to the condition of previous
            publication, make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act
            and the rules made thereunder, for the administration of the
            affairs of the Corporation and for carrying into effect the
            provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
            foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of
            the following matters, namely—
               […..]
               (xvi) the appointment of medical practitioners for the purposes
               of this Act, the duties of such practitioners and the form of
               medical certificates;
[…..]
               (xxi) the method of recruitment, pay and allowances,
               discipline, superannuation benefits and other conditions of
               service of the officers and servants of the Corporation other
               than the [Director General and Financial Commissioner;
                […..]
               (xxiii) any matter in respect of which regulations are required
               or permitted to be made by this Act.
(2-A) The condition of previous publication shall not apply to any
            regulations of the nature specified in clause (xxi) of sub-section
            (2).
(3) Regulations made by the Corporation shall be published
            in the Gazette of India and thereupon shall have effect as if
            enacted in this Act.
(4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be, after it is made by
            the Corporation, be forwarded to the Central Government and
            that Government shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before
            each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period
14
PART C

            of thirty days, which may be comprised in one session or in two
            or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
            session immediately following the session or the successive
            sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
            modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the
            regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter
            have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the
            case may be, so, however, that any such modification or
            annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
            previously done under that regulation.”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)




12    The ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2008 were issued by the ESIC in the

exercise of its powers under
Section 97(1)
and
Section 17(3)
of the ESI Act. These

regulations introduced the cadre of Specialist (Teaching) in the ESIC and governed

all appointments to the teaching faculty posts in ESIC Medical Colleges. The ESIC

Recruitment Regulations 2008 embodied a requirement of four years’ service as

Assistant Professor for promotion as an Associate Professor. The ESIC Recruitment

Regulations 2015 which were made on 5 July 2015 stipulated a requirement of five

years’ service as Assistant Professor for promotion to the post of Associate

Professor. The preamble of the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 notes that

these regulations were to supersede the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2008 and

were made with the approval of the Central Government:
“….ln exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of
Section 97
, read with clause(xxi) of sub-section (2) and sub-
            section (2A) of the said section and sub-section (3) of
section 17
of the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948) and in
            supersession of the Employees State Insurance Corporation
            (Medical Teaching Faculty posts) Recruitment Regulations, 2008
            published in the Gazette of India vide No.A-12(11 )11/2008-Med.-
            IV dated the 2nd May, 2009, except as respects things done or
            omitted to be done before such supersession, the Employees'
            State Insurance Corporation hereby makes, with the
15
PART C

                  approval of the Central Government, the following
                  regulations for regulating the method of recruitment to the
                  medical teaching faculty posts in the Employees' State
                  Insurance Corporation's medical colleges, namely:- …”
                                                         (emphasis supplied)
13        The ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2008 and ESIC Recruitment Regulations

2015 have statutory effect by virtue of
Section 97(3)
of the ESI Act. It is settled law

that regulations framed by statutory authorities have the force of enacted law. A

Constitution Bench in
Sukhdev Singh v. Bhagatram Sardar Singh Raghuvanshi17
considered the regulations framed by several statutory authorities considered as

“State” within the terms of
Article 12.
Chief Justice A N Ray held that the regulations

have the same effect of law and bind the statutory authorities:
“21. The characteristic of law is the manner and procedure
                  adopted in many forms of subordinate legislation. The authority
                  making rules and regulation must specify the source of the rule
                  and regulation making authority. To illustrate, rules are always
                  framed in exercise of the specific power conferred by the statute
                  to make rules. Similarly, regulations are framed in exercise of
                  specific power conferred by the statute to make regulations. The
                  essence of law is that it is made by the law-makers in exercise of
                  specific authority. The vires of law is capable of being challenged
                  if the power is absent or has been exceeded by the authority
                  making rules or regulations.
[…]
23. The noticeable feature is that these statutory bodies have no
                  free hand in framing the conditions and terms of service of their
                  employees. These statutory bodies are bound to apply the terms
                  and conditions as
laid down in
the regulations. The statutory
                  bodies are not free to make such terms as they think fit and
                  proper. Regulations prescribe the terms of appointment,
                  conditions of service and procedure for dismissing employees.
These regulations in the statutes are described as “status fetters
                  on freedom of contract”.
The Oil and Natural Gas Commission
                  Act
in
Section 12
specifically enacts that the terms and conditions
                  of the employees may be such as may be provided by
17
(1975) 1 SCC 421
16
PART C

                  regulations. There is a legal compulsion on the Commission
                  to comply with the regulations. Any breach of such
                  compliance would be a breach of the regulations which are
                  statutory provisions. In other statutes under consideration
                  viz. the Life Insurance Corporation Act and the Industrial
                  Finance Corporation Act though there is no specific
                  provision comparable to
Section 12
of the 1959 Act the
                  terms and conditions of employment and conditions of
                  service are provided for by regulations. These regulations
                  are not only binding on the authorities but also on the
                  public.”
                                                           (emphasis supplied)


14         A two-judge Bench of this Court in
Pepsu Road Transport Corporation,

Patiala v. Mangal Singh and Others
18 interpreted a similar power to frame

regulations under the
Road Transport Corporations Act
1950. This Court held that

regulations made under the statute have the force of law:
“29. It is well-settled law that the regulations made under the
                  statute laying down the terms and conditions of service of the
                  employees, including the grant of retirement benefits, have the
                  force of law. The regulations validly made under the statutory
                  powers are binding and effective as the enactment of the
                  competent legislature. The statutory bodies as well as general
                  public are bound to comply with the terms and conditions
laid
                  down in
the regulations as a legal compulsion. Any action or
                  order in breach of the terms and conditions of the regulations
                  shall amount to violation of the regulations which are in the
                  nature of statutory provisions and shall render such action or
                  order illegal and invalid.”
15        Respondent 3 to 25 joined the service of the ESIC Model Hospital,

Rajajinagar, Bengaluru as Assistant Professors on different dates, between 07

February 2014 and 26 June 2016. On completing two years in the post of Assistant

Professor, Respondent 3 to 25 made representations to the appellant seeking
18
(2011) 11 SCC 702
17
PART C

promotion to the grade of Associate Professor, claiming the benefit of the DACP

Scheme. The Preamble to the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015, recites that the

prior approval of the Central Government, as necessitated by
Section 17(2)
of the

ESI Act was duly sought. In the event of a conflict between an executive instruction,

an office memorandum in this case, and statutory regulations – the latter prevail. A

Constitution Bench in
Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan
19 considered the

applicability of the letters issued by the Government of India detailing the

administrative practice for promotions, against the Indian Police Service (Regulation

of Seniority) Rules, 1954. The Constitution Bench held that:
7. We proceed to consider the next contention of Mr N.C.
                  Chatterjee that in the absence of any statutory rules governing
                  promotions to selection grade posts the Government cannot
                  issue administrative instructions and such administrative
                  instructions cannot impose any restrictions not found in the Rules
                  already framed. We are unable to accept this argument as
                  correct. It is true that there is no specific provision in the Rules
                  laying down the principle of promotion of junior or senior grade
                  officers to selection grade posts. But that does not mean that till
                  statutory rules are framed in this behalf the Government cannot
                  issue administrative instructions regarding the principle to be
                  followed in promotions of the officers concerned to selection
                  grade posts. It is true that Government cannot amend or
                  supersede statutory rules by administrative instructions, but
                  if the rules are silent on any particular point Government can
                  fill up the gaps and supplement the rules and issue
                  instructions not inconsistent with the rules already framed.”
                                                                (emphasis supplied)
19
AIR 1967 SC 1910
18
PART C
16        In
Union of India v. Ashok Kumar Aggarwal
20 a two judge Bench of this

Court speaking in the context of service regulations governing a departmental

enquiry re-iterated that an office order or office memorandum cannot contravene

statutory rules. Justice B S Chauhan noted the position in law in the following terms:
“59. The law laid down above has consistently been followed
                  and it is a settled proposition of law that an authority cannot
                  issue orders/office memorandum/executive instructions in
                  contravention of the statutory rules. However, instructions
                  can be issued only to supplement the statutory rules but not
                  to supplant it. Such instructions should be subservient to
                  the statutory provisions. (Vide Union of Indiav. Majji
                  Jangamayya [(1977) 1 SCC 606 : 1977 SCC (L&S) 191] , P.D.
                  Aggarwal v. State of U.P. [(1987) 3 SCC 622 : 1987 SCC (L&S)
                  310 : (
1987) 4 ATC 272] , Paluru Ramkrishnaiah v. Union of
                  India
[(1989) 2 SCC 541 : 1989 SCC (L&S) 375 : (1989) 10 ATC
                  378 :
AIR 1990 SC 166] , C. Rangaswamaiah v. Karnataka
                  Lokayukta
[(1998) 6 SCC 66 : 1998 SCC (L&S) 1448] and Joint
                  Action Committee of Air Line Pilots' Assn. of India v. DG of Civil
                  Aviation [(2011) 5 SCC 435 : AIR 2011 SC 2220] .)”
                                                              (emphasis supplied)
17        In
P D Aggarwal v. State of U.P.21
a two judge Bench of this Court declined

to grant primacy to an Office Memorandum issued by the Government of Uttar

Pradesh which purportedly amended the method of recruitment of Assistant Civil

Engineers in the U.P. Public Service Commission without amending the relevant

regulations. The Court held:
“20. The office memorandum dated December 7, 1961 which
                  purports to amend the United Provinces Service of
                  Engineers (Buildings and Roads Branch) Class II Rules, 1936
                  in our opinion cannot override, amend or supersede
20
(2013) 16 SCC 147
21
(1987) 3 SCC 622
19
PART C

                  statutory rules. This memorandum is nothing but an
                  administrative order or instruction and as such it cannot
                  amend or supersede the statutory rules by adding
                  something therein as has been observed by this Court
                  in
Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan
[AIR 1967 SC 1910
                  : (1968) 1 SCR 111 : (1968) 2 LLJ 830] . Moreover the benefits
                  that have been conferred on the temporary Assistant Engineers
                  who have become members of the service after being selected
                  by the Public Service Commission in accordance with the service
                  rules are entitled to have their seniority reckoned in accordance
                  with the provisions of Rule 23 as it was then, from the date of
                  their becoming member of the service, and this cannot be taken
                  away by giving retrospective effect to the rules of 1969 and 1971
                  as it is arbitrary, irrational and not reasonable.”
                                                                 (emphasis supplied)
18        The contesting respondents have referred to certain letters and to an internal

communication of the appellant to urge that the DACP Scheme was to be

implemented for promotions at the appellant. However, these letters, similar to the

Office Memorandum dated 29 October 2008 implementing the DACP Scheme,

would not have the force of law until they were enforced through an amendment to

the recruitment regulations.
In considering a similar factual situation, a three-judge

Bench of this Court in
Union of India v. Majji Jangamayya
22 held that:
“31. The second question is whether the requirement of 10
                  years' experience was a statutory rule. The High Court held that
                  the requirement of 10 years' experience is not a statutory rule.
                  Counsel for the respondents contended that the requirement
                  of 10 years' experience is statutory because the letter dated
                  January 16, 1950 is by the Government of India and the
                  Government of India has authority to frame rules and one of
                  the letters dated July 21, 1950 referred to it as a formal rule.
                  The contention is erroneous because there is a distinction
                  between statutory orders and administrative instructions of
                  the Government. This Court has held that in the absence of
22
(1977) 1 SCC 606
20
PART C

            statutory rules, executive orders or administrative
            instructions may be made. (See
CIT v. A. Raman &
            Company
[AIR 1968 SC 49 : (1968) 1 SCR 10 : 67 ITR 11] )

            [….]
34. Counsel on behalf of the respondents contended that the
            requirement of 10 years' experience
laid down in
the letter dated
            January 16, 1950 had the force of law because of
Article 313.
Article 313
does not change the legal character of a document.
Article 313
refers to laws in force which mean statutory laws. An
            administrative instruction or order is not a statutory rule. The
            administrative instructions can be changed by the Government
            by reason of
Article 73(1)(a)
itself.
[….]
36. The expression “ordinarily” in the requirement of 10 years'
            experience shows that there can be a deviation from the
            requirement and such deviation can be justified by reasons.
            Administrative instructions if not carried into effect for good
            reasons cannot confer a right. (See
P.C. Sethi v. Union of
            India
[(1975) 4 SCC 67 : 1975 SCC (L&S) 203 : (1975) 3 SCR
            201] .)….”
                                                      (emphasis supplied)


19    On the dates when the contesting respondents joined the service of the

appellant - 07 February 2014 till 26 June 2016 - their promotions were governed by

the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2008 which came into effect on 2 May 2009 and

mandated four years of qualifying service for promotion from Assistant Professor to

Associate Professor. When the contesting respondents had completed two years of

service, they were governed by the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 which came

into effect on 5 July 2015 and mandated five years of qualifying service for

promotion from Assistant Professor to Associate Professor. Thus, the DACP

Scheme facilitating promotion on the completion of two years of service is not

applicable to the contesting respondents, when the regulations have a statutory
21
PART C

effect that overrides the Office Memorandum dated 29 October 2008 which

implemented the DACP Scheme.
20         The advertisements issued by the appellant mentioned that the DACP

Scheme would be applicable for its recruits. However, it is a settled principle of

service jurisprudence that in the event of a conflict between a statement in an

advertisement and service regulations, the latter shall prevail.
In
Malik Mazhar

Sultan v. U.P. Public Service Commission
23 a two-judge Bench of this Court

clarified that an erroneous advertisement would not create a right in favour of

applicants who act on such representation. The Court considered the eligibility

criteria for the post of Civil Judge (Junior Division) under the U.P. Judicial Service

Rules, 2001 against an erroneous advertisement issued by the U.P. Public Service

Commission and held:
“21. The present controversy has arisen as the advertisement
                   issued by PSC stated that the candidates who were within the
                   age on 1-7-2001 and 1-7-2002 shall be treated within age for the
                   examination. Undoubtedly, the excluded candidates were of
                   eligible age as per the advertisement but the recruitment to the
                   service can only be made in accordance with the Rules and the
                   error, if any, in the advertisement cannot override the Rules and
                   create a right in favour of a candidate if otherwise not eligible
                   according to the Rules. The relaxation of age can be granted only
                   if permissible under the Rules and not on the basis of the
                   advertisement. If the interpretation of the Rules by PSC when it
                   issued the advertisement was erroneous, no right can accrue on
                   basis thereof. Therefore, the answer to the question would turn
                   upon the interpretation of the Rules.”
23
(2006) 9 SCC 507 [“Malik Mazhar Sultan”]
22
PART C
21        In
Ashish Kumar v. State of Uttar Pradesh
24 a two-judge Bench of this

Court followed the decision in Malik Mazhar Sultan (supra) in interpreting an

advertisement issued by the Director, Social Welfare Department, Uttar Pradesh for

the position of a psychologist. This Court declined to give precedence to the

erroneous qualifications prescribed in the advertisement against the relevant

recruitment rules and held:
“27. Any part of the advertisement which is contrary to the
                  statutory rules has to give way to the statutory prescription. Thus,
                  looking to the qualification prescribed in the statutory rules, the
                  appellant fulfils the qualification and after being selected for the
                  post denying appointment to him is arbitrary and illegal. It is well
                  settled that when there is variance in the advertisement and in
                  the statutory rules, it is the statutory rules which take
                  precedence….”
22        The contesting respondents urged that the advertisements indicated the

applicability of the DACP Scheme before the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015

were issued. However, a subsequent amendment to recruitment regulations would

override the conditions prescribed in the advertisement.
In
Rajasthan Public

Service Commission v. Chanan Ram
25 a two-judge Bench of this Court held that

an earlier advertisement becomes infructuous after a subsequent amendment to the

service rules:
“13. Under these circumstances, therefore, it is difficult to
                  appreciate how the Division Bench of the High Court could
                  persuade itself in agreeing with the submission of the learned
                  counsel for the respondent-writ petitioner that despite this change
                  of cadres and the provision for recruitment on new posts the old
                  advertisement of 5-11-1993 Annexure P-1 seeking to consider
24
(2018) 3 SCC 55
25
(1998) 4 SCC 202
23
PART C

                  the candidature of applicants for erstwhile 23 advertised
                  vacancies in the posts of Assistant Directors (Junior) in the
                  Agricultural Marketing Service of the State of Rajasthan would
                  still be pursued further and recruitment should be effected for
                  these 23 erstwhile vacancies as per the old advertisement. It is
                  easy to visualise that even if such an earlier advertisement of 5-
11-1993 was proceeded with further it would have resulted into a
                  stalemate and an exercise in futility. No appointment could
                  have been given to the selected candidates to the posts of
                  Assistant Directors (Junior) after 1995 amendment of Rules
                  as there were no such posts in the hierarchy of State
                  Service. Consequently it must be held that on account of the
                  amendments to the Rajasthan Agricultural Marketing Service
                  Rules the earlier advertisement dated 5-11-1993 had become
                  infructuous and otiose. Only on this short ground the writ
                  petition of the respondent-writ petitioner should have been
                  dismissed by confirming the order of dismissal of the writ petition
                  earlier passed by the learned Single Judge…….”
                                                               (emphasis supplied)


23        The contesting respondents submitted that the appellant is estopped from

urging that the DACP Scheme is not applicable to the Teaching Cadre at the ESIC

since they have taken this stance before the CAT and in its writ petition before the

High Court. While this Court expresses its disapproval at the lack of proper

instructions being tendered to the Counsel of the appellant, there can be no estoppel

against a statute or regulations having a statutory effect.
In
Nedunuri

Kameswaramma v. Sampati Subba Rao
26 a three-judge Bench of this Court

decided a central point of the dispute in favour of a party, irrespective of the

concession of its Counsel since it was on a point of law. Justice M Hidayatullah (as

the learned Chief Justice then was), speaking on behalf of the Court observed:
“20. From the above analysis of the documents, it is quite clear
                  that the documents on the side of the appellant established that
26
AIR 1963 SC 884
24
PART C

                  this was a Karnikam service inam, and the action of the Zamindar
                  in resuming it as such, which again has a presumption of
                  correctness attaching to it, clearly established the appellant's
                  case. Much cannot be made of a concession by counsel that
                  this was a Dharmilainam, in the trial court, because it was a
                  concession on a point of law, and it was withdrawn. Indeed,
                  the central point in the dispute was this, and the concession
                  appears to us to be due to some mistake or possibly
                  ignorance not binding on the client. We are thus of opinion
                  that the decision of the two courts below which had concurrently
                  held     this   to     be jeroyti land  after     resumption     of
                  the Karnikam service inam, was correct in the circumstances of
                  the case, and the High Court was not justified in reversing it.”
                                                               (emphasis supplied)
24         In
Himalayan Coop. Group Housing Society v. Balwan Singh
27 a three-

judge Bench of this Court clarified the law of agency with respect to client-lawyer

relationships. The Court held that while generally admissions of fact by counsel are

binding, neither the client nor the court is bound by admissions as to matters of law

or legal conclusions:
“32. Generally, admissions of fact made by a counsel are binding
                  upon their principals as long as they are unequivocal; where,
                  however, doubt exists as to a purported admission, the court
                  should be wary to accept such admissions until and unless the
                  counsel or the advocate is authorised by his principal to make
                  such admissions. Furthermore, a client is not bound by a
                  statement or admission which he or his lawyer was not
                  authorised to make. A lawyer generally has no implied or
                  apparent authority to make an admission or statement which
                  would directly surrender or conclude the substantial legal
                  rights of the client unless such an admission or statement is
                  clearly a proper step in accomplishing the purpose for which
                  the lawyer was employed. We hasten to add neither the
                  client nor the court is bound by the lawyer's statements or
                  admissions as to matters of law or legal conclusions. Thus,
                  according to generally accepted notions of professional
                  responsibility, lawyers should follow the client's instructions rather
                  than substitute their judgment for that of the client. We may add
27
(2015) 7 SCC 373
25
PART D

                   that in some cases, lawyers can make decisions without
                  consulting the client. While in others, the decision is reserved for
                  the client. It is often said that the lawyer can make decisions as
                  to tactics without consulting the client, while the client has a right
                  to make decisions that can affect his rights.”
                                                                 (emphasis supplied)
25        Recently, a two-judge Bench of this Court in
Director of Elementary

Education, Odisha v. Pramod Kumar Sahoo
28 observed that a concession on a

question of law concerning service rules would not bind the State:
“11. The concession given by the learned State Counsel before
                  the Tribunal was a concession in law and contrary to the
                  statutory rules. Such concession is not binding on the State for
                  the reason that there cannot be any estoppel against law. The
                  rules provide for a specific grade of pay, therefore, the
                  concession given by the learned State Counsel before the
                  Tribunal is not binding on the appellant.”


The concession of the Counsel for the appellant before the CAT does not preclude

the finding on the law that is arrived at by this Court.
D         Conclusion


26        The CAT and the High Court failed to notice the applicability of the ESIC
Recruitment Regulations 2015 to the promotions of the Teaching Cadre in the

appellant corporation. The ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 have precedence

over the Office Memorandum dated 29 October 2008 which implemented the DACP

Scheme in respect of officers of the Central Health Service under the Union Ministry

of Health and Family Welfare. The concession by the Counsel of the appellant
28
(2019) 10 SCC 674
26
PART D

before the CAT does not stand in the way of the appellant supporting the correct

position of law before this Court.
27    The contesting respondents did not challenge the ESIC Recruitment

Regulations 2008 or the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 before the CAT or the

High Court. The argument on lack of prior approval as per
Section 17(2)
of the ESI

Act is obviated by the preamble to the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015. The

contesting respondents have only supported the applicability of the DACP Scheme

to claim promotion as Associate Professor after two years of service. The

advertisements for recruitment mentioning the DACP Scheme would have no effect

since they were in contravention of the applicable recruitment regulations.

Therefore, for the above reasons, we are of the view that the appeal should be

allowed.
28     The appeal is accordingly allowed and the impugned judgement and order of

the Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court dated 5 September 2019 is set

aside. As a consequence, the revised seniority list of the Teaching Cadre at the

appellant corporation should reflect the promotions of the contesting respondents in

accordance with the ESIC Recruitment Regulations 2015 and not the DACP

Scheme.
27
PART D

29   The appeal is disposed of in the above terms.
30   Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…….…………………………...............................J.
                                   [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                   …….…………………………...............................J.
                                   [A S Bopanna]


New Delhi;
January 20, 2022
28