[Cites
9
, Cited by
6
]
Supreme Court of India
The Chief Personnel Officer vs A Nishanth Geroge on 25 January, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
A S Bopanna
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable


                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



                                   Civil Appeal No. 294 of 2022



          The Chief Personnel Officer & Ors.                      … Appellants


                                               Versus


          A Nishanth George                                       … Respondent
And with


                                   Civil Appeal No. 295 of 2022
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2022.01.25
16:21:21 IST
Reason:
1
JUDGMENT


    Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J


1             Leave granted.
2             In the two appeals which have come up for adjudication there is a challenge

    to the judgments dated 21 March 2018 and 3 September 2019 of the Madras High

    Court at its Madurai Bench. Since similar questions of law arise in these appeals,

    both the special leave petitions have been tagged and the arguments have been

    addressed together.
3             On 2 January 2004, the Railway Board under the Union Ministry of Railways

    introduced a scheme known as the Safety Related Retirement Scheme for the

    categories of Gangmen and Drivers. The scheme was intended to cover these “two

    safety categories” since the working of Drivers and Gangmen was perceived to have

    a crucial bearing on train operations and track maintenance. Taking note of the fact

    that the reflexes of the staff recruited to these categories and their physical fitness

    might deteriorate with advancing age, causing a safety hazard, the scheme

    incorporated the following provisions:
(i)       Drivers and Gangmen in the age group of 55-57 could seek voluntary

                 retirement;
(ii)      When the application for retirement is accepted, employment would be

                 considered for a ‘suitable ward’ of the employee;
2
(iii)    The employee should have completed 33 years of qualifying service in

         order to be eligible for seeking voluntary retirement under the scheme;
(iv)     The ward of the employee would be considered for employment only in the

         lowest recruitment grade of the category from which the employee sought

         retirement, depending upon eligibility and suitability but not in any other

         category;
(v)      Applications for retirement under the scheme would be taken once a year

         with the cut-off date for reckoning the eligibility of the employees being 30 th

         June, while the last date for submission of requests would be 31 st July.
The eligibility criteria such as age limit and educational qualifications will

         be determined with reference to the cut-off date;
(vi)     The discretion to consider the request for retirement will vest with the

         administration depending on the shortage of staff, physical fitness and

         suitability of the ward in the category of Driver/Gangman as the case may

         be;
(vii)    Persons who had completed 33 years of service and fell within the age

         group of 55-57 would be considered in the first phase followed by those

         between the age group of 53-55 years;
(viii)   Criteria for the eligibility of wards would be as prescribed for direct

         recruitment; and
(ix)     The request of the employee for retirement would be considered only if the

         ward is considered suitable for appointment in all aspects including

         medical fitness.
3
4             On 11 September 2010, the Railway Board notified that the benefit of the

    scheme would be extended to other safety categories of staff with a grade pay of

    Rs.1800/- per month. The period of qualifying service was reduced from 33 years to

    20 years and the eligible age group from 55-57 to 50-57 years for seeking retirement

    under the scheme.            The nomenclature of the scheme was modified to read as

    Liberalized Active Retirement Scheme for Guaranteed Employment for Safety Staff

    (“LARSGESS Scheme”). The qualifying service period of 33 years and the age

    group of 55-57 years was to remain unchanged for Drivers.

5             The Railway Board also reiterated that retirement of an employee would be

    considered only if a ward is found suitable in all aspects. It was envisaged that the

    retirement of the employee and appointment of the ward should take place

    simultaneously. The LARSGESS Scheme was scrutinised by a Division Bench of

    the High Court of Punjab and Haryana in a decision dated 27 April 2016 in
Kala

    Singh v. Union of India1
. In that case there was a challenge to an order of the

    Central Administrative Tribunal (“CAT”) by which it dismissed the original

    application filed by employees of the Railways seeking the postponement of the

    dates of their voluntary retirement to the date on which their wards were appointed

    by the Railways under the LARSGESS Scheme. Justice Surya Kant (as the learned

    Judge then was) speaking for the Division Bench of the High Court observed: -
“We have heard learned counsel for the petitioners and are
                      of the view that the very foundation of their claim, namely,
                      the Safety Related Retirement Scheme, prima facie, does
                      not stand to the test of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution
                      of India. This policy is a device evolved by the Railways to
1
CWP No.7714 of 2016
4
make back-door entries in public employment and brazenly
                       militates against equality in public employment.”



          The High Court while dismissing the writ petition directed the railway authorities

          to revisit its validity and sustainability keeping in view the principles of equal

          opportunity and elimination of monopoly in holding public employment before

          making any appointment under the “offending policy”. An application which was

          moved by the Railways seeking recall or review of the order dated 27 April 2016

          was dismissed by the Division Bench on 14 July 2017 in the following terms:
“We have heard learned senior counsel for the Railways at a
                       considerable length. It is true that no notice was issued and
                       the Railway Authorities were not heard while making prima
                       facie observations but the fact of the matter is that the only
                       direction issued by this Court was to re-visit the offending
                       policy keeping in view the principle of equal opportunity in
                       public employment before further appointments are made.
                       Such a direction was necessitated keeping in view the
                       mandate of the Constitution Bench in State of Karnataka v.
                       Uma Devi (2006) 4 SCC 1.”
6              The judgment of the High Court was challenged on behalf of the Railways

    before this Court under
Article 136
of the Constitution. On 8 January 2018, while

    disposing of the SLP2, this Court passed the following order: -
“1.    While disposing of SLP (Civil) Diary No.37460/2017
                       on 8-1-2018, this Court has made the following order:
“Heard learned counsel for the parties.
Delay condoned.
Since the direction in the impugned order is only to re-visit
                       the Scheme in question, no interference is called for at this
2
SLP(Civil) Diary No.37460 of 2017
5
stage. The Petitioner(s) may take a conscious decision
                 in the matter within a period of six weeks from today.

                 If any party is affected by the decision taken, such party may
                 take remedy against the same in accordance with law.

                 The special leave petition is, accordingly, dismissed.

                 Pending application(s), including application for intervention,
                 shall also stand disposed of.”

                                                        (emphasis supplied)
7         On 26 September 2018, the Railway Board notified its decision to terminate

    the LARSGESS scheme in view of the observation of the Punjab & Haryana High

    Court in
Kala Singh
(supra). The notification is as follows:
“Sub: Termination of the LARSGESS Scheme in view of
                 directions of Hon’ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana and
                 the orders of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in SLP(C)
                 No.508/2018 dated 08.01.2018.
Ref: Board’s letter of even number dated 27.10.2017.
The Hon’ble Punjab and Haryana High Court in its judgment
                 dated 27.04.16 in CWP No.7714 of 2016 had held that the
                 Safety Related Retirement Scheme 2004 (later renamed as
                 the Liberalised Active Retirement Scheme for Guaranteed
                 Employment for Safety Staff {LARSGESS}, 2010) “prima
                 facie” does not stand to the test of
Article 14
and
16
of the
                 Constitution of India.” It had directed “before making any
                 appointment under the offending policy, let its validity and
                 sustainability be revisited keeping in view the principles of
                 equal opportunity and elimination of monopoly in holding
                 public employment.” Thereafter, in its judgment dated
                 14.07.17 (Review Petition RA-CW-330-2017 in CWP
                 No.7714 of 2016), the Hon’ble High Court reiterated its
                 earlier direction and stated “such a direction was
                 necessitated keeping in view the mandate of the Constitution
                 Bench in State of Karnataka Vs. Uma Devi, (2006) 4 SCC 1.”

                 1.1              In the Appeal against the judgment of the
                 Hon’ble High Court of Punjab & Haryana, the Hon’ble
                 Supreme Court of India, while disposing of the SLP(C)
                 No.508/2018 vide its order dated 8.01.18, declined to
                 interfere with the directions of the High Court.
6
2.       In compliance with the above directions, Ministry of
            Railways have revisited the scheme duly obtaining legal
            opinion and consulted Ministry of Law & Justice.
Accordingly, it has been decided to terminate the
            LARSGESS Scheme w.e.f. 27.10.2017 i.e. the date from
            which it was put on hold. No further appointments should
            be made under the Scheme except in cases where
            employees have already retired under the LARSGESS
            Scheme        before     2710.17    (but     not   normally
            superannuated) and their wards could not be appointed
            due to the Scheme having been put on hold in terms of
            Board’s letter dated 27.10.17 though they had
            successfully completed the entire process and were
            found medically fit. All such appointments should be made
            within the approval of the competent authority.
3.     Please acknowledge receipt.”

                                                  (emphasis supplied)

Subsequently on 28 September 2018, the following decision was notified by the

Railway Board:
“In supersession to Railway Board’s letter No. E(P&A)I-
            2015/RT-43 dated 26.09.2018, it is stated that while the
            LARSGESS Scheme continues to be on hold with effect from
            27.10.2017 on account of various court cases to impart
            natural justice to the staff who have already retired under
            LARSGESS scheme before 27.10.2017 (but not naturally
            superannuated) and appointment of whole wards was
            not made due to various formalities, appointment of
            such of the wards/candidates can be made with the
            approval of the competent authority.”

                                                  (emphasis supplied)

In the above backdrop, the following decision was taken on 5 March 2019 with

regard to the appointment of wards under the LARSGESS Scheme where

formalities were completed before 27 October 2017:
“2. As regards the cases where the wards had completed all
            formalities including Medical examination under LARSGESS
            Scheme prior to 27.10.2017 and were found fit, but the
            employees are yet to retire, the matter is pending
7
consideration before the Hon’ble Supreme Court and further
                    instructions would be issued as per directions of the Hon’ble
                    Court.”

    Consequently, it appears that an application3 was moved before this Court in
Union

    of India v. Kala Singh4
. By an order dated 6 March 2019, a two-Judge Bench of

    this Court observed:
“3. Since the Scheme stands terminated and is no longer in
                    existence, nothing further need be done in the matter.”

8           In
Manjit v. Union of India5
, the jurisdiction of this Court was invoked under
Article 32
of the Constitution seeking a mandamus directing the Union of India and

    the Railways to appoint the petitioners in terms of the LARSGESS Scheme.
Declining to accede to the request, this Court observed:
“6 The reliefs which have been sought in the present case,
                    as already noted earlier, are for a writ of mandamus to the
                    Union of India to appoint the petitioners in their respective
                    cadres. A conscious decision has been taken by the Union of
                    India to terminate the Scheme. This has been noticed in the
                    order of this Court dated 6 March 2019, which has been
                    extracted above. While taking this decision on 5 March 2019,
                    the Union of India had stated that where wards had
                    completed all formalities prior to 27 October 2017 (the date
                    of termination of the Scheme) and were found fit, since the
                    matter was pending consideration before this Court, further
                    instructions would be issued in accordance with the
                    directions of this Court. Noticing
the above decision
, this
                    Court, in its order dated 6 March 2019, specifically observed
                    that since the Scheme stands terminated and is no longer in
                    existence, nothing further need be done in the matter. The
                    Scheme provided for an avenue of a back door entry into the
                    service of the railways. This would be fundamentally at odds
                    with
Article 16
of the Constitution. The Union government
                    has with justification discontinued the scheme. The
                    petitioners can claim neither a vested right nor a legitimate
3
IA 18573/2019, in Miscellaneous Application No(s). 346/2019 in Miscellaneous Application No(s).1202/2018 I
    Petition for Special Leave to Appeal No.508/2018
4
2019 SCC OnLine SC 1965
5
2021 SCC OnLine SC 49
8
expectation under such a Scheme. All claims based on the
                      Scheme must now be closed.”

 9             The Court observed that: (i) the grant of reliefs to the petitioners would only

     enable them to seek back door entry; (ii) the Union of India had correctly terminated

     the scheme; and (iii) no person can claim a vested right or legitimate expectation

     under the scheme.
10             At this stage, it would be material to note that in
Narinder Siraswal v. Union

     of India6
, which was decided on 6 March 2019 by a two-Judge Bench (prior to the

     judgment of the 3-Judge Bench in
Manjit
(supra)), this Court allowed the petitioners

     before it to move the authorities with an appropriate representation since they were

     claiming the benefit of the scheme which was prevalent when their applications had

     been filed.
The decision in
Narinder Siraswal
(supra) was noticed in the judgment

     of the 3-Judge Bench in
Manjit
(supra). In this backdrop, it becomes necessary now

     to advert to the facts of the two appeals.
11             (I) SLP (C) 906 of 2021:- The father of the respondent was a Senior

     Trackman in Southern Railway pursuant to his appointment on 7 February 1988. On

     2 December 2010, he submitted an application for voluntary retirement under the

     LARSGESS Scheme. The application for voluntary retirement was returned by the

     Senior DPO, Madurai Division on 11 April 2011 on the ground that in terms of the

     date of birth furnished in the application (16 February 1954), the employee was

     overage on the cut-off date, i.e., on 1 July 2011. The respondent’s father submitted

     a second application on 28 January 2014. On 31 December 2014, the employee
6
2019 SCC OnLine SC 1966
9
retired and received his retirement benefits. The third application was submitted on

     18 April 2015, seeking reconsideration of the rejection of the first application on the

     ground that the date of birth in the first application had been wrongly recorded. An

     OA was filed before the Madras Bench of the CAT in 2017 seeking a direction to

     provide employment to the respondent under the LARSGESS scheme. It was

     submitted that when the first application was made, the respondent’s father was

     within the age limit but the application was wrongly rejected due to miscalculation of

     age. The counsel for Railways had submitted that the application was made on 28

     January 2014, in response to the notification issued in 2014. As on 1 January 2014,

     the respondent’s father was over 57 years old, irrespective of whether his date of

     birth is considered as 16 February 1954 or 16 December 1954. The OA was

     dismissed on 11 December 2017 with the following observations:
“4.     As the constitutional validity Scheme is suspect and
                  no appointments are being made under the Scheme, it is not
                  possible to give any directions to the Respondents to
                  consider the case of the Applicant. In any case, it is not in
                  dispute that the Applicant’s father retired only on
                  superannuation and not before the age of 57 years.
                  Therefore the question of the applicant being appointed
                  under the scheme never arose.”

12         The respondent challenged the judgment of the Tribunal under
Article 226
of

     the Constitution. By its judgment dated 3 September 2019, the High Court observed

     that the date of birth of the father of the respondent should be reckoned as 16

     December 1954. The High Court observed that in view of the nature of the

     employment of the respondent’s father, he should not be made to suffer for an

     inadvertent mistake. Hence, the application dated 2 December 2010 which had been
10
received on 7 December 2010 was held to be well within the age limit prescribed

     under the LARSGESS Scheme. The High Court also held that though the scheme

     was terminated, since the respondent’s father superannuated on 1 January 2015

     prior to 27 January 2017, the benefit of the scheme could be extended to him in

     terms of the notification dated 28 September 2018.

13         (II) SLP(C) No.1417 of 2019:- The father of the respondent was working as

     Senior Trolley man in Southern Railways. On 29 September 2011, he opted for

     voluntary retirement under the LARSGESS scheme and sought the appointment of

     the respondent. The respondent qualified in the written examination. On 10 April

     2012, the respondent was informed that he was found unfit in class AYE THREE but

     was found fit in class CEE ONE and below. He was informed that the acceptable

     medical classification for the post of Trackman under the rules was AYE THREE and

     so he was medically unfit for appointment to the post of Trackman under the

     scheme. The respondent appealed for constituting a Medical Board. On 4 January

     2013, the Medical Board after examining the respondent, found him ineligible for

     appointment to the post of Trackman. The respondent submitted a representation to

     the Grievance Cell of Southern Railways to consider his claim for appointment as

     Trackman. The representation was rejected by a letter dated 12 December 2013.
The respondent moved the Madras Bench of the CAT praying for his appointment

     under the Scheme. The Tribunal disposed of the case on 1 April 2016, directing the

     Railways to consider his case for appointment for any post of CEE ONE and below.

     The Tribunal by its judgement observed:
11
“8.     It is not disputed that the applicant’s father is still in
                 service. The applicant’s family cannot be said to be in
                 immediate need of his support. His appointment can be
                 considered under the scheme which permits an employee to
                 take VRS and request for appointment of an eligible ward. In
                 this the respondent also agreed that the applicant’s ward is
                 medically fit for the post of CEE ONE for which the applicant
                 has very much agreed. Hence the respondent is directed to
                 act accordingly and simultaneously within six weeks on
                 receipt of copy of the order.
9.       In view of the fact that Respondents have admitted
                 that applicant satisfied in CEE ONE and below post,
                 therefore, he can be considered for any such post under the
                 said category. On such considerations, suitable orders can
                 be passed within six weeks from the date of receipt of copy
                 of this order.
14         The Divisional Office of Southern Railway perused the files of the respondent

     to determine the feasibility of his appointment in CEE ONE posts and below. The

     claim of the respondent was rejected on 31 May 2016 in view of the notification of

     the Railway Board dated 2 January 2004 governing the LARSGESS scheme to the

     effect that the ward of the employee must be considered for appointment only in the

     lowest recruitment grade from which the employee seeks retirement.               Since the

     respondent was found to be medically unfit for appointment in the category of

     Trackman and his father was due for retirement from service on 31 May 2016, the

     claim was rejected. The respondent once again moved an OA before the Tribunal.
The Tribunal by its judgement dated 24 March 2017 noted that the respondent was

     declared to be unfit in the medical examination for the post of Trackman. However,

     the Tribunal observed that its earlier order on 1 April 2016 had recorded that the

     respondent was medically fit for the post of CEE ONE and below. The Tribunal

     accordingly directed the Railways to consider the respondent in a post according to
12
his medical fitness (CEE ONE and below). In 2017, the respondent instituted a

     petition under
Article 226
of the Constitution before the High Court for a mandamus

     directing compliance with the order of the Tribunal dated 24 March 2017. The High

     Court by its judgement dated 14 November 2017 directed the implementation of the

     judgement of the Tribunal. The Divisional Officer of the Southern Railway issued a

     communication on 17 January 2018 negating the claim of the respondent on the

     ground that the High Court of Punjab and Haryana had held that the LARSGESS

     Scheme was contrary to the provisions of
Articles 14
and
16
of the Constitution. The

     claim was also rejected on the ground that the respondent could not be appointed

     for the following reasons:
(i) The father of the respondent had retired on superannuation on 31 May 2016

        as Senior Trackman; and that a coordinate bench of the Madras High Court while

        deciding Writ Petition No. 1040/2017 had declined relief to a similarly placed

        employee who had continued to work until the date of superannuation; and
(ii) In terms of the Railway Board’s letter dated 2 January 2004, the ward could

        be considered for appointment only in the lowest recruitment grade of the

        category from which the employee seeks retirement.
15         The respondent instituted a writ petition before the High Court. The High

     Court by its judgement dated 31 March 2018, came to the conclusion that the

     rejection of the claim was in disregard of the order of the Tribunal dated 24 March

     2017. Accordingly, the petition was allowed by directing the Railways to comply with
13
the order dated 24 March 2017, granting appointment to the respondent in any post

     in CEE ONE and below categories. The judgements of the High court in the two

     cases have given rise to the present appeals.
16         While considering the merits of the appeal, it becomes necessary to note at

     the outset that the LARSGESS Scheme introduced by the Railways was considered

     in the judgement of a Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Kala

     Singh
(supra). The High Court found that the scheme was a device evolved by the

     Railways to make back door entries in public employment and that it brazenly

     militated against equality in public employment. The High Court directed the railway

     authorities to revisit the validity of the scheme before making any appointments

     bearing in mind the principles of equal opportunity and the elimination of monopoly

     in public employment. A review petition was dismissed by the High Court. An SLP

     against the judgment of the Punjab and Haryana High Court was dismissed by this

     Court on 8 January 2018.
17         In the meantime, a decision was taken by the Railway Board on 26

     September 2018, after seeking legal opinion from the Union Ministry of Law and

     Justice, to terminate the scheme with effect from 27 October 2017 which was the

     date on which it was put on hold. The Railway Board directed that no further

     appointments would be made under the scheme except in those cases where

     employees had already retired under the scheme before 27 October 2017 (but had

     not “naturally superannuated”) and their wards could not be appointed despite

     successfully completing the entire process due to the scheme having been held in

     abeyance.
14
18         On 28 September 2018, the earlier decision was superseded by directing that

     in spite of the termination of the scheme, appointments of wards could be made with

     the approval of the competent authority in the case of staff who had retired before 27

     October 2017 under the LARSGESS scheme (but not on attaining the normal age of

     superannuation) but in whose case appointments of wards was not made due to

     “various formalities”.
In
Union of India v. Kala Singh
(supra) a two judge Bench of

     this Court in its order dated 6 March 2019, observed that since the scheme stood

     terminated and was no longer in existence “nothing further need be done in the

     matter”.
In
Narinder Siraswal
(supra) which was decided on 26 March 2019, the

     two judge Bench of this Court permitted the petitioners who claimed the benefit of

     the scheme which was in existence when the applications were filed to move an

     appropriate representation.
In
Manjit
(supra), a three judge Bench of this Court

     declined to entertain a petition under
Article 32
on the ground that a conscious

     decision had been taken by the Union of India to terminate the scheme. The three

     judge Bench observed that the scheme was fundamentally contrary to the principles

     of equality of opportunity in public employment under
Article 16
of the Constitution.

     Noting that the decision of the Union Government to discontinue the scheme was

     justified, the Court observed that all claims based on the scheme must now be

     closed.
19          Now it is in this backdrop that it is necessary to consider the facts insofar as

     they pertain to the two cases. Before dealing with the individual facts of the case, it

     must be determined if the claims of the respondents are covered by the exception

     clause in the notification issued on 28 September 2018. The notification clearly
15
envisages that in spite of the termination of the LARSGESS scheme, appointments

     under the scheme could only be made if (i) the staff had voluntarily retired (and not

     naturally superannuated) under the scheme before 27 October 2017; and (ii)

     appointment of the ward was not made because of ‘formalities’ which remained. The

     exception does not cover all pending claims. As a matter of fact, another Division

     Bench of the Madras High Court7 on 19 January 2017 had held that an employee

     who received service benefits till the date of superannuation, was not entitled to

     make a claim under the LARSGESS scheme. It was held:
“Mr. L. Chandrakumar, learned counsel appearing for the
                         petitioner has objected the dismissal of the original
                         application stating that retirement, pending adjudication of
                         the original application, cannot be a ground for rejection of
                         the claim for compassionate ground under the subject
                         scheme. As rightly held by the learned Tribunal, there was no
                         pre-mature retirement on the part of the first petitioner and
                         the first petitioner also did not choose to file any appeal
                         against the proceedings dated 12.09.2012 as directed by the
                         authorities. The first petitioner, having continued to work and
                         enjoy the services benefits till the date of superannuation
                         cannot be allowed to make use of subject scheme seeking
                         appointment. The scheme, as such, cannot be invoked, in
                         the case on hand as to defeat the purpose, in letter and spirit
                         of the object behind formulating the scheme.”
20              From the above judgment, it is evident that a coordinate Bench of the High

     Court had taken the view that the benefit of the LARSGESS scheme could not be

     extended where an employee had attained the age of superannuation in the normal

     course before 27 October 2017. The respondents’ fathers superannuated on 31 May

     2016 (SLP (C) No. 1417 of 2019) and on 31 December 2014 (SLP (C) No. 906 of

     2021). The contention of the respondents that since the claims were pending
7
Writ Petition 1040 of 2016
16
adjudication before various fora, the delay cannot be attributed to them is erroneous.
This Court in
Manjit
(supra) held that pending claims under the scheme must be

     closed. The respondents cannot claim any vested right under the scheme. Clause
(x) of notification which was issued on 2 January 2004 states that discretion to

     accept the request for retirement will vest with the administration depending on the

     suitability of the wards for appointment in the same category as the employee.

     Therefore, the respondents cannot be brought within the purview of the exception

     merely because the claim was made before 27 October 2017.

21          Moreover, we also find that the individual cases of the respondents’ do not

     hold any merit. In the appeal arising out of SLP (C) No 1417 of 2019, the respondent

     was found to be medically unfit for the post of trackman under the LARSGESS

     scheme. The basis of the claim of the respondent originates in the order of the

     Tribunal dated 1 April 2016. The Tribunal proceeded on the basis that though the

     respondent was found unfit for the post of Trackman, he was medically fit for any

     CEE ONE post and posts below. After due consideration, appointment was denied

     by a letter dated 31 May 2016 on the ground that the ward of an employee can be

     considered under the LARSGESS scheme only in the lowest recruitment grade of

     the ‘respective category’ of the employee seeking retirement. As a matter of fact,

     clause (6) of para 2 of the letter of the Railway Board dated 2 January 2004 clearly

     stipulates that:
“The ward will be considered for appointment only in the
                   lowest recruitment grade of the respective category from
                   which the respective category from which the employee
17
seeks retirement, depending upon his/her eligibility and
                  suitability, but not in any other category.”
22         On 11 September 2010, when the Railway Board decided to extend the

     benefit of the scheme to other safety categories of staff with the grade pay of Rs

     1800 per month, it was envisaged that save and except for certain modifications

     inter alia in regard to the categories and the period of qualifying service, the other

     terms and conditions of the scheme will remain unchanged. The respondent’s father

     was a Trackman. For the respondent to have been appointed under the scheme, he

     must have fulfilled the criteria for the appointment to the category in which his father

     was serving. Therefore, in terms of the scheme, though the respondent fulfilled the

     medical criteria requirement for some other posts, he could not be considered for

     appointment. It is clearly evident that on the plain terms of the scheme as it stood,

     the case of the respondent did not fulfil the criteria envisaged in the scheme.

23          In the companion appeal which arose from SLP (C) No. 906 of 2021, an

     application was submitted on 2 December 2010 by the father of the respondent

     seeking employment for his son, which was received by the Department on 7

     December 2010. There was an endorsement on the letter, as noted by the High

     Court to the effect that there was no pending vigilance case against the

     respondent’s father but the date of birth was mentioned incorrectly as 16 February

     1954 instead of 16 December 1954. The application was rejected on the ground that

     he had crossed 57 years as on the cut-off date. It appears that this mistake was

     realized and another application was submitted on 28 January 2014 mentioning the

     correct date of birth. The Tribunal rejected his application on the ground that even
18
assuming that the date of birth was 16 December 1954, the respondent’s father had

     as on the cut-off date crossed the age of 57 years. On appeal, the High Court held

     that even assuming that a wrong date of birth had been mentioned, the date of birth

     of the respondent’s father should be reckoned as 16 December 1954, in which event

     the application was not barred by time. The divergence in the views of the Tribunal

     and the High Court was because the Tribunal had considered the eligibility with

     respect to the second application of the respondent made in 2014 while the High

     Court considered it against the first application made in 2011.

24         The respondent submitted that according to the notification issued by the

     Ministry of Railways on 29 March 2011, the recruitment process under LARSGESS

     scheme must be done twice in a year according to the fixed time schedule. It was

     submitted that according to the time schedule, the cut-off date for determining the

     eligibility of the employee and their ward was 1 January for the first half; and the last

     date for receiving applications was 31 January. For the second half of July-

     December, the cut-off date was 1 July; and the last date for receiving applications

     was 31 July. The first application of the respondent was submitted on 2 December

     2010. According to the appellant, the first application was submitted by the

     respondent’s father even before the LARSGESS Scheme was notified. The reliance

     of the respondent on the notification of 29 March 2011 to justify the application is

     erroneous.    Clause    (2)   of   the   notification   states   that   the   process   of

     retirement/recruitment may be started from July 2011 for the calendar year of 2011.

     This is evident from the letter dated 11 April 2011 where the application submitted

     by the respondent’s father was rejected on the ground that he would be 57 years 4
19
month 14 days old as on the cut-off date of 30 June 2011. Further, the Divisional

     Office of Southern Office issued a notification on 30 June 2011 stating that the last

     date for receipt of application is 31 July 2011 and that all those applications

     submitted prior to the circular would not be considered. On the rejection of the

     application of the respondent’s father on 11 April 2011, a fresh application ought to

     have been filled before 31 July 2011, mentioning the correct date of birth. However,

     the respondent filled the second application on 28 January 2014, nearly 3 years later

     when he was 59 years and 15 days as on the cut-off date of 1 January 2014. When

     he submitted his second application, he had already superannuated and was above

     the age criteria of 57 years.
25         The Tribunal in the present case dismissed the OA filed by the respondent

     noting that the constitutional validity of the scheme was suspect and that moreover

     the father of the respondent had retired on attaining the normal age of

     superannuation. On a considered view of the matter, we hold that there was no error

     in the judgment of the Tribunal. We have addressed in detail the history of the

     LARSGESS scheme and the doubt expressed on its validity by the Division Bench

     of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Kala Singh
(supra) which eventually led to

     the decision of the Union government to terminate the scheme.
While noticing the

     above backdrop, the three judge Bench of this Court in
Manjit
(supra) clearly noted

     that the Scheme provided an avenue for backdoor entry into service and was

     contrary to the mandate of
Article 16
which guarantees equal opportunity in matters

     of public employment. In this backdrop, the impugned judgment of the High Court of
20
Madras issuing a mandamus for the appointment of the respondent cannot be

     sustained.
26         We accordingly allow the appeals and set aside the judgments of the Madurai

     Bench of the Madras High Court dated (i) 21 March 2018 in WP (MD) No. 5046 of

     2018; and (ii) 3 September 2019 in WP (MD) No. 6452 of 2018 and companion

     cases. The writ petitions filed by the respondents before the High Court shall stand

     dismissed. There shall be no orders as to costs. Pending application(s) if any stands

     disposed.
……….….....................................................J.
                                            [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                             ..…..….….....................................................J.
                                            [A S Bopanna]


     New Delhi;
January 25, 2022.
21