[Cites
47
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Bank Of Baroda And Anr. vs Mbl Infrastructures Limited on 18 January, 2022
Author:
M.M. Sundresh
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8411 OF 2019



              BANK OF BARODA & ANR.                                            …APPELLANT(S)

                                                        VERSUS

              MBL INFRASTRUCTURES
              LIMITED & ORS.                                                 …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                   JUDGMENT
M.M. SUNDRESH, J.
1. A judicial interpretation of Section 29A(h) of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy

                      Code, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as “the Code”), as amended by the Act 26

                      of 2018 is sought from us.
2. We have heard Shri. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General and Mr. Bishwajit

                      Dubey, learned counsel appearing for the Appe1llant, and Shri. Ranjit Kumar

                      and Shri. Parag P. Tripathi, learned senior counsels on behalf of Respondent

                      Nos. 1 and 3, respectively. Perused the documents filed by both sides, and
Signature Not Verifiedadditionally, we had the benefit of going through the written arguments placed
Digitally signed by
Charanjeet kaur
Date: 2022.01.18
17:25:24 IST
Reason:               on record.
1
A BRIEF JOURNEY:
3. M/s. MBL Infrastructures Limited (Respondent No.1) was set up by one,

   Mr. Anjanee Kumar Lakhotiya (Respondent No. 3) in the early 1990s. Loans/

   credit facilities were obtained by the Respondent No.1 from the consortium of

   banks (State Bank of Mysore now State Bank of India as lead bank), some of

   who are also arrayed as respondents apart from the appellant. On the failure of

   the Respondent No.1 to act in tune with the terms of repayment, some of the

   respondents were forced to invoke the personal guarantees extended by the

   Respondent No.3 for the credit facilities availed by the Respondent No.1.
4. M/s. RBL Bank issued a notice under
Section 13(2)
of the Securitisation and

   Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act,

   2002 (‘
SARFAESI Act
’ for short), after duly invoking the personal guarantee

   of the Respondent No.3. This was followed by a similar action at the hands of

   Respondent No.8 (M/s Allahabad Bank) and M/s. State Bank of Bikaner and

   Jaipur. We are given to understand that M/s. State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur

   got merged with State Bank of India. The aforesaid two proceedings invoking
Section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI Act were initiated in the month of February

   and March, 2013, respectively.
5. On the aforesaid factual setting, M/s. RBL Bank filed an application bearing

   No. (IB)-170/KB/2017 under
Section 7
of the Code before the National
2
Company Law Tribunal, Kolkata (hereinafter referred to as “adjudicating

   authority”) to initiate corporate insolvency resolution process (CIRP) against

   Respondent No.1. It was admitted vide order dated 30.03.2017, appointing an

   Interim Resolution Professional, leading to imposition of moratorium in terms

   of
Section 14
of the Code. After the expiry of the initial period of CIRP, an

   application was filed by the Resolution Professional for extending the duration

   of CIRP by an additional 90 days, which was duly granted.
6. Two resolution plans were received by the Resolution Professional

   (Respondent No.2 herein) as he then was, of which, one was authored by

   Respondent No.3 on 29.06.2017. This was done prior to the introduction of

   Section 29A of the Code.
7. A series of meetings took place with the active participation of the Committee

   of Creditors (CoC) on the resolution plan submitted by the Respondent No.3

   between October 16, 2017 to November 17, 2017. A decision was made in the

   9th meeting of the CoC held on 18.11.2017 seeking an appropriate resolution

   plan at the hands of Respondent No.3. In tune with the aforesaid directive, the

   Respondent No.3 submitted a modified resolution plan on 22.11.2017.
8. Thereafter, by way of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment)

   Ordinance, 2017, Section 29A was introduced to the Code with which we are
3
concerned in the present lis, specifically 29A(c) and (h). The same are

   reproduced as under:
“Section 29 A – Persons not eligible to be resolution applicant – A
           person shall not be eligible to submit a resolution plan, if such person or
           any other person acting jointly with such person or any other person who
           is a promoter or in the management or control of such person, -
xxx                              xxx                            xxx
(c) has an account, or an account of a corporate debtor under the
               management or control of such person or of whom such person is a
               promoter, classified as non-performing asset in accordance with the
               guidelines of the Reserve Bank of India issued under the
Banking
               Regulation Act, 1949
and at least a period of one year has lapsed from
               the date of such classification till the date of commencement of the
               corporate insolvency resolution process of the corporate debtor:
Provided that the person shall be eligible to submit a resolution
               plan if such person makes payment of all overdue amounts with
               interest thereon and charges relating to non-performing asset accounts
               before submission of resolution plan;
xxx                              xxx                            xxx
(h) has executed an enforceable guarantee in favour of a creditor, in
               respect of a corporate debtor under insolvency resolution process or
               liquidation under this code.”
9. The CoC held its meeting on 01.12.2017 to deliberate upon the impact of the

   amendment qua the eligibility of the Respondent No.3 in submitting a

   resolution plan in the CIRP proceedings. In view of the lingering doubt

   expressed, the Respondent No.3 filed an application bearing CA(IB)

   No.543/KB/2017 praying for a declaration that he was not disqualified from

   submitting a resolution plan under sub-section (c) and (h) of Section 29A of the

   Code.
4
10.The adjudicating authority, vide its order dated 18.12.2017 held that the

  Respondent No.3 was eligible to submit a resolution plan, notwithstanding the

  fact that he did extend his personal guarantees on behalf of the Respondent

  No.1 which were duly invoked by some of the creditors, as aforesaid. This

  issue was never placed and raised before the adjudicating authority. Though the

  adjudicating authority took note of Section 29A(c) of the Code, it did not give

  any specific findings on it. However, it ruled that inasmuch as the personal

  guarantee having not been invoked and the Respondent No.3 merely having

  extended his personal guarantee, as such there is no disqualification per se

  under Section 29A(h) of the Code as the liability under a guarantee arises only

  upon its invocation. Thus, only those guarantors who had antecedents which

  might adversely impact the credibility of the process are alone to be excluded.

  As debt payable by Respondent No.3 was not crystalized, he could not be

  construed as a defaulter for breach of the guarantee. Incidentally, a finding has

  been given that the Respondent No.3 did not commit any default. With the

  aforesaid clarification, the application filed was allowed by taking into

  consideration the amendment made on 23.11.2017, introducing Section 29A to

  the Code.
11.The aforesaid order was assailed by the Punjab National Bank (Respondent

  No.10) before the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter
5
referred to as “appellate tribunal”) in Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.

  330 of 2017. Upon hearing the Respondent No.10, the following interim order

  was passed on 21.12.2017:
“Let notice be issued to respondents by speed post. Requisites by next
        dated. Dasti service permitted.
Copy of this order may also be forwarded to the respondents. The
        appellant will file the certified copy of the impugned order by 5th January,
        2018. Post the matter on 11th January, 2018.
In the meantime, if the 2nd Respondent filed any Resolution Plan, the
        Resolution Professional and the Committee of Creditors may go through
        the same but the Adjudicating Authority will not accept or reject the
        resolution plan or pass any order in lower court without prior approval of
        this Appellant Tribunal.”
12.On the very same day, the resolution plan submitted by the Respondent No.3

  was put to vote by the Respondent No.2 in the 12 th meeting of the CoC by way

  of e-voting, and the process was completed the next day. The plan received

  68.50% vote share of the CoC. Six financial creditors voted against the plan,

  including Respondent No.10 (PNB) and RBL Bank. The extended 270 day

  period of CIRP expired on 25.12.2017.
13.RBL Bank filed an appeal against the order dated 18.12.2017 being Company

  Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.1 of 2018 wherein an order was passed upon

  hearing the parties on 11.01.2018 facilitating the adjudicating authority to

  proceed further but not to accept the resolution plan, without its prior approval.
6
14.The Respondent No.3 filed an application on 12.01.2018 invoking Section 60

   of the Code bearing CA No.(IB) 50/KB/2018 seeking an appropriate direction

   to the dissenting and abstaining creditors to facilitate a possible change of mind

   by supporting the resolution plan, as modified. Thereafter, Bank of

   Maharashtra (Respondent No. 11), since impleaded by the order of this court

   dated 26.10.2021, sent a letter to Respondent No.2 dated 31.01.2018 setting

   forth its conditions for its approval of the resolution plan. Further, Indian

   Overseas Bank was pleased to give its approval to the resolution plan. As such,

   the resolution plan gathered 78.50% vote share.
15.In the meanwhile, Section 29A(h) went through a further amendment which

   came into effect from 18.01.2018:
“Section 29 A – Persons not eligible to be resolution applicant – A
         person shall not be eligible to submit a resolution plan, if such person or
         any other person acting jointly or in concert with such person –

                   xxx                    xxx                   xxx
(h) has executed an enforceable guarantee in favour of a creditor, in
         respect of a corporate debtor against which an application for insolvency
         resolution made by such creditor has been admitted under this code.”
16.On 23.03.2018, the appellate tribunal passed the following order in the appeals

   filed by Respondent No.10 and RBL Bank:
“When the matter was taken up learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
         Appellant – ‘Punjab National Bank’ sought permission to withdraw the
         appeal. One of the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondent
         opposed the prayer. However, we are not inclined to the ground of
7
opposition as made by the Respondent. Bank intends to withdraw the
        appeal, without any liberty. In this background, without taking into
        consideration the grounds shown in the affidavit for withdrawal, we allow
        the Appellant to withdraw the Appeal without any liberty to challenge the
        same very impugned order. The appeal is dismissed as withdrawn. I.A.
        No.311 of 2018 stands disposed of. The ‘question of law’ may be decided
        in some other case. No cost.
The interim order passed by this Appellant Tribunal on 21st December,
        2017 stands vacated.”
17.The above order was passed while permitting the appellants to withdraw the

  appeals against the order of eligibility of Respondent No.3, in view of the

  resolution plan having reached the mandatory requirement of 75% as warranted

  under
Section 30(4)
of the Code. Thus, it is clear that those appellants did not

  have any grievance on the plan as accepted by the majority of the CoC.
However, the request made by the present appellant who filed I.A. No. 311 of

  2018 before the appellate tribunal, seeking to be impleaded as a party to the

  aforesaid proceedings to continue the lis was not favourably considered though

  no reason was assigned in the aforesaid order. We may also note that the

  appellant before us who incidentally filed the aforesaid application was not

  heard before the adjudicating authority. Suffice it is to state that the appellant

  did raise its objection to the withdrawal of appeal, presumably on the premise

  that it wanted to continue by substituting itself in place of the original

  appellants.
8
18.The resolution professional, the Respondent No.2 filed a report dated

   12.02.2018 for recording the increase in voting share up to 78.50% together

   with the resolution plan stating that it was accordingly passed. Only on the

   aforesaid factual setting the pending appeal before the appellate tribunal was

   withdrawn on 27.02.2018. The adjudicating authority approved the resolution

   plan submitted by its order dated 18.04.2018 inter alia holding that there is a

   marked difference between extension and exclusion and therefore, the rigor of
Section 12(1)
of the Code would not get attracted on the facts of the case

   particularly when there were pending proceedings with interim orders. It was

   further held that the issue qua the eligibility under Section 29A(h) decided

   already, coupled with the resolution plan crossing the requisite threshold of

   approval by the CoC, i.e. 75% vote share, having considered the techno-

   economic viability and feasibility of the plan, the application filed for approval

   of the resolution plan submitted by the Respondent No.3 was liable to be

   allowed. A direction was accordingly given, holding that the approved

   resolution plan shall come into force with immediate effect.
19.The appellant before us put into challenge, the aforesaid order passed by the

   adjudicating authority in Company Appeal (AT)(Insolvency) No. 194 of 2018.
9
20. In the meanwhile, Section 29A(h) went through a further change by way of

   ordinance dated 06.06.2018, which subsequently became an Act with effect

   from the same date through the Act 26 of 2018:
“Section 29 A- Persons not eligible to be resolution applicant – A
         person shall not be eligible to submit a resolution plan, if such person or
         any other person acting jointly or in concert with such person –

                   xxx                    xxx                    xxx
(h) has executed a guarantee in favour of a creditor, in respect of a
             corporate debtor against which an application for insolvency
             resolution made by such creditor has been admitted under this code
             and such guarantee has been invoked by the credit and remains unpaid
             if full or part.”
21.The appellate tribunal did explore other possibilities during the pendency of the

   appeal. It also directed the Respondent No.3 to submit a revised resolution

   plan. After hearing the parties, the order passed by the adjudicating authority

   was confirmed, dismissing the appeal filed by the appellant while approving

   the revised resolution plan submitted by the Respondent No.3 before it. After

   the disposal of the appeals filed including that of the appellant along with the

   others who have not challenged the same before us, the shareholders of the

   Respondent No.1 approved the fund raising of Rs.300 crores in the Annual

   General Meeting.
22.The appeals including that of the appellant were dismissed on the ground that

   the resolution plan was approved with 78.50% of the voting share of the CoC,
10
and it was backed by the techno-economic report qua the viability and

   feasibility. The earlier decision of the adjudicating authority dated 18.12.2017

   has attained finality qua the issue of eligibility of the Respondent No.3 under

   Section 29A of the Code to submit a resolution plan, and it cannot sit in appeal

   over the decision of the adjudicating authority or the CoC in the absence of any

   apparent discrimination. It is this decision of the appellate authority confirming

   the order passed by the adjudicating authority, which is tested before us.
23.Before we proceed with the submissions made at the Bar, we have to record

   one more fact, namely,
Section 30
of the Code also underwent a change by the

   introduction of amendment dated 06.06.2018 by way of an ordinance followed

   by an Act through which the percentage required for approval of a resolution

   plan by the CoC has been brought down from 75% to 66% of the voting share

   of the CoC.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE APPELLANT:
24.We will collectively consider the submissions of the learned counsel appearing

   for the appellant and the Respondent No.7, though the said respondent did not

   choose to file any appeal before us.
25.Section 29A has to be given a holistic interpretation as the objective is to weed

   out undesirable persons with the intention of promoting primacy of debt by
11
disqualifying guarantors who have not fulfilled their co-extensive liability with

   the insolvent corporate debtor. The Respondent No.3 (who is a promoter of the

   corporate debtor) was ineligible to submit a resolution plan under Section

   29A(h) of the Code, as several personal guarantees executed by the Respondent

   No.3 in favour of various creditors of the Respondent No.1 stood invoked,

   prior commencement of CIRP. There is a clear suppression on the part of

   Respondent No.3, which was not taken note of by the adjudicating authority on

   both the occasions. Even the Respondent No.2 failed to bring the said fact

   before the adjudicating authority. Therefore, the premise on which the

   adjudicating held the Respondent No.3 eligible to submit a resolution plan is ex

   facie false.
26.The law which was prevailing on the date of the application has to be seen,

   therefore, the disqualification gets attracted on the date of filing of the

   application and on the same analogy not only Section 29A(h) but also
Section

   30(4)
has to be interpreted. As fraud vitiates all solemn acts, the appeal

   deserves to be allowed. A legal ineligibility cannot be done away with by

   alleged estoppel, such ineligibility is a matter of fact to be considered by

   Courts irrespective of any waiver by any party or creditor. The approval of the

   resolution plan was made after the mandatory period of 270 days, i.e. after the

   expiry of the CIRP period. Since there is clear infraction of
Section 12
, the
12
orders passed are liable to be interfered with. The learned Solicitor General has

   sought to place reliance on the judgment of this Court in K. Shashidhar vs.

   Union of India (Order dated 05.02.2019 in Civil Appeal 10673 of 2018). The

   revised plan before the appellate tribunal was never approved by the

   adjudicating authority, including the conditional assent given by the

   Respondent No.11, which were erroneously accepted.
27.There is no bar in law for questioning the eligibility before the adjudicating

   authority as the appellant was neither a party before it on earlier occasion nor

   an adjudication was made on the merits by the appellate tribunal. Therefore,

   the order passed by the appellate tribunal confirming that of the adjudicating

   authority requires to be set aside.
SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENT:
28.A decision made by the CoC in its commercial wisdom on being satisfied with

   the report of the expert on the viability and feasibility of the resolution plan, is

   not required to be interfered with by this Court by substituting its views. The

   revised plan as accepted by the appellate tribunal is an improvement to the

   earlier one submitted by the Respondent No.3 and, therefore, there cannot be

   any grievance on that count.
13
29.The object of the Code has to be read with Section 29A(h). The appellant being

   aware of the decision of the adjudicating authority in the first instance ought to

   have taken it further, as such the appellant is estopped from questioning the

   eligibility of the Respondent No.3 to submit a resolution plan under Section

   29A(h) of the Code. The provision has to be literally interpreted to the extent

   that a personal guarantor is barred from submitting a resolution plan only when

   the creditor invoking the jurisdiction of the adjudicating authority has invoked

   a personal guarantee executed in favour of said creditor by the resolution

   applicant.
30.No personal guarantee stood invoked by RBL Bank at the time of application

   to the adjudicating authority under
Section 7
of the Code. It is further

   submitted that the invocation of the consortium guarantee by Allahabad Bank

   and State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur under
Section 13(2)
of the SARFAESI

   Act, 2002 is ex facie illegal in terms of the inter-se agreement executed

   between the members of the consortium of banks. Even otherwise the same is

   not relevant as neither Allahabad Bank nor State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur

   filed an application before the adjudicating authority.
31.The first respondent is an on-going concern as of now and the resolution plan is

   under implementation since 18.04.2018. The object of the Code is revival of

   the Corporate Debtor and liquidation is the last resort. Any interference at this
14
stage will have an adverse effect and militate against the very object of the

   Code. The Respondent No.3 has infused over Rs. 63 crores since the resolution

   plan has been in operation and has further received approval of the

   shareholders to raise Rs. 300 crores to revive the Respondent No.1. Since the

   approval of the resolution plan submitted by the Respondent No.3, several

   projects of national importance have been completed and various others are

   under execution. Further, all workmen have also been paid in full, and all

   current employees, operational creditors and statutory dues are being regularly

   paid.
32.Both the forums have rightly construed the issue qua extension and exclusion.

   Admittedly, there were earlier rounds of litigation and proceedings were

   pending against the interim orders. This issue has also been concluded finally

   by this Court inter alia holding that in such a scenario exclusion has to be

   granted, in light of the time spent in litigation.
33.Buttressing the aforesaid submissions, the counsels for the Respondents have

   sought to place reliance on the following decisions:

Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. v. Union of India
, (2019) 4 SCC 17

       
K.N. Rajkumar v. V.N. Nagarajan
2021 SCC OnLine 732

        Arcellor Mittal India Pvt. Ltd. v. Satish Kumar Gupta, (2019) 2 SCC 1
15

Committee of Creditors, Essar Steel India Ltd. v. Satish Kumar Gupta
(2020) 8 SCC 531.

Apollo Joti LLC & Ors. v. Jyoti Structures Ltd. (Company Appeal (AT)

            (Insolvency) No.
548 of 2018.

DBS Bank Ltd. vs. Sharad Sanghi (Civil Appeal No.
3434-3436 of

            2019)

      
Ebix Singapore Pvt. Ltd. vs. COC of Educomp Solutions Ltd.
2021

            SCC OnLine SC 707

      
National Spot Exchange v. Anil Kohli
2021 SCC OnLine SC 716

STATUTORY INTERPRETATION:
34.The principle governing statutory interpretation has been repeated with

  regularity by this Court on quite a few occasions. While construing the said

  principle adequate thought will have to be given to the nature of the statute and

  the provisions contained thereunder. The focus is on avoiding any

  interpretation which might cause an injury or destroy the intent behind the

  legislation.
35.Lord Denning in Seaford Court Estates Ltd. v. Asher, (1949) 2 KB 481 deals

  with the role required to be played by the Court even when there is a possible

  defect:
16
“When a defect appears a Judge cannot simply fold his hands and blame
        the draftsman. He must set to work on the constructive task of finding the
        intention of Parliament and then he must supplement the written word so
        as to give 'force and life' to the intention of the legislature. A Judge should
        ask himself the question how, if the makers of the Act had themselves
        come across this ruck in the texture of it, they would have straightened it
        out? He must then do as they would have done. A Judge must not alter the
        material of which the Act is woven, but he can and should iron out the
        creases.”
36.MAXWELL ON INTERPRETATION OF STATUES, 11th Edition

        “It is said to be the duty of the judge to make such construction of a statute
        as shall suppress the mischief and advance the remedy. Even where the
        usual meaning of the language falls short of whole object of the
        legislature, a more extended meaning may be attributed to the words, if
        they are fairly susceptible of it. The construction must not, of course, be
        strained to include cases plainly omitted from the natural meaning of the
        words.” (Pg. 66)

        “…In determining either the general object of the legislature, or the
        meaning of its language in any particular passage, it is obvious that the
        intention which appears to be most in accord with convenience, reason,
        justice or legal principles, should, in all cases of doubtful significance, be
        presumed to be the true one.” (Pg. 183)
37.CRAIES IN STATUTE LAW, 7th Edition, Pg. 262:
“… It is the duty of Courts of justice to try to get at the real intention of the
        legislature by carefully attending to the whole scope of the statute to be
        construed’ .. that in each case you must look to the subject-matter, consider
        the importance of the provision and the relation of that provision to the
        general object intended to be secured by the Act, and upon a review of the
        case in that aspect decide whether the enactment is what is called
        imperative or only directory.”
38.A DRIEDGER, CONSTRUCTION OF STATUTE, 2nd Edition, 1983, Pg. 37:
“Today there is only one principle or approach, namely, the words of an
        Act are to be read in their entire context and in their grammatical and
        ordinary sense harmoniously with the Scheme of the Act, the object of the
        Act, and the intention of Parliament.”
17
39.As repeated on various other occasions by this Court, judging a statute through

   ‘Literal to Heydon’s Golden rule’ has gone through a complete circle. Thus, we

   have come to a stage of applying a reasonable, creative and fair construction

   principle.
40.The often quoted words of Justice Chinnappa Reddy in the celebrated

   judgment in the
Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless General Finance and

   Investment Company Limited
, (1987) 1 SCC 424 holds the field even today:
“33. Interpretation must depend on the text and the context. They are the
         bases of interpretation. One may well say if the text is the texture, context
         is what gives the colour. Neither can be ignored. Both are important. That
         interpretation is best which makes the textual interpretation match the
         contextual. A statute is best interpreted when we know why it was enacted.
         With this knowledge, the statute must be read, first as a whole and then
         section by section, clause by clause, phrase by phrase and word by word. If
         a statute is looked at, in the context of its enactment, with the glasses of
         the statute-maker, provided by such context, its scheme, the sections,
         clauses, phrases and words may take colour and appear different than
         when the statute is looked at without the glasses provided by the context.
         With these glasses we must look at the Act as a whole and discover what
         each section, each clause, each phrase and each word is meant and
         designed to say as to fit into the scheme of the entire Act. No part of a
         statute and no word of a statute can be construed in isolation. Statutes have
         to be construed so that every word has a place and everything is in its
         place….”
41.Apropos the passage in the case of
Union of India v. Elphinstone Spg. and

   Wvg. Co. Ltd.
, (2001) 4 SCC 139:
“While examining a particular statute for finding out the legislative intent
         it is the attitude of Judges in arriving at a solution by striking a balance
         between the letter and spirit of the statute without acknowledging that they
         have in any way supplemented the statute would be the proper criterion.
         The duty of Judges is to expound and not to legislate is a fundamental rule.
         There is no doubt a marginal area in which the courts mould or creatively
18
interpret legislation and they are thus finishers, refiners and polishers of
         legislation which comes to them in a state requiring varying degrees of
         further processing. (See: Corocraft Ltd. v. Pan American Airways Inc.
         [(1968) 3 WLR 714 : (1968) 2 All ER 1059 : (1969) 1 QB 616] WLR, p.
         732 and
State of Haryana v. Sampuran Singh
[(1975) 2 SCC 810] .) But by
         no stretch of imagination a Judge is entitled to add something more than
         what is there in the statute by way of a supposed intention of the
         legislature. It is, therefore, a cardinal principle of construction of statutes
         that the true or legal meaning of an enactment is derived by considering
         the meaning of the words used in the enactment in the light of any
         discernible purpose or object which comprehends the mischief and its
         remedy to which the enactment is directed.”
42.Touching upon the very interpretation of the Code, this Court on more than one

   occasion has adopted the very same approach in Arcellor Mittal India Pvt. Ltd.

   v. Satish Kumar Gupta, (
2019) 2 SCC 1, Phoenix Arc (P) Ltd. v. Spade

   Financial Services Ltd.
, (
2021) 3 SCC 475 and Arun Kumar Jagatramka v.

   Jindal Steel & Power Limited
, (2021) 7 SCC 474.
19
INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE, 2016:
43.The Code has got its laudable object. The idea is to facilitate a process of

   rehabilitation and revival of the corporate debtor with the active participation

   of the creditors. Thus, there are two principal actors in the entire process, viz.,
(i)the committee of creditors and, (ii) the corporate debtor. The others are mere

   facilitators. There can never be any other interest than that of the committee of

   creditors and the corporate debtor. We do not wish to multiply the rationale

   behind the enactment except by quoting the decision of this Court in the case of
Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. v. Union of India
, (2019) 4 SCC 17, which has also

   found acceptance by the subsequent decision in the case of
Arun

   Kumar
(supra):
“27. As is discernible, the Preamble gives an insight into what is sought to
         be achieved by the Code. The Code is first and foremost, a Code for
         reorganisation and insolvency resolution of corporate debtors. Unless such
         reorganisation is effected in a time-bound manner, the value of the assets of
         such persons will deplete. Therefore, maximisation of value of the assets of
         such persons so that they are efficiently run as going concerns is another
         very important objective of the Code. This, in turn, will promote
         entrepreneurship as the persons in management of the corporate debtor are
         removed and replaced by entrepreneurs. When, therefore, a resolution plan
         takes off and the corporate debtor is brought back into the economic
         mainstream, it is able to repay its debts, which, in turn, enhances the
         viability of credit in the hands of banks and financial institutions. Above all,
         ultimately, the interests of all stakeholders are looked after as the corporate
         debtor itself becomes a beneficiary of the resolution scheme—workers are
         paid, the creditors in the long run will be repaid in full, and
         shareholders/investors are able to maximise their investment. Timely
         resolution of a corporate debtor who is in the red, by an effective legal
         framework, would go a long way to support the development of credit
         markets. Since more investment can be made with funds that have come
         back into the economy, business then eases up, which leads, overall, to
20
higher economic growth and development of the Indian economy. What is
         interesting to note is that the Preamble does not, in any manner, refer to
         liquidation, which is only availed of as a last resort if there is either no
         resolution plan or the resolution plans submitted are not up to the mark.
         Even in liquidation, the liquidator can sell the business of the corporate
         debtor as a going concern.
28. It can thus be seen that the primary focus of the legislation is to ensure
         revival and continuation of the corporate debtor by protecting the corporate
         debtor from its own management and from a corporate death by liquidation.
The Code is thus a beneficial legislation which puts the corporate debtor
         back on its feet, not being a mere recovery legislation for creditors. The
         interests of the corporate debtor have, therefore, been bifurcated and
         separated from that of its promoters/those who are in management. Thus,
         the resolution process is not adversarial to the corporate debtor but, in fact,
         protective of its interests. The moratorium imposed by
Section 14
is in the
         interest of the corporate debtor itself, thereby preserving the assets of the
         corporate debtor during the resolution process. The timelines within which
         the resolution process is to take place again protects the corporate debtor’s
         assets from further dilution, and also protects all its creditors and workers by
         seeing that the resolution process goes through as fast as possible so that
         another management can, through its entrepreneurial skills, resuscitate the
         corporate debtor to achieve all these ends.”

ON SECTION 29A AND ITS PURPOSIVE INTERPRETATION:
44.Section 29A of the Code has also come up for consideration before this Court

   on earlier occasions, though, the provision with which we are concerned, i.e.

   Section 29A(h), was not specifically considered. We do not wish to go into

   Section 29A(c) since no issue has been raised before us in these proceedings.
45.As stated, Section 29A is a facet of the Code, and therefore, this provision has

   to be read with the main objective enshrined thereunder. The objective behind

   Section 29A of the Code is to avoid unwarranted and unscrupulous elements to

   get into the resolution process while preventing their personal interests to step
21
in. Secondly, it consciously seeks to prevent certain categories of persons who

   may not be in a position to lend credence to the resolution process by virtue of

   their disqualification.
46.The then Hon’ble Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs made this

   statement before Parliament on 29.12.2017 while moving the Insolvency and

   Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Bill, 2017, which introduced Section 29A to

   the Code:
“The core and soul of this new Ordinance is really Clause 5, which is
         Section 29-A of the original Bill. I may just explain that once a company
         goes into the resolution process, then applications would be invited with
         regard to the potential resolution proposals as far as the company is
         concerned or the enterprise is concerned. Now a number of ineligibility
         clauses were not there in the original Act and, therefore, Section 29-A
         introduces those who are not eligible to apply. For instance there is a
         clause with regard to an undischarged insolvent who is not eligible to
         apply; a person who has been disqualified under the
Companies Act
as a
         Director cannot apply and a person who is prohibited under the
SEBI Act
cannot apply. So these are statutory disqualifications. And there is also a
         disqualification in clause (c) with regard to those who are corporate
         debtors and who as on the date of the application making a bid do not
         operationalise the account by paying the interest itself i.e. you cannot say
         that I have an NPA. I am not making the account operational. The accounts
         will continue to be NPAs and yet I am going to apply for this. Effectively
         this clause will mean that those who are in management and on account of
         whom this insolvent or non-performing asset has arisen will now try and
         say, I do not discharge any of the outstanding debts in terms of making the
         accounts operational and yet I would like to apply and set the enterprise
         back at a discount value, for this is not the object of this particular Act. So
         Clause 5 has been brought in with that purpose in mind.”
47.The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the aforesaid Bill is as follows:
“2. The provisions for insolvency resolution and liquidation of a corporate
         person in the Code did not restrict or bar any person from submitting a
22
resolution plan or participating in the acquisition process of the assets of
        the company at the time of liquidation. Concerns have been raised that
        persons who, with their misconduct contributed to defaults of companies
        or are otherwise undesirable, may misuse this situation due to lack of
        prohibition or restrictions to participate in the resolution or liquidation
        process, and gain or regain control of the corporate debtor. This may
        undermine the processes
laid down in
the Code as the unscrupulous person
        would be seen to be rewarded at the expense of the creditors. In addition,
        in order to check that the undesirable persons who may have submitted
        their resolution plans in the absence of such a provision, responsibility is
        also being entrusted on the committee of creditors to give a reasonable
        period to repay overdue amounts and become eligible.”
48.The aforesaid was taken note of by this Court in
Chitra Sharma & Ors. v.

  Union of India
, (2018) 18 SCC 575 and followed in
Arun Kumar
(supra),

  wherein this Court considered the need for adopting a purposive interpretation

  with the primary aim to revive and restart the corporate debtor, with liquidation

  of the corporate debtor being the last resort:
“41. The enactment of the IBC has marked a quantum change in
        corporate governance and the rule of law. First and foremost, the IBC
        perceives good corporate governance, respect for and adherence to the
        rule of law as central to the resolution of corporate insolvencies. Second,
        the IBC perceives corporate insolvency not as an isolated problem faced
        by individual business entities but places it in the context of a framework
        which is founded on public interest in facilitating economic growth by
        balancing diverse stakeholder interests. Third, the IBC attributes a
        primacy to the business decisions taken by creditors acting as a collective
        body, on the premise that the timely resolution of corporate insolvency is
        necessary to ensure the growth of credit markets and encourage
        investment. Fourth, in its diverse provisions, the IBC ensures that the
        interests of corporate enterprises are not conflated with the interests of
        their promoters; the economic value of corporate structures is broader in
        content than the partisan interests of their managements. These salutary
        objectives of the IBC can be achieved if the integrity of the resolution
        process is placed at the forefront. Primarily, the IBC is a legislation aimed
        at reorganisation and resolution of insolvencies. Liquidation is a matter of
        last resort. These objectives can be achieved only through a purposive
        interpretation which requires courts, while infusing meaning and content
        to its provisions, to ensure that the problems which beset the earlier
23
regime do not enter through the backdoor through disingenuous
stratagems.
xxx                       xxx                    xxx
48. The underlying purpose of introducing Section 29-A was adverted to
in a judgment of this Court in
Chitra Sharma v. Union of India
(2018) 18
SCC 575 (hereinafter referred to as “Chitra Sharma”). One of us (D.Y.
Chandrachud, J.) speaking for a Bench of three learned Judges took note
of the Statement of Objects and Reasons accompanying the Bill and
emphasised the purpose of Section 29-A thus:
“38. Parliament has introduced Section 29-A into IBC with a
     specific purpose. The provisions of Section 29-A are intended to
     ensure that among others, persons responsible for insolvency of the
     corporate debtor do not participate in the resolution process. The
     Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the Insolvency and
     Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Bill, 2017, which was ultimately
     enacted as Act 8 of 2018, states thus:
‘2. The provisions for insolvency resolution and liquidation of
           a corporate person in the Code did not restrict or bar any
           person from submitting a resolution plan or participating in
           the acquisition process of the assets of a company at the time
           of liquidation. Concerns have been raised that persons who,
           with their misconduct contributed to defaults of companies or
           are otherwise undesirable, may misuse this situation due to
           lack of prohibition or restrictions to participate in the
           resolution or liquidation process, and gain or regain control of
           the corporate debtor. This may undermine the processes
laid
           down in
the Code as the unscrupulous person would be seen
           to be rewarded at the expense of creditors. In addition, in
           order to check that the undesirable persons who may have
           submitted their resolution plans in the absence of such a
           provision, responsibility is also being entrusted on the
           committee of creditors to give a reasonable period to repay
           overdue amounts and become eligible.’

     Parliament was evidently concerned over the fact that persons
     whose misconduct has contributed to defaults on the part of debtor
     companies misuse the absence of a bar on their participation in the
     resolution process to gain an entry. Parliament was of the view that
     to allow such persons to participate in the resolution process would
     undermine the salutary object and purpose of the Act. It was in this
24
background that Section 29-A has now specified a list of persons
      who are not eligible to be resolution applicants.”
                                        (emphasis in original and supplied)
49. The Court held that “Section 29-A has been enacted in the larger
public interest and to facilitate effective corporate governance”. The
Court further observed that “Parliament rectified a loophole in the Act
which allowed backdoor entry to erstwhile managements in CIRP.
xxx                       xxx                    xxx
52. While adverting to the earlier decision in
Chitra Sharma [Chitra
Sharma v. Union           of     India
,     (
2018)     18     SCC       575]
and ArcelorMittal [ArcelorMittal (India) (P) Ltd. v. Satish Kumar Gupta
,
(2019) 2 SCC 1] , which had elucidated the object underlying
Section 29-
A, this Court in
Swiss Ribbons [Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. v. Union of India
,
(2019) 4 SCC 17] held that the norm underlying Section 29-A “continues
to permeate”
Section 35(1)(f)
“when it applies not merely to resolution
applicants, but to liquidation also”. Rejecting the plea that
Section 35(1)
(f) is ultra vires, this Court held : (
Swiss Ribbons
case [
Swiss Ribbons (P)
Ltd. v. Union of India
, (2019) 4 SCC 17] ,

            “102. According to the learned counsel for the petitioners,
            when immovable and movable property is sold in liquidation,
            it ought to be sold to any person, including persons who are
            not eligible to be resolution applicants as, often, it is the
            erstwhile promoter who alone may purchase such properties
            piecemeal by public auction or by private contract. The same
            rationale that has been provided earlier in this judgment will
            apply to this proviso as well — there is no vested right in an
            erstwhile promoter of a corporate debtor to bid for the
            immovable and movable property of the corporate debtor in
            liquidation. Further, given the categories of persons who are
            ineligible under Section 29-A, which includes persons who
            are malfeasant, or persons who have fallen foul of the law in
            some way, and persons who are unable to pay their debts in
            the grace period allowed, are further, by this proviso,
            interdicted from purchasing assets of the corporate debtor
            whose debts they have either wilfully not paid or have been
            unable to pay. The legislative purpose which permeates
            Section 29-A continues to permeate the section when it
            applies not merely to resolution applicants, but to liquidation
            also. Consequently, this plea is also rejected.”

A purposive interpretation
25
53. This line of decisions, beginning with
Chitra Sharma [Chitra
         Sharma v. Union of India
, (2018) 18 SCC 575] and continuing
         to
ArcelorMittal [ArcelorMittal (India) (P) Ltd. v. Satish Kumar Gupta
,
         (
2019) 2 SCC 1] and Swiss Ribbons [Swiss Ribbons (P) Ltd. v. Union of
         India
, (2019) 4 SCC 17] is significant in adopting a purposive
         interpretation of Section 29-A. Section 29-A has been construed to be a
         crucial link in ensuring that the objects of the IBC are not defeated by
         allowing “ineligible persons”, including but not confined to those in the
         management who have run the company aground, to return in the
         new avatar of resolution applicants.
Section 35(1)(f)
is placed in the same
         continuum when the Court observes that the erstwhile promoters of a
         corporate debtor have no vested right to bid for the property of the
         corporate debtor in liquidation. The values which animate Section 29-A
         continue to provide sustenance to the rationale underlying the exclusion
         of the same category of persons from the process of liquidation involving
         the sale of assets, by virtue of the provisions of
Section 35(1)(f)
. More
         recent precedents of this Court continue to adopt a purposive
         interpretation of the provisions of the IBC.
[See in this context the
         judgments in
Phoenix ARC (P) Ltd. v. Spade Financial Services
         Ltd. [Phoenix ARC (P) Ltd.
v. Spade Financial Services Ltd., (2021) 3
         SCC 475 : (2021) 2 SCC (Civ) 1 at paras 103-104] ,
Ramesh
         Kymal v. Siemens Gamesa Renewable Power (P) Ltd. [Ramesh
         Kymal
v. Siemens Gamesa Renewable Power (P) Ltd., (2021) 3 SCC 224
         : (2021) 2 SCC (Civ) 65 at paras 23 and 25] and
Jaypee Infratech
         Ltd. v. Axis Bank Ltd. [Jaypee Infratech Ltd.
v. Axis Bank Ltd., (2020) 8
         SCC 401 : (2021) 2 SCC (Civ) 334 at paras 28.4 and 28.5] ]

         Sustainable revival
54. The purpose of the ineligibility under Section 29-A is to achieve a
         sustainable revival and to ensure that a person who is the cause of the
         problem either by a design or a default cannot be a part of the process of
         solution. Section 29-A, it must be noted, encompasses not only conduct
         in relation to the corporate debtor but in relation to other companies as
         well. This is evident from clause (c) (“an account of a corporate debtor
         under the management or control of such person or of whom such person
         is a promoter, classified as a non-performing asset”), and clauses (e), (f),
(g), (h) and (i) which have widened the net beyond the conduct in relation
         to the corporate debtor.”
49.In Phoenix Arc (P) Ltd.
(supra) case, this Court considered the principle of

   purposive and creative interpretation while approving the interpretation given
26
and approach taken by this Court in the earlier decision in Arcellor

Mittal(supra):
“89. In Arcelor Mittal (India) (P) Ltd. v. Satish Kumar Gupta [(2019) 2
      SCC 1], the issue was whether ineligibility of the resolution applicant
      under Section 29-A(c) of the Code attached to an applicant at the date of
      commencement of the CIRP or at the time when the resolution plan is
      submitted by the resolution applicant. Speaking for this Court, Rohinton
      F. Nariman, J. interpreted the pre-2018 Amendment, framing of Section
      29-A(c), in the following terms: (SCC pp. 61-62, para 46)

         “46. According to us, it is clear that the opening words of Section 29-
         A furnish a clue as to the time at which clause (c) is to operate. The
         opening words of Section 29-A state:‘a person shall not be eligible to
         submit a resolution plan…’. It is clear therefore that the stage of
         ineligibility attaches when the resolution plan is submitted by a
         resolution applicant. The contrary view expressed by Shri Rohatgi is
         obviously incorrect, as the date of commencement of the corporate
         insolvency resolution process is only relevant for the purpose of
         calculating whether one year has lapsed from the date of
         classification of a person as a non-performing asset. Further, the
         expression used is “has”, which as Dr Singhvi has correctly argued,
         is in praesenti. This is to be contrasted with the expression “has
         been”, which is used in clauses (d) and (g), which refers to an
         anterior point of time. Consequently, the amendment of 2018
         introducing the words ‘at the time of submission of the resolution
         plan’ is clarificatory, as this was always the correct interpretation as
         to the point of time at which the disqualification in clause (c) of
         Section 29-A will attach.”

         xxx                            xxx                            xxx
91. However, it is relevant to examine whether the object and purpose for
      which the proviso was enacted, are fulfilled by the literal interpretation of
      the first proviso. Justice G.P. Singh in his authoritative commentary on
      the interpretation of statutes, Principles of Statutory Interpretation [(1 st
      Edn., Lexis Nexis 2015)], has stated that:
“The intention of the legislature thus assimilates two aspects: In one
         aspect it carries the concept of “meaning” i.e. what the words mean
         and in another aspect, it conveys the concept of “purpose and object”
         or the “reason and spirit” pervading through the statute. The process
         of construction, therefore, combines both literal and purposive
         approaches. In other words the legislative intention i.e. the true or
27
legal meaning of an enactment is derived by considering the
  meaning of the words used in the enactment in the light of any
  discernible purpose or object which comprehends the mischief and
  its remedy to which the enactment is directed. This formulation later
  received the approval of the Supreme Court and was called the
  “cardinal principle of construction”.
92. Justice G.P. Singh notes that certain enactments require a liberal
construction to give effect to its objects and purpose:
“A bare mechanical interpretation of the words and application of a
  legislative intent devoid of concept of purpose will reduce most of
  the remedial and beneficent legislation to futility. As stated by Iyer,
  J. “to be literal in meaning is to see the skin and miss the soul. The
  judicial key to construction is the composite perception of the deha
  and the dehi of the provision.” Even in construing enactments such
  as those prescribing a period of limitation for initiation of
  proceedings where the purpose is only to intimate the people that
  after lapse of a certain time from a certain event a proceeding will
  not be entertained and where a strict grammatical construction is
  normally the only safe guide, a literal and mechanical construction
  may have to be disregarded if it conflicts with some essential
  requirement of fair play and natural justice which the legislature
  never intended to throw overboard. Similarly, in a taxing statute
  provisions enacted to prevent tax evasion are given a liberal
  construction to effectuate the purpose of suppressing tax evasion
  although provisions imposing a charge are construed strictly there
  being no a priori liability to pay a tax and the purpose of a charging
  section being only to levy a charge on persons and activities brought
  within its clear terms. For the same reason, in a legislation relating to
  defence services “the considerations of the security of the State and
  enforcement of high degree of discipline additionally intervene and
  have to be assigned weightage while dealing with any expression
  needing to be defined or any provision needing to be interpreted.”
93. Similar words used in different parts of the enactment can have
different meanings. As Justice G.P. Singh notes:
“The rule is of general application as even plainest terms may be
  controlled by the context, and “it is conceivable,” as Lord Watson
  said, ‘that the legislature whilst enacting one clause in plain terms,
  might introduce into the same statute other enactments which to
  some extent qualify or neutralise its effect’. The same word may
  mean one thing in one context and another in a different context. For
  this reason the same word used in different sections of a statute or
28
even when used at different places in the same clause or section of a
   statute may bear different meanings. The conclusion that the
   language used by the legislature is plain or ambiguous can only be
   truly arrived at by studying the statute as a whole. How far and to
   what extent each component part of the statute influences the
   meaning of the other part would be different in each given case. But
   the effect of the application of the rule to a particular case, should
   not be confounded with the legitimacy of applying it.”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)
94.
In this context, it would be useful to refer to an earlier decision of this
Court in
Abhay Singh Chautala v. CBI
[(2011) 7 SCC 141], where the
Court did not interpret the word “is” in praesenti because that would lead
to an absurd result, defeating the purpose of the provision concerned. In
that case this Court had to interpret
Section 19(1)
of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988, which provided:
“19. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution.—(1) No court
   shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under
Sections 7
,
10
,
11
,
13
and
15
alleged to have been committed by a public servant,
   except with the previous sanction—
(a) in the case of a person who is employed in connection
       with the affairs of the Union and is not removable from his
       office save by or with the sanction of the Central
       Government, of that Government;
(b) in the case of a person who is employed in connection
       with the affairs of a State and is not removable from his
       office save by or with the sanction of the State Government,
       of that Government;
(c) in the case of any other person, of the authority
       competent to remove him from his office.”
95. It was argued before this Court that a literal interpretation should be
given to
Section 19(1)
. Since the word “is” has been used in sub-sections
(a), (b) and (c), it was urged that this would exclude a public servant who
had abused office at an earlier point in time and has now ceased to
occupy that office. This Court speaking through Sirpurkar, J. rejected the
argument and held: (
Abhay Singh Chautala
case(supra), SCC p.163, para
44)

   “44. … we reject the argument based on the word “is” in clauses (a),
(b) and (c). It is true that the section operates in praesenti; however,
   the section contemplates a person who continues to be a public
   servant on the date of taking cognizance. However, as per the
29
interpretation, it excludes a person who has abused some other office
   than the one which he is holding on the date of taking cognizance, by
   necessary implication. Once that is clear, the necessity of the literal
   interpretation would not be there in the present case. Therefore,
   while we agree with the principles
laid down in
Robert Wigram
   Crawford v. Richard Spooner; Bidie [(1846 SCC OnLine PC 7)], In
   re [1949 Ch 121(CA)] and Bourne (Inspector of Taxes) v. Norwich
   Crematorium Ltd. [(1967) 1 WLR 691], we specifically hold that
   giving the literal interpretation to the section would lead to absurdity
   and some unwanted results, as had already been pointed out in
   Antulay[(1984) 2 SCC 183].”
96. This Court relied on the judgment in
R.S. Nayak v. A.R.
Antulay
(supra) to fortify its interpretation of
Section 19(1)
of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947: (
Abhay Singh Chautala
case(supra),)

  “22. … ‘24. … An illustration was posed to the learned counsel that
  a Minister who is indisputably a public servant greased his palms by
  abusing his office as Minister, and then ceased to hold the office
  before the court was called upon to take cognizance of the offence
  against him and therefore, sanction as contemplated by
Section 6
would not be necessary; but if after committing the offence and
  before the date of taking of cognizance of the offence, he was elected
  as a Municipal President in which capacity he was a public servant
  under the relevant Municipal law, and was holding that office on the
  date on which court proceeded to take cognizance of the offence
  committed by him as a Minister, would a sanction be necessary and
  that too of that authority competent to remove him from the office of
  the Municipal President. The answer was in affirmative. But the very
  illustration would show that such cannot be the law. Such an
  interpretation of
Section 6
would render it as a shield to an
  unscrupulous public servant. Someone interested in protecting may
  shift him from one office of public servant to another and thereby
  defeat the process of law. One can legitimately envisage a situation
  wherein a person may hold a dozen different offices, each one
  clothing him with the status of a public servant under
Section 21
IPC
  and even if he has abused only one office for which either there is a
  valid sanction to prosecute him or he has ceased to hold that office
  by the time court was called upon to take cognizance, yet on this
  assumption, sanction of 11 different competent authorities each of
  which was entitled to remove him from 11 different public offices
  would be necessary before the court can take cognizance of the
  offence committed by such public servant, while abusing one office
  which he may have ceased to hold. Such an interpretation is contrary
  to all canons of construction and leads to an absurd end product
  which of necessity must be avoided.
Legislation must at all costs be
30
interpreted in such a way that it would not operate as a rogue’s
  charter.’ (
A.R. Antulay
case(supra), pp. 206-207, para 24)”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)
97. This Court has approved of a purposive interpretation of Section 29-A
IBC in Arcelor Mittal (India) (P) Ltd. v. Satish Kumar Gupta(supra),
where it was observed that: (SCC pp. 46-47, paras 29-30)

  “29.
… In
Eera v. State (NCT of Delhi
) [(2017) 15 SCC 133], this
  Court, after referring to the golden rule of literal construction, and its
  older counterpart the “object rule” in Heydon case [(1584) 3 Co Rep
  7a], referred to the theory of creative interpretation as follows: (
Eera
case(supra), SCC pp. 200-01 & 204, paras 122 & 127)

       ‘122. Instances of creative interpretation are when the Court
       looks at both the literal language as well as the purpose or
       object of the statute in order to better determine what the
       words used by the draftsman of legislation mean.
In
D.R.
       Venkatachalam v. Transport Commr.
[(1977) 2 SCC 273],
       an early instance of this is found in the concurring judgment
       of Beg, J. The learned Judge put it rather well when he said:
(SCC p. 287, para 28)

          “28. It is, however, becoming increasingly fashionable
          to start with some theory of what is basic to a
          provision or a chapter or in a statute or even to our
          Constitution in order to interpret and determine the
          meaning of a particular provision or rule made to
          subserve an assumed “basic” requirement. I think that
          this novel method of construction puts, if I may say
          so, the cart before the horse. It is apt to seriously
          mislead us unless the tendency to use such a mode of
          construction is checked or corrected by this Court.
          What is basic for a section or a chapter in a statute is
          provided: firstly, by the words used in the statute
          itself; secondly, by the context in which a provision
          occurs, or, in other words, by reading the statute as a
          whole; thirdly, by the Preamble which could supply
          the “key” to the meaning of the statute in cases of
          uncertainty or doubt; and, fourthly, where some
          further aid to construction may still be needed to
          resolve an uncertainty, by the legislative history which
          discloses the wider context or perspective in which a
          provision was made to meet a particular need or to
          satisfy a particular purpose. The last-mentioned
31
method consists of an application of the Mischief
                  Rule
laid down in
Heydon case (supra) long ago.”

                           *                  *               *
127. It is thus clear on a reading of English, US, Australian
               and our own Supreme Court judgments that the “Lakshman
               Rekha” has in fact been extended to move away from the
               strictly literal rule of interpretation back to the rule of the
               old English case of Heydon (supra), where the Court must
               have recourse to the purpose, object, text and context of a
               particular provision before arriving at a judicial result. In
               fact, the wheel has turned full circle. It started out by the
               rule as stated in 1584 in Heydon case (supra), which was
               then waylaid by the literal interpretation rule laid down by
               the Privy Council and the House of Lords in the mid-1800s,
               and has come back to restate the rule somewhat in terms of
               what was most felicitously put over 400 years ago in
               Heydon case (supra).’
30. A purposive interpretation of Section 29-A, depending both on
           the text and the context in which the provision was enacted, must,
           therefore, inform our interpretation of the same.
(emphasis supplied)”
50.We have already observed that we do not wish to interpret Section 29A(c) as

   no arguments have been addressed on that, perhaps for the reason that

   Respondent No.3 might not attract any disqualification on that score.

   SCOPE OF SECTION 29A(h)
51.Section 29A(h) of the Code creates one more category of persons not being

   eligible to be a resolution applicant. Other than the persons mentioned

   thereunder, there may not be any disqualification. The word “person” is of a

   wider import to include a promoter or a director, as the case may be. The
32
definition of “person” as mentioned under
Section 3(23)
of the Code includes

   certain categories of persons and thus, there is no such exclusion. It is merely

   illustrative/inclusive in nature and therefore, the persons mentioned in Section

   29A alone are ineligible to be resolution applicants.
52.Once a person executes a guarantee in favour of a creditor with respect to the

   credit facilities availed by a corporate debtor, and in a case where an

   application for insolvency resolution has been admitted, with the further fact of

   the said guarantee having been invoked, the bar qua eligibility would certainly

   come into play. What the provision requires is a guarantee in favour of ‘a

   creditor’. Once an application for insolvency resolution is admitted on behalf

   of ‘a creditor’ then the process would be one of rem, and therefore, all creditors

   of the same class would have their respective rights at par with each other. This

   position has also been dealt with by this Court in the case of
Swiss

   Ribbons
(supra):
“82. It is clear that once the Code gets triggered by admission of a
         creditor’s petition under
Sections 7
to
9
, the proceeding that is before the
         adjudicating authority, being a collective proceeding, is a proceeding in
         rem. Being a proceeding in rem, it is necessary that the body which is to
         oversee the resolution process must be consulted before any individual
         corporate debtor is allowed to settle its claim. A question arises as to what
         is to happen before a Committee of Creditors is constituted (as per the
         timelines that are specified, a Committee of Creditors can be appointed at
         any time within 30 days from the date of appointment of the interim
         resolution professional). We make it clear that at any stage where the
         Committee of Creditors is not yet constituted, a party can approach NCLT
         directly, which Tribunal may, in exercise of its inherent powers under
         Rule 11 of NCLT Rules, 2016, allow or disallow an application for
33
withdrawal or settlement. This will be decided after hearing all the parties
        concerned and considering all relevant factors on the facts of each case.”
53.The word “such creditor” in Section 29A(h) has to be interpreted to mean

  similarly placed creditors after the application for insolvency application is

  admitted by the adjudicating authority. As a result, what is required to earn a

  disqualification under the said provision is a mere existence of a personal

  guarantee that stands invoked by a single creditor, notwithstanding the

  application being filed by any other creditor seeking initiation of insolvency

  resolution process. This is subject to further compliance of invocation of the

  said personal guarantee by any other creditor. We have already said that the

  concern of the Court is only from the point of view of two entities viz.,

  corporate creditors and the corporate debtors. Any other interpretation would

  lead to an absurdity striking at the very objective of Section 29A, and hence,

  the Code. Ineligibility has to be seen from the point of view of the resolution

  process. It can never be said that there can be ineligibility qua one creditor as

  against others. Rather, the ineligibility is to the participation in the resolution

  process of the corporate debtor. Exclusion is meant to facilitate a fair and

  transparent process.
54.The provision after the amendment speaks of invocation by a creditor. The

  manner of invocation can never be a factor for the adjudicating authority to
34
adjudge, as against its existence. Adequate importance will have to be given to

   the latter part of the provision which also disqualifies a person whose liability

   under the personal guarantee executed in favour of a creditor, remains unpaid

   in full or in part for the amount due from him, upon invocation.
55.It is quite obvious that a resolution applicant, other than a financial creditor

   under
Section 7
, an operational creditor under
Section 8
and a corporate debtor

   under
Section 10
, can ever have an independent right to insist for the protection

   of its own interest in the resolution process. Thus, Section 29A has a laudable

   object of protecting and balancing the interest of the committee of creditors and

   the corporate debtor, while shutting the doors to canvas the interests of others.

   That is the reason why it consciously excludes certain categories of persons.

   We may add that Section 29A(h) foresees the creditors who are otherwise

   either already under the insolvency resolution process or are entitled to go

   under it.
56.Yet another issue which requires consideration is to the date of reckoning qua

   the provision. That is, the date of submission of resolution plan or the date of

   adjudication by the authority. Having understood the provision and the

   objective behind it, as well as the Code, it is clear that, if there is a bar at the

   time of submission of resolution plan by a resolution applicant, it is obviously

   not maintainable. However, if the submission of the plan is maintainable at the
35
time at which it is filed, and thereafter, by the operation of the law, a person

becomes ineligible, which continues either till the time of approval by the CoC,

or adjudication by the authority, then the subsequent amended provision would

govern the question of eligibility of resolution applicant to submit a resolution

plan. The resolution applicant has no role except to facilitate the process. If

there is ineligibility which in turn prohibits the other stakeholders to proceed

further and the amendment being in the nature of providing a better process,

and that too in the interest of the creditors and the debtor, the same is required

to be followed as against the provision that stood at an earlier point of time.
Thus, a mere filing of the submission of a resolution plan has got no rationale,

as it does not create any right in favour of a facilitator nor it can be

extinguished. One cannot say, what is good today cannot be applied merely

because an applicant was eligible to submit a resolution plan at an earlier point

of time. It is only a part of procedural law. We quote with profit the decision in
Ebix Singapore Pvt. Ltd. vs. COC of Educomp Solutions Ltd.
, 2021 SCC

OnLine 707:
“130. The CoC even with the requisite majority, while approving the
      Resolution Plan must consider the feasibility and viability of the Plan and
      the manner of distribution proposed, which may take into account the
      order of priority amongst creditors as
laid down in
sub-section (1) of
      section 53 of the IBC. The CoC cannot approve a Resolution Plan
      proposed by an applicant barred under Section 29A of the IBC.
Regulation 37
and
38
of the CIRP Regulations govern the contents of a
      Resolution Plan. Furthermore, a Resolution Plan, if in compliance with
      the mandate of the IBC, cannot be rejected by the Adjudicating Authority
36
and becomes binding on its approval upon all stakeholders - including the
         Central and State Government, local authorities to whom statutory dues
         are owed, operational creditors who were not a part of the CoC and the
         workforce of the Corporate Debtor who would now be governed by a
         new management. Such features of a Resolution Plan, where a statute
         extensively governs the form, mode, manner and effect of approval
         distinguishes it from a traditional contract, specifically in its ability to
         bind those who have not consented to it. In the pure contractual realm, an
         agreement binds parties who are privy to the contract. In the context of a
         resolution Plan governed by the IBC, the element of privity becomes
         inapplicable once the Adjudicating Authority confirms the Resolution
         Plan under
Section 31(1)
and declares it to be binding on all stakeholders,
         who are not a part of the negotiation stage or parties to the Resolution
         Plan. In fact, a commentator has noted that the purpose of bankruptcy law
         is to actually solve a specific ‘contracting failure’ that accompanies
         financial distress. Such a contracting failure arises because “financial
         distress involves too many parties with strategic bargaining incentives
         and too many contingencies for the firm and its creditors to define a set of
         rules of every scenario.” Thus, insolvency law recognizes that parties can
         take benefit of such ‘incomplete contract’ to hold each other up for their
         individual gain. In an attempt to solve the issue of incompleteness and the
         hold-up threat, the insolvency law provides procedural protections i.e.,
         “the law puts in place guardrails that give the parties room to bargain
         while keeping them from taking position that veer toward extreme hold
         up”



ON MERIT
57.Having discussed Section 29A(h) of the Code as we understood, we shall now

   go into the facts of the instant case.
58.Admittedly, the Respondent No.3 has executed personal guarantees which were

   invoked by three of the financial creditors even prior to the application filed.

   The rigor of Section 29A(h) of the Code obviously gets attracted. The

   eligibility can never be restricted to the aforesaid three creditors, but also to

   other financial creditors in view of the import of
Section 7
of the Code. In the
37
case at hand, in pursuance to the invocation, an application invoking
Section 7
indeed was filed by one such creditor. It was invoked even at the time of

   submitting a resolution plan by the Respondent No.3. Thus, in the touchstone

   of our interpretation of Section 29A(h), we hold that the plan submitted by the

   Respondent No.3 ought not to have been entertained.
59.The adjudicating authority and the appellate tribunal were not right in rejecting

   the contentions of the appellant on the ground that the earlier appeals having

   been withdrawn without liberty, the issue qua eligibility cannot be raised for

   the second time. Admittedly, the appellant was not a party to the decision of the

   adjudicating authority on the first occasion, in the appeal the appellant merely

   filed an application for impleadment. The appellate authority did not decide

   the matter on merit. In fact, the question of law is left open. The principle

   governing res judicata and issue estoppel would never get attracted in such a

   scenario. Thus, the reasoning rendered by the appellate tribunal to that extent

   cannot be sustained in law.
60.On the question of limitation, we are in agreement with the views expressed by

   the adjudicating authority as confirmed by the appellate tribunal. There were

   earlier rounds of litigation with the interim orders. The delay of 106 days has

   been rightly condoned and excluded by the adjudicating authority by invoking
Section 12(3)
of the Code. It was done only on one occasion. The adjudicating
38
authority was right in holding that there is a marked difference between

      extension and exclusion. Exclusion would come into play when the decision is

      challenged before a higher forum. Extension is one which is to be exercised by

      the authority constituted.
61.   Having held so, we would like to come to the last part of our order. Though the

      very resolution plan submitted by the Respondent No. 3, being ineligible is not

      maintainable, much water has flown under the bridge. The requisite percentage

      of voting share has been achieved. We may also note that the percentage has

      been brought down from 75% to 66% by way of an amendment to
Section

      30(4)
of the Code.
62.Secondly, majority of the creditors have given their approval to the resolution

      plan. The adjudicating authority has rightly noted that it was accordingly

      approved after taking into consideration, the techno-economic report pertaining

      to the viability and feasibility of the plan. The plan is also put into operation

      since 18.04.2018, and as of now the Respondent No. 1 is an on-going concern.

      Though, the Respondent No.11 has taken up the plea that its offer was

      conditional, it has got a very minor share which may not be sufficient to impact

      by adding it with that of the appellant and Respondent No.7. The Respondent

      No.7 and the Respondent No.11 did not choose to challenge the order of the

      appellate tribunal.
39
63.We need to take note of the interest of over 23,000 shareholders and thousands

   of employees of the Respondent No.1. Now, about Rs. 300 crores has also been

   approved by the shareholders to be raised by the Respondent No.1. It is stated

   that about Rs. 63 crores has been infused into the Respondent No.1 to make it

   functional. There are many on-going projects of public importance undertaken

   by the Respondent No.1 in the nature of construction activities which are at

   different stages.
64.We remind ourselves of the ultimate object of the Code, which is to put the

   corporate debtor back on the rails. Incidentally, we also note that no prejudice

   would be caused to the dissenting creditors as their interests would otherwise

   be secured by the resolution plan itself, which permits them to get back the

   liquidation value of their respective credit limits. Thus, on the peculiar facts of

   the present case, we do not wish to disturb the resolution plan leading to the

   on-going operation of the Respondent No.1.
65.The appeal stands disposed of. Accordingly, all applications stand disposed of.

   No costs.
……………………………J.
                                                       (SANJAY KISHAN KAUL)

                                                       ……………………………J.
                                                          (M.M. SUNDRESH)
 New Delhi,
 January 18, 2022
40