[Cites
1
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Lawyers Voice vs The State Of Punjab on 12 January, 2022
Author:
Chief Justice
Bench:
Hima Kohli
,
Surya Kant
,
N.V. Ramana
REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 13 OF 2022


LAWYERS VOICE                                                          …..PETITIONER(S)

                                                 VERSUS

THE STATE OF PUNJAB & OTHERS                                         …...RESPONDENT(S)



                                                  ORDER
1.                  The present Writ Petition arises out of the incident dated

                 5.01.2022       wherein    on    a   visit   to   Hussainiwala,   District

                 Firozpur, State of Punjab the convoy of the Prime Minister was

                 stuck on a flyover for around 20 minutes.
2. Petitioner, an NGO which purports to work for advocates across

                 the country and takes up causes that are in public interest,

                 therefore, seeks that this Court take cognizance of the above

                 incident and has prayed for the following directions:
“(a) Take cognizance of the serious and deliberate
lapse on part of the Respondent Nos. 1,2 ad 3
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Vishal Anand
concerning the security and the movement of the Prime
Date: 2022.01.12
17:58:05 IST
Reason:
Minister of the country; and
1
(b)   Direct the learned District Judge, Bhatinda, to
        collect all official documents and materials from all
        possible sources pertaining to the movements and
        deployment of Punjab Police in connection with the
        visit at the earliest and produce the same before this
        Hon’ble Court; and
(c)   Issue a writ of mandamus or any other writ, order
        or direction fixing responsibility of the Respondent
        No. 2 and Respondent No. 3 and place them under
        suspension and further direct the Respondent No. 4 to
        initiate departmental action against the same;
(d)   Please to issue any other writ or directions(s) or
        orders(s) as the Hon’ble Court may deem fit and proper
        in view of the facts and circumstances of the case and
        in the interest of justice.”
3.   Petitioner contends that the incident constitutes a very grave

     security breach that could have had significant repercussions

     as it impacts the safety of the Hon’ble Prime Minister.
4. Given the seriousness of the subject matter, and the need to

     ensure a thorough investigation into the alleged lapses by the

     security apparatus, we took up the matter on the 07th January,

     2022 when we heard Mr. Maninder Singh, Senior Advocate on

     behalf of the petitioner and Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor
2
General on behalf of Union of India and Mr. D.S. Patwalia,

learned Advocate General for the State of Punjab. This Court,

thus, passed the following order:
“1. Heard learned senior counsel Mr. Maninder Singh
    on behalf of the Petitioner, the learned Solicitor
    General, Mr. Tushar Mehta, and the learned Advocate
    General for the State of Punjab, Mr. D.S. Patwalia.
2. Taking into consideration the arguments advanced
    by the parties with respect to the issues relating to the
    security of WP(C)No.13/2022 the Hon’ble Prime
    Minister and other related issues raised by them, we
    deem it appropriate for the time being to direct the
    Registrar General, Punjab and Haryana High Court to
    secure and preserve the records relating to the Hon’ble
    Prime Minister’s scheduled tour of Punjab on 05th
    January 2022.
3. We direct the Director General of Police, Union
    Territory of Chandigarh and an officer of the National
    Investigation Agency, not below the rank of Inspector
    General, to be nominated by the Director General,
    National Investigation Agency to assist the Registrar
    General, Punjab and Haryana High Court to forthwith
3
secure and seize the records from the State police as
         well as Central agencies.
4. We further direct the State Government of Punjab,
         including the police authorities, the Special Protection
         Group and any other Central/State agencies to
         cooperate and to provide necessary assistance in
         securing and seizing the records.
5. We direct the Registrar General, Punjab and
         Haryana High Court to keep the records in his safe
         custody for the time being.
6. The Registry is directed to forward a copy of this
         order   electronically,   forthwith,   to   the   Registrar
         General, Punjab and Haryana High Court, the Director
         General of Police, Union Territory of Chandigarh, the
         Director General, National Investigation Agency and
         the Principal Secretary, Home, State of Punjab.
XXXXXX XXX”
5.   In deference to the above­stated order, a compliance report has

     been submitted wherein it has been stated that the relevant

     records have been received, seized, and secured. The same

     have been sealed and placed in the custody of the Punjab and

     Haryana High Court.
4
6.   On the previous date of hearing, it was also brought to our

     notice that the State of Punjab has constituted a Committee to

     carry out a thorough probe into the lapses that occurred

     during the Firozpur visit of the Hon’ble Prime Minister. The

     Committee comprised of a Former Judge of the Punjab and

     Haryana High Court and Principal Secretary, Home Affairs and

     Justice, Government of Punjab. It was urged on behalf of

     learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner that since lapses in

     the breach of security of the Hon’ble Prime Minister are being

     seriously attributed to the authorities of the State of Punjab,

     the constitution of an Enquiry Committee by the State was

     nothing but an abortive attempt to become a Judge in its own

     cause.
7. The State of Punjab, on the other hand, has placed on record

     copies of the show cause notices issued by the Government of

     India, Ministry of Home Affairs, Internal Security­I Division

     dated January 06, 2022 to various functionaries of the State of

     Punjab including its Chief Secretary and Director General of

     Police. The show cause notices required the officers to respond

     within 24 hours as to why disciplinary action under the All

     India Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1969 should not
5
be   initiated   against   them    for   their   “omissions   and

   commissions”. The learned Advocate General for the State of

   Punjab urged that the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of

   India has, in a way, already held the officers of Government of

   Punjab ‘guilty’ of the alleged negligence and/or breach of

   security of the Hon’ble Prime Minister. He maintained that

   none of the agencies of the State Government had committed a

   dereliction of their responsibility for the security and safety of

   the Hon’ble Prime Minister, yet there is a smear campaign to

   discredit the State Government. All the same, the learned

   Advocate General for the State fairly offered that the State is

   more than willing to have an independent enquiry of the

   matter.
8. We have heard learned counsel for the parties at considerable

   length and studied the provisions of the
Special Protection

   Group Act, 1988
(for short, “the Act”) along with the relevant

   contents of the Blue Book. The legislative scheme of the Act is

   quite comprehensive with respect to ensuring proximate

   security of the Prime Minister, or a former Prime Minister, or

   their family members, as the case may be. The Blue Book

   contains an unambiguous and detailed procedure to be
6
observed by the State Authorities and the Special Protection

    Group (for short, “SPG”) to ensure full safety and security of

    the Prime Minister while he is touring a State. The additional

    object is to avoid any human error, negligence or any willful

    omission or commission which may hamper and/or expose the

    safety and security of the Executive Head of the nation while he

    is traveling in a particular State. Any lapse in this regard can

    lead to devastating and serious consequences.
9. It is not necessary for us to elucidate more on facts as the lapse

    regarding the breach of security of the Prime Minister during

    his visit to Firozpur on 5th January, 2022 is not seriously

    disputed by either party. There is, however, a blame game

    between the State and Central Government as to who is

    responsible for such lapses. War of words between them is no

    solution. It may rather impair the need of a robust mechanism

    to respond at such a critical juncture.
10. We, therefore, find merit in the submission of Shri Maninder

    Singh, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner that not only

    are the Officer(s)/Authority responsible for the above­stated

    lapse liable to be identified, but there is also a greater urgency

    to evolve new measures that may ensure there is no recurrence
7
of such lapses in the future.
11. The learned Solicitor General appearing for the Union of India,

    supported the submission of the Petitioner and prayed for a

    detailed independent enquiry. The learned Advocate General for

    the State of Punjab also fairly expressed his willingness for an

    independent enquiry ordered by this Court.
12. Keeping the above submissions made by the parties in view, we

    are of the considered opinion that these questions cannot be

    left to be resolved through one­sided enquiries. A judicially

    trained independent mind, duly assisted by officers who are

    well acquainted with the security considerations and the

    Registrar General of the High Court who has seized the record

    pursuant to our earlier order, would be best placed to

    effectively visit all issues and submit a comprehensive report

    for the consideration of this Court.
13. We therefore deem it appropriate to appoint an Enquiry

    Committee comprising the following:
i.   Justice Indu Malhotra, a former Judge of the Supreme
             Court of   India­ Chairperson;
8
ii.   Director General or his nominee not below the rank of
             Inspector General of Police of National Investigation
             Agency­ Member;
iii.   Director    General    of   Police,    Union    Territory   of
             Chandigarh­ Member;
iv.    Additional Director General of Police (Security), State of
             Punjab­ Member;
v.    Registrar General, Punjab and Haryana High Court­
             Member­cum­Coordinator.
14. The following are the Terms of Reference for the Enquiry

   Committee:
i.   What were the causes for the security breach for the
             incident on 5th January 2022?
ii.   Who are responsible for such a breach, and to what
             extent?
iii.   What should be the remedial measures or safeguards
             necessary for the security of the Hon’ble Prime Minister
             or other Protectees?
iv.    Any suggestions or recommendations for improving the
             safety     and   security     of      other    Constitutional
             functionaries.
9
v.    Any other incidental issue that the Committee may
               deem fit and proper.
15. The Enquiry Committee is requested to submit its report at

      the earliest.
16.     Let the entire record seized pursuant to our order dated 7 th

      January, 2022, be handed over to the Chairperson of the

      Enquiry Committee within three days. The Union of India and

      State Government are directed to provide full assistance to the

      Enquiry Committee for completion of the assigned task.
17. The Chairperson of the Enquiry Committee shall be entitled to

      all the perks of a sitting Supreme Court Judge minus pension.

      They shall be provided full secretarial assistance, official car

      and other paraphernalia for effective completion of the enquiry,

      as directed above.
18. Till conclusion of the proceedings of the Enquiry Committee

      constituted above, the enquiries ordered by the Central

      Government and the State Government shall be kept in

      abeyance.
10
19.    List the matter after receipt of the Report of the Enquiry

      Committee.
..……………………..CJI
                                                 (N.V. RAMANA)




                                            .……………………….. J
                                                 (SURYA KANT)




                                            .……………………….. J
                                                 (HIMA KOHLI)
 New Delhi;
Dated: January 12, 2022
11