[Cites
13
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Union Of India vs Shaikh Istiyaq Ahmed on 11 January, 2022
Author:
L. Nageswara Rao
Bench:
B. R. Gavai
,
L. Nageswara Rao
Reportable

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                           Criminal Appeal No.71 of 2022
                                     (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 7723 of 2019)

                         Union of India & Anr.
                                                                             .... Appellant(s)
                                                        Versus
                         Shaikh Istiyaq Ahmed & Ors.
                                                                           …. Respondent (s)

                                                  JUDGMENT
L. NAGESWARA RAO, J.
Leave granted.
1.    The Respondent was convicted by the Supreme Court of

                         Mauritius under Section 30(1)(f)(II), 47(2) and 5(2) of the Dangerous

                         Drugs Act for possession of 152.8 grams of heroin and was

                         sentenced to imprisonment for 26 years. He was transferred to India

                         as per the
Repatriation of Prisoners Act, 2003
(hereinafter, ‘the 2003

                         Act’) on 04.03.2016. He preferred a representation under
Section 13

                         (6)
of the 2003 Act and requested for scaling down the sentence to

                         10 years as per Section 21 (b) of the Narcotics Drugs and
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Nidhi Ahuja
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1994 (hereinafter, ‘
NDPS Act
’). In the
Date: 2022.01.11
16:03:47 IST
Reason:
same representation, he also requested that the sentence that he has
1|Page
already undergone in Mauritius may be taken into account for

revision of his release date.   By an order dated 03.12.2018, the

Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India informed the

Respondent that the period spent by him in remand will be deducted

from the sentence of 26 years. However, another order was passed

on the same day, rejecting his request for reduction of sentence to

10 years from 26 years. The said order rejecting the representation

for reduction in sentence was challenged by the Respondent in a

Writ Petition before the High Court of Bombay which was allowed

by the judgment dated 02.05.2019. Aggrieved thereby, this Appeal

is preferred.
2.    Detention of foreign prisoners was a matter of concern for the

Government of India as well as foreign Governments for which the
Repatriation of Prisoners Act, 2003
was enacted in conjunction with

bilateral treaties enabling the Central Government to transfer

foreign convicted persons to their country and vice versa. One of

the objectives of the 2003 Act was the transfer of foreign convicted

nationals to their respective nations in order to take care of the

human aspect in as much as the said convicts would be near their

families and have better chances of social rehabilitation. One of the

salient features of the legislation is that the enforcement of the

sentence shall be governed by the law of the receiving State.
2|Page
However, the receiving State shall be bound by the legal nature and

duration of the sentence as determined by the transferring State.
Section 12
and
13
of the 2003 Act, which are relevant for the

adjudication of this case, are as follows:
“12. Transfer into India. —
     (1) The Central Government may accept the transfer of a prisoner,
     who is a citizen of India, from a contracting State wherein he is
     undergoing any sentence of imprisonment subject to such terms and
     conditions as may be agreed to between India and that State.
     (2) If the Central Government accepts the request for a transfer under
     sub-section (1), then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other
     law for the time being in force, it may issue a warrant to detain the
     prisoner in prison in accordance with the provisions of
section 13
in
     such form as may be prescribed.
13. Determination of prison and issue of warrant for receiving
     transfer in India. —
     (1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with a State
     Government, determine the prison situated within the jurisdiction of
     such State Government where the prisoner with respect to whom a
     warrant has been issued under sub-section (2) of
section 12
, shall be
     lodged and the officer who shall receive and hold him in custody.
     (2) The Central Government shall authorize any officer not below the
     rank of a Joint Secretary to that Government to issue a warrant under
     sub-section (2) of
section 12
and to direct the officer referred to in
     sub-section (1) to receive and hold the prisoner, with respect to whom
     the warrant is issued, in custody.
(3) It shall be lawful for the officer referred to in sub-section (1) to
     receive and hold in custody any prisoner delivered to him under the
     direction made in the warrant issued under sub-section (2) of section
3|Page
12 and to convey such prisoner to any prison determined under
sub-section (1) for being dealt with in accordance with the said
warrant and if the prisoner escapes from such custody, the prisoner
may be arrested without warrant by any person who shall without
undue delay deliver such prisoner to the officer in charge of the
nearest police station and the prisoner so arrested shall be liable for
committing an offence under
section 224
of the Indian Penal Code (45
of 1860) and shall also be liable to be dealt with in accordance with
the said warrant.
(4) A warrant under sub-section (2) of
section 12
shall provide for—
(a) the bringing of the prisoner into India from a contracting State or
a place outside India;
(b) the taking of such prisoner in any part of India being a place at
which effect may be given to the provisions contained in the warrant;
(c) the nature and duration of imprisonment of the prisoner in
accordance with the terms and conditions referred to in sub-section
(1) of section 12 and the imprisonment of such prisoner in India in such
manner as may be contained in the warrant; and
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the imprisonment of a prisoner in compliance with a
warrant issued under sub-section (2) of
section 12
shall be deemed to
be imprisonment under a sentence of a court competent to pass such
a sentence of imprisonment in India.
(6) If the sentence of imprisonment passed against the prisoner in the
contracting State is incompatible with the Indian law as to its nature,
duration or both, the Central Government may, by order, adapt the
sentence of such punishment as to the nature, duration or both, as the
case may be, as is compatible to the sentence of imprisonment
provided for a similar offence had that offence been committed in
India:
4|Page
      Provided that the sentence so adapted shall, as far as possible,
      correspond with the sentence imposed by the judgment of the
      contracting State to the prisoner and such adapted sentence shall not
      aggravate the punishment, by its nature, duration or both relating to
      the sentence imposed in the contracting State.”
3.     On 24.10.2005, an agreement was entered into between the

Government of India and Government of Mauritius on the Transfer

of Prisoners.
Article 8
of this Agreement refers to conditions for

continued enforcement of sentence, which are as follows:
“ARTICLE 8
      Continued enforcement of sentence
1.   The receiving State shall be bound by the legal nature and duration
      of the sentence as determined by the transferring State.
2.   If, however, the sentence is by its nature or duration or both
      incompatible with the law of the receiving State, or its law so requires,
      that State may, by court or administrative order, adapt the sentence to
      a punishment or measure prescribed by its own law. As to its nature
      and duration the punishment or measure shall, as far as possible,
      correspond with that imposed by the judgment of the transferring
      State. It shall however not aggravate, by its nature or duration, the
      sentence imposed by the transferring State.”
4.     In so far as the conviction and sentence of the Respondent is

concerned, he travelled twice to Mauritius in the guise of doing

business in scrap metal. On the third occasion, he was found to be

in possession of 152.8 grams of heroin and was arrested.                   The

Supreme Court of Mauritius convicted the Respondent after taking
5|Page
into account the mitigating circumstances pleaded by the

Respondent and sentenced him to imprisonment for 26 years.       On

09.10.2015, an undertaking was given by the Respondent that he will

abide by the terms and conditions of the sentence adaptability order

issued under the agreement/treaty on transfer of sentenced

prisoners entered into between India and Mauritius while making a

request for his repatriation to India. Subsequently, his repatriation

to India was approved on 04.03.2016 and a warrant of transfer was

issued on 24.10.2016. After the transfer of the Respondent to India

under the 2003 Act, the Respondent preferred a representation to

the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India for reduction of

sentence from 26 years to 10 years which is the maximum

punishment prescribed under
Section 21 (b)
of the NDPS Act as

applicable for the quantity of heroin seized from the Respondent. By

an order dated 03.12.2018, his representation for reduction of

sentence term was rejected.
5.    While allowing the Writ Petition filed by the Respondent, the

High Court was of the opinion that if the offence was committed in

India, the Respondent would have been sentenced to for a maximum

period of 10 years as provided in
Section 21(b)
of the NDPS Act. The

reason given by the authorities for not accepting the request made

by the Respondent for reduction of sentence by 10 years was found
6|Page
to be not justifiable. The rejection of the request of the Respondent

was found to be in violation of
Section 13 (6)
of the 2003 Act.   On

such findings, the High Court declared that the Respondent was

entitled for the benefit of adaptation of sentence in terms of Section
13 of the 2003 Act. Notice was issued by this Court on 26.08.2019 in

the SLP and the judgment of the High Court was stayed.
6.    Ms. Madhvi Divan, learned Additional Solicitor General for

India appearing for the Appellant relied upon the statement of

objects and reasons of the 2003 Act to submit that the receiving State

is bound by the legal nature and duration of the sentence as

determined by the transferring State, though the enforcement of the

sentence is governed by the law of the receiving State. She further

submitted that the Central Government may accept the transfer of

the prisoner in accordance with
Section 12
of the 2003 Act subject to

the terms and conditions as are agreed upon between India and

another contracting State.
Section 13 (6)
of the 2003 Act gives

discretion to the Central Government to adapt the sentence of

imprisonment passed against the prisoner in the contracting State if

it is incompatible with the Indian law as to its nature, duration or

both. As per
Section 13 (6)
, the adaptation should be compatible to

the sentence of imprisonment provided for a similar offence, had the

offence been committed in India. According to the proviso to Section
7|Page
13 (6), the sentence adapted shall as far as possible, correspond to

the sentence imposed by the judgment of the contracting State to the

prisoner and such adapted sentence shall not aggravate the

punishment by its nature, duration or both relating to the sentenced

imposed in the contracting State. The ASG relied upon
Article 8
of

the agreement between the Government of India and Government

of Mauritius to argue that India is bound by the legal nature and

duration of the sentence as determined by the transferring State.

She asserted that the expression ‘incompatible’ appearing in
Section 13 (6)
of the 2003 Act was misconstrued by the High Court.

According to the learned Additional Solicitor General, discretion

vested in the Central Government under
Section 13 (6)
of the 2003

Act required to be exercised only when the sentence of

imprisonment passed against the prisoner by the contracting State

is incompatible with the Indian law as a whole. The exercise of

discretion of the Central Government under
Section 13 (6)
of the

2003 Act depends on variety of factors, keeping in mind the comity

of nations and strategic partnership.     Mechanical reduction of

sentence would be detrimental to the interests of the other prisoners

awaiting repatriation from Mauritius to India. She further asserted

that the Respondent cannot seek reduction of sentence after

submitting an undertaking that he will abide by the sentence
8|Page
adaptability order issued at the time of his repatriation back to India.

The contention of the Appellant is that the decision to not reduce the

sentence of the Respondent is prompted by foreign policy which

should not be lightly interfered with by judicial review. The learned

Additional Solicitor General further referred to the strong bilateral

ties between India and Mauritius which may be adversely affected

by interference with the sentence imposed by the Supreme Court of

Mauritius in a case of drug trafficking which is a pressing issue in

Mauritius presently.
7.    Mr. A.M. Dar, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the

Respondent justified the judgment of the High Court and submitted

that no reasons have been given by the Government for rejecting

the representation preferred by the Respondent for reduction of

sentence. He submitted that Respondent is being discriminated as

the Government of India has reduced the sentence in respect of

other persons who have been repatriated to India. He also referred

to a judgment of the High Court of Bombay by which the sentence of

the petitioner therein was reduced to 20 years from 30 years. During

the course of hearing, we were informed that the said judgment is

subject matter of a Special Leave Petition pending in this Court. He

further stated that there is obvious incompatibility between the

sentence imposed by the Supreme Court of Mauritius with the
9|Page
sentence that may be imposed for a similar offence under
Section 21
(b) of the
NDPS Act
. The quantity of heroin which was found to be

in possession of the Respondent is an intermediate quantity under

the
NDPS Act
and the maximum sentence that can be imposed on the

convict can be only 10 years. As the Respondent has already

undergone 10 years, the Government accepted to take into account

the sentence undergone by him in Mauritius.
8.    To substantiate its argument, the Appellant placed on record

a document titled “Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative”,

Bringing them Home - Repatriation of Indian Nationals from Foreign

Prisons: A Barrier Analysis, 2017. In this document, a reference has

been made to the ‘Guidelines for the Transfer of Sentenced Persons

under the
Repatriation of Prisoners Act, 2003
’ issued by the Ministry

of Home Affairs, Government of India on 10.08.2015 under the
Repatriation Act, 2003
. As per the guidelines, in case of adaptation

of sentence of a prisoner convicted on the charge of drug trafficking,

a reference has to be made to the Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) to

assess the proposed repatriation and the probabilities of the

prisoner indulging in similar activity on his release. Before granting

permission for repatriation, the prisoner has to be informed about

the total quantum of sentence which he will have to undergo in India

and repatriation would be allowed only if the prisoner gives his




                                                                  10 | P a g e
consent in writing.      There is no dispute that the Respondent has

given an undertaking to this effect on 19.10.2015.
9.     The question that arises for our consideration is related to the

interpretation on
Sections 12
and
13 (6)
of the 2003 Act and
Article 8
of the transfer of sentenced prisoners’ agreement entered between

Indian and Mauritius.
10.    The preamble of the 2003 Act initially reads as follows: -
“
An Act
to provide for the transfer of certain prisoners from India to
      country or place outside India and reception in India of certain
      prisoners from country or place outside India.”
11.    The object of the 2003 Act is to provide an opportunity to the

convicts to be repatriated to their country so that they can be closer

to their families and have better chances of rehabilitation. One of

the salient features of the 2003 Act is also that the enforcement of

sentence of the repatriated prisoner has to be governed by the law

of the receiving State, however in doing so, the receiving State is

bound by the legal nature and duration of the sentence as

determined by the transferring State. While operating in

accordance with this object and feature,
Section 12
of the 2003 Act

makes it clear that the transfer of a prisoner who is a citizen of India

from a contracting State wherein he is undergoing sentence of

imprisonment may be accepted by the Central Government, subject

to certain conditions that may be agreed between India and the


                                                                        11 | P a g e
contracting State. The decision to be taken by the Government on

the representation preferred for transfer, therefore, shall be subject

to the agreement entered into between Republic of India and

Republic of Mauritius regarding the transfer of prisoners.
Article 8
of the said agreement categorically states that while continuing the

enforcement of the sentence, India shall be bound by the legal

nature and duration of the sentence as determined by transferring

State.
12.
Article 8 (2)
of the agreement provides that if the sentence

imposed by the transferring State (Mauritius) is incompatible with

the law in India by its nature or duration or both, the sentence may

be adapted by the receiving State, namely India in this case. The

adaptation shall be with regard to the duration or nature of

punishment as prescribed by Indian law. However,
Article 8 (2)
further makes it clear that even when the sentence is adapted by the

receiving State (India), the nature and duration of the punishment

shall, as far as possible, correspond with that imposed by the

transferring State (Mauritius). The provision for adaptation is also

found in
Section 13(6)
of the 2003 Act.
Section 13 (6)
empowers the

Government of India to adapt the sentence compatible to the

sentence of imprisonment provided for a similar offence had that

offence been committed in India, provided the sentence of




                                                                  12 | P a g e
imprisonment passed in the contracting State (Mauritius) is

incompatible with Indian law.
13.   It is also relevant to examine the scope of
Section 12 (2)
of the

2003 Act. The Section enables the Government to issue a warrant to

detain the prisoner in accordance with the provisions contained in
Section 13 (4)
if the Government decides to accept the transfer of a

prisoner under
Section 12(1)
of the Act.
Section 13 (4) (c)
of the Act

makes it clear that a warrant shall state the nature and duration of

imprisonment of the prisoner in accordance with the terms and

conditions as referred to in
Section 12 (1)
and the imprisonment of

such prisoner in India shall be in such manner as may be contained

in the warrant. It is relevant to note that the warrant issued in this

case on 24.10.2016 refers to the sentence of the Respondent as 26

years.
14.      On a combined reading of
Section 12
and
13
of the 2003 Act

and
Article 8
of the Agreement, the following principles can be

deduced: -
A. Any request for transfer of a prisoner from a contracting

           State to India shall be subject to the terms and conditions

           as stated in the agreement between a contracting State and

           Government of India.
13 | P a g e
B. The duration of imprisonment shall be in accordance with

  the terms and conditions referred to in
Section 12 (1)
of the

  2003 Act, meaning thereby that the acceptance of transfer

  of a prisoner shall be subject to the terms and conditions in

  the agreement between the two countries with respect to

  the transfer of prisoners. To make it further clear, the

  sentence imposed by the transferring State shall be

  binding on the receiving State i.e., India.
C. On acceptance of the request for transfer of an Indian

  prisoner convicted and sentenced in a contracting State, a

  warrant shall be issued for detention of the prisoner in

  accordance with the provisions of
Section 13
of the 2003

  Act in the form prescribed.
D. The warrant which is to be issued has to provide for the

  nature and duration of imprisonment of prison in

  accordance with the terms and conditions as mentioned in
Section 12(1)
of the Act, that is, as agreed between the two

  contracting States.
E. The imprisonment of the transferred prisoner shall be in

  accordance with the warrant.
F. The Government is empowered to adapt the sentence to

  that provided for a similar offence had that offence been




                                                           14 | P a g e
          committed in India. This can be done only in a situation

          where the Government is satisfied that the sentence of the

          imprisonment is incompatible with Indian law as to its

          nature, duration or both.
G. In the event that the Government is considering a request

          for adaptation, it has to make sure that the adapted

          sentence corresponds to the sentence imposed by the

          contracting state, as far as possible.
15.   It is, therefore, clear that the sentence imposed by the

Supreme Court of Mauritius in this case is binding on India. A

warrant of detention was issued in which it was specified that the

Respondent has to undergo a sentence of 26 years. As per
Section

13 (4)
, the sentence shall be 26 years. The question of adaptation of

the sentence can only be when the Central Government is

convinced that the sentence imposed by the Supreme Court of

Mauritius is incompatible with Indian law.
16.   Reference to Indian law in
Section 13 (6)
is not restricted to a

particular
Section in NDPS Act
. Incompatibility with Indian law is

with reference to the enforcement of the sentence imposed by the

Supreme Court of Mauritius being contrary to fundamental laws of

India. It is only in case of such an exceptional situation, that it is open

the Central Government to adapt the sentence imposed by the




                                                                      15 | P a g e
Supreme Court of Mauritius to be compatible to a sentence of

imprisonment provided for the similar offence. Even in cases where

adaptation is being considered by the Central Government, it does

not necessarily have to adapt the sentence to be exactly in the nature

and duration of imprisonment provided for in the similar offence in

India. In this circumstance as well, the Central Government has to

make sure that the sentence is made compatible with Indian law

corresponding to the nature and duration of the sentence imposed

by the Supreme Court of Mauritius, as far as possible.
17.   The High Court allowed the Writ Petition only on the ground

that there is incompatibility between the sentence imposed on the

Respondent by the Supreme Court of India and a sentence that

would have been imposed on the Respondent if a similar offence

would have been committed in India. In doing so, the High Court

failed to examine the statement of object and reasons for the 2003

Act, the scope of
Sections 12
and
13
of the 2003 Act and the

agreement for transfer of prisoners as entered into between

Republic of India and Republic of Mauritius.
18.   The adaptation of sentence from 26 years to 10 years as per
Section 21 (b)
of the NDPS Act was rejected by the Central

Government on the ground that it would amount to reduction of

sentence by 16 years which would not be in consonance with
Section




                                                                  16
| P a g e
13 (6) of the 2003 Act and
Article 8
of the Agreement. The reasons

recorded by the Central Government to reject the request for

scaling down the sentence are in accordance with the provisions of

the 2003 Act and the agreement entered into between India and

Mauritius as discussed above. As we have upheld the order of the

Central Government, for the reasons given above, it is not necessary

to refer to the other submissions made by the learned Additional

Solicitor General.
19.   For the aforementioned reasons, the Appeal is allowed.
.....................................J.
                                           [ L. NAGESWARA RAO ]



                                     .....................................J.
                                                       [ B. R. GAVAI ]

New Delhi,
January 11, 2022.
17 | P a g e