[Cites
5
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Dayalu Kashyap vs The State Of Chhattisgarh on 25 January, 2022
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
1

                                                                                     REPORTABLE
2022 INSC 95
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.130                 /2022

                                     [@ SLP (CRL.) NO.514/2021]

               DAYALU KASHYAP                                             Appellant(s)

                          VERSUS

               THE STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                                 Respondent(s)

                                                 O R D E R
Leave granted.
The   present      appeal       arises     qua    an     incident    of

                 11.09.2010 of 10.30 in the morning when Sub Inspector

                 K.S.Singh     (PW-5),      on    the     basis     of    the     information

                 received, apprehended the appellant and found that he

                 was carrying Ganja in a green polythene bag on a wooden

                 Kanwad from Bhaisabeda to Pithapur for transportation.

                 The appellant was charged under the
Narcotics Drugs and

                 Psychotropic        Substances      Act,    1985
(‘
NDPS    Act
’)    and

                 tried by the Special Judge who convicted the appellant

                 under
Section      20(b)(ii)(c)
of    the      NDPS     Act    and

                 sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 10

                 years and to pay a fine of Rs.1 lakh.                         The appellant

                 preferred      an     appeal       before        the     High     Court    of

                 Chhattisgarh        but   that     appeal       was     dismissed    by    the

                 impugned order dated 28.03.2019.
We issued notice on 01.02.2021 including on the

                 bail     application       as    the     appellant         had    undergone
2
sentence of 10 years and his inability to pay fine was

resulting in him serving out the remaining sentence of

one year.         In the course of hearing this matter with

some other matter, on 01.03.2021, we noticed that the

only point which really arose for consideration was

from the effect of provisions of
Section 50
of the NDPS

Act.       Since the petitioner had already undergone 10

years of sentence and served about six months in the

alternative sentence of one year for non-payment of

fine,      we   considered     appropriate        to      substitute        the

sentence of one year against non-payment of fine by the

sentence of about six months and directed the appellant

to be set free.        The appellant was accordingly set free

on 03.03.2021.
We have heard learned counsel for the appellant

on   the    aforesaid      question       posed      by   him.        Learned

counsel has drawn our attention to the testimony of the

Officer (PW-5) carrying out the search.                    Para 6 of the

testimony reads as under:
“6.    Thereafter,        on   the     spot,     at   the

           side       of    Pithapur           Thothapada        Chowk,

           Murumroad, the accused was served notice
u/s

           50
of the NDPS Act at 12.45 O’Clock that the

           information       has       been    received     from      the

           informer that the Ganja is kept at both ends

           of his Kanwad for which it is necessary to
3
conduct       search.             You   can     get     the    search

conducted           from          any        Gazetted        Officer,

Magistrate or even by me.                       The accused was

explained          about      the       meaning       of     Gazetted

Officer and Magistrate.                       Then, the accused

gave     verbal         consent         to     get     the     search

conducted       by      me.        The       consent       given   for

search     was       recorded           as    dictated        by   the

accused.       The notice served by me is Exhibit

P.5 which bears my signature at part C to C.

On the same date at 13 O’ clock, at the spot

itself,       on    getting         the       consent       from   the

accused, I got myself, accompanying staff

and motorcycle searched from the accused. No

objectionable             article        was     found        in   the

search.
Our personal search is Search Memo

(Exhibit P.6) which bears my signature at

part C to C.            At 13:15 O’clock, at the spot,

the green coloured polythese bundle wrapped

at     both        ends     of      Kanwad        kept        in   the

possession         of     accused        and     accused       Dayalu

Kashyap       were      searched.            Then,    the     article

similar to Ganja were found inside both the

polythene bundles. Search Memo is Exhibit

P.7 which bears my signature at part C to

C.”
4
Learned counsel submits that the option given to

the appellant to take a third choice other than what

is prescribed as the two choices under sub-Section (1)

of
Section    50
of     the    Act       is   something       which       goes

contrary    to    the      mandate       of    the    law    and    in     a    way

affects the protection provided by the said Section to

the    accused. To support his contention, he has relied

upon the judgment of
State of Rajasthan v. Parmanand &

Anr.
– (2014) 5 SCC 345, more specifically, para 19.
The judgment in turn, relied upon a Constitution Bench

judgment of this Court in
State of Punjab v. Baldev

Singh
– 1999 (6) SCC 172 to conclude that if a search

is made by an empowered Officer on prior information

without informing the person of his right that he has

to be taken before a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate

for search and in case he so opts, failure to take his

search accordingly would render the recovery of the

illicit article suspicious and vitiate the conviction

and sentence of the accused where the conviction has

been    recorded      only    the        on   basis    of    possession          of

illicit articles recovered from his person.                         The third

option    stated      to    be     given      to     the    accused      to     get

himself searched from the Officer concerned not being

part of the statute, the same could not have been

offered to the appellant and thus, the recovery from

him is vitiated.
5
In the conspectus of the facts of the case, we

  find the recovery was in a polythene bag which was

  being carried on a Kanwad.         The recovery was not in

  person.   Learned counsel seeks to expand the scope of

  the observations made by seeking to contend that if the

  personal search is vitiated by violation of
Section 50
of the NDPS Act, the recovery made otherwise also would

  stand vitiated and thus, cannot be relied upon. We

  cannot give such an extended view as is sought to be

  contended by learned counsel for the appellant.
The   aforesaid    being        the   only   aspect   for

  consideration, we are not inclined to grant relief to

  the   appellant   and   appeal    is    accordingly   dismissed

  leaving parties to bear their own costs.
……………………………………………….J.
                                            [SANJAY KISHAN KAUL]


                                           ……………………………………………….J.
                                                 [M.M. SUNDRESH]
NEW DELHI;
JANUARY 25, 2022.
6
ITEM NO.6       Court 6 (Video Conferencing)            SECTION II-C

            S U P R E M E   C O U R T O F I N D I A
                            RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)      No(s).   514/2021

(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 28-03-2019
in CRA No. 857/2011 passed by the High Court Of Chhatisgarh At
Bilaspur)

DAYALU KASHYAP                                         Petitioner(s)

VERSUS

THE STATE OF CHHATTISGARH                       Respondent(s)
(Mr. Devansh A. Mohta, Advocate(Amicus Curiae)  Mr. Nikhil Goel,
Advocate for High Court of Gujarat
IA    No.   10234/2021    -    PERMISSION TO   FILE    ADDITIONAL
DOCUMENTS/FACTS/ANNEXURES
IA No. 110932/2021 - PERMISSION TO PLACE ADDITIONAL FACTS AND
GROUNDS)

Date : 25-01-2022 This petition was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
                 HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.M. SUNDRESH

                            Jail Petition

For Petitioner(s)    Mr. Devansh A. Mohta, Adv/AC

For Respondent(s)    Mr. Sumeer Sodhi, AOR
                     Mr. Gaurav, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R
         Leave granted.
The appeal is dismissed in terms of the signed
   reportable order.
Pending applications stand disposed of.
(ASHA SUNDRIYAL)                                (POONAM VAID)
ASTT. REGISTRAR-cum-PS                       COURT MASTER (NSH)
[Reportable signed order is placed on the file]