[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Mukesh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 18 January, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
B. V. Nagarathna
,
M. R. Shah
NON­REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.35 OF 2022


          Mukesh                                                      ..Appellant(S)
                                                 Versus


          The State of Madhya Pradesh                               ..Respondent(S)



                                           JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.             Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

                         judgment and order dated 24.09.2019 passed by the High

                         Court of Madhya Pradesh at Indore in Criminal Appeal No.

                         1244 of 2011 by which the High Court has dismissed the

                         said appeal and has confirmed the judgment and order of

                         conviction passed by the learned Trial Court convicting the

                         accused for the offences punishable under Section 302 read
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Rajni Mukhi
Date: 2022.01.18
14:12:02 IST
with
Section 34
of the IPC, original accused – Mukesh has
Reason:
preferred the present appeal.
1
2.   That an FIR was lodged by one Nanbai – wife of the

     deceased at the Police Station Nanpur, alleging that on the

     Diwali night at about 10:00 or 11:00 pm the elder brother of

     her husband (Jeth) – accused No.1 – Sekadiya and his son

     Mukesh – accused No.2 came to her house to call her

     husband saying that there had been cooked ‘Murga’ in their

     house. According to the complainant, her husband – Vesta

     went along with accused No.1 and accused No.2. According

     to the complainant after sometime, she heard the voice of

     crying/scream of her husband and she immediately rushed

     to the house of her Jeth – accused No.1 – Sekadiya and she

     saw in the light of electricity that accused No.3 – Jethani

     (wife of accused No.1 – Sekadiya) had caught hold her

     husband – Vesta and accused No.1 assaulted her husband

     by Axe on the head, due to which Vesta fell down. As per

     the case of the prosecution, the husband of the complainant

     – Vesta died due to injuries from the axe. According to the

     prosecution there was a land dispute and therefore the

     accused persons killed the deceased by calling him at their

     house. According to the prosecution the accused persons
2
committed the offences punishable under
Section 302
read

with
Section 34
of the IPC. After conclusion of the

investigation, the Investigating Officer filed the chargesheet

against the accused for the aforesaid offences. The accused

pleaded not guilty and therefore all of them claimed to be

tried by the learned Sessions Court for the offences

punishable under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of the

IPC. To prove the charge against accused the prosecution

examined in all eight witnesses out of which Nanbai – PW1

was the eye witness. The prosecution also brought on record

the documentary evidences including the medical evidence

through various witnesses. On closure of the evidence on

the side of the prosecution, statements of accused under
Section 313
Cr.PC were recorded in which the accused

stated that they have been falsely implicated in the case at

the instance of the Sarpanch due to enmity of election. On

appreciation of evidence, the learned Trial Court held all the

accused guilty for the offences punishable under
Section

302
read with
Section 34
of the IPC and sentenced all of

them to undergo life imprisonment.
3
3.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and

     order passed by the learned Trial Court accused preferred

     an appeal before the High Court. By the impugned judgment

     and order the High Court has partly allowed the said appeal

     and has acquitted the original accused No.3 – wife of

     accused No.1 (Jaithani), however, has dismissed the appeal

     qua accused Nos.1 and 2.
4.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned

     judgment and order passed by the High Court original

     accused No.1 and 2 preferred appeals before this Court.

     Appeal qua accused No.1 – Sekadiya has been dismissed by

     this Court earlier vide judgment/order dated 12.01.2021,

     therefore, the present appeal is required to be considered

     qua accused No.2 – Mukesh – son of accused No.1.
5.   We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

     respective parties at length. We have also gone through the

     findings recorded by the learned Trial Court as well as the

     reasoning given by the High Court while convicting Mukesh

     – accused No.2 for the offences punishable under
Section

     302
read with
Section 34
of the IPC. We have also gone

     through the deposition of PW1 – original complainant – eye
4
witness. The learned Trial Court has observed while

convicting the appellant – accused No.2 – Mukesh that he,

along with his father went to the house of the deceased to

call him for dinner as they had cooked ‘Murga’ and

thereafter accused No.1 inflicted the axe blows on the head

of the deceased – Vesta and thereafter dead body was

dragged by Mukesh also, which was thrown in the courtyard

(Aangan of the house of deceased) by accused Mukesh and

Sekadiya. The Trial Court has also observed that there was

a conspiracy hatched by all the accused to kill the deceased.

However, from the deposition of PW1 – eye witness it does

not appear that Mukesh had thrown the dead body in the

Aangan (courtyard). As such except the fact that accused

No.1 and accused No.2 came to the place of the deceased to

call the deceased for dinner at their house and the deceased

went with accused No.1 and accused No.2 no further role is

attributed to Mukesh – accused No.2. There is no overt act

alleged so far as accused No.2 – Mukesh is concerned. The

specific role and overt act is alleged against accused No.1

and accused No.3. However, unfortunately accused No.3

has been acquitted by the High Court against which no
5
appeal is preferred by the State as of today. Be that it may,

solely on the basis that appellant – accused No.2 – Mukesh

accompanied with accused No.1 when they went to the

house of the deceased and invited him to dinner in their

house by that itself it cannot be said that there was any

criminal conspiracy hatched by all the accused. On the

contrary, there are specific allegations against accused No.1

and accused No.3 only and as observed hereinabove no

overt act at all is alleged so far as accused No.2 Mukesh is

concerned.   As   observed       hereinabove,   there   are   no

allegations even by PW1 that Mukesh had dragged the dead

body and thrown it into the courtyard of the deceased.

Therefore, the finding recorded by the learned Trial Court

against appellant – accused No.2 – Mukesh that he also

dragged the dead body and thrown into the courtyard of the

deceased is not supported by any evidence. Therefore, we

are of the opinion that both, Trial Court as well as the High

Court have committed a grave error in convicting appellant

herein – accused No.2 – Mukesh for the offences punishable

under
Section 302
read with
Section 34
of the IPC.
6
Conviction and sentence of appellant – accused No.2 –

    Mukesh is hence unsustainable.
12. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the

    present appeal succeeds. The impugned judgment and order

    passed by the High Court as well as that of the Trial Court

    convicting appellant herein – Mukesh – original accused

    No.2 for the offences punishable under
Section 302
read

    with
Section 34
of the IPC is hereby quashed and set aside.
As per the custody certificate, a copy of which has

    been placed at page No.94 of the paperbook, accused

    Mukesh is presently undergoing sentence in Central Jail,

    Barwani, M.P. Since, we have quashed and set aside the

    judgment and order of conviction and sentence against him,

    accused Mukesh be released forthwith, if not required in

    any other case. The present appeal is accordingly allowed so

    far as accused Mukesh is concerned.
…………………………………J.
                                     (M. R. SHAH)

                                    …………………………………J.
                                    (B. V. NAGARATHNA)
New Delhi,
January 18th, 2022
7