[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Kerala Transport Development Finance ... vs Basil T.K. on 31 January, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
Surya Kant
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
1

                                                                                               Reportable
                                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                              Civil Appeal No 806 of 2022
                                          (Arising out of SLP(C) No 13067 of 2019)




     Kerala Transport Development Finance
     Corporation Limited                                                             .... Appellant(s)


                                                          Versus


     Basil T K & Ors                                                                 ....Respondent(s)




                                                           WITH


                                              Civil Appeal No 808 of 2022
                                          (Arising out of SLP(C) No 13179 of 2019)


                                              Civil Appeal No 807 of 2022
                                          (Arising out of SLP(C) No 13200 of 2019)




                                                        JUDGMENT
Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J



     1                   Leave granted.
2
Signature Not Verified   This batch of three appeals arises from the judgments of the Division Bench of
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2022.02.04
16:27:33 IST
Reason:
the High Court of Kerala dated 12 April 2019 and 14 March 2019 in writ appeals

                         from a judgment of a Single Judge dated 6 December 2018.
2
3     The Kerala Transport Development Finance Corporation Limited 1 and its

      Managing Director are the appellants in the first two appeals.         In the third

      appeal, the appellant, Aneesh Babu R2, seeks to challenge one of the directions

      of the Single Judge by which it was directed that the seniority list is to be recast

      by placing Sherith A and Basil T K 3, who are Managers, above him in the

      seniority list.
4     The facts, insofar as they are material for a decision on the appeals, need to be

      noted, at this stage.   In 2000, the respondents were appointed as Assistant

      Managers in the services of KTDFCL on contract for a period of one year, a

      position on which they continued until 2006.        The Service Rules framed by

      KTDFCL were approved by the State Government on 22 February 2006. The

      Government issued GO (MS) No. 15/2006 on 22 February 2006 to regularize the

      services of one hundred and six contractual employees of KTDFCL. On 23

      February 2006, the services of the respondents were regularized. However, on

      12 February 2007, the State Government issued GO (MS) 4/2007 cancelling the

      order of regularization on the ground that the appointments were not made

      through a standard recruitment procedure and reservation as mandated by the

      Constitution for the members of the Schedule Castes and Scheduled Tribes was

      not provided In proceedings instituted under
Article 226
of the Constitution. The

      High Court, by its judgment dated 9 April 2007, quashed the G.O (MS) 4/2007

      cancelling the regularization since the order was without issuing notice or

      hearing the petitioners. KTDFCL was granted liberty to proceed in the matter

      afresh. In pursuance of the direction of the Court, fresh notice was issued to the

      respondents. The Government terminated the respondents’ employment on 12

      September 2007 on the grounds that:- (a) the posts against which the

      respondents were appointed were not available at the time of their appointment;

1 “KTDFCL”
2 “Aneesh Babu”
3 “Respondents”
3
(b) the service rules were in force at the rime and therefore, the initial

    appointment of the respondents was irregular and the regularization was

    consequently illegal. By its judgement dated 11 October 2007, the High Court

    had observed that the six employees, including the respondents, stood on a

    different footing compared to the rest of the retrenched employees since they

    were appointed on a contractual basis through a selection process. Therefore,

    the High Court set aside the termination of the employment of the respondents

    and directed the Government to pass fresh orders after hearing the respondents.


5   In pursuance of the direction, a fresh notice was issued to the respondents. After

    hearing the respondents, the Government by its order dated 25 April 2008

    issued the following order:
“Accordingly, they were heard by the Transport
                 Secretary to the State Government on 16/1/2008.
                 The matter of regularization or otherwise of the
                 termination of those six persons’ service in the
                 K.T.D.F.C was examined in detail. It was found that
                 no deviation from the decision taken earlier in the
                 Government order read as the 3rd paper above was
                 necessary, the request for regularization in service
                 of K.T.D.F.C, put forth by S/Shri Basil T.K Mohanan,
                 P.K Sherith A, Radhakrishanan I.S, Smt. Sheeja C.V,
                 and Smt. Jasmy S is rejected.”



    Subsequently, the respondents filed another writ petition challenging the order

    of the Government and seeking a direction to reinstate them in service with

    consequential benefits with effect from 12 September 2007. By a judgment

    dated 9 October 2009, a Single Judge of the Kerala High Court set aside the

    order on following grounds:- (i) the order indicated no reason; (ii) in the earlier

    challenge it was submitted before the Court that the respondents were

    appointed against sanctioned posts; (iii) though the posts were not available

    when the respondents were initially appointed, posts were created before they

    were regularized; (iv) the service rules were framed before the respondents were

    regularized. The High Court directed the reinstatement of the respondents in
4
service with retrospective effect from 12 September 2007. The direction of the

    High Court, which is contained in paragraph 22 of its judgment, is extracted

    below:
“22. For these reasons, I cannot sustain Ext. P22 and
                  therefore Ext.P22 will stand quashed. Respondents
                  are directed to reinstate the petitioners in service
                  immediately     with   retrospective    effect   from
                  12/9/2007. In the circumstances of this case, it is
                  ordered that the petitioners will not be entitled to
                  any monetary benefits for the period till they
                  are reinstated but, will be entitled to
                  continuity of service.”

                                                 (emphasis supplied)
6   Following the above decision of the Single Judge, a writ appeal was dismissed on

    14 March 2012. On 28 April 2012, the State Government issued GO (MS) No

    23/2012 directing that the respondents be reinstated with retrospective effect

    from 12 September 2007 without any monetary benefits but with continuity of

    service. Since the order of reinstatement did not provide clarity on promotions,

    the respondents wrote to the State Government highlighting their grievance. The

    Government issued a letter dated 3 November 2012 directing that the period

    spent out of service may be ‘regularized as non-duty without forfeiture of past

    service.’ The clarification is as follows:
“The Hon’ble High Court have granted only the
                  benefit of continuity of service to the employees
                  reinstated in the service of KTDFC and has not
                  allowed them any monetary benefits notionally or
                  otherwise. In order to provide continuity in service,
                  the period spent out of service may be regularized
                  as non-duty without forefeiture of past service.
                  Regarding the post of probation, the rules as states
                  in KTDFC Service Rules can be insisted.”


7    On 21 June 2013, the State Government clarified its earlier communication

    dated 3 November 2012 to the effect that it would not adversely affect the

    prospects of seniority or promotion. On 9 January 2014, increments in the salary

    payable to the respondents were authorized without taking into account the
5
period from 12 September 2007 to 2 May 2012. The respondents instituted writ

    proceedings contending that they were entitled to reckon the above period for

    the grant of promotion and increments.       During the pendency of the writ

    proceedings, the respondents were promoted as Deputy Managers with effect

    from 24 July 2014.
8   Consequent to a letter of the State Government dated 18 March 2016, a

    Committee was constituted for the scrutiny of the seniority and promotion of

    regular employees in the managerial service of KTDFCL. The Committee opined

    that the respondents were eligible to be promoted as Deputy Managers from 24

    February 2007; that, since the period spent out of service was to be treated as

    ‘non-duty’, the requirement of residency of one year in the post of Deputy

    Manager for promotion to the post of Manager will be completed only on 13

    October 2012 and that they would be eligible for promotion as Managers as on

    14 October 2012.     On 7 February 2017, a seniority list of Assistant Managers

    and Deputy Managers as on 1 August 2016 was published in which the names of

    respondents stood at Serial Nos 1 and 2 respectively with their date of

    appointment being 23 February 2006, while the name of Aneesh Babu stood in

    Serial Nos 3, whose date of appointment was 13 October 2008.


9   On 24 March 2017, the Staff Promotion Committee resolved to promote the

    respondents as Managers, but referred the question as regards the eligibility

    dates for promotion to the State Government. The State Government by its order

    dated 5 July 2017, accepted the report of the Committee, without providing any

    retrospective monetary effect. A provisional Seniority list of Managers as on 11

    July 2017 was published on 15 July 2017, in which Aneesh Babu was placed in

    S.No 1, while the respondents were placed in S.Nos 2 and 3. It was also stated

    that the respondents are entitled to promotion as Manager with effect from 14

    October 2012. On the other hand, Aneesh Babu, who was appointed as Assistant
6
Manager on contract basis on 27 September 2008 and was subsequently

     regularized through an order dated 12 December 2014, with effect from 13

     October 2008 was held to be entitled to be promoted as Manager on 11

     December 2010 and as Chief Manager on 26 November 2011. The respondents

     filed objections on the ground that the period when they stood retrenched must

     be counted as service completed for the purpose of promotion.                On 11

     December 2017, the Staff Promotion Committee finalized the seniority list.


10   The respondents instituted a writ petition before the High Court challenging the

     seniority list to the extent that the Expert Committee as well as the Government

     had come to the conclusion that they were not entitled to count the period of

     service from 12 September 2007 to 2 May 2012 towards increments and

     promotion.   It was their contention that they are entitled to be promoted as

     Managers with effect from 24 February 2008 and as Chief Manager from 22

     February 2009. KTDFCL raised the following contentions supporting the decision

     to place the respondents after the Aneesh Babu in the Seniority List:
(i) If the retrenched period of more than four years was considered as actual

     service, then the respondents would have been permitted to rejoin on 2 May

     2012 at the highest promotional post of Chief Manager since the residency

     period for promotion from Assistant Manager to Deputy manager, and Deputy

     Manager to Manger is one year each;
(ii) The High Court by its judgment dated 9 October 2009 directed the

     reinstatement of the respondents without monetary benefit. They were only

     entitled to continuity of service. The direction that they are entitled to continuity

     of service only means that there will not be any forfeiture of their previous

     service from 23 February 2006 to 12 September 2007;
(iii) Under the service rules, non-duty period cannot be counted for any service
7
benefits, including probation and promotion;
(iv)   Aneesh Babu was appointed as Assistant Manager on 13 October 2008

     through direct recruitment after undergoing a three-tier selection process.
Though the job notification was for regular appointment, he was appointed on

     contract basis consequent to the decision of the Government. Subsequently, the

     Government rectified its decision and regularized his appointment in 2014 with

     effect from 13 October 2008. The Expert Committee had noted that his

     appointment was erroneously classified on ‘contract basis’ at the time of

     appointment. This error was rectified later. The service of Aneesh Babu in

     KTDFCL was considered for calculating the residency periods for the purpose of

     promotion;
(v) The respondents were originally promoted as Deputy Manager with effect

     from 24 July 2014. The one year residency period would only be completed on

     24 July 2015. However, by holding that the respondents would be entitled to be

     promoted as Manager with effect from 14 October 2012, they were promoted

     without serving in the post of Deputy Manager even for a day since they served

     as Assistant Manager till 23 July 2014; and
(vi) The committee followed a uniform procedure of counting their service in

     KTDFCL for calculating residency period for the purpose of promotion. The only

     period that was not calculated with respect to the respondents was the period

     they spent out of service due to the retrenchment.
11   On 6 December 2018, a Single Judge of the High Court allowed the petition and

     directed KTDFCL to grant promotion to the respondents, treating the period

     during which they were kept out of service, as notional service in the post of

     Manager and Chief Manager. The Single Judge arrived at this conclusion on the

     grounds that: (i) the Government on 21 June 2013 had informed the respondents
8
that the period during which they were kept out of service would not affect their

     prospect of promotion; (ii) the respondents were unable to perform their duties

     since they were unjustly terminated from service, which was subsequently

     rectified by the High Court; (iii) Aneesh Babu was granted promotion reckoning

     the service rendered by him in the post of Assistant Manager for promotion to

     Deputy Manager and Manager. However, according to the Service Rules, actual

     service in each of the posts is a requirement. If the benefit of promotion is

     denied to the respondents on that ground, it must be denied to Aneesh Babu as

     well on the ground of parity; and (iv) the High Court, while directing the

     respondents to be reinstated directed that continuity of service must be

     provided. A writ appeal filed against the judgment of the single Judge has been

     dismissed by the Division Bench on 14 March 2019.
12   When the Special Leave Petitions came up for hearing before this Court on 3 July

     2019, the Court, while issuing notice, summarized the submissions which were

     urged on behalf of KTDFCL. The order dated 3 July 2019 records thus:
“Mr. V. Giri, learned Senior Counsel has submitted
                  that in the order of the learned Single Judge dated 9
                  October 2009 (Annexure P1), it was specifically
                  observed that the employees would be entitled to
                  reinstatement with continuity of service without any
                  monetary benefits for the period till they are
                  reinstated. However, in the order of the learned
                  Single Judge dated 6 December 2018 (which
                  resulted in the impugned order of the Division
                  Bench), there was a direction to the effect that the
                  original petitioners will be entitled to the fixation of
                  pay reckoning the period during which they were
                  kept out of service, but they shall also be granted all
                  benefits on the basis of fixation of pay. The Special
                  Leave Petition has been instituted in view of this
                  anomaly.
Issue notice, returnable in eight weeks.”

13   As stated earlier, the challenge by KTDFCL to the judgment of the Division Bench

     lies within a narrow compass. While advancing his submissions, Mr V Giri, senior

     counsel appearing on behalf of KTDFCL, adverted to the following directions
9
issued by the Single Judge:
“Therefore, there shall be a direction to the
                  respondents to grant promotion to the
                  petitioners reckoning the period during which
                  they were kept out of service treating the same
                  as notional service, to the post of Manager and
                  also Chief Manager. On the basis of such
                  promotion, Ext.P20 shall be revised assigning
                  the petitioners seniority above the 4th
                  respondent. Petitioners will also be entitled to
                  fixation of pay reckoning the period during
                  which they were kept out of service and they
                  shall be granted all benefits on the basis of
                  such fixation of pay. This shall be done within a
                  period of 'three months' from the date of
                  receipt of a copy of the judgment.”
14   As a result of the above directions, the respondents have been held to be

     entitled to the fixation of pay, reckoning the period during which they were kept

     out of service. There is no dispute over this part. However, besides the above

     direction, it has been directed that “they shall be granted all benefits on the

     basis of such fixation of pay”. Mr V Giri submitted that the latter part of the

     direction would be inconsistent with the earlier decision of the Single Judge

     dated 9 October 2009 in terms of which the respondents were held entitled to

     reinstatement with effect from 12 September 2007, but, without monetary

     benefits for the period till they were reinstated.
15   So far as the above grievance of KTDFCL is concerned, Mr Roy Abraham, counsel

     appearing on behalf of the respondents, has fairly clarified that the respondents

     do not claim arrears of salary for the period during which they were out of

     service, namely, from 12 September 2007 until the date of reinstatement.


16   Besides the concession which has been made on behalf of the respondents, it is

     clearly evident from the earlier order of the Single Judge dated 9 October 2009,

     that the respondents who were directed to be reinstated were held not to be

     entitled to any monetary benefits for the period till they were reinstated.
10
According to the order, reinstatement from 12 September 2007 entitles them to

     continuity of service. The direction in the judgment of the Single Judge dated 6

     December 2018 to the effect that respondents would be entitled to the fixation

     of pay by reckoning the period of service during which they were kept out of

     service is consistent with the earlier judgment. However, the further direction

     that they shall be granted all benefits on the basis of such fixation of pay needs

     to be clarified to the extent that they shall not be entitled to any payment of

     arrears of salary for the period during which they were out of service.


17   The surviving issue in this batch of appeals, however, relates to the issue of

     seniority as between the respondents and Aneesh Babu, who has filed the third

     appeal. In this context, Mr V Giri appearing for KTDFCL submitted that he does

     not take or adopt any specific position as regards the seniority between the

     contesting parties.
18   Mr Kuriakose Varghese, counsel appearing on behalf of Aneesh Babu, submitted

     that his client was appointed originally as an Assistant Manager following a due

     process of selection.   The submission is that despite the fact that he was

     appointed following a due process of recruitment, he was initially appointed on a

     contractual basis on 13 October 2008, but the injustice to him was rectified and

     he was eventually regularized on 12 December 2014 with effect from the original

     date of appointment.
19   On the other hand, it was submitted by Mr Kuriakose Varghese that the

     respondents were appointed purely on a contractual basis and it was as a result

     of the initial order of regularization dated 23 February 2006 that they came to be

     recruited as regular employees. Following the cancellation of that order on 12

     February 2007, there was another round of proceedings which ultimately

     culminated in the order of the Single Judge dated 9 October 2009.          In this
11
context, it was sought to be urged that the consequence of the direction to grant

       continuity of service would mean that the services of the respondents would

       have to be treated as unbroken and uninterrupted. Counsel sought to make a

       distinction   between     continuity   and   continuous    service,    urging   that   the

       respondents had not fulfilled minimum residency requirements when they were

       promoted as Deputy Mangers and Managers and since his client did so, he must

       rank higher in seniority in the post of Manger.
20     Hence, it is urged that at the time when Aneesh Babu fulfilled the residency

       requirement of one year in each of the subsequent posts as Deputy Manager

       and Manager, he was the only eligible candidate for promotion to the post of

       Chief Maanager. As a consequence, the subsequent reinstatement in service of

       the respondents should not allow them to steal a march in seniority over Aneesh

       Babu. Reliance has been placed on the Service Rules governing KTDFCL. That in

       essence is the submission of Mr Kuriakose Varghese.
21     At the outset, while considering the submissions, it needs to be noticed that the

       Kerala Transport Development Finance Corporation Rules 4 contains a definition of

       the expression “Approved Probationer”.           The provisions for promotion are

       contained in Rule 13. Rule 18 provides for the determination of seniority in the

       following terms:
“18.   Seniority
(a)    Seniority of a person in a service, class, category or
                     grade shall unless he has been reduced to a lower
                     rank as punishment be determined by the date of
                     order of his first appointment to such service, class
                     category or grade.
Provided that the seniority of persons appointed
                     direct, otherwise than on advice of the Commission
                     shall be in accordance with the ranked list of
                     approved candidates.”


4 “Service Rules”
12
22   In the present case, the respondents who were initially regularized in service on

     23 February 2006 were aggrieved by the cancellation of the order of

     regularization dated 12 February 2007. The judgment of the Single Judge dated

     9 October 2009 set aside the order by which the regularization of the

     respondents was cancelled and there was a direction to reinstate them in service

     with retrospective effect from 12 September 2007. This clearly implies that they

     were entitled to the benefit of continuity of service. The cancellation of their

     regularization stood effaced. However, the Single Judge directed that they shall

     not be entitled to any monetary benefits for the period till they are reinstated. In

     other words, no arrears of salary were granted. The respondents have, upon

     their regularization, been promoted as Deputy Managers and Managers.            The

     appointment of the respondents as Deputy Managers and Managers are not in

     question. There is no challenge to their promotions. The Single Judge of the High

     Court has come to the conclusion that since respondents stand reinstated with

     effect from 12 September 2007 and the order by which the regularization was

     cancelled has been quashed, necessary consequences under the law would have

     to follow.   There can be no manner of doubt that Aneesh Babu who was

     appointed to the service on 13 October 2008 could have any legitimate

     grievance in regard to the position of the respondents following the order of

     reinstatement.
23   The Court has been informed that, as a matter of fact, all the three employees

     (the respondents and Aneesh Babu) are presently holding the post of Manager.

     The next promotion which is available is to the post of Chief Manager.          The

     promotion to the post of Chief Manager would be governed by the Service Rules

     and Regulations.    The judgment of the Single Judge granting the benefit of

     seniority to the respondents is a plain consequence of the earlier judgment

     dated 9 October 2009 and the provisions for seniority contained in Rule 18 of the

     Service Rules. Rule 18 of the Service Rules provides for seniority of a person in a
13
service, class, category or grade on the basis of the date of the order of the first

     appointment to such service, class, category or grade. The respondents were

     appointed to the post of Assistant Manager in 2000, whereas, Aneesh Babu was

     appointed in 2008. Both the respondents and Aneesh Babu’s service were

     regularized retrospectively from their initial date of appointment. The judgment

     of the Single Judge dated 9 October 2009, saves the respondents continuity of

     service. Therefore, there was no justification to exclude the period during which

     the respondents were not in service due to the illegal termination of

     employment, which was subsequently set aside, given that the High Court

     expressly saved the continuity of service. The contention that the respondents

     did not satisfy the one year residency rule in the post for the purpose of

     promotion is without merit. The only distinction between the respondents and

     Aneesh Babu is that unlike the former, the latter was in service throughout.

     Aneesh Babu, though appointed in 2008 in the post of Assistant Manager was

     regularized retrospectively only in 2014. Inspite of not fulfilling the one year

     residency criteria in each post (that is as Deputy Manager and Manager), he was

     still promoted taking into account his service as the Assistant Manager. However,

     this distinction between the parties diminishes in view of the direction of the

     Single Judge to grant continuity of service to the respondents. Therefore, we find

     no error in the impugned judgment. However, it only needs to be clarified that

     since the respondents as well as Aneesh Babu hold the post of Manager from

     which the next promotion is to the post of Chief Manager, the promotional post

     of Chief Manager shall be filled up in accordance with the applicable Service

     Rules and regulations.
24   As regards the appeals by KTDFCL, we clarify that the judgment of the Single

     Judge dated 6 December 2018 shall stand modified to the extent that the

     respondents shall not be entitled to arrears of salary for the period between

     2007 and 2012 when they were out of service. The rest of the directions of the
14
Single Judge, as affirmed by the Division Bench, are maintained, subject to the

     clarification that the promotion to the post of Chief Manager shall take place in

     accordance with the Service Rules and Regulations.
25   The appeals shall stand disposed of in the above terms.


26   Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
…..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                               [Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                               …..…..…....…........……………….…........J.
                                               [Surya Kant]


New Delhi;
January 31, 2022
-S-