[Cites
3
, Cited by
14
]
Supreme Court of India
The Director Directorate Of ... vs K. Sudheesh Kumar on 28 January, 2022
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
Sanjiv Khanna
,
M. R. Shah
REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.442 OF 2022


         The Director, Directorate of Enforcement & Anr.                    ..Appellant (S)


                                                 VERSUS


         K. Sudheesh Kumar & Ors.                                          ..Respondent (S)


                                               JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.              Feeling   aggrieved   and   dissatisfied   with    the   impugned

                         judgment and order dated 23.10.2019 passed by the High

                         Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in OP (CAT) No.171 of 2019, by

                         which the High Court has allowed the said original petition

                         (OP) and set aside the order passed by the learned Central

                         Administrative Tribunal, Ernakulam Bench and has declared
Signature Not Verified
that respondent Nos.1 & 2 herein – original petitioners are
Digitally signed by R
Natarajan
Date: 2022.01.28
16:53:10 IST
Reason:
entitled to grade pay of Rs.6600/­ on their third financial

                         upgradation as per the Modified Assured Career Progression
1
(MACP) Scheme and they be paid the pension accordingly

     with effect from April, 2015, the Director, Directorate of

     Enforcement, New Delhi and another – original respondents

     before the High Court, have preferred the present appeal.
2.   That the private respondent Nos.1 & 2 herein were appointed

     as Assistant Enforcement Officer (AEO) in the year 1976 and

     1977, respectively. That in the year 2009, the Government of

     India – Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievance and Pensions

     (Department of Personnel and Training) notified the MACP

     Scheme for the Central Government Civilian Employees. The

     Scheme further provided as per clause 8.1 (which is relevant

     so far as the present matter is concerned) ‘consequently upon

     the implementation of Sixth
CPC
’s recommendations, grade

     pay of Rs.5400 is now in two pay bands viz., PB­2 and PB­3.

     It further provided that the grade pay of Rs.5400 in PB­2 and

     Rs.5400 in PB­3 shall be treated as separate grade pays for

     the purpose of grant of upgradations under MACP Scheme’.

     However, it so happened that while granting third financial

     upgradation   vide   order   dated   17.11.2009,   the   private

     respondents herein and others were granted the grade pay of
2
Rs.6600 for PB­3 under MACP Scheme, though as per clause

     8.1 PB­3 carried the grade pay of Rs.5400. However, on the

     objection being raised by the Audit Department their grade

     pays (GP) of Rs.6600 in PB­3 was modified/corrected as GP

     of Rs.5400 as per clause 8.1. Therefore, respondent Nos.1

     and   2   herein   approached      the   Central   Administrative

     Tribunal, Ernakulam Bench and prayed to continue the GP

     of Rs.6600 as per the earlier order dated 17.11.2009 and not

     to make any recovery. A decision of the Madras High Court

     was pressed into service by which a similar order of

     withdrawing the GP of Rs.6600 and to grant GP Of Rs.5400

     for PB­3 was set aside. On relying upon the clause 8.1 of the

     MACP Scheme by which the implementation of Sixth
CPC
’s

     recommendations, grade pay of Rs.5400 was in two pay

     bands i.e., PB­2 and PB­3 and for grant of upgradation under

     MACP Scheme they shall be treated as separate grade pays,

     the learned Tribunal dismissed the original application (OA).
3.    Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment and

      order    passed   by   the   Central Administrative Tribunal

      dismissing the said OA, respondent Nos.1 & 2 herein
3
preferred the original petition before the High Court. By the

     impugned judgment and order and ignoring clause 8.1 of

     the MACP Scheme the High Court has allowed the said

     petition by observing that the next promotion post of

     Assistant Director which is in the PB­3 would be that of

     Deputy Director which carries a grade pay of Rs.6600, when

     the third financial upgradation is due to an employee, it has

     to be of the next promotional post in the hierarchy as per

     the Recruitment Rules. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied

     with the impugned judgment and order passed by the High

     Court, the department has preferred the present appeal.
4.   Ms. Madhavi Divan, learned ASG appearing on behalf of the

     appellants has vehemently submitted that the impugned

     judgment and order passed by the High Court is just

     contrary to the decision of the Delhi High Court in the case

     of National Council of Educational Research & Training

     & Anr. Vs. Anita Gupta & Anr. 2016 SCC OnLine Del 4720

     as well as to the decision of this Court in the case of Union

     of India and others Vs. M.V. Mohanan Nair (2020) 5 SCC
421.
4
4.1   It is submitted that on interpretation of very MACP Scheme,

      it is observed and held by this Court that the employees are

      entitled to the grade pay as provided under the MACP

      Scheme which has been framed on the recommendations of

      the pay commission. It is submitted that on interpreting

      MACP Scheme, it is specifically observed and held by this

      Court that MACP Scheme envisages merely placement in

      the immediate next higher grade pay in the hierarchy of the

      recommended revised pay bands and grade pay as given in
Section 1
, Part A of the First Schedule of the CCS (Revised

      Pay) Rules, 2008 and has nothing to do with the next

      promotional post.
4.2   It is submitted that in the present case the High Court has

      allowed the grade pay of Rs.6600. However, as per clause

      8.1, PB­2 and PB­3 carried grade pay of Rs.5400 and it

      specifically provided that the grade pay of Rs.5400 in PB­2

      and grade pay of Rs.5400 in PB­3 shall be treated as

      separate grade pays for the purpose of grant of upgradation

      under MACP Scheme. It is submitted that therefore

      respondent Nos.1 & 2 – original petitioners as per the MACP
5
Scheme shall be entitled to the grade pay of Rs.5400 i.e.,

      next grade pay for PB­3. It is submitted that as such by the

      impugned judgment and order and directing to grant grade

      pay of Rs.6600 the High Court has modified the MACP

      Scheme and has granted the benefit of three steps upward.

4.3   Making the above submissions and relying upon the

      aforesaid decisions, it is prayed to allow the present appeal.
5.    The present appeal is vehemently opposed by Shri Mathai

      Paikaday, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of

      the private respondent Nos.1 & 2 herein.
5.1   It is vehemently submitted by learned Senior Advocate

      appearing on behalf of the private respondent Nos.1 & 2

      that the employee shall be entitled to the next higher pay

      and the submissions made on behalf of the appellants that

      both PB­2 and PB­3 shall carry grade pay of Rs.5400 is

      accepted in that case the purpose of higher­grade pay shall

      be frustrated. It is submitted that when the next higher­

      grade pay would be Rs.6600, the High Court has rightly

      directed to grant grade pay of Rs.6600.
5.2   It is submitted that it is true that the High Court has

      wrongly used the word next promotion post. It is submitted
6
that the question is not of next promotional post but the

      question is of next higher grade pay.
5.3   In the alternative it is prayed by the learned Senior Advocate

      appearing on behalf of respondent Nos.1 & 2 and relying

      upon the decision of this Court in the case of
State of

      Rajasthan Vs. Mahesh Kumar Sharma
(2011) 4 SCC 257

      that if this Court is inclined to accept the submissions made

      on behalf of the appellants and set aside the judgment and

      order passed by the High Court holding that respondent

      No.1 & 2 shall be entitled to grade pay of Rs.5400
,
in that

      case
no recovery be ordered as respondent Nos.1 & 2 have

      already retired and the difference would be of Rs.1200

      approximately    per   month   so   far   as   the   pension   is

      concerned.
6.    We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

      respective parties.
7.    At the outset it is required to be noted that the issue

      involved in the present appeal is as such squarely covered

      by the decision of this Court in the case of M.V. Mohanan

      Nair (supra). By detailed judgment and order this Court has
7
interpreted the very MACP Scheme and it is observed and

held that under the MACP Scheme employees are entitled to

the immediate next higher grade pay as given in
Section 1
,

Part A of the First Schedule of the CCS (Revised Pay) Rules,

2008. It is specifically observed and held by this Court in

the aforesaid decision that MACP has nothing to do with the

next promotional post and what the employee would be

entitled would be the immediate next higher grade pay in

the hierarchy of the recommended revised pay bands and

grade pay as given in the CCS (Revised Pay) Rules, 2008. As

per clause 8.1 of the MACP Scheme ‘consequently upon the

implementation of Sixth
CPC
’s recommendations, grade pay

of PB­2 and PB­3 would be Rs.5400. It specifically provides

that the grade pay of Rs.5400 in PB­2 and Rs.5400 in PB­3

shall be treated as separate grade pays for the purpose of

grant of upgradations under the MACP Scheme’. Therefore,

respondent Nos.1 &2 as PB­2 shall be entitled to the next

grade pay of Rs.5400 as per clause 8.1 and as per
Section 1
,

Part A of the First Schedule of the CCS (Revised Pay) Rules,

2008. The High Court has allowed the grade pay of Rs.6600

by considering the next promotion post of Assistant Director
8
i.e., Deputy Director which carries a grade pay of Rs.6600.
However, the aforesaid interpretation would be contrary to

     the MACP Scheme. On considering the relevant clauses of

     the MACP Scheme, it appears that the MACP Scheme

     envisages placement in the immediate next higher grade pay

     in the hierarchy of the recommended revised pay bands and

     grade pay as given in
Section 1
, Part A of the First Schedule

     of the CCS (Revised Pay) Rules, 2008. Thus, the High Court

     has committed a grave error in allowing the grade pay of

     Rs.6600 ­ the grade pay which was available to the next

     promotional post as Deputy Director. Respondent Nos.1 & 2

     as per PB­2 were entitled to the grade pay of Rs.5400 as PB­

     3 as per clause 8.1.
8.   By the impugned judgment and order and while granting

     grade pay of Rs.6600 to respondent Nos.1 & 2 virtually, the

     High Court has modified the MACP Scheme which has been

     framed by the Government on the recommendations of the

     expert   body    like   the       pay   commission   and   its

     recommendations for the MACP Scheme. As observed and

     held by this Court in the case of M.V. Mohanan Nair

     (supra) the ACP which is now superseded by MACP Scheme
9
is a matter of Government policy and interfering with the

recommendations        of   the    expert   body    like   the   pay

commission and its recommendations for the MACP Scheme

would have serious impact on the public exchequer. It is

further observed that the recommendations of the pay

commission for the MACP Scheme have been accepted by

the Government and implemented. It is further observed

that therefore the High Court has no jurisdiction to interfere

with the Government policies in the form of MACP Scheme

which   was    after    accepting     the   Sixth    Central     Pay

Commission. In view of the above and for the reasons stated

above and the binding decision of this Court in the case of

M.V. Mohanan Nair (supra) with which we also agree, the

impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court

granting grade pay of Rs.6600 to respondent Nos.1& 2 is

unsustainable and deserves to be quashed and set aside.
However, we observe that the view which we are taking

is on the premise that neither the MACP Scheme nor Clause

8.1 is under challenge and as per the law laid down by this

Court in M.V. Mohanan Nair (supra), an employee is

entitled to the higher grade pay as provided under MACP
10
Scheme, more particularly, as per
Section 1
, Part A of the

     First Schedule of the CCS (Revised Pay) Rules, 2008.

     Therefore, so long as Clause 8.1 and the grade pay

     mentioned as per
Section 1
, Part A of the First Schedule of

     the CCS (Revised Pay) Rules, 2008 stands, the employee

     shall be entitled to the grade pay accordingly. Therefore, if

     any of the employees is aggrieved by Clause 8.1 and if in his

     opinion, there is any anomaly the same has to be challenged

     by the aggrieved employee, which can be considered in

     accordance with law and on its own merits. However, as the

     same is not under challenge, we have to go by the MACP

     Scheme as it is.
9.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the

     impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court is

     hereby quashed and set aside and the judgment and order

     that of the Central Administrative Tribunal is hereby

     restored. It is observed and held that on implementation of

     MACP Scheme respondent No.1 and 2 herein shall be

     entitled to the grade pay of Rs.5400 and not of Rs.6600 as

     claimed by them. Their pensions be refixed accordingly.

     However, it is observed that as respondent Nos.1 & 2 are
11
the retired employees and till date they have received the

    pension considering the grade pay of Rs.6600 and being

    retired persons it will be very difficult for them to refund the

    difference in the pay pension, in the peculiar facts and

    circumstances of the case we direct that there shall be no

    recovery of the difference in the pension between the grade

    pay of Rs.5400 and grade pay of Rs.6600 for the period

    prior to December, 2021. However, on refixation of the

    pension as per the present judgment and order, fixing their

    grade pay of Rs.5400 they shall be paid the pension

    accordingly from January, 2022 onwards. The present

    appeal is allowed accordingly, however, with the above

    observations and directions. No costs.
…………………………………J.
                                         (M. R. SHAH)


                                      …………………………………J.
                                        (SANJIV KHANNA)
New Delhi,
January 28, 2022.
12