[Cites
26
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Competition Commission Of India vs State Of Mizoram on 19 January, 2022
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
M.M. Sundresh
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 10820-10822 OF 2014


                         COMPETITION COMMISSION OF INDIA                         … Appellant


                                                          Versus


                         STATE OF MIZORAM & ORS.                                …Respondents

                                                         WITH

                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.1797 OF 2015


                         M/S. TAMARAI TECHNOLOGIES PVT. LTD.                      …Appellant

                                                         Versus

                         STATE OF MIZORAM & ORS.                                 …Respondents.


                                                   JUDGMENT
SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
Facts:
1.    A complaint received by the Competition Commission of India
Signature Not Verified      (for short ‘appellant/CCI’) from respondent No.4 seeking investigation
Digitally signed by
RASHI GUPTA
Date: 2022.01.19
17:22:55 IST
Reason:                     under the
Competition Act, 2002
(hereinafter referred to as the
1
‘
Competition Act
’) in respect of State Lottery run by the State of

Mizoram (respondent No.1) has given rise to the present dispute. The

jurisdiction of CCI to inquire into allegations of bid rigging, collusive

bidding, and cartelisation in the tender process for appointment of selling

agents and distributors for lotteries organised in the State of Mizoram has

been challenged in the present proceedings by the successful bidders, and

to a much lesser extent, by the State of Mizoram.
2.    The State of Mizoram issued an Invitation for Expression of

Interest (for short ‘EoI’) through respondent No.2, the Director,

Institutional Finance and State Lottery (IF&SL) on 20.12.2011 inviting

bids for the appointment of lottery distributors and selling agents for state

lotteries to be organised by the Government of Mizoram in terms of the

Mizoram Lotteries (Regulation) Rules, 2011 (hereinafter referred to as

the ‘Regulation Rules’) framed under the
Lotteries (Regulation) Act,

1998
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Regulation Act’). The EoI was for

appointment of lottery distributors/selling agents to organise, promote,

conduct, and market the Mizoram State Lottery through both

conventional paper type and online system. The EoI specified that the

minimum rate fixed by the Government of India is Rs.5 lakh per draw for
2
Bumper and Rs.10,000 per draw for others – bids less than these rates

 would be summarily rejected. In pursuance of the EoI, five bids were

 received of which four were accepted.         The accepted bids quoted

 identical rates as per the following table:
Rate per draw
S.No.   Name                       Paper          Online        Bumper
1.      E-Cool Gaming Solutions -                 10,000        -
2.      Summit Online Trade -                     10,000        -
Solution Pvt. Ltd. (R5)
3.      M/s. NV International -                   10,000        -
(R6)
4.      Teesta Distributors        10,000         -             5,00,000


        These four companies/partnerships were selected as distributors to

 operate the lotteries as per the
Regulation Rules and the Regulation Act
.
In accordance with the EoI, selected distributors/selling agents were inter

 alia required to furnish Rs. 5 crore each for paper and online lottery as

 security, a sum of Rs.1 crore each as advance payment of the sale

 proceeds, and a sum of Rs.1 crore each towards the prize pool.
3.     Respondent No.4 made a complaint to the CCI on 16.05.2012

 under
Sections 3
& 4 read with
Section 19(1)(a)
of the Competition Act

 and the complaint was registered as Case No. 24 of 2012. In order to

 complete the array of parties defined as per Civil Appeal No.10820/2014,
3
we may note that respondent No. 3 is the Director General of CCI and

both respondent Nos. 4 & 5 are private companies while respondent No.

6 is a partnership firm.
4.    The substratum of the complaint by respondent No. 4 was that

identical offers of Rs.10,000 per draw were made in all four bids (one for

paper and three for online) and a single bid of Rs.5 lakh per draw was

made for the Bumper draw. These amounts were the minimum rates

fixed under the EoI. The allegation made by respondent No. 4 was that

the bidders had cartelised and entered into an agreement that had an

appreciable adverse effect on competition in the lottery business in

Mizoram. There was bid rigging and a collusive bidding process which

violated
Section 3(1)
read with
Section 3(3)
of the Competition Act, and

also caused grave financial loss to the State of Mizoram.
5.    Respondent No. 4 also alleged that the State of Mizoram abused its

dominant position as administrator of State lotteries, by requiring

distributors to furnish exorbitant sums of money towards security,

advance payment, and prize pool even before the lotteries were held.

This was alleged to be unfair, discriminatory and illegal and effectively

restricted the supply of service of lotteries. The consequent allegation
4
against the State was that it violated
Section 4
of the Competition Act.

   The prayer made by respondent No. 4 was that the EoI be quashed and

   set aside, respondent No.1 be restrained from abusing their dominant

   position, a restraint be passed from awarding the tender to the selected

   bidders, and selected bidders be banned from carrying out business in the

   State of Mizoram.
The Legal Position:
6.    In order to appreciate the contours of the complaint, it may be

   appropriate to deal with some of the provisions of the
Competition Act
.

   The objective of the
Competition Act
is set out in the Preamble itself, i.e.,

   to establish a Commission to prevent practices having adverse effect on

   competition, to promote and sustain competition in markets, to protect

   the interests of consumers, and to ensure freedom of trade carried on by

   other participants in markets, in India, and for matters connected

   therewith or incidental thereto.
Chapter II of the Competition Act
prohibits certain agreements, abuse of dominant position and regulation

   of combinations. The prohibition of anti-competitive agreements is set

   out in
Section 3
. The relevant provisions read as under:
5
“CHAPTER II
 PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN AGREEMENTS, ABUSE
  OF DOMINANT POSITION AND REGULATION OF
              COMBINATIONS

                   Prohibition of agreements
3. Anti-competitive agreements (1) No enterprise or
association of enterprises or person or association of persons
shall enter into any agreement in respect of production, supply,
distribution, storage, acquisition or control of goods or
provision of services, which causes or is likely to cause an
appreciable adverse effect on competition within India.
(2) Any agreement entered into in contravention of the
provisions contained in subsection (1) shall be void.

(3) Any agreement entered into between enterprises or
associations of enterprises or persons or associations of persons
or between any person and enterprise or practice carried on, or
decision taken by, any association of enterprises or association
of persons, including cartels, engaged in identical or similar
trade of goods or provision of services, which—
(a) directly or indirectly determines purchase or sale
      prices;
(b) limits or controls production, supply, markets,
      technical development, investment or provision of
      services;
(c) shares the market or source of production or provision
      of services by way of allocation of geographical area of
      market, or type of goods or services, or number of
      customers in the market or any other similar way;
(d) directly or indirectly results in bid rigging or
      collusive bidding,
6
shall be presumed to have an appreciable adverse effect on
              competition:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply
              to any agreement entered into by way of joint ventures if such
              agreement increases efficiency in production, supply,
              distribution, storage, acquisition or control of goods or
              provision of services.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, “bid
              rigging” means any agreement, between enterprises or persons
              referred to in sub-section (3) engaged in identical or similar
              production or trading of goods or provision of services, which
              has the effect of eliminating or reducing competition for bids or
              adversely affecting or manipulating the process for bidding.
[…]”

Under the same Chapter, Section 4 prohibits the abuse of dominant position.

The relevant portion is extracted hereunder:
“4. Abuse of dominant position. – [(1) No enterprise or group shall
        abuse its dominant position.]

        (2) There shall be an abuse of dominant position 4 [under sub-section
        (1), if an enterprise or a group],—
(a) directly or indirectly, imposes unfair or discriminatory—
(i) condition in purchase or sale of goods or service; or
(ii) price in purchase or sale (including predatory price) of
              goods or service.
[…]”
7.      Chapter III deals with provisions relating to establishment,
7
Composition, etc. of the CCI while Chapter IV set outs the Duties,

Powers and Functions of CCI. Chapter V sets out the Duties of the

Director-General. Penalties are provided in Chapter VI. Chapter VIIIA

refers to the Establishment of the Appellate Tribunal.
8.
Section 26
of the Competition Act provides for the procedure for

an inquiry under
Section 19
, which deals with inquiries into certain

agreements and dominant position of enterprises.           The relevant

provisions of Section 26 are extracted as under:
“[26. Procedure for inquiry under
section 19
. – (1) On
         receipt of a reference from the Central Government or a State
         Government or a statutory authority or on its own knowledge or
         information received under
section 19
, if the Commission is of
         the opinion that there exists a prima facie case, it shall direct
         the Director-General to cause an investigation to be made into
         the matter:
Provided that if the subject-matter of an information received
         is, in the opinion of the Commission, substantially the same as
         or has been covered by any previous information received, then
         the new information may be clubbed with the previous
         information.
(2) Where on receipt of a reference from the Central
         Government or a State Government or a statutory authority or
         information received under section 19, the Commission is of
         the opinion that there exists no prima facie case, it shall close
         the matter forthwith and pass such orders as it deems fit and
         send a copy of its order to the Central Government or the State
         Government or the statutory authority or the parties concerned,
         as the case may be.
8
(3) The Director General shall, on receipt of direction under
           sub-section (1), submit a report on his findings within such
           period as may be specified by the Commission.
(4) The Commission may forward a copy of the report referred
           to in sub-section (3) to the parties concerned:
[…]”


The Developments:
9.    In pursuance of the complaint received from respondent No. 4, the

  CCI exercised its powers under
Section 26(1)
of the Competition Act, as

  it found prima facie evidence of cartelisation and bid rigging by the

  bidders and gave three reasons for the same:
a. Three bidders made identical bids of the minimum rate of

           Rs.10,000/- per draw for online lotteries;
b. Only one party made a bid for the paper lottery segment and

           they quoted the minimum rate for the same.
c. Only one party made a bid for the bumper draw and also quoted

           the minimum rate for the same.
10.   In the aforesaid circumstances, the CCI expressed a prima facie

  view that there appears to be contravention of the provisions of
Section

  3(1)
read with
Section 3(3)
of the Competition Act by respondent Nos. 5
9
& 6 and other successful bidders. Accordingly, the CCI required the

Director General (for short ‘DG’) to conduct an investigation into the

matter. However, the CCI opined that no prima facie case was made out

against respondent No.1/State of Mizoram as it could not be considered

as an ‘enterprise’ or a ‘group’ under the
Competition Act
. Respondent

No. 1’s role was to regulate and monitor the business of lotteries in the

State of Mizoram in exercise of its powers and functions under the

Regulation Act and the Regulation Rules. It was, thus, opined that they

have every right to impose financial, technical and other conditions in

their bid documents as they deemed fit. The CCI, thus, rejected the

complaint of respondent No. 4 under
Section 4
of the Competition Act.
11.   The DG in pursuance of the said order of the CCI, a report dated

14.01.2013 was submitted on 17.01.2013 whereby it came to the

conclusion that respondent Nos. 5 & 6 along with M/s. Teesta

Distributors and M/s. E-Cool Gaming Solutions (P) Ltd. had colluded,

formed a cartel, and indulged in bid rigging. Thus, they were in violation

of the provisions of
Section 3(1)
read with
Section 3(3)
of the

Competition Act. However, no order was passed against the State of

Mizoram.
10
12.   What is relevant to note is that the DG did make some

observations against respondent No.2 and the State of Mizoram to the

effect that they ought to have been more vigilant in stopping unfair trade

practices and their lapses raised suspicions of favouritism and collusion.

The bidding committee had received the complaint of respondent No. 4

on 18.05.2012 when the Committee recommended that the successful

bidders be appointed as selling agents. Thus, the DG opined that the

Committee allowed rigging to happen and respondent No.2 was also

instrumental in calling all four bidders together for the renegotiation of

bid prices on 22.05.2012. The DG, thus, opined that it was a case of

collusive bidding but the case against respondent No.1 under
Section 4
of

the Competition Act was dropped.
13.   The aforesaid report was placed before the CCI in its ordinary

meeting on 12.02.2013 when it was decided to send copies of the report

to the parties so that they could file their objections/replies thereto. The

parties were instructed to file profit & loss accounts, balance sheets, and

turnover of their enterprise for the past three financial years along with

their objections to the DG’s report and a date was fixed of 20.03.2013 for

an oral hearing.
11
The Court Litigation:
14.   We may note that surprisingly respondent No.1 filed a writ

   petition, being WP(C) No.24/2013, in the Gauhati High Court, Aizwal

   Bench challenging both the report of the DG and the CCI’s order dated

   12.02.2013. The grievance of respondent No.1 was actually with the

   adverse observations made by the DG in his report and the fact that the

   CCI had forwarded the DG report to them despite observations that

   respondent No. 4 had failed to establish a prima facie case under
Section

   4
of the Competition Act. We say ‘surprisingly’, because if at all, the

   grievance could have been of respondent No.2 qua the observations

   made, but could not have been of respondent No.1/State.         That too

   respondent No.2 could have filed a response and it was open to the CCI

   to close the proceedings both against respondent Nos.1 & 2. In fact,

   Section 4 proceedings against respondent No.1 were already closed. The

   Gauhati High Court, however, chose to pass an interim order on

   18.03.2013 in the writ petition directing that no final order be passed by

   the CCI. On the said order being passed, the CCI vide its order dated

   11.06.2013, authorised its representative to inform the High Court that it

   did not intend to pass an order against the State of Mizoram, and to pray
12
that the High Court’s injunction against passing a final order be lifted. In

any case, that ought to have put the matter to rest.
15.   It, thus, does appear to us that the respondent No.1 lent its shoulder

to assist the other private parties and respondent No. 6 filed a writ

petition, being WP(C) No.76/2013, praying for quashing of the DG

report and all proceedings pending before the CCI. Respondent No. 6

sought to raise a plea that they had struck an agreement with respondent

No.1 on 22.07.2010 as per which they were formally assured of at least

25% of the total number of draws held per day once lotteries were

reopened. An agreement was struck to settle an amount of Rs.2.89 crore

stated to be owed by respondent No.1 to respondent No. 6 and, thus, it

was pleaded that the very question of forming a cartel or indulging in bid

rigging did not arise. Respondent No. 5 also sought to take advantage of

the proceedings initiated by respondent No.1 and filed a writ petition,

being WP(C) No.90/2013 seeking similar relief. Among the pleas raised

by respondent No. 5 was that lotteries were not covered by the
Competition Act
and, thus, the CCI did not have jurisdiction to conduct

an inquiry under
Section 26(1)
of the Competition Act.
16.   The three writ petitions were taken up together and admitted by the
13
Gauhati High Court vide its order dated 29.10.2013 and the operation of

  interim directions issued on 18.03.2013 were continued, restraining the

  CCI from delivering the final order.
17.   The CCI aggrieved by the same moved this Court against the said

  interim direction dated 29.10.2013. Notice was issued in the SLP(C) No.

  4438-4441/2014 on 10.03.2014 and the High Court was permitted to

  proceed with the matter in the mean time. The High Court, thus, passed

  its final order in the three writ petitions on 16.08.2014, which made those

  SLPs infructuous and were consequently dismissed as withdrawn on

  25.08.2014.
The Impugned Order:
18.   The final order dated 16.08.2014 sought to be impugned in the

  present proceedings shows that the merits of the case were not really

  urged but the arguments were confined to the show cause notice issued

  by the CCI. Thus, what the High Court examined was whether the
Competition Act
would be applicable entitling the CCI to entertain the

  complaint/information given by respondent No. 4.
19.   The High Court went into the question of the nature of the

  business sought to be carried out, i.e., of lotteries.
In this behalf relying
14
on the judgment of this Court in
B.R. Enterprises v. State of UP1
it was

    held that lotteries cannot be considered to be trade and commerce within

    the meaning of Articles 301-303 of the Constitution of India.
The High

    Court also observed that the lottery tickets have no value in and of

    themselves (
Sunrise Associates v. Government of NCT of Delhi
).2 The

    right covered by a lottery ticket is nothing but an actionable claim and,

    therefore, it was concluded from the definition of ‘goods’ under the
Sale

    of Goods Act, 1930
that they were excluded from such definition and

    other tax statutes.
Lastly, relying upon the judgment of this Court in
Union of India v. Martin Lotter Agencies Ltd.
3 it was opined that

    lotteries, being akin to gambling activities, came under the purview of

    the doctrine of res extra commercium.
The Competition Act
, it was

    opined, was applicable to legitimate trade and goods, and was

    promulgated to ensure competition in markets that are res commercium.
Thus, lottery activity being in the nature of res extra commercium could

    not be covered by the
Competition Act
and consequently the CCI did not

    have jurisdiction to entertain the complaint of respondent No. 4. The

    High Court also took note of the stand of the CCI, which found no
1
(1999) 9 SCC 700.
2
(2006) 5 SCC 603.
3
(2009) 12 SCC 209.
15
contravention of
Section 4
of the Competition Act by the State of

   Mizoram and, thus, there was no question of any further proceedings

   being allowed by the CCI against the State of Mizoram.
20.   We may place at this stage itself our caveat to the manner in which

   the High Court proceeded. On the statement of the CCI indicating its

   intent not to proceed against the State of Mizoram, that petition could

   have been put to rest. In fact, even earlier there was no intent to take out

   any proceedings against the State of Mizoram and only some

   observations had been made against respondent No.2 in the manner in

   which they proceeded to carry out the allotment pursuant to the EoI. The

   lis really was between the private parties and whether their conduct could

   have been inquired into by the CCI.
21.   The Special Leave Petitions were filed by the CCI and respondent

   No. 4 against the orders passed in the three petitions and leave was

   granted with all the matters being tagged together.

Appellant’s case:
22.   Mr. Rajshekhar Rao, learned senior counsel sought to canvas the

   case on behalf of the CCI. It was urged that the High Court had not

   appreciated the contours of the case sought to be examined by the CCI.
16
The CCI was not concerned with the carrying out, regulation, or

      prohibition of lottery business at all; but its concern was only about

      potential bid rigging in the tender process for appointment of selling

      agents and distributors of lotteries. There is stated to be no conflict

      between the
Competition Act and the Regulation Act
. There was not even

      an overlap between the two which would require us to exclude the

      particular tender process from the mandate of
Section 3(1)
read with
Section 3(3)
of the Competition Act. It was urged that notwithstanding

      the fact that lotteries are a regulated commodity under the Regulation

      Act, the CCI would continue to have jurisdiction over the competition

      law aspect of such regulated commodity.
In this behalf, he referred to the

      judgment of this Court in
CCI v. Bharti Airtel4
, which examined the

      contours of the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘
TRAI Act
’) and the
Competition Act
in the

      context of the exercise of power by the Telecom Regulatory Authority of

      India (for short ‘TRAI’) and the CCI. It was observed in that context that

      the
Competition Act
frowns on anti-competitive agreements and it

      prohibits:
“
4
(2019) 2 SCC 521.
17
(a)   where agreements are entered into by certain persons with a

      view to cause an appreciable adverse effect on competition;
(b)   where any enterprise or group of enterprises, which enjoys

      dominant position, abuses the said dominant position; and
(c)   regulating the combination of enterprises by means of mergers

      or amalgamations to ensure that such mergers or amalgamations do

      not become anti-competitive or abuse the dominant position which

      they can attain.”
23.     In the aforesaid context, it was, thus, observed that the function

assigned to the CCI was distinct from the function of the TRAI under the
TRAI Act
. What the CCI was supposed to find out was whether there

was concert and collusion thereby forming a cartel. Whether a particular

agreement would have an appreciable adverse effect on competition

within the relevant market in India was, thus, held to be within the

exclusive domain of the CCI.
24.     Learned senior counsel referred to us the definition of ‘Service’

under
Section 2(u)
of the Competition Act, which reads as under:
“2. Definitions. – In this Act, unless the context otherwise
            requires,—

            xxxx              xxxx               xxxx               xxxx
18
(u) “service” means service of any description which is made
      available to potential users and includes the provision of
      services in connection with business of any industrial or
      commercial matters such as banking, communication,
      education, financing, insurance, chit funds, real estate,
      transport, storage, material treatment, processing, supply of
      electrical or other energy, boarding, lodging, entertainment,
      amusement, construction, repair, conveying of news or
      information and advertising;”

   It was, thus, urged that the expression ‘service’ would mean

service of any description which is made available to potential users

and includes the provision of services in connection with business of

any industrial or commercial matter. In the aforesaid context it was

urged that the sale or distribution of lottery tickets to a prospective

buyer on behalf of the State for consideration should be construed as

“service”.   While referring to the definition of ‘service’ it was

submitted that a reading of the definition would show it as a “means”

and “includes” definition and the ‘includes’ part does not narrow

down the width of the ‘means’ part. Thus, the widest amplitude must

be given to the definition of ‘service’ in this case to mean “service of

any description”. To support this contention, learned senior counsel

referred to the view taken by this Court in
Black Diamond Beverages
19
v. Commercial Tax Officer5
. Wherein, it was observed in paragraph 7

            that the first part of the definition gives the meaning of the expression

            “sale price” and must have its ordinary, popular or natural meaning

            which is not controlled or affected by the second part which `includes'

            certain other things in the definition. The same principle, it was

            urged, would apply in the given scenario.
25.      Learned senior counsel also urged that had the Parliament intended

      to exclude any service from the application of the
Competition Act
, then

      they would have specifically stated so under
Section 2(h)
or
Section 54
of the Competition Act.
Section 54
forms part of
Chapter IX of the

      Competition Act
under the general heading ‘Miscellaneous’ and it

      specifically empowers the Central Government to exempt from the

      application of the Act or any provision thereof and for such period as it

      may specify in such notification. It was urged that no such notification

      has been issued. The present activity could hardly be called a sovereign

      function. On the different cases referred to in the impugned judgment

      and by the respondents, it was urged that they were all in the context of

      tax laws to be tested on the touchstone of
Article 19(1)(g)
of the
5
(1998) 1 SCC 458.
20
Constitution of India while the present case really dealt with the interplay

      of the
Competition Act and the Regulation Act
. In such a scenario the

      doctrine of res extra commercium would only apply where the issue was

      whether the State Government can regulate (by taxation or otherwise)

      certain kinds of trades, which would otherwise be free for

      regulation/subject to reasonable restriction.     It was argued that the

      business of acting as distributors/selling agents cannot be said to come

      within the purview of such a doctrine (
State of Punjab v. Devans

      Modern Breweries6
).
26.     Lastly, it was urged that the High Court ought not to have

      entertained a petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India

      as an order passed under
Section 26(1)
of the Competition Act was in the

      nature of an administrative direction.      There were no adverse civil

      consequences. The proceedings were akin to a show cause notice and

      even the DG’s report did not amount to a final decision. The respondents

      were also stated to have the alternative efficacious remedy of an appeal

      under
Section 53B
of the Competition Act whereby it could approach the

      appellate tribunal aggrieved by any decision or direction or order inter

      alia under sub-section (2) of
Section 26
of the Competition Act. The
6
(2004) 11 SCC 26.
21
commission is expected to form an opinion about the existence of a

      prima facie case for contravention of certain provisions of the
Competition Act
and then passes a direction for the DG to cause an

      investigation into the matter. Post the report of the DG it can proceed

      further or close the proceedings. (
Competition Commission of India v.

      Steel Authority of India & Anr.7
confirmed in
CCI v. Bharti Airtel8
case.) That stage had not even arisen.
The final report of the CCI was yet

      to mature and the CCI was not even bound by the report of the DG.
27.     The aforesaid was also in the context of the CCI having already

      made it clear that it did not intend to pass any adverse orders against the

      State of Mizoram and that the DG being the investigative arm was duty

      bound to report all facts to the CCI.
Respondent No.1’s Arguments:
28.     The State of Mizoram actually prayed to be deleted as a party as

      they contended that the appeal had become infructuous in the context of

      the order passed by the CCI on 07.06.2012 and 11.06.2013 when it was

      opined that no fault could be attributed to the State and they would not

      pass any adverse orders against it. As noted, what is surprising is that
7
(2010) 10 SCC 744.
8
(supra)
22
there was originally also no cause for the State of Mizoram to have

  approached the High Court.
29.   Learned counsel for the State sought to contend that they had

  never prayed for quashing of the proceedings against the private parties.

  They only restricted their prayer against the continuation of proceedings

  against the State, something which we have already failed to appreciate

  and, once again, fail to appreciate. The last submission of the State of

  Mizoram was, once again, surprising – that it was a victim of

  cartelisation and would continue to cooperate with the CCI. If it was so,

  then the proceedings should have been permitted to continue before the

  CCI and the State ought to have given appropriate assistance as is sought

  to be volunteered now.
Respondent No.5’s arguments:
30.   The only real contesting party before us and the beneficiary of

  what was complained against was respondent No. 5. Their contention

  was based on the fact that
Section 3(1)
of the Competition Act would

  have no application as there was no “goods” or “provisions of services”

  which could give rise to the CCI’s jurisdiction. Lottery tickets were not

  goods and there was no provision of any services. Lottery business being
23
res extra commercium, it had to be strictly regulated under the provisions

of the Regulation Act. The definition of “goods” under
Section 2(i)
of

the Competition Act, which refers to the definition of
Sale of Goods Act
,

reads as under:
“2. Definitions. – In this Act, unless the context otherwise
         requires,—

         xxxx                xxxx               xxxx               xxxx
(i)    “goods” means goods as defined in the
Sale of Goods
         Act, 1930
(8 of 1930) and includes—

         (A) products manufactured, processed or mined;

         (B) debentures, stocks and shares after allotment;


         (C) in relation to goods supplied, distributed or controlled in
         India, goods imported into India;”
31.
Section 2(7)
of the Sale of Goods Act specifically excludes

actionable claims from the ambit of goods, which reads as under:
“2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless there is anything
         repugnant in the subject or context,—

         xxxx                xxxx               xxxx               xxxx

         (7) “goods” means every kind of moveable property other than
         actionable claims and money; and includes stock and shares,
         growing crops, grass, and things attached to or forming part of
         the land which are agreed to be severed before sale or under the
         contract of sale;”
24
32.     A lottery ticket has been held to be only an actionable claim

      (
Sunrise Associates v. Government of NCT of Delhi9
) and was, thus held

      to not be a good. Where an actionable claim was sought to be included

      within the definition of ‘goods’, it was specifically so done. For example,

      debentures are specifically included within the definition of ‘goods’

      under
Section 2(i)(B)
of the Competition Act.
A comparison was also

      sought to be made with the
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices

      Act, 1969
where there was no such inclusion and, thus, debentures were

      opined to be excluded (
R.D. Goyal & Anr. V. Reliance Industries Ltd.10
).
33.     Respondent No. 5 claimed to be merely a distributor which did not

      provide any services to any potential user of lottery and such distribution

      does not constitute a service under
Section 2(u)
of the Competition Act,

      which has been extracted above.
34.     It may be relevant to note here that the definition of service is

      inclusive and the principles of specifying certain inclusions would, thus,

      apply without inhibiting the first part of the definition clause.
35.     Lastly it was contended that lottery business is res extra

      commercium and strictly regulated by State. Therefore, it could not have
9
(2006) 5 SCC 603.
10
(2003) 1 SCC 81.
25
been the intent of the legislature to promote or sustain competition in

  lottery business.
The Competition Act
will thus not apply as there was a

  special act promulgated for conduct of lotteries.

Our View:
36.    In the conspectus of the arguments, we find that a simple aspect of

  anti-competitive practices and cartelisation has got dragged on for almost

  ten years in what appears to be a mis-application by the High Court of

  the interplay of the two Acts, i.e., the
Competition Act and the Regulation

  Act
. We have already observed that respondent No. 1 seems to have

  played a very non-appreciable role in our opinion. What ought to have

  weighed with respondent No.1/State is what is sought to contend now,

  i.e., it is a victim of cartelisation and it is in its interests to cooperate with

  the CCI.
37.    The complaint of respondent No.4 may have been also under
Section 4
of the Competition Act but it had not even referred that aspect

  to the DG and had decided not to proceed against the State. That should

  have been the end of the matter so far as the State is concerned. Yet the

  State, in our view, under a misconception, approached the High Court,

  possibly in an endeavour to defend one of its officers, respondent No. 2,
26
whose conduct has not been very favourably commented on by the DG.

Even if the State felt that these comments of the DG were not

sustainable, such an aspect could have been pleaded with the CCI in

pursuance of its notice and possibly the matter would have been closed at

that stage. In fact, the CCI had opined, both before and after the filing of

the writ petition, that it was not proceeding against respondent No.1/State

under
Section 4
of the Competition Act.           The aforesaid gave an

opportunity to respondent Nos. 5 & 6 also to approach the Court and

interdict the proceedings which ought to have been concluded a long

time ago. It would, in our view, have been beneficial even to the State to

have come to a conclusion one way or the other. The interdict post the

investigation report by the DG and prohibiting the CCI from carrying out

its mandate under the
Competition Act
is unsustainable.
38.   We are in agreement with the line of arguments advanced by Mr.

Rajshekhar Rao, learned senior counsel for the CCI where he has

succinctly sought to point out that the concern of the CCI was not at all

with the carrying out, regulation or prohibition of the lottery business as

was governed by the Regulation Act. Rather, the concern was limited to

the role assigned to the CCI under the
Competition Act
, and in the
27
context of the EoI was limited to examining any perceived bid rigging in

the tendering process for appointment of selling agents and distributors

for the lottery business. There was no conflict in the interplay of the two

Acts that even needed reconciliation or prohibition against either one, as

the limited scrutiny was to examine the mandate of
Section 3(1)
read

with
Section 3(3)
of the Competition Act. Lotteries may be a regulated

commodity and may even be res extra commercium. That would not take

away the aspect of something which is anti-competition in the context of

the business related to lotteries.
39.    We must take note of the expansive definition of ‘Service’ under
Section 2(u)
of the Competition Act.          It means “service of any

description”, which is to be made available to potential users.        The

purchaser of a lottery ticket is a potential user and a service is being

made available by the selling agents in the context of the
Competition

Act
.   Suffice for us to say the inclusive mentioning does not inhibit the

larger expansive definition. The lottery business can continue to be

regulated by the Regulation Act. However, if in the tendering process

there is an element of anti-competition which would require investigation

by the CCI, that cannot be prevented under the pretext of the lottery
28
business being res extra commercium, more so when the State

Government decides to deal in lotteries.
40.   We would like to say that the intervention by the High Court was

extremely premature. It ought to have waited for the CCI to come to a

conclusion but on the other hand what has happened is that the CCI

proceedings have been brought to a standstill while the High Court

opined on the basis of some aspects which may or may not arise.
41.   We are, thus, of the view that there was really no need for the High

Court to proceed in the manner and in the direction it sought to proceed.

The correct approach, more so once the statement was made on behalf of

the CCI, would have been to close the proceedings filed by the State

Government and let the private parties face the ultimate decision of the

CCI. If they were aggrieved by any adverse decision of the CCI they

were entitled to avail of the appellate remedy under
Section 53B
of the

Competition Act.
42.   The complaint having been made by respondent No.4 under
Section 19
of the Competition Act, which provides that the Commission

“may” inquire into certain agreements and dominant position of

enterprise as envisaged under sub-section (1) of
Section 3
and sub-
29
section (1) of
Section 4
of the Competition Act. The CCI found out a

  prima facie case for investigation by the DG under
Section 3(1)
of the

  Competition Act, the DG opined adversely, and the CCI issued notice

  giving an opportunity to the affected parties to place their stand before it.

  This process ought to have been permitted to conclude with the right

  available to the affected parties to avail of the appellate remedy under
Section 53B
of the Competition Act.
Conclusion:
43.   We, thus, set aside the impugned judgment of the High Court and

  direct that the proceedings in WP(C) No. 24/2013 filed by respondent

  No.1 would stand closed in view of the statement made on behalf of the

  CCI before the High Court on 11.06.2013 and the proceedings against the

  other parties would continue. Since the State Government has already

  volunteered in the present proceedings to cooperate, we are sure a proper

  sequitur to the investigation would follow. WP(C) No. 76/2013 and

  WP(C) No. 90/2013 filed by the private parties would stand dismissed.

  We are conscious of the fact that much time has passed but then the

  material forming basis of the investigation is already with the CCI and it

  will have to proceed in accordance with law. This will have a future
30
impact even if the contracts have come to an end and also in the context

  of the jurisdiction of the CCI, and that is why we have proceeded to pen

  down the judgment.
44.   The appeals are accordingly allowed leaving the parties to bear

  their own costs.
...……………………………J.
                                                [Sanjay Kishan Kaul]



                                           ...……………………………J.
                                                  [M.M. Sundresh]
New Delhi.
January 19, 2022.
31