[Cites
18
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Subhash Chander vs M/S Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd ... on 28 January, 2022
Author:
Ajay Rastogi
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
,
Ajay Rastogi
REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 7517 OF 2012


               SUBHASH CHANDER & ORS.                           ……Appellant(s)


                                  VERSUS


               M/S BHARAT PETROLEUM
               CORPORATION LTD.(BPCL) & ANR.                    .….Respondent(s)




                                            JUDGMENT
Rastogi, J.
1.        The   instant   appeal   has   been    preferred   by    the

               appellants/plaintiffs assailing the judgment dated 8th July, 2009,

               upholding the judgment and decree of the Court of appeal dated

               28th March, 2006 holding that the Civil Court has no jurisdiction

               to entertain and try the suit for possession in reference to the
Signature Not Verified
Anita Malhotra subject property and the appropriate remedy available with the
Digitally signed by
Date: 2022.01.28
17:06:04 IST
Reason:
appellants is to initiate proceedings for eviction of the suit property
1
under the provisions of the
Haryana (Control of Rent & Eviction)

Act, 1973
(hereinafter called as “Act 1973”).
2.   The brief facts of the case manifest from the record are that

the appellants filed a suit on the averment that their predecessor

in interest Sh. Vinod Kumar was owner of the subject plot of land

admeasuring 10,000 sq. feet in municipal limits, Kaithal bearing

Municipal No.657/10.     Undisputedly, the Act 1973 applies to the

suit property in question.
3.   The subject property was given on lease by late Vinod Kumar

to M/s Burmah Shell Oil Storage Distributing Company Ltd. for a

fixed period of 20 years at the rate of Rs.35/­ per month vide lease

dated 4th June, 1958 with effect from 1 st April, 1958.   The lease

period initially was for 20 years and clause 10 of the lease

contemplated renewal of the lease once for another 20 years. The

lease period commenced from 1st April, 1958 for a period of 20

years expired on 1st April, 1978 and in terms of clause 10 of the

lease deed, one extension was permissible and that renewal option

for another period of 20 years was availed and that lease period

also expired on 1st April, 1998.
4.   At this stage, the appellants served a legal notice on the

respondents dated 30th January, 1998 in which although
Section
2
106
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 has not been specifically

mentioned, but in pith and substance the notice was served for

terminating tenancy of the respondents and later filed a civil suit

for possession of the subject land on 7 th August, 1998.
5.   The preliminary objection was raised by the respondents

regarding jurisdiction of the Civil Court in entertaining the suit and

the defence throughout was that the Act 1973 is applicable on the

subject property and they can be evicted only under the provisions

of the Act 1973. It is not disputed that the subject land admittedly

falls within the area administered by Municipal Committee, Kaithal

and the rented land is situated within the urban area and covered

under the provisions of the Act 1973.
6.   That before expiry of the period of lease of 20 years, the

Central   Government    enacted
Burmah     Shell   (Acquisition   of

Undertakings) Act, 1976
(hereinafter called as “Act 1976”),

pursuant to which the leasehold rights were taken over by the

respondents/defendants.      The option of renewal of lease for

another period of 20 years was availed by the respondents in terms

of clause 10 of the lease deed dated 4 th June, 1958. The case of

the appellants was that after lease expired on 1st April, 1998, the

possession of the respondents on the suit property became
3
unauthorised and without consent of the appellants and since the

respondents failed to vacate the suit property despite a legal notice

dated 30th January, 1998 being served, the appellants since

required the suit property for their personal bonafide necessity for

expanding their business, although had earlier filed an application

under the Act 1973, as alleged on the wrong premise.          It was

pleaded that at least the provisions of the Act 1973 do not apply to

the suit property as it is governed by the special Act enacted by the

Central Government being Act 1976.        In the alternative, it was

pleaded by the appellants that respondent no.1 had sub­let the

suit property to respondent no.2 without consent of the appellants

and hence the appellants are entitled to possession of the suit

property and also claimed mesne profits during pendency of the

suit at the market rate, in addition to three years rent prior to

lapse of the renewal period and prayed for a decree for possession

and recovery of mesne profits.
7.   The respondents filed written statement and it was admitted

that the suit property had been leased out by late Vinod Kumar to

M/s Burmah Shell Oil Storage Distributing Company Ltd.           and

later by the Act 1976, the leasehold rights were transferred to

respondent no.1.   It was also admitted that they exercised their
4
renewal option in terms of clause 10 of the lease for a period of 20

years.   At the same time, it was also averred that on expiry of the

lease period, the respondents became the statutory tenant of the

suit property and the appellants had been receiving rent from the

respondents without any demur and further averred that the Civil

Court has no jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit as the same

is specifically barred by the provisions of the Act 1973.
8.   It was further stated that there was a relationship of landlord

and tenant between the parties and the suit land is a rented land

as defined under
Section 2(h)
of the Act 1973 and the disputes

between landlord and tenant are to be adjudicated in accordance

with the provisions of the Act 1973 and the respondents being in

possession as a statutory tenant of the suit property, cannot be

evicted except in accordance with the provisions of
Section 13
of

the Act 1973 and that apart the appellants had earlier filed a

petition for ejectment against the respondents before the Rent

Controller on the ground of subletting and personal necessity and

that has been dismissed by the Rent Controller by order dated 3 rd

May, 1986. An appeal against the same also came to be dismissed

by the appellate authority by order dated 18th March, 1987.
5
9.    On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the learned trial

Court by a judgment and decree dated 13 th March, 2002 held that

the respondents are in unauthorised possession over the suit

property w.e.f. 1st April, 1998 after notice dated 30th January, 1998

under
Section 106
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 has been

served for vacating the suit property holding the appellants entitled

for restoration of possession of the suit land in question.
10.   On appeal being preferred by the respondents, the Court of

Appeal set aside the judgment and decree of the trial Court dated

13th March, 2002 by the judgment dated 28th March, 2006 and

held that the Civil Court has no jurisdiction to entertain and try

the suit and the respondents are in possession of the suit property

as statutory tenant and can be evicted from the suit property only

under the provisions of the Act 1973.     The said order came to be

challenged by the appellants/plaintiffs in second appeal before the

High Court and that came to be dismissed by the impugned

judgment dated 8th July, 2009, being the subject matter of

challenge in appeal before us.
6
11.   The dispute between the parties pertains to as to whether the

jurisdiction of the Civil Court is barred and the petition for

possession filed by the appellants/plaintiffs will lie before the Rent

Controller under the Act 1973.
12.   Counsel for the appellants, Shri Manoj Swarup, Senior

Advocate, submits that before the term of initial lease period of 20

years came to be expired on 1 st April, 1978, the Central

Government came with a special legislation, namely, the
Burmah

Shell (Acquisition of Undertakings) Act, 1976
and the High Court

has failed to consider the effect of
Section 11
of the Act 1976 which

has an overriding effect and that excludes all other laws

inconsistent with the provisions of the Act 1976, including the Act

1973 and further submits that the finding which has been

recorded of the respondents being a statutory tenant under the Act

1973 is in contravention of
Section 5(2)
of the Act 1976 and in the

absence of any fresh lease being executed by the parties only one

renewal as per the lease deed originally executed dated 4 th June,

1958, was permissible in law and that being availed and the term

had expired on 1st April, 1998, no further extension was

permissible in law and the respondents became trespassers after
7
expiry of the lease period and the only remedy available with the

appellants was to file a suit for possession of the suit property and

in support of his submissions placed reliance on the judgments of

this Court in Depot Superintendent, H.P. Corpn. Ltd. and Another v.

Kolhapur Agricultural Market Committee, Kolhapur1, Ram Bharosey

Lal Gupta(Dead) by LRs and Others v.
Hindustan Petroleum

Corporation Limited and Another2, Bharat Petroleum Corporation

Limited v. Rama Chandrashekhar Vaidya and Another3
.
13.   Per contra, counsel for the respondents, Shri V. Giri, Senior

Advocate, while supporting the findings recorded under the

impugned judgment conceded that only one term of extension of

lease of 20 years was permissible and that indeed was availed and

stood expired on 1st April, 1998, but further submits that the

respondents became statutory tenant thereafter under the Act

1973 and they could be evicted only by invoking
Section 13
of the

Act 1973 which undisputedly is applicable to the subject property

and thus in the given circumstances the Civil Court at least has no

jurisdiction to try the suit.   That being the finding recorded by

the first appellate Court and confirmed by the High Court on


1 (2007) 6 SCC 159
2 (2013) 9 SCC 714
3 (2014) 1 SCC 657
8
dismissal of second appeal preferred at the instance of the

appellants under the impugned judgment being supported by the

judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court in
V. Dhanapal

Chettiar v. Yesodai Ammal4
followed in
Shyam Lal v. Deepa Dass

Chela Ram Chela Garib Dass5
, what is being urged by learned

counsel for the appellants is without substance and the finding

with regard to the jurisdiction being supported by the settled

principles of law needs no further indulgence of this Court.
14.   It may be relevant to note that in the interregnum period, title

deed of the subject property in question was mortgaged with the

Punjab National Bank creating security interest and after the

account of the appellants became NPA, proceedings under the
SARFAESI Act, 2002
were initiated against the appellants and

public notice (symbolic) was issued by the secured creditor (Punjab

National Bank) for securing possession of the subject property on

14th August, 2018.     Pursuant thereto, a letter was sent from the

office of Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. on 12 th October, 2018

for withdrawal of the possession notice (symbolic) dated 14 th

August, 2018 but what steps have been taken inter se is not on

record. However, this Court is not concerned with this controversy

4 (1979) 4 SCC 214
5 (2016) 7 SCC 572
9
in the instant proceedings, but since the documents have been

placed on record, the same are being noticed only for completion of

the facts.
15.   We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their

assistance perused the material available on record.
16.   It is not disputed that the appellants are the owners of the

suit property which is a plot admeasuring 10,000 square feet

situated within the municipal limits of Kaithal.   Their predecessor

in interest, late Vinod Kumar son of Tilaj Raj had leased out the

subject plot to M/s Burmah Shell Oil Storage Distributing

Company Ltd. for a period of 20 years pursuant to lease deed dated

4th June, 1958 and before the expiry of the lease period, the

Central Government came out with a legislation, namely,
Burmah

Shell (Acquisition of Undertakings) Act, 1976
and took over the

rights of the lessee and transferred the same to M/s Bharat

Petroleum Corporation Ltd. in exercise of its power under
Section

5(2)
read with
Section 7(3)
of the Act 1976.
17.   It is also not disputed that the subject land is situated within

the municipal limits of Kaithal and is governed by the Act 1973

and the term “tenant” defined under
Section 2(h)
includes “rented

land” in question. At the same time, in terms of
Section 3
of the
10
Act 1976, on the appointed day the right, title and interest of

Burmah Shell in relation to its undertaking in India stood

transferred and vested in the Central Government and by a legal

fiction the Central Government stepped into the shoes of Burmah

Shell and became the lessee in the lease deed dated 4 nd June, 1958

and in terms of
Section 5(2)
read with
Section 7(3)
of the Act 1976,

the statutory rights stood conferred on the respondents in terms of

clause 10 of lease deed/agreement for another term of 20 years on

the same terms and conditions as were operating and/or existing

on the date of enactment of the said Act 1976.                As such, upon

vesting by virtue of the provisions of the Act 1976, the respondents

became the lessee in respect of the subject land in terms of the

provisions of the Act which has an overriding effect by virtue of
Section 11
of the Act 1976.
18.
Sections 3
,
5
,
7
and
11
of the Act 1976, relevant for the

purpose, are reproduced hereunder:
“3. Transfer and vesting in the Central Government of the
      undertakings of Burmah Shell in India. ­ On the appointed day,
      the right, title and interest of Burmah Shell, in relation to its
      undertakings in India, shall stand transferred to, and shall vest in,
      the Central Government.
11
5.    Central Government to be lessor or tenant under certain
circumstances. ­ (1) Where any property is held in India by
Burmah Shell under any lease or under any right of tenancy, the
Central Government shall, on and from the appointed day, be
deemed to have become the lessee or tenant, as the case may be,
in respect of such property as if the lease or tenancy in relation to
such property had been granted to the Central Government, and
thereupon all the rights under such lease or tenancy shall be
deemed to have been transferred to, and vested in, the Central
Government.
(2)    On the expiry of the term of any lease or tenancy referred to
in sub­section (1), such lease or tenancy shall, if so desired by the
Central Government, be renewed on the same terms and
conditions on which the lease or tenancy was held by Burmah
Shell immediately before the appointed day.
7.     Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the
undertakings of the Burmah Shell in a Government company. ­
(1)    Notwithstanding anything contained in
sections 3
,
4
and
5
,
the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that a Government
company is willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms
and conditions as that Government may think fit to impose, direct
by notification, that the right, title and interest and the liabilities
of Burmah Shell in relation to any of its undertakings in India
shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government,
vest in the Government company either on the date of the
notification or on such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier
than the appointed day) as may be specified in the notification.

(2)    Where the right, title and interest and the liabilities of
Burmah Shell in relation to its undertakings in India vest in a
Government company under sub­section (1), the Government
company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to
have become the owner, tenant or lessee, as the case may be, in
relation to such undertakings, and all the rights and liabilities of
the Central Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on
and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the
rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Government company.

(3)   The provisions of sub­ section (2) of
section 5
shall apply to
a lease or tenancy, which vests in a Government company, as they
apply to a lease or tenancy vested in the Central Government, and
reference therein to the" Central Government" shall be construed
as a reference to the Government company.
12
11. Effect of Act on other laws. The provisions of this Act shall
      have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
      contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any
      instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act or
      in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority.”

                                                   [Emphasis Supplied]
19.   By virtue of the statutory enactment of Act 1976, the pre­

existing tenancy rights held by Burmah Shell with the appellants

stood transferred and vested with the Central Government and

thereafter by operation of
Section 7
, the said rights in turn stood

transposed and vested in the Government Company (Bharat

Petroleum     Corporation      Ltd.)   as   the    Government       Company

statutorily became the tenant of the appellants/plaintiffs. The

Constitution Bench of this Court in
V. Dhanapal Chettiar
(supra)

had an occasion to examine the controversy as to whether in order

to get a decree/order of eviction against the tenant in the State

Rent Control Act, it is necessary to give a notice under
Section 106
of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and taking note of various

State enactments of the Act 1973, L.N. Untwalia, J., speaking for

the Bench, observed in para 18 as under:
“Lastly our attention was drawn to the decision of this Court
      in
Firm Sardarilal Vishwanath v. Pritam Singh
[(1978) 4 SCC 1.
      The lease
in that case
had come to an end by efflux of time. A
      tenant continued in possession and became a so­called statutory
      tenant. The argument put forward before this Court that a fresh
      notice under
Section 106
of the Transfer of Property Act was
      necessary was rejected on the ground: (SCC p. 10, para 18)
13
“Having examined the matter on authority and precedent it
      must be frankly confessed that no other conclusion is
      possible on the first principle. Lease of urban immovable
      property represents a contract between the lessor and the
      lessee. If the contract is to be put to an end it has to be
      terminated by a notice to quit as envisaged under
Section
      106
of the Transfer of Property Act. But it is equally clear as
      provided by
Section 111
of the Transfer of Property Act that
      the lease of immovable property determines by various
      modes therein prescribed. Now, if the lease of immovable
      property determines in any one of the modes prescribed
      under
Section 111
, the contract of lease comes to an end,
      and the landlord can exercise his right of re­entry. The right
      of re­entry is further restricted and fettered by the
      provisions of the Rent Restriction Act. Nonetheless the
      contract of lease had expired and the tenant lessee
      continues in possession under the protective wing of the
      Rent Restriction Act until the lessee loses protection. But
      there is no question of terminating the contract because the
      contract comes to an end once the lease determines in any
      one of the modes prescribed under
Section 111
. There is,
      therefore, no question of giving a notice to quit to such a
      lessee who continued in possession after the determination
      of the lease i.e. after the contract came to an end under the
      protection of the Rent Restriction Act. If the contract once
      came to an end there was no question of terminating the
      contract over again by a fresh notice.”

If we were to agree with the view that determination of lease in
accordance with the
Transfer of Property Act
is a condition
precedent to the starting of a proceeding under the State Rent Act
for eviction of the tenant, we could have said so with respect that
the view expressed in the above passage is quite correct because
there was no question of determination of the lease again once it
was determined by efflux of time. But on the first assumption we
have taken a different view of the matter and have come to the
conclusion that determination of a lease in accordance with the
Transfer of Property Act
is unnecessary and a mere surplusage
because the landlord cannot get eviction of the tenant even after
such determination. The tenant continues to be so even
thereafter. That being so, making out a case under the
Rent Act
for eviction of the tenant by itself is sufficient and it is not
obligatory to found the proceeding on the basis of the
determination of the lease by issue of notice in accordance with
Section 106
of the Transfer of Property Act.”

                                              [Emphasis Supplied]
14
20.   It has been held that even if the lease period is determined by

forfeiture under the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882
, still the tenant

continues to be a tenant that is to say that there is no forfeiture in

the eyes of law and the tenant becomes liable to be evicted and the

forfeiture comes into play only if he has incurred a liability to be

evicted under the State Rent Act and not otherwise and further

held that even after the expiry of the period of contractual tenancy,

the tenant can be evicted only in terms of provisions of the State

Rent Act which is applicable in reference the subject property in

question.
21.   A perusal of the scheme of the Act 1976 would show that

from the appointed day, right, title and interest of Burmah Shell

with effect to
Section 5(1)
stood transferred and vested with the

Central Government and by virtue of
Section 7(2)
, the vesting of

tenancy rights with the Central Government stood further

transposed and vested in Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. and

that became a statutory tenant by virtue of
Section 7(3)
of the Act.

To that extent,
Section 11
of the Act has an overriding effect to the

provisions of other laws. That being so, the jurisdiction indeed of a
15
civil Court is impliedly barred from the field covered specifically by

the provisions of the Act 1973 and that being the complete code

determining the rights of a tenant/landlord to the exclusion of the

other laws, we find no error in the view expressed by the High

Court in the impugned judgment holding that the jurisdiction of

the Civil Court is held to be barred and remedial mechanism for

ejectment could be possible only under the provisions of the Act

1973.
22.   The judgments on which the counsel for the appellants has

placed reliance are of no assistance. In Depot Superintendent, H.P.

Corpn.   Ltd.   and   Another(supra),    the   question    arose   for

consideration as to whether the company was entitled for second

renewal invoking the provisions of the Act 1976.      It was declined

by this Court holding that there is no option for further renewal

which can be claimed independently under the Act 1976.
23.   In Ram Bharosey Lal Gupta(Dead) by LRs and Others(supra),

the substantial question of law was as to whether under clause

3(d) of the lease deed executed between the parties, (the lessor) was

under a legal obligation to renew the lease term for a further period

of 20 years and it was not the case where the lease has been

determined or the renewal of lease term has either been availed or
16
expired.   In the given situation, certain observations have been

made by this Court in para 28 of the judgment that may not be of

any assistance in the given facts and circumstances.
24.   The counsel further placed reliance on
Bharat Petroleum

Corporation Limited
(supra). The question under consideration was

as to whether if one term of lease has been extended under the

lease deed, whether automatic renewal of lease is permissible by

virtue of
Section 5(2)
of the Act 1976 and it has been held by this

Court that only one extension was permissible in terms of the

conditions of lease deed and
Section 5(2)
of the Act 1976 will not

be available for a further renewal.
25.   In the given circumstances, we are of the considered view that

no error was committed by the High Court in arriving to a

conclusion that even after the expiry of the lease term of the lease

deed, the respondents became a statutory tenant and jurisdiction

of the Civil Court is impliedly barred and could be evicted only

under the provisions of the Act 1973.
26.   The appeal is devoid of merit and accordingly dismissed.
17
27.   Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of.
………………………….J.
                                            (AJAY RASTOGI)


                                            ………………………….J.
                                            (ABHAY S. OKA)
NEW DELHI
January 28, 2022.
18