[Cites
32
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Jaibunisha vs Meherban on 18 January, 2022
Author:
Vineet Saran
Bench:
B.V. Nagarathna
,
M.R. Shah
,
Vineet Saran
1


                                                                     NON­REPORTABLE

                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.76 OF 2022
                                (ARISING OUT OF SLP(CRL.) NO. 6329 OF 2020)

                         JAIBUNISHA                                  …..APPELLANT(S)
                                                    VERSUS

                         MEHARBAN & ANR.                           ….RESPONDENT(S)

                                                      WITH

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.77 OF 2022
                                (ARISING OUT OF SLP(CRL.) NO. 1337 OF 2021)

                         JAIBUNISHA                                  …..APPELLANT(S)
                                                    VERSUS

                         JUMMA & ORS.                              ….RESPONDENT(S)

                                                JUDGMENT
NAGARATHNA J.
These appeals have been preferred by the informant ­

                         appellant assailing the orders dated 7 th October, 2020 and 17th

                         November, 2020 passed by the High Court of Judicature at

                         Allahabad in Criminal Miscellaneous Bail Application Nos.
Signature Not Verified   29759 of 2020 and 39886 of 2021 respectively whereby bail has
Digitally signed by
DEEPAK SINGH
Date: 2022.01.18
13:43:59 IST
Reason:                  been granted to six persons accused in Sardhana P.S. Crime

                         Case No.955 of 2018.
2
2.   It is the case of the appellant that she is the mother of the

deceased Yameen. She is stated to be an eyewitness to the attack

on her sons, namely Yameen and Mobin and her husband,

Jamshed. The appellant herein is the person who lodged the

First Information Report being FIR No. 955/2018 for offences

under sections 147, 148, 452, 324, 307, 302, 504, 506 with
section 34
of the Indian Penal Code (for short, the ‘
IPC
’). In all

eleven accused were named in the FIR, being respondent no.1 in

Criminal Appeal No.76/2022, namely Meherban; respondent no.

1 to 5 in Criminal Appeal No.77/2022, namely Jumma,

Hakmeen, Yaseen, Arshad and Firoz, and five more persons

namely, Bhoora, Shahid, Sullad, Yamin and Dev.
3.   That FIR No. 955/2018 dated 27th August, 2018 is stated

to have been filed by the appellant herein at around 21:05 hrs in

the night stating that at around 18:00 hrs of the same day the

accused, armed with swords and knives entered appellant’s

house with a common intention to attack and kill Yameen and

Mobin, sons of the appellant and Jamshed, appellant’s husband.

That on entering the house, they started hurling abuses and

attacked the sons and husband of the appellant, attempting to

kill them. The neighbours of the appellant came to their rescue.
3
However, as a result of such assault, Yameen died and Mobin

and   Jamshed     sustained   serious   injuries.   The   informant­

appellant has further stated that there was a pre­existing

dispute between the deceased and Bhoora, one among the

accused, which was settled by the residents of their locality.

However, the accused, in continuation of the said dispute

attacked the sons and the husband of the appellant and killed

one of her sons, namely, Yameen.
4.    Appellant’s son, Mobin was medically examined on the date

of the incident and the medical report records that that incised

wounds were found on his hand, which could be caused by a

sharp edged object. The injury report of Jamshed described three

injuries, i.e. an incised wound on the scalp, abrasion and

contusion on the back and arm.
5.    After conducting an investigation, the Police filed a

charge­sheet only against three accused, namely, Sullad, Bhoora

alias Shadab and Yamin. They were subsequently arrested by

the Police. The accused­respondents in the instant appeals are

the eight other accused named in the FIR but were not

charge­sheeted.
4
6.   The appellant filed an application under
section 319
of the

Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as

“
CrPC
” for the sake of brevity) for summoning the accused­

respondents herein who were not charge sheeted by the Police.

The accused­respondents were summoned by the Additional

Sessions Judge by order dated 21st September, 2019.
7.   On the date of commencement of trial before the Additional

District and Sessions Judge, Meerut, the accused Sullad, Bhoora

alias Shadab and Yamin were presented before the Court by the

Police. However, the accused­respondents summoned under
section 319
of the CrPC, failed to appear before the trial court.

Therefore, the Additional District and Sessions Judge by order

dated 15th October, 2019 issued Non­Bailable Warrants against

the respondents herein.
8.   On the next date fixed for trial, the accused­respondents

against whom Non­Bailable Warrants were issued, again failed to

appear before the court and it was reported by the Police that the

said accused were absconding and were not found even at their

residences. The Additional District and Sessions Judge by order

dated 4th November, 2019 issued a proclamation under
section

82
of the CrPC against the accused­respondents.
5
9.    In the meantime, the accused­respondents summoned by

the Sessions Court preferred an application under
section 482
of

the CrPC before the High Court, praying for an order to quash

the order dated 21st September, 2019 whereby the respondents

had been summoned to appear before the Additional District and

Sessions Judge, Meerut. By order dated 11 th November, 2019,

the High Court dismissed the said application and granted 30

days’ time to the accused to surrender before the Trial Court.

The accused­respondents assailed the said order by preferring a

Special Leave Petition, being SLP (Crl.) No. 10947/2019, before

this Court, which came to be dismissed by order dated 6 th

December 2019.
10.   On 8th January, 2020, the next date on which the sessions

trial was presented, the accused­respondents once again failed

to appear notwithstanding the direction by this Court to

surrender. Hence the Additional Sessions Judge, Meerut, by

order dated 8th January, 2020, directed that proceedings for

attachment of property of the accused­respondents be initiated

under
section 83
of the CrPC.
11.   The accused­respondents were arrested by the Police on 5 th

February, 2020 and remained in judicial custody till they were
6
enlarged on bail by the impugned orders of the High Court dated

7th October, 2020 and 17th November 2020.
12.   Accused­respondent Meherban preferred a bail application

before the Court of the Additional Sessions Judge, Meerut. The

same came to be rejected by order dated 8th July, 2020.

Similarly, the bail applications preferred by accused­respondents

Jumma, Hakmeen, Yaseen, Arshad and Firoz were also rejected

by a separate order dated 8th July, 2020, having regard to the

seriousness of the offences alleged against the respondents.
13.   Accused­respondent Meherban preferred a bail application

before the High Court and the same was allowed by the

impugned order dated 7th October 2020 with a direction that the

accused be released on bail. Subsequently, the bail application

preferred   by   the   accused­respondents   Jumma,    Hakmeen,

Yaseen, Arshad and Firoz was also allowed by the High Court by

impugned order dated 17th November 2020 by relying on the

order granting bail to co­accused Meherban. Being aggrieved, the

appellant has preferred these appeals before this Court.
14.   We have heard Sri. Ronak Karanpuria, learned counsel for

the appellant, Ms. Kanishka Prasad, learned counsel for
7
accused­ respondents and Sri. R.K. Raizada, learned Senior

Counsel appearing for the State of Uttar Pradesh and perused

the material on record.
15.   The Learned counsel for the appellant contended that the

impugned orders of the High Court have been passed without

exercising jurisdiction in a judicious manner. In support of this

contention, it was submitted that the accused­respondents had

failed to appear before the Trial Court notwithstanding multiple

directions issued by the Trial Court, High Court and even this

Court to that effect. That they were under judicial custody for a

period less than nine months and had earlier absconded but

have now been granted bail by the High Court contrary to the

settled principles of law and the judgments of this Court. That by

directing that the accused be released on bail, the High Court

has invited the risk of them absconding again and that this

would prove to be prejudicial to the investigation and trial.
It was further contended on behalf of the appellant that the

possibility of the accused ­respondents tampering with evidence

and/or influencing witnesses while on bail, cannot be ruled out.
16.   Further it was urged that the High Court has not assigned

reasons for the grant of bail in the instant cases. That the High
8
Court could not have granted bail to the accused having scant

regard to the gravity of the offences alleged against them.

According to the learned counsel for the appellant, the High

Court in a very cryptic order de hors any reasoning has granted

bail to the accused­respondents. It was submitted on behalf of

the mother of the deceased, that the instant appeals may be

allowed by setting aside the impugned orders of the High Court.

In support of his submission, learned counsel for the appellant

has relied upon certain judgments of this Court which shall be

referred to later.
17.   Per contra, Ms. Kanishka Prasad, learned counsel for

accused­ respondents supported the impugned orders and

submitted that the same do not suffer from any infirmity

warranting interference by this Court. That the informant­

appellant has narrated an untrue version of events in order to

falsely implicate the accused. The learned counsel for the

respondents has stated that there was a scuffle between the

sons and the husband of the appellant, and the accused­

respondents on the day of the alleged incident. That four of the

accused have also been seriously injured as a result of the

attack by appellant’s husband and sons. That an FIR in this

regard had been lodged against the appellant, her sons and
9
husband, in connection with which case the said persons have

been granted bail by the competent court. That no prima facie

case has been made out against the accused and this is

evidenced by the fact that they were not charge­sheeted.
It   has   further   been   submitted   that      the   accused­

respondents have no criminal antecedents and therefore, the

High Court acted in accordance with law in enlarging the

accused­respondents on bail.
It has also been contended that a court deciding a bail

application should avoid elaborate discussion on merits of the

case as detailed discussion of facts at a pre­trial stage is bound

to prejudice fair trial.
It   was   submitted   that   the   allegations    against   the

respondent­accused are false and hence the impugned orders of

the High Court do not call for any interference in these appeals.
18.   Having regard to the contention of Sri. Ronak Karanpuria,

learned counsel for the appellant that the impugned orders

granting bail to the accused respondents are bereft of any

reasoning and they are cryptic and bail has been granted in a

casual manner, we extract those portions of the impugned

orders dated 7th October, 2020 and 17th November, 2020 passed
10
by the High Court which provide the “reasoning” of the Court for

granting bail, as under:
Impugned Order dated 7th October, 2020

          “Without expressing any opinion on the
          merits of the case and considering the
          nature of accusation and the severity of
          punishment in case of conviction and the
          nature of supporting evidence, reasonable
          apprehension of tampering of the witnesses
          and prima facie satisfaction of the Court in
          support of the charge, the applicant is
          entitled to be released on bail in this case.
Let the applicant Meharban involved in Case
          Crime No. 955 of 2018 under
sections 147
,
148
,
452
,
324
,
307
,
302
,
504
,
506
,
34
I.P.C.,
          police station Sardhana, District Meerut be
          released on bail on his furnishing a personal
          bond of Rs. One lac with two sureties (out of
          which one should be of his family member)
          each in the like amount to the satisfaction of
          the court concerned with the following
          conditions.
(i)   The applicant shall file an undertaking
                to the effect that he shall not seek any
                adjournment on the dates fixed for
                evidence when the witnesses are
                present in court. In case of default of
                this condition, it shall be open for the
                trial court to treat it as abuse of liberty
                of bail and pass orders in accordance
                with law.
(ii)  The applicant shall remain present
                before the trial court on each date
                fixed, either personally or through his
                counsel. In case of his absence,
                without sufficient cause, the trial court
                may proceed against him under
Section 229
­A of the
Indian Penal
                Code
.
11
(iii)   In case, the applicant misuses the
               liberty of bail during trial and in order
               to secure his presence proclamation
               under
Section 82
Cr.P.C. is issued and
               the applicant fails to appear before the
               court on the date fixed in such
               proclamation, then, the trial court
               shall initiate proceedings against him,
               in accordance with law, under
Section
               174
­A of the
Indian Penal Code
.
(iv)    The applicant shall remain present, in
               person, before the trial court on the
               dates fixed for (i) opening of the case,
(ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording
               of statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
If in the opinion of the trial court
               absence of the applicant is deliberate
               or without sufficient cause, then it
               shall be open for the trial court to treat
               such default as abuse of liberty of bail
               and proceed against him in accordance
               with law.
It is further directed that the identity, status
       and residence proof of the sureties be
       verified by the authorities concerned before
       they are accepted. In case of breach of any of
       the above conditions, the trial court will be
       liberty to cancel the bail.”


Impugned Order dated 17th November, 2020

       “Without expressing any opinion on the
       merits of the case and considering the
       nature of accusation and the severity of
       punishment in case of conviction and the
       nature of supporting evidence, reasonable
       apprehension of tampering of the witnesses
       and prima facie satisfaction of the Court in
       support of the charge, the applicant is
       entitled to be released on bail in this case.
12
Let the applicants­ Jumma, Hakmeen,
Yaseen, Arshad, and Firoz involved in
aforesaid case crime be released on bail on
his furnishing a personal bond and two
sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned with the
following conditions which are being
imposed in the interest of justice:­
(i)     The      applicants    shall     file   an
        undertaking to the effect that they
        shall not seek any adjournment on the
        dates fixed for evidence when the
        witnesses are present in court. In case
        of default of this condition, it shall be
        open for the trial court to treat it as
        abuse of liberty of bail and pass orders
        in accordance with law.
(ii)    The applicants shall remain present
        before the trial court on each date
        fixed, either personally or through his
        counsel. In case of his absence,
        without sufficient cause, the trial court
        may proceed against him under
Section 229
­A of the
Indian Penal
        Code
.
(iii)   In case, the applicants misuses the
        liberty of bail during trial and in order
        to secure his presence proclamation
        under
Section 82
Cr.P.C. is issued and
        the applicants fails to appear before
        the court on the date fixed in such
        proclamation, then, the trial court
        shall initiate proceedings against him,
        in accordance with law, under
Section
        174
­A of the
Indian Penal Code
.
(iv)    The applicants shall remain present, in
        person, before the trial court on the
        dates fixed for (i) opening of the case,
(ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording
        of statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
If in the opinion of the trial court
        absence of the applicant is deliberate
        or without sufficient cause, then it
13
shall be open for the trial court to treat
        such default as abuse of liberty of bail
        and proceed against him in accordance
        with law.
(v)     The party shall file computer generated
        copy of such order downloaded from
        the official website of High Court of
        Allahabad.
(vi)    The computer generated copy of such
        order shall be self attested by the
        counsel of the party concerned.
(vii)   The concerned/Authority/Official shall
        verify   the   authenticity    of    such
        computerized copy of the order from
        the official website of High Court of
        Allahabad     and     shall    make      a
        declaration of such verification in
        writing.
In view of the extraordinary situation
prevailing in the State due to Covid­19, the
directions of this Court dated 6.4.2020
passed in Public Interest Litigation No. 564
of 2020 (In re vs. State of U.P.), shall also be
complied.
The order read thus:
Looking to impediments in arranging
sureties because of lockdown, while invoking
powers under
Article 226
and
227
of the
Constitution of India, we deem it appropriate
to order that all the accused­applicants
whose bail application came to be allowed on
or after 15th March, 2020 but have not been
released due to non­availability of sureties as
a consequence to lockdown may be released
on executing personal bond as ordered by
the Court or to the satisfaction of the jail
authorities    where    such     accused      is
imprisoned, provided the accused­applicants
undertakes to furnish required sureties
within a period of one month from the date
of his/her actual release.”
14
19.   Before proceeding further, it would be useful to refer to the

judgments of this Court in the matter of granting bail to an

accused as under:
a)    In
Gudikanti     Narasimhulu        &     Ors.    vs.   Public

      Prosecutor, High
Court of Andhra Pradesh ­­ (1978) 1

      SCC 240, Krishna Iyer, J., while elaborating on the content

      of
Article 21
of the Constitution of India in the context of

      liberty of a person under trial, has laid down the key

      factors that have to be considered while granting bail,

      which are extracted as under:
“7. It is thus obvious that the nature of the charge is
           the vital factor and the nature of the evidence also is
           pertinent. The punishment to which the party may
           be liable, if convicted or conviction is confirmed, also
           bears upon the issue.
8. Another relevant factor is as to whether the
           course of justice would be thwarted by him who
           seeks the benignant jurisdiction of the Court to be
           freed for the time being.
9. Thus the legal principles and practice validate the
           Court considering the likelihood of the applicant
           interfering with witnesses for the prosecution or
           otherwise polluting the process of justice. It is not
           only traditional but rational, in this context, to
           enquire into the antecedents of a man who is
           applying for bail to find whether he has a bad record
           – particularly a record which suggests that he is
           likely to commit serious offences while on bail. In
           regard to habituals, it is part of criminological
           history that a thoughtless bail order has enabled the
           bailee to exploit the opportunity to inflict further
           about the criminal record of a defendant, is therefore
           not an exercise in irrelevance.”
15
b)   In
Prahlad Singh Bhati vs. NCT of Delhi & ORS
–

     (2001) 4 SCC 280 this Court highlighted the aspects

     which are to be considered by a court while dealing with an

     application seeking bail. The same may be extracted as

     follows:
“The jurisdiction to grant bail has to be
           exercised on the basis of well settled principles
           having regard to the circumstances of each case
           and not in an arbitrary manner. While granting
           the bail, the court has to keep in mind the
           nature of accusations, the nature of evidence in
           support thereof, the severity of the punishment
           which conviction will entail, the character,
           behavior, means and standing of the accused,
           circumstances which are peculiar to the
           accused, reasonable possibility of securing the
           presence of the accused at the trial, reasonable
           apprehension of the witnesses being tampered
           with, the larger interests of the public or State
           and similar other considerations. It has also to
           be kept in mind that for the purposes of
           granting the bail the Legislature has used the
           words "reasonable grounds for believing" instead
           of "the evidence" which means the court dealing
           with the grant of bail can only satisfy it as to
           whether there is a genuine case against the
           accused and that the prosecution will be able to
           produce prima facie evidence in support of the
           charge.”
c)   This Court in
Ram Govind Upadhyay vs. Sudarshan

     Singh
– (2002) 3 SCC 598, speaking through Banerjee, J.,

     emphasized that a court exercising discretion in matters of
16
bail, has to undertake the same judiciously. This Court

     highlighted that bail cannot be granted as a matter of

     course, bereft of cogent reasoning.
d)   In
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar vs. Rajesh Ranjan
alias

     Pappu Yadav & Anr. – (2004) 7 SCC 528, this Court held

     that although it is established that a court considering a

     bail application cannot undertake a detailed examination

     of evidence and an elaborate discussion on the merits of

     the case, the court is required to indicate the prima facie

     reasons justifying the grant of bail.
e)   In
Prasanta Kumar Sarkar vs. Ashis Chaterjee
­­ (2010)

     14 SCC 496 this Court observed that where a High Court

     has granted bail mechanically, the said order would suffer

     from the vice of non­application of mind, rendering it

     illegal. This Court has enumerated the circumstances

     under which an order granting bail may be set aside.
f)   Another factor which should guide the courts’ decision in

     deciding a bail application is the period of custody.

     However, as noted in
Ash Mohammad vs. Shiv Raj Singh

     @ Lalla Bahu & Anr.
– (2012) 9 SCC 446, the period of
17
custody has to be weighed simultaneously with the totality

     of the circumstances and the criminal antecedents of the

     accused, if any. Further, the circumstances which may

     justify the grant of bail are to be considered in the larger

     context of the societal concern involved in releasing an

     accused, in juxtaposition to individual liberty of the

     accused seeking bail.
g)   In
Neeru Yadav vs. State of UP & Anr.
– (2016) 15 SCC

     422, after referring to a catena of judgments of this Court

     on the considerations to be placed at balance while

     deciding to grant bail, observed through Dipak Misra, J.

     (as His Lordship then was) in paragraph18 as under:
18. Before parting with the case, we may repeat
          with profit that it is not an appeal for cancellation
          of bail as the cancellation is not sought because of
          supervening circumstances. The annulment of the
          order passed by the High Court is sought as many
          relevant factors have not been taken into
          consideration    which     includes   the   criminal
          antecedents of the accused and that makes the
          order a deviant one. Therefore, the inevitable result
          is the lancination of the impugned order.”
h)   In
Anil Kumar Yadav v. State (NCT of Delhi
) – (2018) 12

     SCC 129, this Court, while considering an appeal from an

     order of cancellation of bail, has spelt out some of the

     significant considerations of which a court must be
18
mindful, in deciding whether to grant bail. In doing so, this

     Court has stated that while it is not possible to prescribe

     an exhaustive list of considerations which are to guide a

     court in deciding a bail application, the primary requisite of

     an order granting bail, is that it should result from

     judicious exercise of the court’s discretion.
i)   Recently in
Bhoopendra Singh vs. State of Rajasthan &

     Anr.
– 2021 SCC Online SC 1020, this Court made

     observations with respect to the exercise of appellate power

     to determine whether bail has been granted for valid

     reasons   as   distinguished     from    an    application    for

     cancellation of bail. i.e. this Court distinguished between

     setting aside a perverse order granting bail vis­a­vis

     cancellation of bail on the ground that the accused has

     misconducted himself or because of some new facts

     requiring such cancellation.
Quoting Mahipal vs. Rajesh

     Kumar ­ (2020) 2 SCC 118, this Court observed as under:
“16. The considerations that guide the power of
            an appellate court in assessing the correctness of
            an order granting bail stand on a different
            footing from an assessment of an application for
            the cancellation of bail. The correctness of an
            order granting bail is tested on the anvil of
            whether there was an improper or arbitrary
            exercise of the discretion in the grant of bail. The
            test is whether the order granting bail is
            perverse, illegal or unjustified. On the other
            hand, an application for cancellation of bail is
            generally examined on the anvil of the existence
19
of supervening circumstances or violations of the
             conditions of bail by a person to whom bail has
             been granted.”
j)   The most recent judgment of this Court on the aspect of

     application of mind and requirement of judicious exercise

     of discretion in arriving at an order granting bail to the

     accused is
Brijmani Devi v. Pappu Kumar and Anr.
–

     Criminal Appeal No. 1663/2021, wherein a three Judge

     Bench of this Court, while setting aside an unreasoned

     and casual order of the High Court granting bail to the

     accused, observed as follows:
“While we are conscious of the fact that liberty of
             an individual is an invaluable right, at the same
             time while considering an application for bail
             Courts cannot lose sight of the serious nature of
             the accusations against an accused and the facts
             that have a bearing in the case, particularly,
             when the accusations may not be false, frivolous
             or vexatious in nature but are supported by
             adequate material brought on record so as to
             enable a Court to arrive at a prima facie
             conclusion. While considering an application for
             grant of bail a prima facie conclusion must be
             supported by reasons and must be arrived at
             after having regard to the vital facts of the case
             brought on record. Due consideration must be
             given to facts suggestive of the nature of crime,
             the criminal antecedents of the accused, if any,
             and the nature of punishment that would follow
             a conviction vis­à­vis the offence/s alleged
             against an accused.”
20. On the aspect of the duty to accord reasons for a decision

arrived at by a court, or for that matter, even a quasi­judicial
20
authority, it would be useful to refer to a judgment of this Court

in
Kranti Associates Private Limited & Anr. Vs. Masood

Ahmed Khan & Ors.
– (2010) 9 SCC 496, wherein after

referring to a number of judgments this Court summarised at

paragraph 47 the law on the point. The relevant principles for

the purpose of this case are extracted as under:
(a)   Insistence on recording of reasons is meant to serve the
      wider principle of justice that justice must not only be
      done it must also appear to be done as well.
(b)   Recording of reasons also operates as a valid restraint on
      any possible arbitrary exercise of judicial and quasi­
      judicial or even administrative power.
(c)   Reasons reassure that discretion has been exercised by
      the decision­maker on relevant grounds and by
      disregarding extraneous considerations.
(d)   Reasons have virtually become as indispensable a
      component of a decision­making process as observing
      principles of natural justice by judicial, quasi­judicial and
      even by administrative bodies.
(e)   The ongoing judicial trend in all countries committed to
      rule of law and constitutional governance is in favour of
      reasoned decisions based on relevant facts. This is
      virtually the lifeblood of judicial decision­making justifying
      the principle that reason is the soul of justice.
(f)   Judicial or even quasi­judicial opinions these days can be
      as different as the judges and authorities who deliver
      them. All these decisions serve one common purpose
      which is to demonstrate by reason that the relevant
      factors have been objectively considered. This is important
      for sustaining the litigants' faith in the justice delivery
      system.
21
(g)    Insistence on reason is a requirement for both judicial
       accountability and transparency.
(h)    If a judge or a quasi­judicial authority is not candid
       enough about his/her decision­making process then it is
       impossible to know whether the person deciding is faithful
       to the doctrine of precedent or to principles of
       incrementalism.
(i)    Reasons in support of decisions must be cogent, clear and
       succinct. A pretence of reasons or “rubber­stamp reasons”
       is not to be equated with a valid decision­making process.
(j)    It cannot be doubted that transparency is the sine qua
       non of restraint on abuse of judicial powers. Transparency
       in decision­making not only makes the judges and
       decision­makers less prone to errors but also makes them
       subject to broader scrutiny. (See David Shapiro in Defence
       of Judicial Candor [(1987) 100 Harvard Law Review 731­
37)
(k)    In all common law jurisdictions judgments play a vital role
       in setting up precedents for the future. Therefore, for
       development of law, requirement of giving reasons for the
       decision is of the essence and is virtually a part of “due
       process”.
Though the aforesaid judgment was rendered in the context

of a dismissal of a revision petition by a cryptic order by the

National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, reliance

could be placed on
the said judgment
on the need to give reasons

while deciding a matter.
21.    The Latin maxim “cessante ratione legis cessat ipsa lex”

meaning “reason is the soul of the law, and when the reason of
22
any particular law ceases, so does the law itself”, is also

apposite.
22.   We have extracted the relevant portions of the impugned

orders above. At the outset, we find that the extracted portions

are the only portions forming part of the “reasoning” of the High

court while granting bail. As evident from the judgments of this

Court
referred to above
, a court deciding a bail application

cannot grant bail to an accused without having regard to

material aspects of the case such as the allegations made

against the accused; severity of the punishment if the allegations

are proved beyond reasonable doubt and would result in a

conviction; reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being

influenced by the accused; tampering of the evidence; the

frivolity in the case of the prosecution; criminal antecedents of

the accused; and a prima facie satisfaction of the Court in

support of the charge against the accused.
While we are conscious of the fact that it is not necessary

for a Court to give elaborate reasons while granting bail

particularly when the case is at the initial stage and the

allegations of the offences by the accused may not have been

crystalised as such, an order de hors any reasoning whatsoever

cannot result in grant of bail. If bail is granted in a casual
23
manner, the prosecution or the informant has a right to assail

the order before a higher forum. As noted in Gurcharan Singh

vs. State (Delhi Admn.) ­ 1978 CriLJ 129, when bail has been

granted to an accused, the State may, if new circumstances have

arisen following the grant of such bail, approach the High Court

seeking cancellation of bail under
section 439 (2)
of the CrPC.

However, if no new circumstances have cropped up since the

grant of bail, the State may prefer an appeal against the order

granting bail, on the ground that the same is perverse or illegal

or has been arrived at by ignoring material aspects which

establish a prima­facie case against the accused.
23.   In view of the aforesaid discussion, we shall now consider

the facts of the present cases. The allegations against accused­

respondents as well as the contentions raised at the Bar have

been narrated in detail above. On a consideration of the same,

the following aspects of the case would emerge:
a) The allegations against the accused­respondents are under

  147, 148, 452, 324, 307, 302, 504, 506 with
section 34
of the

  IPC, with regard to murder of the deceased, Yameen and

  attempt to murder Mobin and Jamshed. Thus the offences

  alleged against the accused are of grave and heinous nature
24
inasmuch as there was death of appellant’s son and serious

  injuries caused to her husband and another son.
b) That allegedly the accused­respondents attacked with deadly

  weapons such as swords and knives.
c) That there was allegedly a pre­existing enmity between the

  deceased and Bhoora, one of the accused, which apparently

  had been settled by the local residents.
d) The accused­respondents were summoned by the Trial Court

  by order dated 21st September, 2019. The accused preferred

  an application under
section 482
CrPC praying for an order

  quashing the order dated 21st September, 2019. By an order

  dated 11th November, 2019, the High Court dismissed the said

  application and granted 30 days’ time to the accused to

  surrender before the Trial Court. The accused­respondents

  assailed the said order by preferring a Special Leave Petition,

  being SLP (Crl.) No. 10947/2019, before this Court, which

  came to be dismissed by order dated 6th December 2019.
e) The accused­respondents resisted arrest for a period of

  approximately three and a half months as they were

  absconding. The accused failed to surrender before the Trial

  Court in gross violation of the directions of the Additional

  District and Sessions Judge, the High Court and even this
25
Court. This is a glaring instance of gross violation of the

  courts’ orders and rule of law.
f) The accused­respondents had preferred applications before the

  Additional District and Sessions Judge which came to be

  rejected by separate orders dated 8th July, 2020.
g) The chances of the accused absconding are grave having

  regard to their previous conduct, if they are on bail. This

  would delay commencement and conclusion of the trial and

  consequently have an adverse impact on the cause of justice.
h) The propensity of accused­respondents tampering with the

  evidence and influencing the witnesses is an important factor

  to be borne in mind in such cases. As a result, the accused

  being beneficiaries of the same cannot be ruled out.
i) The High Court in the impugned orders has failed to consider

  the aforestated aspects of the case in the context of the grant

  of bail and has granted bail to the accused by cryptic orders.
24.   Having considered the aforesaid facts of the present cases

in light of the judgments cited above, we do not think that these

cases are fit cases for grant of bail to the accused­respondents,

having regard to the seriousness of the allegations against them

as well as the aforesaid reasons.
26
25.   The High Court has lost sight of the aforesaid material

aspects of the cases and has, by a very cryptic and casual

orders, de hors any coherent reasoning, granted bail to the

accused­respondents. We find that the High Court was not right

in allowing the applications for bail filed by the accused­

respondents. Hence the impugned orders dated 7 th May, 2020

and 17th November, 2020 are set aside. The appeals are allowed.
26.   The accused­respondents are on bail. Their bail bonds

stand cancelled and they are directed to surrender before the

concerned jail authorities within a period of two weeks from

today.
……………………………J.
                                             (M.R. SHAH)


                                        ……………………….…..J.
                                         (B.V. NAGARATHNA)
NEW DELHI;
18TH JANUARY, 2022.