[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Subhash Desai vs Principal Secretary, Governor Of ... on 23 August, 2022
Bench:
Hima Kohli
,
Krishna Murari
,
N.V. Ramana
1



                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       ORIGINAL CIVIL JURISDICTION

                                  WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 493/2022

     SUBHASH DESAI                                                         …PETITIONER(S)
                                                VERSUS

     PRINCIPAL SECRETARY,
     GOVERNOR OF MAHARASHTRA & ORS.                                        …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                    With
                                          W.P.(C)   No.469/2022
                                          W.P.(C)   No.468/2022
                                          W.P.(C)   No.470/2022
                                          W.P.(C)   No.479/2022
                                          W.P.(C)   No.538/2022

                                                 ORDER
1.                  We have heard learned senior counsels appearing on both

     sides and perusing the material available on record.
2.                  This Court is of opinion that the present batch of petitions

     raise important constitutional questions relating to interpretation

     of Schedule X of the Constitution pertaining to disqualification, as

     well as the powers of the Speaker and the Governor and the power

     of judicial review thereof.
3.                  At the outset, it may be necessary to highlight one particular
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
question raised in these batch of matters relating to the power of
Date: 2022.08.23
20:33:44 IST
Reason:
the                  Speaker/Deputy     Speaker       to   initiate    disqualification
2
proceedings, when proceedings for removal from the said office has

been initiated against them. In Nabam Rebia & Bamang Felix v.

Deputy Speaker, Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly,

(2016) 8 SCC 1, a Constitution bench of this Court held as follows:
“193….We are, therefore, of the view that
       constitutional purpose and constitutional harmony
       would be maintained and preserved, if a Speaker
       refrains from adjudication of a petition for
       disqualification under the Tenth Schedule, whilst his
       own position, as the Speaker, is under challenge. This
       would also, allow the two provisions [
Article 179(c)
and
       the Tenth Schedule] to operate in their individual
       constitutional space, without encroaching on the
       other.”
4.     We may prima facie observe that the proposition of law laid

down by the Constitution bench in Nebam Rebia (supra), stands

on contradictory reasoning, which requires gap filling to uphold the

constitutional morality. As such, this question needs a reference to

a Constitution bench for the requisite gap filling exercise to be

conducted.
5.     Further, these matters merit reference under
Article 145(3)
of

the Constitution to a 5­Judge bench as they raise other substantial

questions of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution, which

are:
a. Whether notice for removal of a Speaker restricts him

            from continuing with disqualification proceedings under
3
Tenth Schedule of the Constitution, as held by this

     Court in Nebam Rebia (supra)?
b. Whether a petition under
Article 226
or
Article 32
lies,

     inviting a decision on a disqualification petition by the

     High Courts or the Supreme Court, as the case may be?

c. Can a Court hold that a member is “deemed” to be

     disqualified, by virtue of his/her actions, absent a

     decision by the Speaker?
d. What is the status of proceedings in the House during

     the pendency of disqualification petitions against the

     members?
e.   If the decision of a Speaker that a member has incurred

     disqualification under the Tenth Schedule relates back

     to the date of the action complained of, then what is the

     status of proceedings that took place during the

     pendency of a disqualification petition?

f. What is the impact of the removal of Paragraph 3 of the

     Tenth Schedule?
g. What is the scope of the power of the Speaker to

     determine the Whip and the leader of the house

     legislature party? What is the interplay of the same with

     respect to the provisions of the Tenth Schedule?
4
h. Are intra­party decisions amenable to judicial review?

          What is the scope of the same?
i. What is the extent of discretion and power of the

          Governor to invite a person to form the Government, and

          whether the same is amenable to judicial review?

       j. What   is the scope of the powers of the Election

          Commission of India with respect to determination of a

          split within a party?
6.   The papers may be placed before the Hon’ble the Chief Justice

for appropriate orders, immediately.
...........................CJI.
(N.V. RAMANA)



                                                ...........................J.
                                                (KRISHNA MURARI)




                                                 ...........................J.
                                                         (HIMA KOHLI)

NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 23, 2022.