[Cites
11
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Brij Raj Oberoi vs The Secretary, Tourism And Civil ... on 18 August, 2022
Author:
Indira Banerjee
Bench:
C. T. Ravikumar
,
Indira Banerjee
REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                               CIVIL APPEAL NOS.                        OF 2022
                              [Arising out of S.L.P. (C) Nos. 19520-19521 of 2021]




           BRIJ RAJ OBEROI                                                   …Appellant (s)


                                                    Versus


           THE SECRETARY, TOURISM AND
           CIVIL AVIATION DEPARTMENT & ANR.                                 ...Respondent (s)




                                                 JUDGMENT
Indira Banerjee, J.
Leave granted.
2.            These appeals are against a common judgment and final order

           dated 18th November 2021 passed by the High Court of Sikkim at Gangtok

           allowing Arbitration Appeal No.02 of 2021 filed by the Respondents,

           setting aside the impugned order dated 31 st May 2021 passed by the

           Commercial Court on an application of the Appellant under Section 9 of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
GULSHAN KUMAR
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, hereinafter referred to as “the
ARORA
Date: 2022.08.18
17:08:10 IST
Reason:
1996 Act”, and also dismissing Arbitration Petition No. 02 of 2021 filed by
2
the Appellant under Section 11 of the 1996 Act for appointment of an

Arbitrator.
3.     The State of Sikkim, impleaded as Respondent No.2 in this appeal,

is the absolute owner of the property bearing Plot No.309, Paljor Stadium

Road, Gangtok, East Sikkim, known as Norkhill Hotel, hereinafter referred

to as the ‘said property’ along with its land, buildings, annexe, servants

quarters and garages.
4.    By a registered deed of lease dated 9 th December 1997, the

Respondent State leased out the said property to the Appellant on terms

and conditions stipulated in the said deed of lease. Some of the terms

and conditions of the Deed of Lease are set out hereinbelow for

convenience:-
“ ***
2. The consideration of the lease of the premises fully described
     in the schedule I below, the lessee undertakes to pay to the
     lessor the sum of Rs. 30.00 lakhs (Rupees Thirty lakhs) only per
     annum with a 10% (ten percent) increase compounded every
     three years in quarterly installments of Rs. 7,50,000/- (Rupees
     Seven Lakhs Fifty Thousand only) payable by the 7 th April, 7th July,
     7th October and 7th     December of each year and the first
     installment shall be payable on the date of the execution of this
     deed.
3. That the initial terms of the lease under this deed shall be a
     period of twenty four years from 01.06.1997 to 31.05.2021 (First
     day of June one thousand nine hundred and ninety seven to the
     thirty first day of May two thousand and twenty one) and shall be
     renewable for such acceptance of the lessee’s offer in terms of
     clause 4(xiii) hereinafter.
4. The lessee covenants with the Lessor as follows:
3
i) The lessee shall pay the lease amounts on the dates
aforesaid in clause 2 hereinabove.
ii) The lessee shall pay the increased lease amounts at the
rate of 10% (ten percentage) to be compounded every three
years as follows:
a) from 01.06.2000 to 31.05.2003 Rs. 33,30,000.00 per
annum.
b) from 01.06.2003 to 31.05.2006 Rs. 36,30,000.00 per
annum.
c) from 01.06.2006 to 31.05.2009 Rs. 39,93,000.00 per
annum.
d) from 01.06.2009 to 31.05.2012 Rs. 43,92,300.00 per
annum.
e) from 01.06.2012 to 31.05.2015 Rs. 48,31,530.00 per
annum.
f) from 01.06.2015 to 31.05.2018 Rs. 53,14,683.00 per
annum.
g) from 01.06.2018 to 31.05.2021 Rs. 58,46,151.30 per
annum.
...
v) The lessee shall keep the leased premises in good order
and condition and in the same condition in which it was
handed over the lessee with a reasonable wear and tear for
which he shall not be entitled to make any claim
subsequently.
vi) The lessee shall comply with all the provisions of the
relevant enactments and regulations thereunder and with
any other obligations imposed by the local laws in regard to
the lease premises.
...
x) The lessee shall upon termination and/or expiry of the
lease quit and vacate the leased premises.
xi) The lessee shall give three months notice in writing of
his intention to terminate this agreement if he wants to
vacate the premises before the expiry of the lease period. If
such notice is given the lessee shall be entitled to vacate
the leased premises on expiry of the term of notice.
xii) The lessee if he fails and neglects to pay two
consecutive quarterly lease amounts within the period
4
situated in clause 2 the lessee shall become a defaulter in
         payment of the lease amount and on and from the eight day
         of such second and consecutive defaulting month, the
         lessee shall be deemed to be a trespasser in the demised
         premises.
xiii) The lessee shall in the last year of the lease tenure and
         not later than six months prior to the expiry of the present
         lease, communicate in writing to the lessor his terms and
         conditions for the renewal of the present lease and if the
         same is accepted by the lessor, then the present lease may
         be renewed for such further period and on such rent as may
         be mutually agreed upon between the parties thereto,
         failing which the matter shall be referred to arbitration by an
         arbitrator to be appointed by the Chief Justice of the Sikkim
         High Court.
...
xvii) The lessee shall after the expiry of the tenure of   this
         lease or sooner determination thereof, shall peacefully    and
         quietly surrender to the lessor, the possession of          the
         demised premises in the condition in which the same        has
         been delivered to the lessee.
5. The lessor covenants with the lessee as follows:
...
ii) The lessee upon paying the lease amount and observing
         and performing the other covenants and conditions and
         agreements to be observed and performed, shall peaceably
         hold and enjoy the leased premises during the tenure of this
         lease without any interruption or disturbance.
6. In the event of any breach of the terms and conditions of the
     agreement by the lessee, the agreement/terminated by the
     lessor, at his option, after giving one months notice in writing of
     its intention to do so and the lessor shall be entitled to exercise
     its right of reentry, into the leased premises without prejudice to
     its right to recover all arrears of rent and other claims for
     damages caused by such breach of the terms and conditions
     hereinbefore covenanted.”
5.    The lease was due to expire by efflux of time on 31 st May 2021. By

a letter dated 12th November 2020 addressed to the Respondent State,

through the Secretary, Tourism Department, the Appellant offered its
5
terms and conditions for renewal of the lease of the said property, for a

further period of 30 years, at an annual rent of Rs.64,30,766.43 per year,

that is, 10% more than annual rent being paid then, with escalation of

10% every three years.
6.    By a letter dated 17th May 2021 written in response to the

Appellant’s letter dated 12th November 2020, Dr. K. Jayakumar, IAS,

Additional Chief Secretary, Department of Tourism and Civil Aviation,

Gangtok rejected the offer of the Appellant for renewal of lease of the

property in question.     The said letter is extracted hereinbelow for

convenience:-
“...This has reference to your request for renewal of lease
     ownership of Norkhill hotel period for a further period of 30 years
     vide your letter dated 12 Nov. 2020.
2.        In the context of the above, this is to inform you that
     the State Government has approved a policy as part of executing
     the vision for bringing about transformative changes in the
     tourism sector, which interalia envisages professional methods of
     managing tourism infrastructure, assets and facilities in the
     State.
3.        Efforts are being made for mobilization of revenues for
     the government with effective mechanisms, with effective
     mechanisms, with associated enforcement of policies for their
     professional regulation, processes for deciding on lease
     ownership, and for monitoring and enforcement of regulations.
Assessment and revenue collections are to be realistic, with
     focus on quality assurance and standards, in keeping with the
     image and branding efforts, to make Sikkim a preferred
     destination for tourism.
4.        The State Government has considered the fact that
     Norkhill property being a heritage hotel located at a most
     commanding place near the Palzor Stadium has considerable
     significance and would need to be treated as a premium
     property with a potential to generate better revenues for the
6
State exchequer, in order that much needed funds to operate
     and manage the state machinery< especially in the context of
     the current pandemic is ensured.
5.        Furthermore, in the present context, energetic
     enthusiastic qualified younger generation hoteliers having the
     experience of having served in the hotel industry in Sikkim and
     outside the State are available. It would only be fair for the State
     to provide an opportunity for them to also make their offers for
     lease ownership, in terms of providing augmented quality of
     value added services and spelling out their capability to generate
     and offer more revenues for the state.
6.         Hence, the State has decided that it would be in public
     interest to adopt a process with stringent qualifications and bid
     participating criteria, and determine appropriate lease owner
     through a selection process. This approach would ensure that
     capacities of emerging, capable, professional hoteliers who
     provide more value added services and revenues can be given
     the opportunity to participate for lease ownership selection.
7.         Hence,     the  Government      has    after   crateful
     consideration and application of mind, has decided in public
     interest that, your request for consideration of renewal of lease
     ownership and extension of tenure of lease in respect of Nikhill
     hotel would not be accepted. The decision is also in keeping with
     the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court for letting
     out Government properties, in a number of cases, which lays
     down that Public property partakes the character of a trust and
     that, public purpose would be served only by getting the best
     price for government property, so that larger revenue coming
     into the coffers of the State administration can be utilized for
     beneficent activities to subserve public purpose namely, the
     welfare State...”
7.    By a letter dated 21st May 2021, the Appellant requested the

Respondents to refrain from taking steps to hand over the hotel to a third

party until the disputes and differences were decided through arbitration.
7
8.    The Appellant filed an application under Section 9 of the 1996 Act,

being Arbitration Suit No.05 of 2021 in the Commercial Court, being the

Court of the District Judge, East Sikkim at Gangtok.
9.    On or about 28th May 2021, the Respondent State filed its Response

to the application under Section 9 of the 1996 Act, contending that the

Appellant had misconstrued Clause 4(xiii) of the Lease Agreement. It was

contended that as the Respondent State had not accepted the offer made

by the Appellant, there was no case for arbitration. Read properly, clause

4(xiii) would permit reference of disputes with regard to the quantum of

rent and the period of renewal, to arbitration.    Furthermore, under clause

4(xvii), upon termination and/or expiry of the lease, the Appellant was

required to quit and vacate the said property.
10.   By an order dated 31st May 2021, the learned Judge, Commercial

Court restrained the Respondent State from disturbing the Appellant’s

possession of the property in question, until the commencement of the

arbitral proceedings.
11.   The Respondent State filed an appeal from the said order dated 31 st

May 2021 under Section 37 of the 1996 Act read with
Section 13
of the

Commercial Courts Act, 2015 and
Article 227
of the Constitution of India

being Arbitration Appeal No. 02 of 2021.         The Appellant, on the other

hand, filed an application under
Section 11
of the 1996 Act, read with
Section 10
of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 being Arbitration Petition

No.02 of 2021 for appointment of an Arbitrator.
8
12.    By the impugned judgment and order, the Division Bench of the

High Court allowed Arbitration Appeal No. 02 of 2021, set aside the order

dated 31st May 2021 passed by the Commercial Court and also dismissed

Arbitration Petition No.02 of 2021 filed by the Appellant under
Section 11
of the 1996 Act, for appointment of an Arbitrator.
13.    The Division Bench, inter alia, held:-
“9. As stated hereinbefore, the arbitration clause is set out
      under clause 4 (xiii). A plain reading of this clause reveals that it
      can be invoked only if the following two situations arise, once the
      proposal for renewal of the present lease - communicated in
      writing by the lessee to the lessor within the stipulated time
      frame is accepted by the lessor:-
i. If there is a dispute with regard to the further period of
          renewal of the present lease, as proposed; and
          ii. If there is a dispute with regard to the quantum of rent
          proposed to be paid by the lessee to the lessor for the
          extended period of lease.
10. In the instant case, the State expressed its inability to renew
      the lease through its letter dated 17th May, 2021. It may have
      been written belatedly, however, it was before expiry of the lease
      period. As a consequence, the result of this letter dated 17 th May,
      2021, tantamount to a final decision on the part of the State not
      to renew the present lease in favour of Brij Raj Oberoi.
11. In such circumstances, none of the disputes - which can be
      termed as arbitrable dispute - as specified hereinbefore, are
      present in the facts of the instant case. In absence of any
      arbitrable dispute, an order could not have been passed by the
      Learned Commercial Court under
section 9
of the Arbitration Act.
      12 . Consequently, Arbitration Appeal No. 02 of 2021, is allowed
      and the impugned judgment and order dated 31.05.2021, passed
      by the learned Commercial Court on the application filed by Brij
      Raj Oberoi under
section 9
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
      1996 is set aside. The Arbitration Petition No. 02 of 2021 seeking
      appointment of Arbitrator under
section 11
of the Arbitration and
      Conciliation Act, 1996 read with
section 10
of the Commercial
      Courts Act, 2015 is also dismissed. The parties to bear their own
      costs.”
9
14.   In our considered opinion, the Division Bench fell in error in arriving

at the finding that the arbitration clause could only be invoked if the

proposal for renewal was accepted by the lessor, but there was dispute

with regard to the period of renewal or there was dispute with regard to

the quantum of rent proposed to be paid by the lessee to the lessor.
15.   It is well settled that clauses in a lease deed cannot be read and

construed in isolation.    The lease deed is to be construed as a whole.

Clause 4(xiii) has to be read with Clause 3 which clearly provides that the

initial term of the lease under the deed shall be a period of 24 years from

1st June 1997 to 31st May 2021 and shall be renewable for such acceptance

of the lessee’s offer in terms of Clause 4(xiii). Clause 4(xiii) has wrongly

been printed as Clause 4(xii). It is not in dispute that it is to be read as

Clause 4(xiii) and all concerned have proceeded on the basis that the offer

is to be in terms of Clause 4(xiii).
16.   Prima facie, the parties to the lease deed have used the expression

“shall” which connotes a command.       If the lessee offered its terms for

renewal or extension of the lease within the time stipulated in the lease,

prima facie the same would have to be accepted.            However, if the

quantum of rent or the period of lease could not be mutually agreed upon,

the same would necessarily have to be referred to arbitration by an

Arbitrator to be appointed by the Chief Justice of the Sikkim High Court.
10
17.
In
Vidya Drolia & Ors. v. Durga Trading Corporation
1, a three-

Judge Bench of this Court held :-
“151. ....Broad or narrow interpretations of an arbitration
      agreement can, to a great extent, effect coverage of a
      retroactive    arbitration   agreement.      Pro-arbitration  broad
      interpretation, normally applied to international instruments, and
      commercial transactions is based upon the approach that the
      arbitration clause should be considered as per the true
      contractual language and what it says, but in case of doubt as to
      whether related or close disputes in the course of parties'
      business relationship is covered by the clause, the assumption is
      that such disputes are encompassed by the agreement. The
      restrictive interpretation approach on the other hand states that
      in case of doubt the disputes shall not be treated as covered by
      the clause. Narrow approach is based on the reason that the
      arbitration should be viewed as an exception to the court or
      judicial system. The third approach is to avoid either broad or
      restrictive interpretation and instead the intention of the parties
      as to scope of the clause is understood by considering the strict
      language and circumstance of the case in hand. Terms like “all”,
      “any”, “in respect of”, “arising out of”, etc. can expand the scope
      and ambit of the arbitration clause. Connected and incidental
      matters, unless the arbitration clause suggests to the contrary,
      would normally be covered.
152. Which approach as to interpretation of an arbitration
      agreement should be adopted in a particular case would depend
      upon various factors including the language, the parties, nature
      of relationship, the factual background in which the arbitration
      agreement was entered, etc. In case of pure commercial
      disputes, more appropriate principle of interpretation would be
      the one of liberal construction as there is a presumption in favour
      of one-stop adjudication.
153. Accordingly, we hold that the expression “existence of an
      arbitration agreement” in
Section 11
of the Arbitration Act,
      would include aspect of validity of an arbitration agreement,
      albeit the court at the referral stage would apply the prima facie
      test on the basis of principles set out in this judgment. In cases
      of debatable and disputable facts, and good reasonable arguable
      case, etc., the court would force the parties to abide by the
      arbitration agreement as the Arbitral Tribunal has primary
      jurisdiction and authority to decide the disputes including the
      question of jurisdiction and non-arbitrability.
1 (2021) 2 SCC 1
11
xxx                  xxx                xxx
154.3.The general rule and principle, in view of the legislative
      mandate clear from Act 3 of 2016 and Act 33 of 2019, and the
      principle of severability and competence-competence, is that the
      Arbitral Tribunal is the preferred first authority to determine and
      decide all questions of non-arbitrability. The court has been
      conferred power of “second look” on aspects of non-arbitrability
      post the award in terms of sub-clauses (i), (ii) or (iv) of Section
      34(2)(a) or sub-clause (i) of
Section 34(2)(b)
of the Arbitration
      Act.
154.4.Rarely as a demurrer the court may interfere at
Section 8
or 11 stage when it is manifestly and ex facie certain that the
      arbitration agreement is non-existent, invalid or the disputes are
      non-arbitrable, though the nature and facet of non-arbitrability
      would, to some extent, determine the level and nature of judicial
      scrutiny. The restricted and limited review is to check and protect
      parties from being forced to arbitrate when the matter is
      demonstrably “non-arbitrable” and to cut off the deadwood. The
      court by default would refer the matter when contentions relating
      to non-arbitrability are plainly arguable; when consideration in
      summary proceedings would be insufficient and inconclusive;
when facts are contested; when the party opposing arbitration
      adopts delaying tactics or impairs conduct of arbitration
      proceedings. This is not the stage for the court to enter into a
      mini trial or elaborate review so as to usurp the jurisdiction of the
      Arbitral Tribunal but to affirm and uphold integrity and efficacy of
      arbitration as an alternative dispute resolution mechanism.”
18.    In the considered opinion of this Court, the Division Bench fell in

error in rejecting the application of the Appellant under
Section 11(6)
of

the 1996 Act for appointment of an Arbitrator. The dispute arising out of

non-renewal of the lease is clearly arbitrable.      As observed above, the

deed of lease provided “That the initial terms of the lease under this deed

shall be a period of twenty four years from 01.06.1997 to 31.05.2021

(First day of June one thousand nine hundred and ninety seven to thirty

first day of May two thousand and twenty one) and shall be renewable for
12
such acceptance of the lessee’s offer in terms of clause 4(xiii)

hereinafter”.
19.   Clause 4(xiii) provides that the Appellant-lessee shall, in the last

year of the lease tenure and not later than six months prior to the expiry

of the present lease, communicate in writing to the lessor, his terms and

conditions for the renewal of the present lease and if the same is accepted

by the lessor, then the present lease may be renewed for such further

period and on such rent as may be mutually agreed.          The arbitration

clause cannot be rendered otiose by refusal of the Respondent State to

renew the lease. The Respondent State may have formulated a policy for

encouraging self-employment of local youth who are duly qualified and

competent to run the hotel.      Such policy decision cannot impact an

existing agreement with a renewal clause.       All disputes between the

parties to the lease with regard to renewal and/or non-renewal, the period

of renewal and the quantum of rent would have be decided by the

Arbitrator, as observed above.    The issue of arbitrability of the dipsute

over non-renewal of the lease is within the realm of the Arbitral

Tribunal/Arbitrator.
20.   The appeals are allowed. The impugned judgment and order is set

aside. Justice Bhaskar Bhattacharya, Former Chief Justice of Gujrat High

Court and Former Chairman of the Sikkim Law Commission is appointed

Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes between the parties. The Arbitrator is

requested to complete the proceedings as early as possible preferably
13
within three months from the date of communication of this order.

Needless to mention that the learned Arbitrator will not be influenced by

any observations made in this order on the merits and/or arbitrability of

the disputes.
21.   The order of status quo passed by this Court shall continue for a

period of three months from today or until further orders of the Arbitral

Tribunal, whichever is earlier.
.………………………………….J.
                                             [ INDIRA BANERJEE ]




                                            …………………………………..J.
                                             [ C. T. RAVIKUMAR ]
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 18, 2022