[Cites
39
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
Securities And Exchange Board Of India vs Rajkumar Nagpal on 30 August, 2022
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
A S Bopanna
,
Surya Kant
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable


                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                Civil Appeal No. 5247 of 2022


          Securities and Exchange Board Of India                  …Appellant


                                          Versus


          Rajkumar Nagpal & Ors.                                …Respondents




Signature Not Verified

Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2022.08.30
17:00:54 IST
Reason:




                                             1
                                                            JUDGEMENT


Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud, J.
Table of Contents


A.          Facts .................................................................................................................. 4

     i.          The dispute.............................................................................................................. 4

     ii.         The suit before the Bombay High Court ............................................................... 5

     iii.        The impugned judgment ...................................................................................... 10

B.          Issues............................................................................................................... 12

C.          Submissions ................................................................................................... 12

D.          Overview of contractual arrangements......................................................... 19

     i.          The Debenture Trust Deeds ................................................................................. 19

     ii.         Steps taken by the DebentureTrustee (Vistra) .................................................... 23

E.          Evolution of the law surrounding the resolution of debts .......................... 25

     i.          The framework for the resolution of debt under the
Companies Act
1956 ....... 25

     ii.         The RBI Circular dated 6 July 2019 and the legal framework thereafter ........... 27

     iii.        SEBI (Debenture Trustees) Regulations 1993 ..................................................... 32

     iv.         The SEBI Circular dated 13 October 2020 and the legal framework thereafter 34

            a.      The SEBI Circular: Overview and Implications ................................................................... 34

            b.      Voting at the ISIN level ....................................................................................................... 42

            c.      The SEBI Circular has a statutory character ...................................................................... 44


F.          Analysis ........................................................................................................... 47

     i.          There is no bar to the civil court‟s jurisdiction ................................................... 47
2
ii.    The SEBI Circular is applicable if debenture holders wish to implement a

Resolution Plan to which the lenders are a party ....................................................... 49

iii.   Dissenting ISIN level debenture holders are bound by the ICA / Resolution Plan
54
iv.    The SEBI Circular has retroactive application .................................................... 56

v.     Exercise of this Court‟s power under
Article 142
of the Constitution ............... 59

vi.    Dissenting debenture holders in the present case ............................................. 63
3
PART A

      A.    Facts


      i.    The dispute
1.    Reliance Commercial Finance Limited1 issued Non-Convertible Debentures

      to various persons.2 Vistra ITCL (India) Limited was the Debenture Trustee3

      under three Debenture Trust Deeds dated 3 May 2017, 23 May 2017 and 5

      February 2018.4 RCFL committed its first default under the Debenture Trust

      Deeds in March 2019.
2.    On 7 June 2019, RBI issued the Reserve Bank of India (Prudential

      Framework for the Resolution of Stressed Assets)5 Directions 2019, with ―a

      view to providing a framework for early recognition, reporting and time

      bound resolution of stressed assets‖.6 The RBI Circular provided that certain

      lenders may opt for a resolution strategy available to them under the

      existing legal framework, including entering into a resolution plan7 or

      initiating legal proceedings for recovery or insolvency. If the lenders chose

      to implement a Resolution Plan, they were required to enter into an inter-

      creditor agreement.8 Bank of Baroda and other lenders of RCFL entered into

      an ICA on 6 July 2019, pursuant to the RBI Circular. Bank of Baroda was

      later appointed as the lead bank under the ICA.
1
―RCFL‖
2
―debenture holders‖
3
―Vistra‖
4
―Debenture Trust Deeds‖ or ―Debenture Trust Deed‖
5
―RBI Circular‖
6
Clause 4, RBI Circular.
7
―Resolution Plan‖
8
―ICA‖
4
PART A
3.      The RBI Circular applied to banks and specified categories of lenders. Other

        investors were outside its purview. SEBI issued a circular on 13 October

        2020. The subject was the ‗Standardisation of procedure to be followed by

        Debenture Trustee(s) in case of ‗default‘ by issuers of listed debt

        securities‘.9 On 11 March 2021, RCFL and Vistra amended the Debenture

        Trust Deeds by executing a Supplementary Debenture Trust Deed which

        took note of the SEBI circular. On 15 July 2021, the Resolution Plan

        submitted by Authum Investment and Infrastructure Limited10 was approved

        by RCFL‘s lenders.
ii.    The suit before the Bombay High Court
4.      Seventeen debenture holders instituted a suit on the Original Side of the

        Bombay High Court on 1 July 2021. The debenture holders instituted the

        suit for the protection of their interests with respect to the amounts due to

        them by RCFL. RCFL was impleaded as the first defendant to the suit. The

        debenture holders urged that Vistra, who was impleaded as the third

        defendant, should have taken necessary steps to protect their interests. The

        debenture holders also alleged that certain funds available with the Bank of

        Baroda, the second defendant, were distributed amongst creditors without

        regard to their status as ‗secured‘ or ‗unsecured‘ creditors. They also

        alleged that this was done without their consent and that they had a first

        charge on the receivables of RCFL. The debenture holders alleged that the

        RBI Circular permitted this ―illegal‖ distribution of funds. They also stated
9
―SEBI Circular‖
10
―Authum‖
5
PART A

     that RCFL, Bank of Baroda, and Vistra could not seek an ex post facto

     consent from the debenture holders for either the ICA or the Resolution

     Plan. They urged that it was mandatory for Vistra to sign the ICA on behalf

     of the debenture holders before considering the Resolution Plan. The

     plaintiffs in the suit before the High Court sought the setting aside of the RBI

     Circular as illegal and ultra vires. They also sought an injunction restraining

     RCFL, Bank of Baroda, and RBI from implementing the RBI Circular.
5.   On 20 August 2021, Justice G S Patel of the Bombay High Court opined

     prima facie that a meeting of debenture holders was required. The Court,

     however, held that it could not recommend the manner in which the meeting

     of debenture holders should be convened, observing that:
―3. Prima facie, it is clear that a meeting or possibly meetings of debenture
          holders are required. The question presently that Vistra faces relates to the
          terms on which such a meeting is to be called. Mr. Ankhad explains that one
          option is to proceed according to the ISIN series. The second is to proceed
          according to the Debenture Trust Deeds. There are three different Debenture
          Trust Deeds. The first option does not commend itself. Surely, this series of
          debentures is immaterial in a situation like this.
4. Another problem that presents itself is the curtailing or abbreviation of the
          necessary notice that is required.
5. Both aspects are not, prima facie, one on which this Court can make a
          recommendation, it is one thing to ask a Civil Court to adjudicate on the
          correctness or otherwise of a decision of a regulator or a validity of a rule or
          regulation. But I am unable to see how a Civil Court can direct that a notice that
          is required by the Trust Deed or by the applicable regulation should be
          shortened or that a meeting should be held of all debenture holders in one
          particular manner over preference to another. These are directions that only a
          regulator can issue.‖
6.   The Court noted that Vistra had sought a clarification on 11 August 2021,

     regarding the manner in which the meeting was to be held. It directed SEBI

     to respond to Vistra‘s representation on a ―priority and extremely urgent
6
PART A

        basis‖. SEBI issued a clarificatory letter on 23 August 2021 in response to

        this representation. The clarificatory letter referred to
Regulation 15(7)
of

        SEBI (Debenture Trustees) Regulations 199311 and the SEBI Circular and

        clarified that the voting would have to be conducted in accordance with the

        SEBI Circular. The relevant extract of this letter reads as follows:
―5. In view of regulation 15(7) of the DT Regulations read with clause 3, 6.5,
6.6 and 7 of SEBI Circular, it is stated that it shall be mandatory for DTs to sign
              the Inter-Creditor Agreement (ICA) on behalf of debenture holders before
              considering the resolution plan to be implemented as a result of ICA
              proceedings.‖
7.      SEBI was not impleaded as a party to the suit. On 17 September 2021, the

        Single Judge granted leave to the debenture holders to join SEBI as a

        respondent to an interlocutory application, Interim Application No. 14224 of

        2021. SEBI entered appearance on 24 September 2021. SEBI in its affidavit

        before the High Court submitted that the debenture trustees are obligated to

        comply with its circular in case of a default committed by an issuer of listed

        debt securities even though the event of default has taken place prior to the

        issuance of its circular.
8.      On 14 October 2021 and 20 October 2021, the Single Judge of the High

        Court suggested that all the concerned parties enter into a negotiated

        settlement.
9.      The terms of repayment under the Resolution Plan formulated under the

        ICA and approved by the company‘s lenders are as follows:
11
―1993 Regulations‖
7
PART A

     Sr. No.      Particulars       Nos. Debt as on 6th Recovery   % of
                                           July 2019      (Rs)   Recovery
                                             (Rs)

                                    1 ICA Lenders

       1.1          Secured          19        7,586.05   1,893.47    24.96

                   Unsecured          1        640.00     130.02      20.32

                                  2 Non-ICA Lenders

       2.1     Secured Term Loan      1        250.00      62.40      24.96

                                      2.2 NCDs

      2.2.1    Individuals & HUFs    227        13.92      13.92       100
                up to Rs. 10 Lacs

      2.2.2    Individuals & HUFs    37         43.95      13.17      29.96
                more than Rs. 10
                       Lacs

      2.2.3    Other secured NCDs    41        202.30      50.49      24.96

      2.2.4     Unsecured NCDs       21         81.00      16.46      20.32

      2.2.5       Related Party       1        200.00      26.90      13.45

                    Total                      9,017.22   2,206.83




    In terms of the above table, all individuals/ HUFs holding debentures of a

    value less than Rs. 10 Lakhs were to get 100% of their principal sum due,

    while individuals and HUFs holding debentures in excess of Rs. 10 lakhs

    were to receive 24.96% of the principal.
10. By an order dated 28 October 2021, the Single Judge recorded that RCFL

    and the resolution applicant had agreed to pay the debenture holders an

    additional sum of 5% of the total principal sum outstanding as an additional

    settlement. Therefore, the debenture holders were to receive an aggregate
8
PART A

sum of Rs. 91,00,000/- representing 29.96% of the total principal

outstanding. In return, debenture holder parties to the suit would have to

accept the terms of the negotiated settlement in full and final satisfaction of

all their claims against the parties and agreed to transfer their debentures in

favour of the resolution applicant. In the same order, the Court held that the

SEBI Circular could not be permitted to operate retrospectively and did not

govern the Debenture Trust Deeds. The Court directed Vistra to conduct a

meeting of all debenture holders in terms of the Debenture Trust Deed(s):
―13. In view of this, the 3rd Defendant is directed to call and conduct meeting of
     all the debenture holders under all three Debenture Trust Deeds within 30 days
     of this order ensuring that the calling and conduct of the meeting/s and the
     voting at such meetings conforms to the terms of the respective Debenture
     Trust Deeds. At such meeting/s, the 3rd Defendant will place for consideration
     and approval of the beneficial owners or debenture holders the settlement
     offer/compromise/arrangement as envisaged in the approved resolution plan,
     and as modified to the extent provided herein above.
14. If there is any further or later or supplementary trust deed, then the
     provisions of that supplementary trust deed will also be taken into account.
15. All parties agree and undertake to maintain confidentially of the settlement
     and/or compromise and/or arrangement arrived thereto.
16. In view of the above comprise arrived at between the parties, the suit
     stands disposed off in these terms.
17. It is made clear that the aforesaid order is passed considering the peculiar
     facts and circumstances of the present case. It also has consent of all the
     parties.
18. As regards SEBI, I am making it clear that this order will constitute no
     precedent against SEBI nor will SEBI be held to the terms of this order for
     other cases. This order is made on the peculiar facts and circumstances of this
     case.‖

On 15 November 2021, the Single Judge passed a clarificatory order

indicating that the meeting should not deviate from the terms of the

Debenture Trust Deed(s) and that the Supplementary Trust Deeds would
9
PART A

         have to be read with the Debenture Trust Deed(s) in a consistent manner.
The court also held that a mere reference to the SEBI Circular would not

         override the express terms of any of the Debenture Trust Deeds.


         iii.   The impugned judgment
11. SEBI challenged the Single Judge‘s orders dated 28 October 2021 and 15

         November 2021 before a Division Bench. SEBI submitted in its appeal, that

         the SEBI Circular is applicable and the consent of the debenture holders at

         the International Securities Identification Number12 level is necessary before

         a Resolution Plan could be implemented.
12.      At the first hearing, SEBI took objection to paragraphs 15 to 17 of the Single

         Judge‘s order dated 28 October 2021. Accordingly, the Division Bench

         passed an order dated 3 December 2021 granting liberty to SEBI to move

         the Single Judge to obtain a clarification. On 3 December 2021, the Single

         Judge clarified that SEBI was not a party to the suit and could therefore not

         be a party to the compromise.
13. On 6 December 2021, the Division Bench admitted the appeal filed by SEBI

         and allowed the meeting to be held on 8 December 2021. On 21 December

         2021, a co-ordinate bench passed an order directing that the results of e-

         voting of the meeting conducted on 8 December 2021 be placed on record.
14. After consideration of the rival submissions, the Division Bench dismissed

         the appeal filed by SEBI for the following reasons:
12
―ISIN‖
10
PART A

a.   The SEBI Circular would not apply retrospectively to defaults

     committed prior to 13 October 2020 because: (a) it comes into force on

     13 October 2020 and therefore only applies to defaults committed after

     13 October 2020; and (b) it does not contain any provision for

     retrospective application to defaults prior to 13 October 2020;
b.   The SEBI Circular will only apply in two situations, namely,

     enforcement of security or entering into an ICA. The SEBI Circular will

     not apply to the present case as the debenture holders are not

     proposing to enforce their security or enter into an ICA;


c.   The Supplementary Debenture Trust Deed executed on 11 March

     2021 makes the SEBI Circular applicable to defaults occurring after it

     was issued or to defaults after 13 October 2020;
d.   Clause 23 of the Fifth Schedule to the Debenture Trust Deed(s) is

     consistent with the 1993 Regulations. Therefore, the SEBI Circular will

     not defeat the Debenture Trust Deed(s) in lieu of clause 59 of the

     Debenture Trust Deed(s); and


e.   The clarificatory letter dated 23 August 2021 issued by SEBI is also

     inapplicable since the SEBI Circular is inapplicable.


The Court also observed that the application of the SEBI Circular would lead

to a situation where one debenture holder holding debentures worth Rs. 5

crores could veto a Resolution Plan worth Rs. 9,017 crores. Thus, in the

view of the Division Bench, holding an ISIN-wise meeting of debenture
11
PART A

    holders would defeat the interests of small investors, who were realizing

    100% of the debt owed to them, under the Resolution Plan.


    B.   Issues
15. Based on the submissions which have been canvassed by the parties, the

    issues which arise for determination are:
a.   Whether the debenture holders and other parties in the present case

         were required to follow the procedure under the SEBI Circular; and


    b.   Whether the civil court had the jurisdiction to entertain the lis in this

         case.
C.   Submissions
16. Mr. N Venkataraman, learned senior counsel and Additional Solicitor

    General made the following submissions in support of the appellant‘s

    argument that the SEBI Circular applies to the present case:
a.   The parties to the Debenture Trust Deeds have entered into a Master

         Supplementary Debenture Trust Deed on 11 March 2021 to align the

         Debenture Trust Deeds with the SEBI Circular. Therefore, the parties

         were aware that the SEBI Circular is applicable to the debenture

         holders. The meeting of debenture holders directed by the Single

         Judge was in contravention of Clauses 6.5 and 6.6 of the SEBI

         Circular;
12
PART C

        b.    The SEBI Circular is retroactive in nature because it does not travel

              backwards and take away or impair vested rights. The SEBI Circular

              operates in future, but its operation is based on events that arose prior

              to it. Although the Debenture Trust Deeds were signed prior to the

              SEBI Circular, the circular was brought into force before voting took

              place. Therefore, the voting ought to have taken place in accordance

              with the SEBI Circular;
c.    The SEBI Circular has the force of law;


        d.    Under the SEBI Circular, voting is required to be conducted as per
ISINs. ISIN-wise voting ensures that rights of small investors are

              protected against the excesses of large investors. The possibility of

              ISIN-wise voting will not defeat the Resolution Plan as the issuer

              company can always ‗adjust‘ the size of the security;


        e.    The Resolution Plan expressly states that it has to be carried out in

              terms of the ―Applicable Law‖, which includes laws enacted by SEBI.

              Therefore, compliance with regulatory provisions mandated by the

              circular issued by SEBI is required before implementing the Resolution

              Plan;
f.    Prior to the coming into force of the SEBI Circular on 13 October 2020,

              a joint of meeting of a class of creditors was governed by
section 230
of the Companies Act 2013.13 The SEBI Circular adopted a special

              majority of 60% of the investors by ISIN and 75% of the investors by
13
―
Companies Act
"
13
PART C

                  value for debenture holders to resolve their debt under a resolution

                  plan or compromise. The SEBI Circular adopted a higher threshold

                  than
Section 230
of the Companies Act to bind the dissenting/

                  abstaining debenture holders. The civil court does not have jurisdiction

                  over the present matter by virtue of
Section 15Y
of the SEBI Act 199214

                  and
Section 430
of the Companies Act; and


        g.        After the SEBI Circular came into force on 13 October 2020, only two

                  possible options were available to the debenture holders to restructure

                  the debt: (i) a compromise independent of the NCLT under the SEBI

                  Circular; or (ii) approaching the NCLT under
section 230
of the

                  Companies Act. No third option, especially under the Debenture Trust

                  Deed, is available to the debenture holders. Contrary to the express

                  provisions of law, the High Court incorrectly assumed jurisdiction and

                  directed a meeting of debenture holders to consider the Resolution

                  Plan in accordance with the terms of the Debenture Trust Deeds. The

                  High Court could not have exercised jurisdiction to direct the calling of

                  a meeting of debenture holders to consider the Resolution Plan without

                  complying with the SEBI Circular.
17. Mr. Darius Khambata, learned senior counsel appearing for RCFL

        (Respondent No. 11) made the following submissions in support of his

        argument that the SEBI Circular does not apply retroactively or

        retrospectively to the present case:
14
―
SEBI Act
‖
14
PART C

a.   The language employed in the SEBI Circular and in
Regulation 15(7)
of

     the1993 Regulations is facilitative and not mandatory. There is no

     separate or independent ICA imposed by SEBI outside RBI‘s Circular.

     RBI itself reads its framework as not extending to debenture holders.

     The SEBI Circular does not provide that the signing of an ICA is the

     only route to entering into a compromise or arrangement with the

     issuer company. Correspondingly, there is no prohibition, express or

     implied, on the freedom of debenture holders to take any course of

     action as they see fit. In particular, the SEBI Circular does not exclude

     the provisions of
Sections 62
and
63
of the Indian Contract Act 1872;


b.   The SEBI Circular does not provide a mechanism by which dissenting

     ISIN level debenture holders can ‗exit‘ an ICA / Resolution Plan. ISIN

     wise voting would enable a single ISIN number to defeat the

     Resolution Plan;
c.   The SEBI Circular is issued under
section 11(1)
of the SEBI Act.
Hence, the SEBI circular is administrative in nature and is not

     delegated   legislation.   An    administrative   circular   cannot    have

     retrospective operation as it takes away vested rights. Moreover, the

     SEBI Act does not provide for retrospective or retroactive application of

     subordinate legislation;
d.   The SEBI Circular extinguishes the vested rights of debenture holders

     under the Debenture Trust Deeds. Under Clauses 22 and 23 of the

     Fifth Schedule to the Debenture Trust Deeds, the debenture holders by
15
PART C

     a special majority have a vested right to sanction any compromise or

     arrangement with the company. However, the SEBI Circular subjects

     the will of the majority to the will of the ISIN number holders, and in the

     process impairs the vested rights conferred under the Debenture Trust

     Deeds. Thus, the application of the SEBI Circular will not only be

     retroactive, but also renders it retrospective;


e.   The SEBI Circular does not prohibit the debenture holders from

     conferring the authority on the debenture trustee in respect of the

     matters enumerated under Clause 22 of the Fifth Schedule to the

     Debenture Trust Deeds. The mandatory language used in the SEBI

     Circular applies only to the two eventualities mentioned in Clause 6.5

     and does not encompass all the generalities which are covered under

     the Debenture Trust Deeds. The SEBI Circular is applicable to only two

     situations: (i) a negative consent for proceeding with enforcement of

     security; and (ii) a positive consent for signing an ICA. The subject

     matter of the Resolution Plan covers neither of the aforesaid situations;


f.   The Supplementary Trust Deed does not expressly amend, substitute,

     or modify the provisions of Clauses 22 and 23 of the Fifth Schedule to

     the Debenture Trust Deeds. Even if it is assumed that the

     Supplementary Trust Deed incorporates each and every term of the

     SEBI Circular, this    will not result in overriding or superseding the

     provisions of Clauses 22 and 23;
16
PART C

    g.   The Resolution Plan places the debenture holders in a better position

         than they would be in under a new ICA process. It provides for 100%

         repayment to debentures holders with an exposure of upto Rs. 10

         lakhs. The debenture holders will constitute only 21.02% of the total

         value of debt if they become a part of the ICA along with the lenders.

         Resultantly, they could be easily outvoted by the lenders, who would

         constitute 78.98% of the ICA by value; and


    h.   SEBI‘s contention that
Section 230
read with
Section 430
of the

         Companies Act excludes the jurisdiction of the High Court is untenable

         because the law does not expressly bar a company from entering into

         a contractual compromise with any of its creditors.
18. It is necessary to record that Mr. Khambata does not contest the following

    principles of law relied upon by the appellants:
a.   Circulars issued by SEBI constitute special law and are binding, with

         the force of law;
b.   Where SEBI prescribes a particular procedure to do a particular thing,

         such a process cannot be dispensed with;
c.   There can be no waiver of a provision of law based on public policy;
and


    d.   No court will give effect to a contract which is forbidden either

         expressly or by necessary implication by statute.
17
PART C
19. Mr. KV Viswanathan, learned senior counsel appearing for Bank of Baroda

    (Respondent No. 12) submitted that the impugned order should not be

    interfered with because:
a.   The SEBI Circular has no retrospective/ retroactive operation because

         it is not a regulation in terms of
section 30
of the SEBI Act.


    b.   The compromise under the Resolution Plan does not fall foul of
section

         430
read with
section 230
of the Companies Act, 2013 because the

         latter is only an enabling provision. The jurisdiction of the NCLT is

         invoked only when a company which proposes to enter into a

         compromise with its creditors opts to file an application before the

         NCLT.
c.   Any further change to the extant resolution process carried out validly

         under the RBI Prudential Framework would derail the efforts

         undertaken by all the stakeholders. Particularly, it would prejudice all

         the creditors of the company, including 69% of the retail debenture

         holders who are poised to receive 100% of the principal exposure.
20. Mr. Dhruv Mehta, learned senior counsel, appeared for Authum, the

    Resolution Applicant. Authum is not a party to the present proceedings. Mr

    Mehta submitted that the SEBI Circular can only apply prospectively and not

    retrospectively/retroactively. He also submitted that this Court can, after

    declaring the correct legal position, exercise its discretion under
Article 136
of the Constitution to mould the final relief based on equitable

    considerations.
18
PART D




    D.   Overview of contractual arrangements


    i.   The Debenture Trust Deeds
21. Three Debenture Trust Deeds were entered into between the issuer

    company (RCFL) and the Debenture Trustee (Vistra) on 3 May 2017, 23

    May 2017, and 5 February 2018. Clauses 58 and 59 of the first Debenture

    Trust Deed are as follows:
―58. SEVERABILITY

         Each Provision of these presents shall be considered severable and if for any
         reason any provision of these presents is determined by a court of competent
         jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable and contrary to Indian laws or
         existing or future applicable law, such invalidity shall not impair the operation or
         prevent those provisions of these presents which are valid. In that case, these
         presents shall be construed so as to limit any term or provision so as to make it
         enforceable or valid within the requirements of any applicable law and in vent
         such term or provision cannot be so limited, these presents shall be construed
         to omit such invalid or unenforceable provisions. Following the determination
         that any provision of these presents is unenforceable, the Parties shall
         negotiate in good faith a new provision that as far as legally possible, most
         nearly reflects the intent of the Parties and that restores these presents as
         nearly as possible to its original intent and effect.
59. CONFLICT OF TERMS

         The parties agree that in the event any of the terms or provisions as contained
         in this indenture are in conflict with the provisions of the SEBI (Debenture
         Trustees) Regulations, 1993 as amended from time to time, then such clauses
         shall stand null and void. Further the Parties have agreed that in case there is
         inconsistency in clauses mentioned in this Deed and Information
         Memorandum, then the clauses mentioned in the Information Memorandum
         shall prevail.‖

    The defaults by RCFL took place from March 2019. The lead bank – Bank of

    Baroda – in its letter dated 13 June 2020 to RBI stated that:
19
PART D

         ―The Company (Reliance Commercial Finance Limited) availed credit facilities
         aggregating to Rs.9017 Crs from various banks. It started defaulting in
         servicing debt since March 2019. Sequence of Events lead to start Resolution
         Process in the company‘s account is as under:
♦ Demerger of commercial finance business of RCL (Reliance Capital Ltd.) into
         RCFL – 24.03.2017;
♦ Mr. Devang Mody, CEO of the company resigned – 31.12.2018;

         ♦ Default in repayment of Andhra Bank‘s Term Loan – 22.03.2019;

         ♦ Rating (LT) downgraded from CARE BBB+ to D-26.04.2019;

         ♦ PWC, the erstwhile auditor of the company resigned – 11.06.2019‖
22. On 15 July 2019, an ICA was entered into between Bank of Baroda and the

    other lenders of RCFL. On 24 August 2020, Bank of Baroda issued a

    process note elucidating the process for seeking a Resolution Plan from

    eligible bidders. The process note set out three options of which the first

    option was in the following terms:
―Option I – Submission of bid for RCFL as a going concern, on as-is-where-is
         and as-is-what-is basis.
Under Option-I, bidders are invited to submit bid for the acquisition of entire
         shareholding and business of RCFL as a going concern, on as-is-where-is and
         as-is-what-is basis including each of the Asset Books, and all rights,
         obligations, debts (secured and unsecured) titles, interests, assets, properties
         whether movable or immovable real or personal, in possession or reversion,
         corporeal or incorporeal, tangible or intangible, present or continent, powers,
         allotments, approvals, allotments, consents, privileges, employees etc., of
         RCFL. Under this Option-I, bid for selective or part of the Asset Book will not
         be accepted. Exercise of this option would result in change in management of
         RCFL. The acquirer shall have the flexibility to structure the acquisition either
         as share purchase or scheme of arrangement (including merger, demerger
         etc.) or in such other manner which is mutually beneficial from a commercial,
         tax, and regulatory perspective.
It is hereby clarified that an amount of Rs.100 crores will be retained in RCFL
         for its day to day operations. Any amount in excess of Rs.100 crores may be
         utilised for the benefit of the lenders.‖
20
PART D
23. The Resolution Plan was submitted by Authum on 15 January 2021. The

    relevant terms and conditions of the Resolution Plan submitted by Authum

    were as follows:
―Clause 7.5.ii - After the settlement of the Resolution Plan related expenses,
         employee related expenses in operations related expenses, the Resolution
         Applicant will settle the dues of the Dissenting Financial Creditors and
         Consenting Financial Creditors

         Clause 7.5.vi - It is clarified the FC claims of the Dissenting Financial Creditors
         shall be paid in priority to the payments to any Consenting Financial Creditors

         Clause 41 - Financial Creditors (FC) shall mean the existing secured and
         unsecured lenders to the Company including but not limited to … debenture
         holders etc. as identified in the information memorandum of the company‖

         Clause 40 - Financial Claims or FC Claims or Financial Creditor Claims or FC
         Dues means all amounts or claims to a financial creditor

         Clause 33 - Dissenting Financial creditors or Dissenting Lenders shall mean
         the financial creditors who vote against the Resolution Plan or abstain from
         voting in favour of the Resolution Plan, as approved by the ICA Lenders.

         Clause 6.1 - …..In line with this thought process the RA proposes to acquire
         the entire business of the company ongoing basis under Option 1 of the BID
         documents through either one or combination of options mentioned in
section 5
herein.
Clause 6 - ―Applicable Law means all applicable Indian statutes, enactments,
         laws, ordinances, bye-laws, rules, regulations, guidelines, notifications, notices
         and/or judgments, decrees, injunctions, writs or orders of any court statutory or
         regulatory authority, tribunal, board, or stock exchange in any jurisdiction, as
         may be in force and effect including any amendment, modification or
         reenactment from time to time‖
24. On 11 March 2021, parties entered into the Supplementary Debenture Trust

    Deed to amend the earlier Debenture Trust Deeds. The recitals to the

    Supplementary Trust Deed inter alia provide that:
―WHEREAS

         A. The Parties have entered into Principal Deeds as listed in Schedule 1
         hereunder for recording the terms and conditions for issuance of Debentures
         by the Company in accordance with the provisions of the
Companies Act, 2013
21
PART D

     and the regulations applicable to issue of debentures notified by Securities
     Exchange Board of India (―SEBI‖), from time to time.

     B. SEBI has amended certain provisions of the SEBI (Issue and Listing of Debt
     Securities) Regulations, 2008 and SEBI (Debenture Trustee) Regulations,
     1993 through its Gazette Notifications Nos. 34 and 35, respectively and each
     dated October 8, 2020. Further, SEBI has issued certain guidelines regarding
     debt instruments and debenture trustees through its circulars bearing reference
     numbers i) SEBI/HO/DDHS/CIR/P/2020/198 and dated October 5, 2020; ii)
     SEBI/HO/MIRSD/CRADT/CIR/P/2020/203 and dated October 13, 2020; iii)
     SEBI/HO/MIRSD/CRADT/CIR/P/2020/207 and dated October 22, 2020; iv)
     SEBI/HO/MISRD/CRADT/CIR/P/2020/218 and dated November 3, 2020; and
v) SEBI/HO/MIRSD/CRADT/CIR/P/2020/230 and dated November 12, 2020
     (collectively referred to as the ―Debenture Circulars‖).
C. In accordance with the applicable laws including the terms stipulated under
     the Debenture Circulars, the Parties are now desirous of making amendments
     to the Principal Deeds by executing this Supplementary Deed.‖

The Supplementary Trust Deed also contains the following provisions:
―2.2 Immediately after the last provision/article/section clause of the respective
     Principal Deeds, the following shall be inserted:
―In order to incorporate the terms of the SEBI Debenture Circulars within
     this Deed, all the provisions set out under the schedule hereto named
     ‗Schedule-SEBI AMENDMENTS 2020‘ is hereby included as an integral part of
     this Deed

     …

     2.3 A new Schedule as „Schedule-SEBI Amendments 2020‟ shall be inserted
     after the last existing Schedule of each respective Principal Deed as follows:
…
5. The Company shall ensure due compliance and adherence to the SEBI
     Debenture Circulars in letter and spirit.”

                                                                  (emphasis supplied)

The above contents of the Supplementary Trust Deed clearly take notice of

the 1993 Regulations and the SEBI Circular, among others. Moreover, the

Supplementary Debenture Trust Deed expressly incorporated the terms of

SEBI‘s debenture circulars within its ambit and the requirement that RCFL

shall ensure due compliance and adherence to SEBI‘s circulars in letter and
22
PART D

    spirit. The Resolution Plan submitted by Authum was approved thereafter on

    15 July 2021.
ii.   Steps taken by the Debenture Trustee (Vistra)
25. In an affidavit filed before the Bombay High Court, Vistra elucidated the

    steps which it had taken upon being intimated by RCFL of its liquidity crisis.

    Vistra stated that it scheduled a meeting of the debenture holders on 17

    October 2019, 6 November 2019 and 14 January 2020 on whether or not an

    ICA should be entered into. Vistra provided updates regarding all these

    meetings to SEBI and RBI. In February 2020, Vistra had filed proceedings

    before the Debts Recovery Tribunal, Bombay for the recovery of the

    outstanding dues of secured debenture holders from RCFL. On 12 June

    2020, Bank of Baroda informed Vistra that under the Resolution Plan, it was

    proposed to distribute the funds of RCFL to those lenders who had signed

    the ICA and the deed of indemnity.
26. Vistra addressed a communication to the Bank of Baroda on 18 June 2020

    objecting to this mechanism and the non-involvement of the debenture

    holders in the decision-making process. On 1 July 2020 Bank of Baroda

    intimated that the total amount available for distribution was Rs. 523 crores

    and that the debenture holders would be receiving 5.7% of the amount they

    had invested.     Bank of Baroda stated that upon signing the ICA, a

    proportionate amount would be paid to the debenture holders. Vistra

    adverted to the steps which it took of intimating the debenture holders on

    various aspects of signing the ICA.
23
PART D
27. The Resolution Plan advisor requested Vistra to sign the ICA on behalf of

    the debenture holders pursuant to which a meeting of the ICA lenders was

    held on 6 November 2020. This meeting was inter alia attended by Vistra as

    an observer, along with four debenture holders. In the meantime, Vistra

    received payments in the amount of Rs. 38.6 crore (5 September 2020) Rs.

    23.4 crore (29 January 2021) and Rs. 9 crore (23 April 2021) which were

    distributed to the debenture holders.
28. Thereafter, Vistra received an email on 16 July 2021 stating that the

    Resolution Plan submitted by Authum had been approved by the ICA

    lenders on 15 July 2021 and requesting the convening of a meeting of the

    debenture holders for completing the resolution process. The details of the

    approved Resolution Plan were sent to the debenture holders on 19 July

    2021.
29. Vistra conducted a meeting of the debenture holders on 30 July 2021. After

    several   concerns   were    raised     by   the   debenture   holders,    Vistra

    communicated with the officials of SEBI. By a letter dated 23 August 2021,

    SEBI clarified that in consonance with the SEBI Circular, voting by the

    debenture holders would have to be conducted ISIN wise. Finally, Vistra

    clarified in its affidavit before the Bombay High Court that despite making

    several requests to debenture holders to provide instructions on whether to

    sign the ICA, it had not received any response.
24
PART E

    E.   Evolution of the law surrounding the resolution of debts


    i.   The framework for the resolution of debt under the Companies Act
1956
30. Prior to 6 July 2019,
Section 391
of the Companies Act 1956 in Chapter V of

    the erstwhile legislation inter alia dealt with compromises, arrangements and

    reconstructions.
Section 391
as its marginal notes indicated, elucidated

    upon the power to compromise or make arrangements with creditors and

    members. Under the provision, a compromise or arrangement could be

    contemplated between a company and;
a.   A creditor or any class of them; or


    b.   Its members or any class of them.
31. In terms of sub-section (1) of
Section 391
, the Company Court (prior to the

    substitution of the National Company Law Tribunal for the Company Court)

    could order a meeting of the creditors or a class of creditors or of members

    or of a class of members.       Sub-section (2) of
Section 391
required a

    stipulated majority representing three-fourths in value of the creditors or

    members or a class of them present and voting to agree to a compromise or

    arrangement. In that event upon sanction by the judicial body it would be

    binding on all creditors or members or a class of them, as the case may be.

    The impact of a compromise or arrangement when approved by the special

    majority as stipulated in
Section 391(2)
was that the scheme would bind
25
PART E

    even those who dissented or abstained from voting. These provisions

    applied to all kinds of creditors without exception.
32. In the absence of a provision such as
Section 391
of the erstwhile
Companies Act
1956, a contract for the repayment of the dues of creditors

    would be governed by the provisions of
Section 62
of the Contract Act.
Section 62
envisages that if the parties to a contract agree to substitute a

    new contract for it, or to rescind or alter it, the original contract need not be

    performed. Similarly,
Section 63
envisages that every promisee may

    dispense with or remit, wholly or in part, the performance of the promise

    made to him, or may extend the time for such performance or may accept

    instead of it any satisfaction which he may think fit. The provisions of
Sections 62
and
63
would obviously apply to consenting parties. Hence, the

    terms of an earlier agreement between a debtor and a creditor would be

    varied by a specific act of acceptance.
33. The impact of
Section 391
of the Companies Act 1956 lay in its ability, in

    relation to the creditors or members of a company, to bind non-consenting

    members or creditors where the terms of the compromise or arrangement

    were approved by a special majority and assented to by the judicial body.

    Upon the enactment of the
Companies Act
,
Section 230
which forms a part

    of Chapter XV is titled ―Compromises, arrangements and amalgamations‖.
Section 230
contains an analogous provision.
34. Sub-section (6) of
Section 230
provides that where at a meeting which is

    held in pursuance of sub-section (1), the majority of persons representing
26
PART E

      3/4th in value of the creditors or class of creditors or members or class of

      members agree to a compromise or arrangement and upon its sanction by

      the Tribunal, it shall be binding on the company and all the creditors or class

      of creditors or members or class of members and the contributories of the

      company.
Section 230
of the Companies Act provides for the manner in

      which dissenting or abstaining creditors within a class of creditors of the

      company (such as debenture holders) can be bound by the terms of the

      compromise or arrangement upon approval by a special majority and by the

      NCLT.
35.    Section 1(4) of the Companies Act, 2013 stipulates that the provisions of

      the Act shall apply inter alia to:
a.    Companies incorporated under the Act or the previous company

            legislation;
b.    Insurance companies;


      c.    Banking companies;


      d.    Companies engaged in the generation or supply of electricity;


      e.    Any other company governed by a special Act for the time being in

            force.
ii.   The RBI Circular dated 6 July 2019 and the legal framework thereafter
36. In exercise of its powers under the
Banking Regulation Act
1949 and the
Reserve Bank of India Act
1934, RBI issued directions on 7 June 2019 ―with
27
PART E

     a view to providing a framework for early recognition, reporting and time

     bound resolution of stressed assets‖. The RBI Circular indicates that it

     applies to:
a.             Scheduled commercial banks excluding regional rural banks;


     b.             Specified All India Term Financial Institutions;
c.             Small Finance Banks; and


     d.             Deposit and non-deposit taking non-banking financial companies.15
37. The RBI Circular envisages that all lenders must recognize incipient stress

     in loan accounts immediately on default by classifying such assets as

     ‗special mention accounts‘. The expression ‗default‘ means a non-payment

     of a debt, as defined in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code 2016 when the

     whole or any part or an instalment has become due and payable and is not

     paid by the debtor or corporate debtor. The framework which has been put

     into place by the circular includes the following provisions:-
a.             The   framework          requires that           lenders initiate             the   process of

                    implementing a Resolution Plan even before a default occurs. Once

                    the borrower is reported to be in default, lenders must undertake a
15
―3.     The provisions of these directions shall apply to the following entities:
(a)   Scheduled Commercial Banks (excluding Regional Rural Banks);
(b)   All India Term Financial Institutions (NABARD, NHB, EXIM Bank, and SIDBI);
(c)   Small Finance Banks; and,
(d)   Systemically Important Non-Deposit taking Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFC-ND-SI)
         and Deposit taking Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBF-C-D)‖
28
PART E

            prima facie review of the borrower‘s account within 30 days from such

            default, within which a resolution strategy has to be decided (clause 9);
b.    In cases where a Resolution Plan is to be implemented, all lenders

            have to enter into an ICA during the review period (clause 10); and


      c.    The ICA has to provide that any decision agreed by lenders

            representing 75% by value of the total outstanding credit facilities

            (―fund based and non-fund based‖) and 60% of lenders by number

            shall be binding upon all the lenders (clause 10).
The RBI Circular contains other provisions including those on the

      implementation       of   the   Resolution      Plan,    consequences of           delayed

      implementation, prudential norms, supervisory review, disclosures, and

      exceptions.
38. Clause 3 of RBI‘s directions indicates that its ambit is restricted to lenders

      as defined in that clause.          The directions therefore do           not make any

      provision for other investors such as debenture holders, a point which has

      been highlighted by footnote 1 to the framework.16 Clause 10 provides as

      follows:
―10. In cases where RP is to be implemented, all lenders shall enter into an
            inter-creditor agreement (ICA), during the above-said Review Period, to
            provide for ground rules for finalisation and implementation of the RP in respect
            of borrowers with credit facilities from more than one lender. The ICA shall
            provide that any decision agreed by lenders representing 75 per cent by value
            of total outstanding credit facilities (fund based as well non-fund based) and 60
            per cent of lenders by number shall be binding upon all the lenders.
            Additionally, the ICA may, inter alia, provide for rights and duties of majority

16                          ―
  Footnote 1, RBI Circular: For the purpose of these directions, ‗lenders‘ shall mean all entities
mentioned at paragraph 3, unless specified otherwise.‖
29
PART E

           lenders, duties and protection of rights of dissenting lenders, treatment of
           lenders with priority in cash flows/differential security interest, etc. In particular,
           the RPs shall provide for payment not less than the liquidation value due to the
           dissenting lenders.‖

     Footnote 5 states:
―In cases where asset reconstruction companies (ARCs) have exposure to the
           borrower concerned, they shall also sign the ICA and adhere to all its
           provisions.‖

     Clause 10 makes it mandatory for all lenders to enter into an ICA, where a

     Resolution Plan is to be implemented. The ICA has to provide ground rules

     for finalizing and implementing the Resolution Plan where the borrower has

     credit facilities from more than one lender. Significantly, the ICA must

     mandate that any decision agreed by lenders representing 75% by value of

     the total outstanding credit facilities and 60% of lenders by number shall be

     binding upon by all the lenders. This means that where the requisite majority

     of lenders supports the decision, the decision binds all lenders including

     those who may dissent or abstain. The ICA is to inter alia provide for the

     protection of rights of dissenting lenders and in particular, for a payment of

     not less than the liquidation value to the dissenters. The liquidation value (as

     specified in footnote 6 to the RBI Circular) means the estimated realizable

     value of the assets of the borrower, if the borrower were to be liquidated as

     on the date of the commencement of the review period.17 Hence the ability

     to bind all lenders, including those who dissent or abstain is conditioned on

     the decision being backed by the requisite majority representing 75% by

     value and 60% by number.
17
Footnote 6, RBI Circular: ―Liquidation value would mean the estimated realizable value of the
assets of the relevant borrower, if such borrower were to be liquidated as on the date of
commencement of the Review Period.‖
30
PART E
39.
Section 1(4)(e)
of the Companies Act recognizes that banking companies

       can be regulated by a special legislation.
Section 230(2)(c)(iv)
of the

       Companies Act contemplates that the company or person by whom an

       application is made under sub-section (1) shall disclose by affidavit any

       scheme of corporate debt restructuring consented to by not less than 75%

       of the secured creditors in value, and where the company proposes to adopt

       the corporate debt restructuring guidelines specified by the RBI, a statement

       to that effect. Clauses 9, 10 and 13 of the RBI Circular read together with

       footnote 7 contemplate a Resolution Plan inclusive of restructuring of a

       default account with lender institutions falling within the ambit of Clause 3.18
40. Since the circular issued by the RBI is under a special law within the

       meaning of
Section 1(4)(e)
of the Companies Act, Section C provides for

       implementation conditions for a Resolution Plan without a requirement of

       approaching the NCLT under
Section 230
, where the Resolution Plan is

       being implemented in relation to lenders governed by Clause 3 of the RBI

       Circular.
41. These provisions make it abundantly clear that the RBI Circular which traces

       its origin to the exercise of its statutory powers envisages that:
a.     All lenders must enter into an ICA where a Resolution Plan is being

              implemented;
18                             ―
   Footnote 7, RBI Circular: Restructuring is an act in which a lender, for economic or legal reasons
relating to the borrower‘s financial difficulty, grants concessions to the borrower. Restructuring would
normally involve modification of terms of the advances / securities, which would generally include,
among others, alteration of payment period / payable amount / the amount of instalments / rate of
interest; roll over of credit facilities; sanction of additional credit facility / release of additional funds for
an account in default to aid curing of default / enhancement of existing credit limits; compromise
settlements where time for payment of settlement amount exceeds three months.‖
31
PART E

    b.     The ICA shall provide that a decision by lenders representing 75% by

           value and 60% by number shall bind all lenders, including those who

           may dissent. Entering into an ICA by the lenders is a mandatory first

           step to the implementation of the Resolution Plan; and


    c.     It is the ICA which will stipulate the ability to bind all lenders once the

           decision has been agreed upon by the stipulated majority.
Significantly, the RBI Circular has prescribed a higher voting threshold than

    the threshold mandated by
Section 230(6)
of the Companies Act.

    Consequently, on and from 7 June 2019 (the date of issuance of the RBI

    Circular), lending institutions governed by Clause 3 of the RBI Circular can

    avail of the special mechanism which has been introduced under it for the

    purpose of entering into a compromise, resolution, plan or arrangement for

    restructuring the debt due to lenders, with the ability to bind dissenters or

    those who abstain, without having to approach the NCLT under
Section 230
of the Companies Act.
iii.   SEBI (Debenture Trustees) Regulations 1993
42.
Regulation 2(bb)
defines ‗debenture trustee‘ to mean a trustee appointed in

    respect of any issue of debentures of a body corporate. Chapter II of the

    1993 Regulations contains provisions for the registration of a debenture

    trustee. Chapter III provides the responsibilities and obligations of debenture

    trustees. Chapter IV provides for inspection and disciplinary proceedings.

    Chapter V provides the procedure for action in case of default. Chapter VI

    contains a provision to relax the strict enforcement of the 1993 Regulations.
32
PART E
Regulation 15
provides for the duties of debenture trustees. Among them is

      the duty to take steps to convene a meeting of the holders of debentures as

      and when a meeting is required to be held (Clause (l)).
Regulation 14
provides for the obligation of debenture trustees.19
43. As already noted earlier, the RBI Circular specifically applies to the category

      of lenders specified in Clause 3. The requirement that lenders enter into an

      ICA is triggered where a Resolution Plan is to be implemented, as specified

      in Clause 10.
44.
Regulation 15(7)
of the 1993 Regulations was inserted by the SEBI

      (Debenture Trustees) (Amendment) Regulation 2020 with effect from 8

      October 2020.
Regulation 15 (7)
provides as follows: -
―15(7) Subject to the approval of the debenture holders and the conditions as
            may be specified by the Board from time to time, the debenture trustee, on
            behalf of the debenture holders, may enter into inter-creditor agreements
            provided under the framework specified by the Reserve Bank of India.‖

      Regulation 15(7) contemplates that the debenture trustees ―may‖ enter into

      ICAs provided under RBI‘s framework subject to:
a.    the approval of the debenture holders; and


      b.    the conditions which may be specified by SEBI from time to time.
45.
Regulation 15(7)
is facilitative in character.
Regulation 15(7)
indicates that

      the debenture trustee may enter into an ICA in terms of RBI‘s framework
19
Regulation 14
, 1993 Regulations: ―14. Every debenture trustee shall amongst other matters, accept
the trust deeds which shall contain the matters as specified in
section 71
of Companies Act, 2013 and
Form No. SH.12 specified under the Companies (Share Capital and Debentures) Rules, 2014. Such
trust deed shall consist of two parts:
a. Part A containing statutory/standard information pertaining to the debt issue;
b. Part B containing details specified to the particular debt issue.‖
33
PART E

    with the approval of the debenture holders. But Clause 7 does not in and of

    itself specify the modalities or manner in which the approval by the

    debenture holders is to be provided.
iv.   The SEBI Circular dated 13 October 2020 and the legal framework

          thereafter


          a.    The SEBI Circular: Overview and Implications
46. The subject of the SEBI Circular is the standardization of the procedure to

    be followed by debenture trustees when there is a default by an issuer of

    listed debt securities. The circular prescribes the process to be followed by

    the debenture trustees in the event of such default including seeking the

    consent of the investors for refraining from enforcing the security and/or

    entering into an ICA.         Section B of the SEBI Circular provides for the

    consent of the investors for the enforcement of security and for signing an

    ICA. Section B is extracted in its entirety below:
―B. Consent of investors for enforcement of security and for signing the ICA
4. The Reserve Bank of India (―RBI‖), vide Circular dated June 07, 2019
          issued the Reserve Bank of India (Prudential Framework for Resolution of
          Stressed Assets) Directions 2019 which inter alia specified the mechanism for
          resolution of stressed assets by Lenders (viz. Scheduled Commercial Banks,
          All-India Term Financial Institutions, Small Finance Banks, Systematically
          Important Non-Deposit Taking Non-Banking Finance Companies (NBFCs) as
          well as Deposit Taking NBFCs). In terms thereof, investors in debt securities,
          being financial creditors, are approached by other lenders to sign an
          agreement, referred to as the Inter Creditor Agreement (―ICA‖), under specific
          terms detailed in the framework as stipulated by RBI.
5.
Regulation 59
of LODR Regulations provides that material modification in
          the structure of debt securities shall be made only after obtaining the consent
          of the requisite majority of investors.
Regulation 18
of the Securities and
          Exchange Board of India (Issuer and Listing of Debt Securities) Regulations,
          2008 (―ILDS Regulations‖), applicable in case of public issue of debt securities,
34
PART E

stipulates a period of fifteen days for giving notice in case of roll-over of debt
securities and further provides for approval to be obtained from not less than
75% of the holders by value of such debt securities.
6. As resolution plan in the ICA may involve restructuring including roll-over of
debt securities, requiring the consent of the investors, the process to be
followed for seeking consent for enforcement of security and/or entering into an
Inter-Creditor Agreement shall be as under:
6.1.        The Debenture Trustee(s) shall send a notice to the investors within
3 days of the event of default by registered post/acknowledgement due or
speed post/acknowledgement due or courier or hand delivery with proof of
delivery as also through email as a text or as an attachment to email with a
notification including a read receipt, and proof of dispatch of such notice or
email, shall be maintained.
6.2.       The notice shall contain the following:
6.2.1.     negative consent for proceeding with the enforcement of security;

6.2.2.     positive consent for signing the ICA;
6.2.3.     the time period within which the consent needs to be provided, viz.
consent to be given within 15 days from the date of notice; and

6.2.4.     the date of meeting to be convened,

6.3.       Debenture Trustee(s) shall convene the meeting of all investors
within 30 days of the event of default (as per para 6.1 above);

Provided that in case the default is cured between the date of notice and the
date of meeting, then the convening of such a meeting may be dispensed with.

6.4.      In view of
Regulation 15(2)(b)
of SEBI (Debenture Trustees)
Regulations, 1993, in case of debt securities issued by way of public issue, the
notice sent by the Debenture Trustee(s) in para 6.2 shall not contain the
consent as per para 6.2.1 and the requirement to convene a meeting for
enforcement of security, as per para 6.3, shall not be applicable.

6.5.        The Debenture Trustee(s) shall take necessary action to enforce
security or enter into the ICA or as decided in the meeting of investors, subject
to the following:
6.5.1.     In case(s) where the majority of investors expressed their dissent
against enforcement of the security, the Debenture Trustee(s) shall not enforce
security.
6.5.2.      In case(s) where majority of investors expressed their consent to
enter into ICA, the Debenture Trustee(s) shall enter into the ICA.
35
PART E

         6.5.3.     In case(s) consents are not received for enforcement of security and
         for signing ICA, Debenture Trustee(s) shall take further action, if any, as per
         the decision taken in the meeting of the investors.
6.5.4.     The Debenture Trustee(s) may form a representative committee of
         the investors to participate in the ICA or to enforce the security or as may be
         decided in the meeting.
6.6.        The consent of the majority of investors shall mean the approval of
         not less than 75% of the investors by value of the outstanding debt and 60% of
         the investors by number at the ISIN level.‖
47. Clause 4 envisages that the RBI Circular dated 7 June 2019 has specified

    the mechanism for the resolution of stressed assets by lenders. In terms of

    the RBI Circular, investors in debt securities who are financial creditors are

    approached by other lenders to sign an ICA under specific terms which are

    detailed in the framework which is stipulated by the RBI.
48. Clause 6 of the SEBI Circular acknowledges that the Resolution Plan in the

    ICA may involve the restructuring of debt security which would, as a

    consequence, require the consent of the investors. It specifies the process

    to be followed for seeking the consent of investors for:
a.   Enforcing the security; and / or


    b.   Entering into an ICA.
Clause 6.2 specifies the requirement of issuing a notice to investors within a

    specified period of the event of default. The notice must contain:
a.   A negative consent for proceeding with the enforcement of the security;


    b.   A positive consent for signing the ICA;
36
PART E

    c.    The requirement that the consent needs to be given within 15 days

          from the date of notice; and


    d.    The date of the meeting to be convened for the purpose.


    The debenture trustee has to convene a meeting of all investors within 30

    days of the event of default.        Clause 6.5 mandates that the debenture

    trustee must take necessary action:
a.    To enforce the security; or


    b.    To enter into the ICA; or


    c.    As decided in the meeting of investors; subject to certain conditions

          namely:


          i.    Where the majority of investors has expressed its dissent against
the enforcement of the security, the security is not to be enforced

                by the debenture trustees;
ii.    Where the majority of investors has expressed its consent to enter

                into an ICA, the debenture trustees must enter into the ICA;


         iii.   Where consents are not received for the enforcement of security

                or signing the ICA, the debenture trustee shall take further action

                according to the decision which is taken in the meeting of the

                investors.
49. Significantly, Clause 6 of the SEBI Circular contains mandatory language by

    the use of the expression ―shall‖ when it relays the process to be followed
37
PART E

        for seeking the consent for enforcement of the security or entering into an

        ICA and the steps which are adopted thereafter. The expression ―shall‖ is

        used in the prefatory part of Clause 6 and in Clauses 6.1, 6.2, 6.3. 6.5 and

        6.6.    However, in contradistinction, Clause 6.5.4 adopts the expression

        ―may‖. Clause 6.5.4 permits the debenture trustee to form a representative

        committee of investors to participate in the ICA; or to enforce the security; or

        as may be decided in the meeting.
50. Clause 6.6 of the SEBI Circular specifies that the consent of the majority of

        investors shall mean the approval of not less than 75% of the investors by

        value of the outstanding debt and 60% of the investors by number at the

        ISIN level.
51. Clause 7 of the SEBI Circular specifies conditions for the signing of an ICA

        by a debenture trustee on behalf of the investors. Evidently, the debenture

        trustee is vested with a discretion (―may sign the ICA and consider the

        resolution plan on behalf of the investors‖) upon compliance with certain

        conditions, namely:
a.     The signing of the ICA and acceptance of the Resolution Plan would

               be in the interest of the investors;
b.     This would be in compliance with the
Companies Act, the Securities

               Contracts (Regulation) Act
1956,20 and the
SEBI Act
and the rules,

               regulations, and circulars issued thereunder;
20
―SCRA‖
38
PART E

    c.   The debenture trustee shall be free to exit the ICA if the Resolution

         Plan imposes conditions which are not in accordance with the
Companies Act, 2013
, the SCRA and the SEBI Act together with the

         rules, regulations, and circulars issued thereunder;


    d.   If the Resolution Plan is not finalized within a period of 180 days from

         the end of the review period, the debenture trustee shall be free to exit

         the ICA altogether; and


    e.   The debenture trustee is free to exit the ICA and seek legal recourse if

         the terms of the Resolution Plan are contravened by any of the

         signatories to the ICA.
52. The mechanism which has been prescribed by the RBI Circular is restricted

    only to those lending institutions which fall within the ambit of Clause 3.

    Apart from these lending institutions, debenture holders constitute another

    class of financial creditors to whom a debt may be due by the debtor

    company. Other creditors including debenture holders could voluntarily enter

    into a contractual arrangement for the restructuring of the debt within the

    ambit of
Section 62
of the Contract Act. These provisions are, however,

    restricted to consenting parties. Prior to the issuance of the SEBI Circular,

    the ability to bind creditors who fell outside the purview of Clause 3 of the

    RBI Circular would be based on the invocation of the provisions of
Section

    230
of the Companies Act.
53. However, subsequent to the issuance of the SEBI Circular, debenture

    holders can bind dissenters by taking recourse to the SEBI Circular as well.
39
PART E

     The SEBI Circular facilitates the process of seeking consent for enforcement

     of security and/or entering into an ICA. The SEBI Circular recognizes that

     investors in debt securities who are financial creditors falling outside the

     purview of the RBI Circular are approached by other lenders to sign the ICA

     under the RBI Circular. SEBI‘s circular has enunciated the modalities for

     standardizing the procedure.
54. Clause 6.6 incorporates the requirement of a special majority by stipulating

     that the consent of the majority of investors shall mean the approval of not

     less than 75% of the investors by value of the outstanding debt and 60% of

     the investors by number at the ISIN level. We have already seen how a

     provision for a special majority is stipulated in
Section 230(6)
of the

     Companies Act. The RBI Circular on the one hand and the SEBI Circular on

     the other contain separate provisions indicating the nature of the majority

     necessary under each circular. The SEBI Circular stipulates the requirement

     of the consent of a heightened majority of not less than 75% of the investors

     by value and 60% of the investors by number at the ISIN level. The SEBI

     Circular contemplates that the investors who lie outside the purview of RBI‘s

     framework may be approached by the lenders to sign an ICA. This is for the

     reason that the Resolution Plan in the ICA which has been entered into by

     the lenders may involve the restructuring of debt security.
55. Where a Resolution Plan has to be implemented, it has to be preceded by

     all lenders entering into an ICA, in terms of the RBI Circular. Debenture

     holders who lie outside the purview of the RBI Circular may agree to enter
40
PART E

    into the ICA in which event, the Resolution Plan which is being implemented

    in pursuance of the ICA entered into with the lenders would enure to the

    benefit of the debenture holders subject to the obligations and duties cast

    under it. The debenture holders are not bound to enter into an ICA in which

    event they would not be governed by its provisions or of the Resolution Plan

    which is entered into under the ICA. But to bind the entire class of debenture

    holders, the decision to enter into an ICA has to be backed by the stipulated

    majority which is prescribed in the SEBI Circular. The ability to bind the

    dissenting debenture holders or those who abstain is precisely conditional

    on whether the decision to enter into an ICA is backed by the requisite

    majority. In the absence of the consent expressed by the majority of

    investors to enter into an ICA in terms of Clause 6.5.2 the debenture trustee

    would have no authority to enter into an ICA in which event, the trustee shall

    take such further action in terms of the decision taken in the meeting of the

    investors. Such further action would, however, not comprehend the ability to

    bind dissenting debenture holders. Dissenters can be bound only if a

    requisite majority as defined in Clause 6.6 expresses its consent.
56. To recapitulate, in the case of an NCLT approved scheme of compromise or

    arrangement within the ambit of
Section 230
of the Companies Act, the

    threshold is of a ―majority of persons representing 3/4th in value of the

    creditors or class of creditors or members or class of members‖. When it

    comes to the prudential framework for resolution governing lenders within

    the description of Clause 3 of the RBI Circular, the threshold is 75% by

    value of the total outstanding credit facilities and 60% of lenders by number.
41
PART E

    The SEBI Circular on the other hand mandates the approval of not less than

    75% of the investors by value of the outstanding debt and 60% of the

    investors by number at the ISIN level. The majority prescribed in
Section

    230(6)
would govern NCLT approved compromises within the meaning of
Section 230
in its ability to bind those who do not consent to the

    compromise or arrangement. Likewise, the importance of the heightened

    majority prescribed in the RBI Circular lies in the consequence of binding

    dissenting lenders. In the same vein, the heightened majority prescribed in

    Clause 6.6 of the SEBI Circular has the consequence of binding dissenting

    debenture holders.
b.   Voting at the ISIN level
57. Each debenture instrument has an international security identification

    number (ISIN) related to a particular issue. Each ISIN forms a separate

    class or category having the same feature such as an issue date, face

    value, rate of interest, maximum duration or date of redemption. These

    features are homogenous for all debentures within the same ISIN or

    tranches when compared to debentures across different ISINs.         In the

    present case there are three Debenture Trust Deeds having 19 ISIN

    numbers, with ISINs split across the three Debenture Trust Deeds dated 3

    May 2017, 23 May 2017 and 5 February 2018.
58. Each ISIN being a separate class or category, the SEBI Circular mandates

    that the voting is required to be done ISIN wise. SEBI has explained that it

    is left to the debenture holder in each ISIN to determine how they wish to
42
PART E

    vote and adopt or reject the Resolution Plan. SEBI has asserted that nothing

    prevents an individual holder of an ISIN to accept a haircut in the payment

    of its dues. But this cannot be forced upon them without following the

    framework prescribed by SEBI to protect the interests of debenture holders.

    In the present case, the three Debenture Trust Deeds with 19 ISIN numbers

    are distributed in the following manner:
a.   Debenture Trust Deed-1 dated 5 February 2018 has four (4)

         ISIN with an approximate principal amount of Rs.564.77 crores;


    b.   Debenture Trust Deed-2 dated 3 May 2017 has nine (9) ISIN

         with an approximate principal amount of Rs.1249.8 crores; and


    c.   Debenture Trust Deed-3 dated 23 May 2017 has six (6) ISIN

         with an approximate principal amount of Rs.81.00 crores.
59. Clauses 22 (ii) and 22(iii) of the Fifth Schedule to the Debenture Trust

    Deeds contains the following provision:
―22. A meeting of the Beneficial Owner(s) / Debenture holder(s) as the case
         may be shall, inter alia, have the following powers exercisable in the manner
         hereinafter specified in Clause 23 hereof

         …
(ii) Power to sanction any compromise or arrangement proposed to be made
         between the Company and the Beneficial Owner(s) / Debenture holder(s).
(iii) Power to sanction any modification, alteration, or abrogation of any of the
         rights of the Beneficial Owner(s) / Debenture holder(s) as the case may be
         against the Company or against the Mortgaged Premises or other properties
         whether such right shall arise under the Trust Deed or Debentures or
         otherwise.‖
43
PART E

    Clause 23 of the of the Fifth Schedule to the Debenture Trust Deeds

    provides thus:
―The powers set out in Clause 22 hereof shall be exercisable by a Special
           Resolution passed at a meeting of the Beneficial Owner(s) / Debenture
           holder(s) as the case may be duly convened and held in accordance with the
           provisions herein contained and carried by a majority consisting of not less
           than three-fourth of the persons voting thereat upon a show of hands or if a poll
           is demanded by a majority representing not less than three-fourths in value of
           the votes cast on such poll. Such a Resolution is hereinafter called ―Special
           Resolution‖.‖
60. All the Debenture Trust Deeds were executed prior to the RBI Circular.

    Clause 22(ii) deals with voting on a compromise proposed to be made

    between the issuer company and the debenture holder. The concept of a

    third party resolution applicant stepping into a debtor company in terms of a

    Resolution Plan led by the lenders came in with the RBI Circular. The

    Debenture Trust Deeds which are earlier in point of time must consequently

    be with reference to a compromise under
Section 230
of the Companies

    Act.    Clause 22(ii) and 23 can therefore not have precedence over the

    requirement of the special majority prescribed by the circulars of the RBI or

    SEBI.
c.    The SEBI Circular has a statutory character
61. The SEBI Circular has been issued in exercise of the powers conferred by

    the
SEBI Act
, the 1993 Regulations, the Securities and Exchange Board

    of     India (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations

    2015 and the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Issue and Listing

    of Debt Securities) Regulations 2008 to protect the interest of investors in

    securities for promoting the development of and regulation of the securities
44
PART E

      market.21 Now it is important to emphasise that the ICA which has been

      referred to in the SEBI Circular is the ICA which is provided for in the RBI

      Circular. Clause 4 of the SEBI Circular indicates that investors in debt

      security who are financial creditors are approached by other lenders to sign

      an agreement namely an ICA ―under specific terms detailed in the

      framework as stipulated by RBI.‖ Moreover,
Regulation 15(7)
of the 1993

      Regulations confers an enabling power upon the debenture trustee, subject

      to the approval of the debenture holders and the conditions specified by

      SEBI to enter into an ICA ―provided under the framework specified by the

      RBI‖. In its affidavit filed before the Bombay High Court, RBI clarified that :
―8. Given that the ICA is a contractual agreement between the creditors to a
            borrower undergoing resolution, inter se disputes between the signatories to
            the ICA have to be resolved within the ICA which is a contract. Since the
            Prudential Framework was issued by the RBI under powers conferred upon it
            by the provisions of the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934
and
Banking
            Regulation Act, 1949
, the provisions of the Prudential Framework are
            mandatory only for the RBI-regulated lenders. These powers do not extend to
            other creditors of a borrower such as the debenture holders whose primary
            regulator is the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI).‖

            ―9. At the same time, other creditors to the borrower can voluntarily agree to be
            a party to the ICA since it is ultimately a contract between the creditors. If such
            creditors are regulated by other financial sector regulators, signing of the ICA
            by such creditors may be subject to permission from their respective
            regulators. In this connection, it is pertinent to note that SEBI vide circular
            SEBI/HO/MIRSD/CRADT/CIR/P/2020/203 dated October 13, 2020 has
            prescribed the conditions under which Debenture Trustees may sign an ICA
            under the Prudential Framework.‖
21
Clause 9, SEBI Circular: ―9. This circular is issued in exercise of the powers conferred upon SEBI
under
Section 11(1)
of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 read with the provisions
of Regulation 2A of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Debenture Trustees) Regulations,
1993,
Regulation 31(1)
of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Issue and Listing of Debt
Securities) Regulations, 2008 and
Regulation 101(1)
or the Securities and Exchange Board of India
(Listing Obligation and Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 to protect the interest of
investors in securities and to promote the development of, and to regulate, the securities market.‖
45
PART E
62. The above extract indicates that RBI‘s stated position was that:
a.   The prudential framework for the resolution of stressed assets

          formulated in the RBI Circular was in exercise of the powers conferred

          by the
RBI Act
1934 and the
Banking Regulation Act
1949;


     b.   The provisions of the prudential framework are mandatory only for RBI

          regulated lenders;
c.   RBI‘s powers do not extend to other creditors of a borrower such as

          debenture holders who are primarily regulated by SEBI;


     d.   Other creditors of a borrower may voluntarily agree to the ICA since it

          is a contract between creditors;
e.   Where the other creditors are regulated by a distinct financial sector

          regulator such as SEBI, the signing of the ICA by such creditors would

          be subject to permission by the concerned regulator; and


     f.   In this backdrop, SEBI prescribed the conditions under which

          debenture trustees may sign an ICA under the prudential framework,

          by issuing the SEBI Circular.
RBI has, in the above extract of its affidavit, clarified that the resolution of

     stressed assets is ultimately an act of commercial negotiation between the

     debtor and the creditor and between various creditors of the borrower under

     resolution.
46
PART F

     F.   Analysis
63. It is RCFL‘s case that the SEBI Circular is applicable only if the debenture

     holders choose to enter into an ICA under the RBI Circular. According to

     RCFL, it is open to debenture holders to choose not to enter into an ICA.

     Instead, they may approve of a Resolution Plan that the lenders have

     formulated independent of the modalities prescribed in the SEBI Circular. It

     is argued that this route permits debenture holders to approve or reject

     Resolution Plans based on whether their interests are properly accounted

     for. It has been urged that this may be preferable to entering into an ICA,

     where the debenture holders may find themselves at the mercy of the

     lenders (who may wield greater power while formulating the Resolution

     Plan, either due to their number or due to the value of the debt owed to

     them or both). Debenture holders would, it has been argued, consequently

     be forced to abide by a Resolution Plan which does not properly account for

     their interests. Hence, according the submission, they may opt out of an ICA

     and instead approve or reject the restructuring of debt at the stage of

     implementation of a Resolution Plan. While this argument may seem

     attractive at first blush, it gives way on closer inspection. The reasons why

     we are not inclined to accept the submission are formulated below:
i.   There is no bar to the civil court’s jurisdiction
64. As noted above, the suit before the Single Judge of the Bombay High Court

     (on the original side) sought the setting aside of the RBI Circular as illegal
47
PART F

     and ultra vires. An injunction restraining RCFL, Bank of Baroda, and RBI

     from implementing the RBI Circular was also sought.
65.
Section 15Y
of the SEBI Act stipulates that no civil court shall have the

     jurisdiction to entertain any suit in respect of any matter which an

     adjudicating officer appointed under the
SEBI Act
is empowered to

     determine.
Section 15-I
of the SEBI Act provides that an adjudicating officer

     may be appointed to adjudge cases under
Sections 15A
,
15B
, 15C, 15D,

     15E, 15EA, 15EB, 15F, 15G, 15H, 15HA, 15HB. None of the sections

     mentioned in
Section 15-I
of the SEBI Act would confer jurisdiction on the

     adjudicating officer to grant the relief sought by the plaintiffs in the first

     instance. Hence, the bar in Section 15Y would not operate as against the

     suit in the present case.
66. Similarly,
Section 430
of the Companies Act provides that no civil court shall

     have the jurisdiction to entertain any suit in respect of any matter which the

     National Company Law Tribunal or the National Company Law Appellate

     Tribunal is empowered to determine. Nothing in the Companies Act 2013 or

     any other law for the time being in force vests either the National Company

     Law Tribunal or the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal with the

     jurisdiction to adjudicate upon a challenge to the RBI Circular. Hence, the

     bar in
Section 430
is not attracted.
67. The Single Judge of the Bombay High Court (in the first instance) as well as

     the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court properly exercised jurisdiction

     over the subject matter of the suit.
48
PART F

    ii.   The SEBI Circular is applicable if debenture holders wish to implement

          a Resolution Plan to which the lenders are a party
68. It is undoubtedly true that the SEBI Circular does not stipulate that the

    signing of an ICA is the only route to entering into a compromise with the

    issuer company. Besides the absence of a clause mandating an ICA

    pursuant to an event of default, Clause 6.5.3 of the SEBI Circular

    recognizes that the debenture holders (through the Debenture Trustees)

    may undertake actions besides those contemplated in the SEBI Circular.

    However, if debenture holders choose to implement a Resolution Plan to

    which the lenders are party, they must do so in compliance with the

    conditions laid down in the SEBI Circular.
69. Clause 9 of the RBI Circular stipulates that the lenders are to undertake a

    review of the borrower‘s accounts within 30 days from the date of default,

    during which they may decide on the resolution strategy. The lenders may

    opt for any resolution strategy available to them under the existing legal

    framework, including (i) entering into a Resolution Plan; or (ii) initiating legal

    proceedings for recovery; or (iii) insolvency. If the lenders choose to

    implement a Resolution Plan, they are required to enter into an ICA in terms

    of Clause 10 of the RBI Circular. The existence of an ICA which is in

    compliance with the RBI Circular is a sine qua non for the implementation of

    a Resolution Plan.
70. After the RBI Circular was issued, all creditors could opt for one of the

    following courses of action:
49
PART F

     a.   Enforce the security;
b.   Initiate CIRP under the IBC;
c.   File a suit for the recovery of the monies due to them;


     In addition, lenders could choose to implement a Resolution Plan in terms of

     the RBI Circular (with other lenders). The debenture holders could enter into

     an arrangement or scheme under
Section 230
Companies Act (with any

     other creditors). Needless to say, creditors were free to exercise other

     options available in law, besides those detailed in this paragraph.
71. As evident from the definition of ‗lenders‘, the RBI Circular did not apply to

     debenture holders. Debenture holders continued to be governed by
Section

     230
Companies Act. However, the options available to debenture holders

     increased with the issuance of the SEBI Circular. The SEBI Circular laid

     down the process to be followed for:
a.   Refraining from enforcing security; and


     b.   Entering into an ICA.
72. The SEBI Circular was issued with reference to the RBI Circular; it does not

     specify the conditions for the execution of an independent ICA or Resolution

     Plan which is separate from the ICA and Resolution Plan under the RBI

     Circular. Both the RBI Circular and the SEBI Circular refer to one and the

     same ICA and Resolution Plan. This is evident from Clause 4 of the SEBI

     Circular which states:
50
PART F

         ―The Reserve Bank of India (―RBI‖), vide Circular dated June 07, 2019 issued
         the Reserve Bank of India (Prudential Framework for Resolution of Stressed
         Assets) Directions 2019 which inter alia specified the mechanism for resolution
         of stressed assets by Lenders … In terms thereof, investors in debt securities,
         being financial creditors, are approached by other lenders to sign an
         agreement; referred to as the Inter Creditor Agreement (“ICA”), under
         specific terms detailed In the framework as stipulated by RBI.‖

                                                                   (emphasis supplied)

    Further,
Regulation 15(7)
of the 1993 Regulations relates to the duties of

    Debenture Trustees. It provides:
―Subject to the approval of the debenture holders and the conditions as may be
         specified by the Board from time to time, the debenture trustee, on behalf of
         the debenture holders, may enter into inter-creditor agreements provided
         under the framework specified by the Reserve Bank of India.‖

                                                                   (emphasis supplied)
73. By issuing the SEBI Circular, SEBI subscribed to the overall framework of

    the RBI Circular and permitted debenture holders to participate in the

    process specified in the RBI Circular to enter into a Resolution Plan. Under

    the RBI Circular, the Resolution Plan cannot come into existence without an

    ICA. The SEBI Circular does not disturb this position. When the SEBI

    Circular came into force, it specified the conditions under which the

    debenture holders (through the Debenture Trustees) could access this

    Resolution Plan and participate in its formulation via the ICA.
74. By arguing that Clauses 22 and 23 of the Fifth Schedule to the Debenture

    Trust Deed(s) are not concerned with signing an ICA or with the subject

    matter of the SEBI Circular in general, RCFL is suggesting that the ICA and

    the Resolution Plan are distinct and severable. The implication is that

    debenture holders may opt in to the Resolution Plan after it has been
51
PART F

formulated, without concerning themselves with the ICA. This is an incorrect

interpretation of the circulars in question. The ICA and the Resolution Plan

are inextricably intertwined and the latter has its genesis in the former, and

flows from it. The SEBI Circular, too, recognizes this fact in Clause 6, which

states:
―As the resolution plan in the ICA may involve restructuring including roll-
     over of debt securities, requiring the consent of the investors, the process to be
     followed for seeking consent for enforcement of security and/or entering Into an
     Inter-Creditor Agreement shall be as under …‖

                                                                  (emphasis supplied)

Further, Clause 7 recognizes the interdependence between the ICA and the

Resolution Plan:
―The Debenture Trustee(s) may sign the ICA and consider the resolution
     plan on behalf of the investors upon compliance with the following conditions:

     7.1 The signing of the ICA and agreeing to the resolution plan is in the
     interest of investors and in compliance with the
Companies Act, 2013
and the
     rules made thereunder, the
Securities Contracts (Regulations) Act, 1956
and
     the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992
and the rules,
     regulations and circulars issued thereunder from time to time.

     7.2. If the resolution plan imposes condition(s) on the Debenture
     Trustee(s) that are not in accordance with the provisions of
Companies Act,
     2013
and the rules made thereunder, the
Securities Contracts (Regulations)
     Act, 1956
and the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992
and the
     rules, regulations and circulars issued thereunder from time to time, then the
     Debenture Trustee(s) shall be free to exit the ICA altogether with the same
     rights as if it had never signed the ICA. Under these circumstances, the
     resolution plan shall not be binding on the Debenture Trustee(s).

     7.3. The resolution plan shall be finalized within 180 days from the end of
     the review period. If the resolution plan is not finalized within 180 days from
     the end of the review period, then the Debenture Trustee(s) shall be free to exit
     the ICA altogether with the same rights as if it had never signed the ICA and
     the resolution plan shall not be binding on the ·Debenture Trustee(s). However,
     if the finalization of the resolution plan extends beyond 180 days, the
     Debenture Trustee(s) may consent to an extension beyond 180 days subject to
     the approval of the investors regarding the total timeline. The total timeline
52
PART F

               shall not exceed 365 days from the date of commencement of the review
               period.
7.4. If any of the terms of the approved Resolution Plan are contravened
               by any of the signatories to the ICA, the Debenture Trustee(s) shall be
               free to exit the ICA and seek appropriate legal recourse or any other action as
               deemed fit in the interest of the investors.‖

                                                                         (emphasis supplied)

         Hence, any reference to an ICA in the SEBI Circular is also necessarily a

         reference to the Resolution Plan and vice versa. It is not open to debenture

         holders to participate in the implementation of the Resolution Plan without

         being involved in its genesis through the ICA. There is only one ―door‖, so to

         speak, through which debenture holders can gain entry into the Resolution

         Plan with the lenders and that is through the ICA. Therefore, while the SEBI

         Circular does not mandate the execution of an ICA as the only route to

         entering a compromise with the issuer company, it lays down a procedure in

         the event that debenture holders choose the route of implementing a

         Resolution Plan with the lenders. This procedure cannot be circumvented.
75. The purpose of the SEBI Circular is multi-fold – not only does it protect the

         interests of debenture holders at large (Clause 7), but it also protects the

         interests of any dissenting debenture holders (Clause 6.6). If RCFL‘s

         argument was to be accepted, both these protections would fail. In the

         absence of Clause 7, debenture trustees would likely be unable to exit the

         ICA or the Resolution Plan even if they were not ―in the interest of

         investors‖22 or if the Resolution Plan was not finalized within 180 days from
22
Clause 7.1, SEBI Circular
53
PART F

         the end of the review period.23 It is indubitable that tremendous hardship

         would be caused to the debenture holders in both these situations.
Significantly, the absence of Clause 6.6 could mean that dissenting

         debenture holders would be bound by decisions taken even by way of a

         simple majority. While Clause 23 of the Fifth Schedule to the Debenture

         Trust Deed(s) in this case provides for a majority of 75%, other Debenture

         Trust Deed(s) could provide for a simple majority. Dissenting debenture

         holders would then be unable to avail of the protection provided to them by

         the SEBI Circular.
76. We agree that the language in
Regulation 15(7)
of the 1993 Regulations

         and the SEBI Circular is facilitative and not mandatory. This is in recognition

         of the fact that debenture holders may opt to exercise their rights through

         mechanisms other than the execution of a Resolution Plan. The language

         cannot be construed to be facilitative in the sense of providing debenture

         holders with the option of by-passing the modalities prescribed by the SEBI

         Circular while accepting a Resolution Plan. The ICA continues to be the

         foundation or mother document for the Resolution Plan.


         iii.   Dissenting ISIN level debenture holders are bound by the ICA /

                Resolution Plan
77. Clause 6.6 of the SEBI Circular inter alia requires the ―approval of not less

         than 60% of the investors by number at the ISIN level‖ for entering into an

         ICA. RCFL has argued that the ISIN level voting could potentially frustrate a
23
Clause 7.3, SEBI Circular
54
PART F

      Resolution Plan. The concern is that a single debenture holder who holds an

      entire ISIN (or more than one ISIN) can prevent the creditors from arriving at

      an ICA / a Resolution Plan, especially in the absence of a provision for their

      ―exit‖ from this process. In response, SEBI has argued that the issuer

      company can ―adjust‖ the size of the security by proportionally reducing it

      and releasing it to the extent that debenture holders agree to the ICA /

      Resolution Plan. Both these arguments miss the crux of the matter.
78. Dissenting creditors do not have the option of ―exiting‖ the compromise or

      arrangement arrived at in terms of
Section 230
Companies Act.24 Similarly,

      dissenting lenders do not have the option of ―exiting‖ the ICA / Resolution

      Plan under the RBI Circular.25 The respective majorities provided for in each

      of these laws bind dissenting creditors. It is along these lines that the SEBI

      Circular binds dissenting debenture holders. Indeed, the SEBI Circular could

      bind dissenting debenture holders even in the absence of similar provisions

      in other laws.
79. The argument that the SEBI Circular is not applicable because a single

      debenture holder will be able to frustrate the Resolution Plan is a

      consequential one. The applicability of a circular cannot be determined on

      the basis of such a concern. We need not comment upon this aspect in the

      absence of a challenge to the SEBI Circular. We also note that it is open to

      the relevant stakeholders to approach SEBI with any concerns, commercial

      or otherwise, and request an amendment to the SEBI Circular. SEBI as a
24
The NCLT will look into the overall fairness of the compromise or arrangement under
Section 230
Companies Act.
25
The RBI Circular states that the ICA may provide for the protection of dissenting lenders.
55
PART F

     statutory regulator can always look at such concerns and has the power to

     factor them in if it deems fit to do so in public interest and for the orderly

     functioning of the securities‘ market.
iv.   The SEBI Circular has retroactive application
80. Mr. N Venkataraman, learned senior counsel and Additional Solicitor

     General has argued that the SEBI Circular is retroactive in nature as it does

     not take away or impair any vested rights. It operates in the future, based on

     events that arose prior to its issuance. Mr. Darius Khambata, learned senior

     counsel appearing for RCFL argued that the effect of applying the SEBI

     Circular to the present case will render it retrospective and not retroactive.

     According to him, Clauses 22 and 23 of the Fifth Schedule to the Debenture

     Trust Deed(s) vested debenture holders with the right to authorize

     debenture trustees ―to sanction any compromise or arrangement proposed

     to be made between the company and the beneficial owner(s) / debenture

     holder(s)‖. This sanction could be authorized by a majority of ―not less than

     three-fourths of the persons voting … or if a poll is demanded … not less

     than three-fourths in value of the votes cast on such poll‖. The SEBI

     Circular, it has been urged, changed the nature of the special majority

     required to sanction a compromise by introducing the requirement of a

     majority of 60% of ISIN level votes.
81. We are of the opinion that the SEBI Circular has retroactive application. In

     Principles of Statutory Interpretation by Justice G.P. Singh (14th edition,

     2016 at page 583), it is stated that:
56
PART F

              ―The rule against retrospective construction is not applicable to a statute
              merely because “a part of the requisites for its action is drawn from a
              time antecedent to its passing‖. If that were not so, every statute will be
              presumed to apply only to persons born and things which come into existence
              after its operation and the rule may well result in virtual nullification of most of
              the statutes.‖

                                                                            (emphasis supplied)
82.
In
Vineeta Sharma v. Rakesh Sharma,26
this Court described the nature of

        prospective, retrospective, and retroactive laws:
―61. The prospective statute operates from the date of its enactment conferring
              new rights. The retrospective statute operates backwards and takes away or
              impairs vested rights acquired under existing laws. A retroactive statute is the
              one that does not operate retrospectively. It operates in futuro. However, its
              operation is based upon the character or status that arose earlier.
              Characteristic or event which happened in the past or requisites which had
              been drawn from antecedent events.‖
83. The terms ‗retrospective‘ and ‗retroactive‘ are often used interchangeably.
However, their meanings are distinct. This Court succinctly appreciated the

        difference between these concepts in
State Bank's Staff Union (Madras

        Circle) v. Union of India:27


              ―'Retroactivity
' is a term often used by lawyers but rarely defined. On analysis it
              soon becomes apparent, moreover, that it is used to cover at least two distinct
              concepts. The first, which may be called 'true retroactivity', consists in the
              application of a new rule of law to an act or transaction which was completed
              before the rule was promulgated. The second concept, which will be referred to
              as 'quasi-retroactivity', occurs when a new rule of law is applied to an act or
              transaction in the process of completion....The foundation of these concepts is
              the distinction between completed and pending transactions...."

              (T.C. Hartley, The Foundations of European Community Law 129 (1981)‖

        Many decisions of this Court define ‗retroactivity‘ to mean laws which

        destroy or impair vested rights. In real terms, this is the definition of

        ‗retrospectivity‘    or    ‗true   retroactivity‘.    ‗Quasi-retroactivity‘       or   simply
26
2020 (9) SCC 1
27
(2005) 7 SCC 584
57
PART F

    ‗retroactivity‘ on the other hand is a law which is applicable to an act or

    transaction that is still underway. Such an act or transaction has not been

    completed and is in the process of completion. Retroactive laws also apply

    where the status or character of a thing or situation arose prior to the

    passage of the law. Merely because a law operates on certain

    circumstances which are antecedent to its passing does not mean that it is

    retrospective.
84. In the present case, RCFL issued the debentures and defaulted on the

    payments to the debenture holders prior to the issuance of the SEBI

    Circular. However, as of 13 October 2020 (the date on which the SEBI

    Circular came into force), a compromise or agreement on the restructuring

    of the debt owed by RCFL did not exist. The debenture holders were not

    vested with any rights with respect to the resolution of RCFL‘s debt. The

    existence of the debt and the subsequent default by RCFL was the status of

    events, which existed prior to 13 October 2020. Once it came into force, the

    SEBI Circular applied to the manner of resolution of debt, as specified

    therein.
85. Even assuming that debenture holders were vested with the right to

    sanction a compromise or arrangement in terms of the special majority in

    Clause 23 to the Fifth Schedule of the Debenture Trust Deed, they were

    divested of such a right upon the issuance of the SEBI Circular. Clause 59

    of the Debenture Trust Deed stipulates that any provision in the Debenture

    Trust Deed which is in conflict with the 1993 Regulations is null and void. In
58
PART F

         so doing, it lays down a trigger for the divestment of rights under the

         Debenture Trust Deed. A contractually vested right may be taken away by

         the operation of a statutory instrument. A fortiori, in the present case, the

         SEBI Circular owes its existence to statutory powers conferred by a special

         legislation enacted with a view to protect the interests of investors and to

         ensure the stable and orderly growth and development of the market for

         securities.
86. The SEBI Circular was issued partly in exercise of the powers under the

         1993 Regulations.28 Further,
Regulation 15(7)
of the 1993 Regulations lays

         the foundation for the conditions specified in the SEBI Circular. As such, the

         phrase ―provisions of the [1993 Regulations]‖ in Clause 59 must be read to

         include the SEBI Circular. Clauses 22 and 23 of the Fifth Schedule to the

         Debenture Trust Deed are evidently in conflict with the SEBI Circular as they

         each provide for different voting mechanisms. Therefore, Clauses 22 and 23

         must give way to the SEBI Circular, which will take precedence.


         v.    Exercise of this Court’s power under
Article 142
of the Constitution
87. Under the present scheme of the Resolution Plan, retail debenture holders

         having an exposure of up to INR 10 lakhs would stand to realize 100% of

         their principal dues. The secured retail debenture holders having an

         exposure of more than INR 10 lakhs would realize 29.69%. The table

         showing the distribution is extracted below:
28
Clause 9, SEBI Circular
59
PART F

         Particulars             Count       Exposure Recovery        Recovery

                                               (INR)      (In INR)    (In %)

Secured individuals and HUF        227         13.92        13.93     100
debenture holders (up to INR                   crores       crores
10 lakhs)

Secured individuals and HUF        37          43.95        13.17     29.96
debenture holders (more than                   crores       crores
10 lakhs)

Other secured      debenture       42        1,556.70      388.55     24.96
holders                                       crores       crores

Unsecured debenture holders        21        81 crores      16.46     20.32
                                                            crores

Related party                       1        200 crores     26.90     13.45
                                                            crores

Total                              328        1,896
                                              crores
88. The above table highlights that small investors, especially those whose

    exposure is up to INR 10 lakhs, are benefiting to the extent of 100% of their

    principal amount. Even debenture holders whose exposure is more than 10

    lakhs are receiving 29.96% of their principal amount. In comparison, the

    secured ICA lenders would receive 24.96% of their principal amount, which

    is lower than the recovery made by the debenture holders. It is also

    important to highlight that none of the debenture holders have raised any

    grievance with regard to the proposed compromise. In such a situation,

    application of the SEBI Circular, though right in law, may lead to unjust

    outcomes for the retail debenture holders if this court were to reverse the

    entire course of action which has occurred in the present case.
60
PART F
89. The different voting mechanism proposed under the SEBI Circular will

        further delay the resolution process and potentially disrupt the efforts

        undertaken by the stakeholders, including the retail debenture holders. Such

        unscrambling of the resolution process will not only prove time-consuming,

        but may also adversely affect the agreed realized gains to the retail

        debenture holders, who have already consented to the negotiated

        settlement before the High Court.
90. Depending upon the facts and circumstances of a case, this Court can,

        having regard to
Article 142
of the Constitution of India, stipulate suitable

        directions to mitigate the potential denial of rights.
91.
In its decision in
State v. Kalyan Singh29
this Court observed that the

        jurisdiction under
Article 142
can be used to relax the rigors of law

        depending upon the peculiar facts and circumstances. It was observed:
―22. […] This article gives a very wide power to do complete justice to the
              parties before the Court, a power which exists in the Supreme Court because
              the judgment delivered by it will finally end the litigation between the parties. It
              is important to notice that
Article 142
follows upon
Article 141
of the
              Constitution, in which it is stated that the law declared by the Supreme Court
              shall be binding on all courts within the territory of India. Thus, every judgment
              delivered by the Supreme Court has two components — the law declared
              which binds courts in future litigation between persons, and the doing of
              complete justice in any cause or matter which is pending before it. It is, in fact,
              an Article that turns one of the maxims of equity on its head, namely, that
              equity follows the law. By
Article 142
, as has been held in
State of
              Punjab [State of Punjab v. Rafiq Masih
, (2014) 8 SCC 883: (2014) 4 SCC (Civ)
              657: (2014) 6 SCC (Cri) 154: (2014) 3 SCC (L&S) 134] judgment, equity has
              been given precedence over law. But it is not the kind of equity which can
              disregard mandatory substantive provisions of law when the court issues
              directions under
Article 142.
While moulding relief, the court can go to
              the extent of relaxing the application of law to the parties or exempting
              altogether the parties from the rigours of the law in view of the peculiar
              facts and circumstances of the case. This being so, it is clear that this
29
(2017) 7 SCC 444
61
PART F

              Court has the power, nay, the duty to do complete justice in a case when
              found necessary. […]‖

                                                                         (emphasis supplied)
92.
In
Laxmidas Morarji v. Behrose Darab Madan30
, a three-judge bench of

        this Court held that the use of powers under
Article 142
should be based on

        equitable principles in situations where the provisions of law cannot do

        complete justice. It was observed:
“25.
Article 142
being in the nature of a residuary power based on equitable
              principles, the Courts have thought it advisable to leave the powers under the
              article undefined. The power under
Article 142
of the Constitution is a
              constitutional power and hence, not restricted by statutory enactments. Though
              the Supreme Court would not pass any order under
Article 142
of the
              Constitution which would amount to supplanting substantive law applicable or
              ignoring express statutory provisions dealing with the subject, at the same time
              these constitutional powers cannot in any way, be controlled by any statutory
              provisions. However, it is to be made clear that this power cannot be used to
              supplant the law applicable to the case. This means that acting under
Article
              142
, the Supreme Court cannot pass an order or grant relief which is totally
              inconsistent or goes against the substantive or statutory enactments pertaining
              to the case. The power is to be used sparingly in cases which cannot be
              effectively and appropriately tackled by the existing provisions of law or
              when the existing provisions of law cannot bring about complete justice
              between the parties.‖

                                                                         (emphasis supplied)
93. The compromise presently arrived at, which is in the interests of all the

        parties, will be disturbed if a new process is directed to be commenced in

        accordance with the SEBI Circular at the present stage.
94. Pertinently, the SEBI Circular only contemplates two situations where ISIN-
wise voting is mandated: (i) non-enforcement of security; and (ii) entering

        into an ICA. Although it applies retroactively, it admittedly does not
30
(2009) 10 SCC 425
62
PART F

     contemplate a scenario where the debenture holders could give ex post

     facto consent to ICAs agreed prior to the commencement of the SEBI

     Circular, that is 13 October 2020. In the present case, the application of the

     SEBI Circular will lead to a scenario where a Resolution Plan validly agreed

     upon by the ICA lenders under the RBI Framework will have to be

     unscrambled. For this reason, we consider it necessary to extend the benefit

     under
Article 142
to the retail debenture holders by allowing the Resolution

     Plan to pass muster. We would like to reiterate that this Court is issuing the

     directions to mould the relief under
Article 142
in view of the peculiar facts

     and circumstances of the present case noted above.
vi.   Dissenting debenture holders in the present case
95. As stated in the above sections, after 13 October 2020, there are two

     mechanisms in situations where a compromise or resolution is sought:
a.    A compromise under the SEBI Circular, which lies outside the process

           of the NCLT,    to restructure the debt, binding both dissenting and

           abstaining debenture holders;
b.    A compromise under
Section 230
of the Companies Act by

           approaching the NCLT, binding dissenting/abstaining debenture

           holders.
96. It is clear that a compromise arrived under the SEBI Circular or
Section 230
of the Companies Act effectively assimilates the rights of the dissenting
63
PART F

     creditors. The SEBI Circular adopts a higher voting threshold of 60% by

     number and 75% to bind dissenting/ abstaining debenture holders.
97. SEBI submits that debenture holders are entitled to full outstanding amounts

     due (principal plus interest) if their debt cannot be resolved under the

     compromise/ resolution mechanism. However, it has been argued that the

     compromised arrived at in terms of the direction of the Division Bench will

     also bind all the other debenture holders, who were not a party to the

     original suit before the High Court. This will prejudice the dissenting

     debenture holders as they have to settle for a lesser amount – 24.96% of

     the principal among with a further 5% of the principal outstanding. We agree

     with SEBI‘s submission that the compromise arrived at the Debenture Trust

     Deed level among the consenting debenture holders should not bind the

     dissenting debenture holders.
98. The dissenting debenture holders would have been bound by the Resolution

     Plan if it had been approved in accordance with the Insolvency and

     Bankruptcy Code, 2016 or under an ICA as acceded to under the SEBI

     Circular. We accordingly deem it appropriate that dissenting debenture

     holders should be provided an option to accept the terms of the Resolution

     Plan. Alternatively, the dissenting debenture holders have a right to stand

     outside the proposed Resolution Plan framed under the lender‘s ICA and

     pursue other legal means to recover their entitled dues.
99. For the reasons indicated in the text of the judgment, we accept the

     submissions which have been urged by SEBI and disapprove of the
64
PART F

     interpretation placed by the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court on the

     SEBI Circular. The appeal is allowed in part, subject to the directions issued

     above under
Article 142
of the Constitution.
100. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
……………………….…………………….. J.
[Dr. Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]




                                       …..…………………………………………..J.
                                        [Surya Kant]




                                        …….……………………..…………………J.
                                         [A S Bopanna]



New Delhi;
August 30, 2022
65